I believe that the astonishingly consistent and nuanced reality of the planetary correlations
with the archetypal dynamics of human life is one of the most compelling intimations
we have that we live in a meaning-laden and purposeful universe.

Archetypal Cosmology:
Past and Present
by Richard Tarnas

S

ince a recent issue of The Mountain
Astrologer was devoted to matters
archetypal, I was asked by the editors
and a number of its readers to consider
writing a brief overview of the history of
archetypal cosmology. So, in this essay,
I would like to describe, first, the key
individuals and influences that contributed to the academic discipline and philosophical perspective called archetypal
cosmology, and then its longer ancestry,
the centuries-old traditions out of which
it emerged.
	
It could be argued that the emergence of archetypal cosmology was in
some sense inevitable, as scholars and
researchers working in late 20th-century
academia recognized the larger implications of the evidence for planetary correlations with the patterns of human
experience. Given the extraordinary
nature of these correlations, the obvious task was to pursue the research in
a more systematic way, think deeply
about the resulting evidence, then integrate this with the relevant ideas and
conceptual frameworks from both the
admired past, such as the Platonic–
Pythagorean tradition or the work of
Johannes Kepler, and the cutting-edge
present, from depth psychology to the
new paradigm sciences.
	
But if the rise of archetypal cosmology was perhaps inevitable in principle,
its specific character and even its name

reflect its emergence from a unique
convergence of scholars and intellectual currents at two particular learning
communities, Esalen Institute during the
1970s and ’80s and the California Institute of Integral Studies from the 1990s
to the present. Out of that creative
commingling of people and ideas arose
a distinctive vision of psyche and cosmos, of the human being’s co-creative
participation in an ensouled, evolving
universe. This cosmological vision is
grounded in a particular astrological
research paradigm that has proved
highly promising in the study of history
and biography, psychology, philosophy, religion, mythology, culture, and
the arts.
	
It often happens that the fresh
winds of new ideas and spiritual
impulses that enter into a culture and
eventually transform it do not originate
in the mainstream universities, but
rather come from outlier institutions
and learning communities that are
more countercultural, adventurous,
and visionary in character. Such was
the case, for example, in 15th-century
Europe, when the late medieval universities had become stagnant, and the
crucial insights and scholarship that
helped bring forth the Renaissance
emerged from the Florentine Platonic
Academy. In the second half of the 20th
century, Esalen Institute in California

played a similar role in late modern culture, attracting countless scholars and
visionaries, from Aldous Huxley, Alan
Watts, and Arnold Toynbee to Abraham Maslow, R. D. Laing, and Lama
Govinda. An overriding impulse toward
exploration and transformation pervaded the institute community, as contemporary psychology and philosophy
met esoteric traditions and practices
in service of expanding the horizons
of human experience and knowledge.
Ancient and modern, East and West,
body and soul, science and spirituality,
shamanism and mysticism, quantum
physics and the psychedelic revolution
— all had a place at the table.
	
In astrology, the field at Esalen was
seeded by Dane Rudhyar’s lectures
there in the 1960s. I had first encountered astrology in conversations with
a Jungian faculty member at Harvard
when I was an undergraduate in the
late 1960s and early ’70s, but it took
the metaphysically wide-open, esoterically intensive atmosphere of Esalen
to spur a more serious engagement
with that perspective. In my early years
at Esalen, I was working on my doctoral degree and taking seminars with
a number of remarkable teachers, each
of whom was carrying critical insights:
Joseph Campbell, with his multicultural
erudition deciphering the archetypal
language of myth, “the secret opening
June/July 2011 * The Mountain Astrologer 65

Archetypal Cosmology
through which the inexhaustible energies of the cosmos pour into human cultural manifestation”; Gregory Bateson,
with his polymath’s recognition of an
“ecology of mind” in nature and “the
patterns which connect”; Huston Smith,
with his ecumenical transmission of the
world’s religious and mystical traditions;
and Stanislav Grof, with his radically
expanded cartography of the psyche
and powerful methods of psychospiritual
transformation. While, in retrospect,
one can see how these teachings helped
shape the approach to astrology that
would emerge at Esalen, initially astrology still seemed to me an unlikely candidate for being a key to the mystery of
psyche and cosmos. Richly symbolic,
yes, strangely helpful perhaps in framing imaginative reflections on one’s psychological tendencies — but what could
it really have to do with the actual vast
universe of planets and galaxies?
	
That perception rapidly changed
when Grof and I, pursuing research
together in the field of consciousness
studies and following a suggestion by
Arne Trettevik, were surprised to discover an extraordinarily consistent
and symbolically nuanced correlation
between the timing of individuals’ major
psychological transformations and the
planetary transits to their natal charts.
Esalen offered many intensive techniques and practices for catalyzing psychological transformation, and many
hundreds of individuals came there in
the course of their life journeys specifically to undergo profound transformative experiences, so Esalen proved to be
a superb laboratory for conducting this
research. Suddenly, we had a method
of illuminating both the archetypal
character and the timing of such experiences, including non-ordinary states of
consciousness such as those mediated
by powerful psychoactive plants and
compounds — something Grof and his
colleagues at psychiatric research clinics in Prague and Maryland had sought
fruitlessly for many years. To be able
to better understand the sudden onset
of a psychological crisis or a spiritual
breakthrough, to schedule sessions of
LSD therapy or shamanic sacred medi-

66 www.mountainastrologer.com

We witnessed the
various ways a transit
involving Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, or
Pluto to the natal chart
could be embodied
in experience.
cine rituals with greater awareness of the
psychological dynamics active for that
person and that time, to gain insight into
certain cyclical activations of particular
complexes in an individual’s inner
world and outer-life circumstances —
astrology seemed to represent, as Grof
put it, a kind of “Rosetta stone” for
understanding the human psyche. I was
reminded of Bruno Schulz’s words:
So it comes to pass that, when we
pursue an inquiry into a character
beyond a certain depth, we step
out of the field of psychological cat­
egories and enter the sphere of the
ultimate mysteries of life. The floorboards of the soul, to which we try
to penetrate, fan open and reveal
the starry firmament.1

	
This particular context and pragmatic motivation for our astrological
research had another unexpected
consequence. The unusually profound
encounters with the deep unconscious
that we were studying frequently
involved direct experiences of an archetypal dimension of reality — whether
in the form of mythic figures and narratives from various cultures, gods and
goddesses, transcendent Platonic Ideas,
or Jungian archetypes. These numinous
essences and forces were experienced
as informing the wide range of biographical memories, psychological complexes, transpersonal experiences, and
other vivid emotional and somatic content activated during the sessions. Such
encounters gave us a vivid experiential
ground for understanding astrological
factors and allowed us to have a more
precise grasp of the multivalent character of the archetypal principles connected to the planetary alignments, as

we witnessed the various ways a transit
involving Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, or
Pluto to the natal chart could be embodied in experience. We were also able to
assess with greater experimental precision which astrological factors tended
to be most significant and what were
the orbs (the range of degrees before
and after exact) within which planetary
aspects were archetypally operative.
	
We found that by far the principal
factors in understanding these experiences were the major planetary aspects
in natal charts, personal transits and
progressions, and world transits. The
astrological approach that emerged as
most illuminating was thus essentially
equivalent to that of Kepler, with his
emphasis on the planetary aspects as
the dominant indicators of astrological
meaning, an unfolding cosmic geometry
of archetypal meaning centered on the
moving Earth. The evidence also suggested the importance of recognizing
larger orbs than have generally been
used in traditional astrology. We came
to see aspects not as acting like isolated
on-and-off light switches, but rather as
indicating archetypal wave forms that
enter into the individual or collective
psychic field and interact with the larger
complex whole of archetypal dynamics cumulatively operative in the field.
These are then shaped and inflected by
the specific circumstances and creative
responses of the individuals and communities in question, and expressed as
concrete events and experiences. From
1976 onward, we expanded the compass of the research to include a systematic study of the biographies of
hundreds of prominent historical and
cultural figures, as well as the archetypal
dynamics of the collective psyche evident in major historical phenomena
and cultural epochs.
	
In essence, the research was driven
by a synthesis of two traditions that
had been evolving rapidly during the
20th century: the depth psychology of
Jung, Freud, and William James, developed further by Rank, Reich, Klein, von
Franz, Edinger, and many others; and
what we might call depth astrology,
coming from Rudhyar, with Leo, Carter,
Addey, and Ebertin among others contributing to the lineage. In the later
1960s and ’70s, both these traditions

received a fresh creative infusion, on the
one hand with the rise of transpersonal
psychology led by Grof and of archetypal psychology led by James Hillman,
and on the other hand with a new generation of psychologically informed
astrologers led by Robert Hand, Stephen
Arroyo, Liz Greene, and Charles Harvey
— most of them coming to Esalen at
this time for public seminars as well as
private discussions. Hillman’s magnum
opus of 1975, Re-Visioning Psychology,
was an eloquent manifesto of the archetypal perspective reaching back from
Jung to the Renaissance and the Greeks
that deeply informed our astrological
analyses, while Grof’s Realms of the
Human Unconscious in the same year
provided a radically expanded map of
the psyche adequate to the emerging
vision.
	
Something of the excitement felt at
this time, almost like a Platonic epiphany, is conveyed in a letter written to
me by Charles Harvey, then president
of the British Astrological Association:
“Astrology has kept the archetypes alive,
we have all worked with them, but how
flat, abstract, remote, dry this all now
seems … Like breaking through into the
world of real living ideas after watching
the shadow show … A living astrology
is being born again.”2
	
During the ten years of research
at Esalen (where I stayed on as director of programs and education for several years), our astrological reflections
were shaped by one other important
factor. Educated within the cosmological assumptions of a modern scientific
world view that made astrology more
or less impossible in principle, Grof
and I naturally sought to develop a
new frame of reference that could bring
these findings into a larger coherence.
Although the evidence for planetary correlations sharply contradicted the mainstream Newtonian–Cartesian scientific
paradigm, we noticed many parallels
with the concepts coming from the new
sciences — quantum physics, systems
theory, morphogenetic fields, the implicate order, the holonomic universe —
and from innovative thinkers whom we
in turn invited to Esalen for numerous
seminars and discussions: David Bohm,
Fritjof Capra, Rupert Sheldrake, Karl
Pribram, Theodore Roszak, and Ervin

The evidence from our
research suggested
the importance of
recognizing larger orbs
than have generally
been used in traditional
astrology.
Laszlo among them. All these thinkers
and influences provided a fertile matrix
shaping the ideas and research that
were developing into an archetypal
cosmology.
	
In important respects, however, the
astrological evidence pointed to the
metaphysical intuitions of the past.
The word “archetype” comes from Platonism, and indeed the archetypal cosmos was first articulated by Plato. Here
was the philosophical vision of the universe as pervasively ensouled, informed
by transcendent archetypal principles,
and ordered in its complex celestial
movements by a sovereign divine intelligence. There were yet earlier roots to
this perspective: the ancient pantheon
of Greek myth (gods as archetypes), the
ritual illuminations of the mystery religions (cosmos as divine revelation), and
the Pythagorean disclosure of a universe
whose unitive order was at once mathematical and numinous. For the Platonic–
Pythagorean tradition, to align with the
archetypal order of the cosmos was to
realize one’s essential being. To know
the cosmos was to know oneself. To
study the numinous order of the heavens was to be spiritually and philosophically elevated, to break free from the
cave of ephemeral shadows, to know
the Good and the Beautiful.
	
I had been drawn to the concept
of archetypes since studying classical
Greek and Latin at my Jesuit high
school, where Plato’s and Aristotle’s differing views of transcendent and immanent universal forms had made a deep
impression. Years before I encountered
the astrological correlations, I had proposed as my doctoral dissertation topic
“A History of Archetypes from Plato
to Jung,” since even then it seemed to
me that this concept provided a central

organizing principle for understanding
not only psychological phenomena but
much of the history of Western thought,
from antiquity to the modern age. The
differences between Platonic archetypes and Jungian archetypes as usually
understood — the former seen as the
essential structures of reality; the latter,
as the essential structures of the human
psyche — represented an enormous
metaphysical and cosmological evolution in the Western world view, with the
Copernican revolution as the turning
point in shifting the locus of archetypal
meaning from the cosmos to the human
psyche, which were now sharply differentiated from each other.
	
By 1980, an enormous body of
evidence had emerged suggesting a systematic correlation between planetary
alignments and the archetypal patterns
of human experience — in the clinical
therapeutic setting, in individual biographies, and on the collective level in
historical and cultural phenomena. The
question then became how best to introduce this evidence and perspective to
the larger educated public, to the intelligent general reader who is astrologically uninitiated and whose very sense
of rationality presumes astrology’s falsehood. While Grof and I had already
begun lecturing on the material, developing a synthesis of transpersonal
psychology and archetypal astrology,
I decided for the longer term on a twostage strategy. Before introducing the
astrological evidence, I would first write
a history of the Western world view,
from the ancient Greek to the postmodern, that would set out the necessary
concepts and contexts for understanding the significance of the archetypal
planetary correlations. Over the next
ten years, in researching and writing
the book that became The Passion of
the Western Mind, I traced the evolution of the archetypal perspective from
Plato and Aristotle onward, the development of planetary astronomy through
the Copernican revolution, the crucial
role of Christianity and Judaism, the
complex interaction between religion
and science and philosophy, the rise of
the autonomous modern self during the
Renaissance and the Enlightenment,
the emergence of depth psychology,
and finally our own postmodern age of
June/July 2011 * The Mountain Astrologer 67

Archetypal Cosmology
extraordinary metaphysical pluralism
and creative fluidity.
	
Ideally, I hoped that this book
could prepare the reader for the astrological evidence and in some sense
serve as a credible foundation for what
was to come. The second stage would
be a book setting out a body of planetary correlations sufficiently robust
and extensive that the rigorous, openminded reader could come to his or her
own assessment of the potential validity
and value of astrology. This became
Cosmos and Psyche: Intimations of a
New World View. But although most of
the research and the basic framework
had been completed by the later 1980s,
another step would intervene.
	
In the years after it was published in
1991, The Passion of the Western Mind
became widely adopted as a text in
philosophy, humanities, and history of
science departments. I was invited to
join the faculty at the California Institute
of Integral Studies, a graduate school
in San Francisco focused especially on
psychology, religion, and philosophy.
To my surprise, both the faculty and
the students requested that I teach not
only the history of philosophy and Western thought but also the results of our
astrological research, which Grof and
I began to do in large graduate seminars, the most highly enrolled courses
in the school. At the same time, joined
by cosmologist Brian Swimme, philosopher Robert McDermott, ecofeminist
Charlene Spretnak, scholar of ancient
religions David Ulansey, and others,
I founded in 1994 a multidisciplinary
master’s and Ph.D. program called
Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness (PCC). The program essentially represented our ideal of the
graduate program that we ourselves
would want to attend. As the institute
catalog described the program:
This course of study is designed for
students who wish to engage the
intellectual challenge, in our postmodern age, of exploring new understandings of the cosmos and the
human being’s place in it … Areas
of inquiry include cosmology, epis-

68 www.mountainastrologer.com

The dialogue between
cosmology and
psychology is especially
critical, with astrology
as a meeting point.
temology, metaphysics and metapsychology, as well as archetypal
studies (Platonic, Romantic, esoteric), mythology, history of ideas,
evolution of consciousness, ecofeminist thought, new paradigm studies, and the changing relationship
between science and spirituality.

	
Over the next 17 years, hundreds
of highly committed and often brilliant
students enrolled in the PCC program.
Again to my surprise, the language of
archetypal astrology became a kind of
lingua franca (or lingua astra) within the
community: an integral part of its discourse and evolving world view and a
uniquely valuable tool for not only psychological self-understanding but historical analysis and philosophical insight.
Many master’s and Ph.D. courses have
been taught applying archetypal astrological analysis to psychology, history,
philosophy, music, and film — even to
comedic creativity and the cultural role
of comedy (in a course co-taught by
John Cleese).
	
Especially helpful for these astrological studies was the larger multidisciplinary dialogue that was an essential
ongoing aspect of the PCC program.
By bringing astrology into direct engagement with the thinking of pioneers
in other disciplines — contemporary
physics and evolutionary cosmology,
ecology, feminism, history of ideas,
postmodern philosophy, religious studies — the school provided a nourishing
matrix for the critical self-reflection and
refinement of astrological thought in a
philosophically rigorous, open-minded
academic setting. An example of the
kind of dialogue and synthesis developing during these years was the “Return
of Soul to the Cosmos” conference in
San Francisco in 1997, with more than

a thousand people in attendance. Organized by Barbara Winkler and myself,
participants included psychologists
James Hillman and Stan Grof, physicists Victor Mansfield and Will Keepin,
and many leading astrologers: Robert
Hand, Charles and Suzi Harvey, Stephen Arroyo, Caroline Casey, Demetra
George, Steven Forrest, Glenn Perry,
Greg Bogart, Karen Hamaker-Zondag,
Laurence Hillman, Ray Grasse, and
Gerry Goddard.
	
Cosmology is the encompassing
container within which take place all
our activities, both collectively and individually. It is the largest frame of reference within which a civilization implicitly
operates. Yet, conversely, our cosmology is deeply influenced by our psychology, which shapes our cognitive
perceptions and collective paradigms.
Thus, the dialogue between cosmology
and psychology is especially critical,
with astrology as a meeting point. Particularly in discussions during the past
decade between Brian Swimme and
myself — representing, as it were, the
two poles within the PCC program:
cosmos moving toward psyche, and
psyche moving toward cosmos — the
term “archetypal cosmology” began to
be used as a more comprehensive term
bridging our multiple disciplines. The
ideas of Alfred North Whitehead and
Teilhard de Chardin were recognized
as especially relevant, as were parallels
between Swimme’s concept of cosmological powers and the cosmic archetypes evident in astrology. A public
“Dialogue on Archetypal Cosmology”
took place at Esalen in 2004, followed
by a doctoral seminar at CIIS co-taught
by Swimme and myself, “Archetypal
Process: Whitehead, Jung, and the
Meeting of Psychology and Cosmology.”
It was at this time that I began supervising the first doctoral dissertations in
the field, beginning with Rod O’Neal’s
“Seasons of Agony and Grace: An
Archetypal History of New England
Puritanism,” which applied the research
methodology of Cosmos and Psyche to
a single cultural movement — developing an approach to the study of history
that O’Neal calls archetypal historiography. This was followed by Keiron Le
Grice’s dissertation, “Foundations of an
Archetypal Cosmology: A Theoretical

Synthesis of Jungian Depth Psychology
and the New Paradigm Sciences.”
	
Of course, it was the continuing
support from and collaboration with
the international astrological community that provided the essential context
for archetypal cosmology’s emergence:
the World Astrology Congresses in Switzerland overseen by Claude Weiss, the
Astrological Association conferences in
the U.K., Liz Greene’s Centre for Psychological Astrology in London, the
Faculty of Astrological Studies summer
schools in Oxford, and the UAC, NCGR,
and ISAR conferences. With this foundation among the astrologically initiated,
there could be a fruitful dialogue with
other intellectual communities working
at the frontiers of contemporary thought.
After Cosmos and Psyche was published
in 2006, a sign of astrology’s increasing
rapprochement with such communities
was the book’s being awarded the Book
of the Year prize from the Scientific and
Medical Network in the U.K., an international association of innovative, spiritually engaged scientists and scholars
(whose members include Sheldrake,
Pribram, Laszlo, and David Lorimer
and, in earlier years, Bohm and Schu­
macher). Until that time, no astrological
work had received the award, nor had
astrology played a role in the Network’s
conferences or public lectures. Similarly,
in the Jungian world, Grof and I presented our astrological research at Eranos in Ascona, Switzerland — where,
half a century earlier, Jung had presented his paper on synchronicity, his
final annual lecture at Eranos.
	
In 2007, a group of about 70 scholars, researchers, and practitioners in
the San Francisco Bay Area — most of
them faculty and graduates of the Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness
program at CIIS — formed the Archetypal Research Collective, with monthly
meetings, presentations, and discussions.
In 2008, Archai: The Journal of Archetypal Cosmology was begun under the
editorship of Keiron Le Grice and Rod
O’Neal, its Web site established, and the
field’s principles articulated. It was at
this time that the term “archetypal cosmology,” suggested by Le Grice for the
journal, was chosen by the community
as the name of the emerging academic
field, with archetypal astrology and the

study of planetary correlations in psychology, history, culture, and biography
as the empirical foundation of a wider,
multidisciplinary inquiry into their philosophical implications and cosmological
context. In 2010, two major books were
published that addressed archetypal
astrology in a multidisciplinary context:
Coming Home: The Birth and Transformation of the Planetary Era, by CIIS
professor and Hegel scholar Sean Kelly,
provided an insightful analysis of the
teleological, evolutionary dimension
of history as it unfolds through the
archetypal planetary cycles described in
Cosmos and Psyche. And The Archetypal Cosmos: Rediscovering the Gods
in Myth, Science, and Astrology by Le
Grice addressed the theoretical basis for
the relationship between the archetypal
dynamics of the human psyche and the
planetary order of the solar system, in
a comprehensive synthesis of Jungian
psychology, Campbell’s work in myth,
and many of the new paradigm perspectives mentioned above.
	
Most recently, several leading
teachers of archetypal astrology —
Le Grice, Jessica Garfield-Kabbara,
Chad Harris, Matthew Stelzner, O’Neal,
Bill Streett, and Grant Maxwell, along
with Grof and myself — founded the
Institute of Archetypal Cosmology
in San Francisco, to offer dedicated
instruction to students in archetypal
astrological theory and practice, to
provide a forum to pursue and share
research, and to help disseminate ideas
to a wider audience. The first foundational series of lectures (later to be
streamed as online videos) took place in
early 2011. Another recent expression
of the vitality of the field is Correlations,
a series of lively, accessible podcasts on
archetypal astrology hosted by Stelzner,
with Delia Shargel, Garfield-Kabbara,
Harris, and other leading archetypal
astrologers in conversation.
	
I believe that the astonishingly consistent and nuanced reality of the planetary correlations with the archetypal
dynamics of human life is one of the
most compelling intimations we have
that we live in a meaning-laden and
purposeful universe — a cosmos that is
coherent with our deepest spiritual and
moral aspirations. Recognition of these

correlations can help us to become
more consciously co-creative participants in a cosmic unfolding. All of this
points to yet another level of archetypal
understanding: what Plato would call
the Idea of the Good informing the cosmos, what Hegel would call the World
Spirit realizing itself through history, and
what Jung might describe as the Self
archetype operating within the collective
evolution of humankind itself.
	
Much like a life-changing spiritual
awakening produced by a powerful synchronicity, it is possible that a collective
encounter with the growing body of
rigorously researched and skillfully presented astrological correlations could
help to awaken the modern mind from
its disenchanted cosmological condition.
Astrology could then serve as a great
catalyst of humanity’s evolution of consciousness at this pivotal moment in our
history, reframing the larger Copernican
revolution as part of a long, birth-panged
initiation of humanity and the Earth into
the larger cosmic community of being. In
this sense, astrology itself might be seen
mythically as a form of Promethean fire
bestowed from the heavens, helping to
liberate humankind from the collapsing
modern matrix it has clearly outgrown.
References
1. Letters and Drawings of Bruno Schulz, with
Selected Prose, ed. J. Ficowski, trans. W. Arndt
with V. Nelson, Harper & Row, 1988; quoted
in John Updike, “The Visionary of Brohobycz,”
The New York Times Book Review, October 30,
1988: www.nytimes.com/1988/10/30/books/
the-visionary-of-brohobycz.html
2. Letter from Charles Harvey to Richard Tarnas, March 1, 1979. (Charles wrote to me after
reading my early essay on archetypal astrology,
“Prometheus the Awakener,” which set forth
the beginning outlines of a conjoined archetypal
cosmology and psychology.)
© 2011 Richard Tarnas – all rights reserved
Richard Tarnas is a professor of philosophy
and cultural history at the California Institute
of Integral Studies in San Francisco, where he
founded the graduate program in Philosophy,
Cosmology, and Consciousness. He also lectures
on archetypal studies and depth psychology at
Pacifica Graduate Institute in Santa Barbara, and
is on the Board of Governors of the C. G. Jung
Institute of San Francisco. His article, “World
Transits 2000–2020: An Overview,” which is
focused especially on the years 2008–12, can be
read at www.Archaijournal.org

June/July 2011 * The Mountain Astrologer 69

