The Planets Within
THE ASTROLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY OF MARSILIO FICINO




         Thomas Moo n
             Author of Care of the   Soul
The Planets Within
STUDIES IN IMAGINATION SERIES

The Planets Within. Thomas Moore
Facing the World with Soul, Robert Sardello
Archetypal Imagination, Noel Cobb
Book of the Heart, Andres Rodriguez
Romanticism & Esoteric Tradition, Paul Davies
The Planets Within
   The Astrological Psychology
       of Marsilio Ficino


    Thomas Moore




       A   Lindisfarne Books
             ©1982 Associated University Presses, Inc.
                 Introduction ©1989 Noel Cobb


This edition of The Planets Within is a revised edition of the one first
         published by Bucknell University Press in the series
                    “Studies in Jungian Thought."


                  Published with the permission of
                Associated University Presses, Inc. by
                         Lind is fame Books
                        Post Office Box 799
                   Great Barrington. MA 01230
                        w w w. 1 i nd i s fa rn e. org


                         ISBN 0-940262-28-2



                              10 9 8 7 6


                         All rights reserved.
               No part of this book may be reproduced
     in any form without written permission from the publisher.




              Printed in the United States of America
Know that you are another world in miniature and have
in you Sol and Luna and even the stars.
                 — Origen, Homilinc in Lcviticuni, 5, 2



The dance along the artery
The circulation of the lymph
Are figured in the drift of stars.
                       —T. S. Eliot, "Burnt Norton"



We have an entire sky within us, our fiery strength
and heavenly origin: Luna which symbolizes the
continuous motion of soul and body. Mars speed and
Saturn slowness, the Sun God, Jupiter law, Mercury
reason, and Venus humanity.
                —Marsilio Ficino, letter to Lorenzo
                                   the Magnificent
For Pat—Luna and Venus in conjunction
                   Contents

                Foreword by Noel Cobb
                        Preface
        Introduction: The Recovery of Soul

     PART I     Portion Animne: Poetic of the Soul
    1 Marsilio Ficino: Physician of the Soul 29
               2 A World with Soul 40
3 "Dissolve and Congeal": Psychological Alchemy 63
             4 The Elements of Psyche 76
               5 Necessary Madness 96

   PART II     Radii Planetarum: Planetary Radiance
              6 Zodiacal Reflections 119
                      7 Sol 127
                     8 Venus 137
                    9 Mercury 148
                     10 Luna 156
                    11 Saturn 165
                    12 Jupiter 175
                     13 Mars 183

    PART III Musicn Humana: Music of the Soul
          14 The Well-Tempered Life 193

                      Notes 209
                   Bibliography 218
                      Index 223
                           Foreword
               Harping       on an      Old Tune?
       Thomas Moore and the Imagination of Marsilio Ficino


Exactly five hundred years ago this year, in 1489, one of the
great minds of the Renaissance, Marsilio Ficino, sat down to
compose his astonishing treatise of archetypal imagination in
everyday life: Dr Vita Coelitus Comparanda, "How Life Should Be
Arranged According to the Heavens." The brilliant comet of
Ficino's genius showered sparks of inspiration all through the
fertile skies of late quattrocento psyche, leaving countless seed-
fantasies to sprout into rare Neo-Platonic blooms in succeeding
generations, but disappearing out of common view as the flames
of the inquisition rose up to snarl at any sign of pagan enthusiasm.
Now, half a millennium later, it mysteriously returns, swinging
on a long-forgotten arc into collective awareness once again.
Thomas Moore has performed a great service to Ficino's thought
and to contemporary schools of soul-making by writing this
loving and appreciative introduction to the master's "natural
magic" which is "really a school of imagination" (Moore).
   This is an important book! And, of the many reasons that it is
important, I would like to name four. First, it shows a way where­
by the world may be ensouled, whereby soul is given body and is
also nourished by spirit. As James Hillman1 has pointed out,
there is no doubt that Ficino was the formulator of the central
idea of the quattrocento rebirth: that soul is "all things together . . .
the center of the universe, the middle term of all things." Further,
this book, like Ficino's, celebrates and unfolds the rich complexi­
ties of soul, a sorely needed corrective in our time, not only to
the "shrinking" aims of analysis, but to the vague spirituality of
New Age psychologies.
   Second, by following Ficino's own elegant modulations through
the modes, Moore opens a door into Ficino's world, the imaginal
world of the Florentine Renaissance. The author enables us to
join hands with Ficino and thereby to accompany him on his
journeys in pursuit of images of the phenomenal world to their
                       The Planets Within

archetypal origins, a method he called Orphica comparatio, arche-
typa 1 ly identifying the mythic personage behind Plotinus' idea
of epistrophe. With this, we are at the heart of that great pageant
of imagination which we call the "Renaissance." And, what is
more, the re-emergence of the pagan gods in the quattrocento takes
on an entirely new, and urgent, relevance. Not only is a vision
given us of our cultural roots in ancient Greece, but a vision is
given of our origins in the archetypal world, mundus archetypnlis.
   At a time when the ruling structure of consciousness seems
utterly ignorant of the archetypal forces informing the literal
realities of our lives, this book is a God-send. Perhaps now what
appears at first glance to be an inexplicably extravagant claim by
a renowned authority on Renaissance Italy, Eugenio Garin, will
begin to make sense — that "after Ficino there is no writing, no
thought, in which a direct or indirect trace of his activity may
not be found."2
   The third, then, of the reasons why this book is important is
that it gives astrology at last the kind of home it deserves: a
palace designed by Leonardo, decorated by Botticelli, furnished
by Lorenzo and filled with the living music of Ficino's lyre.
   Astrology has too long been homeless, feeling ill-at-ease
among the cheap oracles of the fortune-teller's tent or languish­
ing in Theosophy's baroque tea-rooms; sickened by the stale
hamburgers of the newspaper columns or enslaved by the
mechanical melodramas of the faceless astro-computer companies.
Placing soul, instead of prediction, in the center of his astrology,
Ficino, as Moore elucidates, creates a perspective which gives
attention to the planets as rays of divinity, rather than as objects
of divination. A perspective which is both an imaginal placing
and a dimension of experience. "In Ficinian imagination the psyche
is pictured as a round of planets, all simultaneously contributing
to the music of the soul" (pl89). The task is neither one of out­
witting the stars, nor of simply suffering their "accidental"
interventions. Not atonement, but attunement. Know thyself,
becomes: "know the stars!" Astrology as a way of living one's
life in accord with the heavens.
   By differentiating the specific qualities of the particular plane­
tary rays, Ficino founds an archetypal phenomenology. All the
world is infused with soul, each particular thing displaying
archetypal radiance, its own unique face: pomegranate, grape,
starfish, python, raincloud, rose, emerald, oaktree, waterfall,
zebra, orchid, earthquake, papaya, dolphin and giraffe. What­
ever it may be, each thing has an archetypal home: Saturn, Mars,
                            Foreword

Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Sol or Luna. Further, 1 am encouraged
to discover the medicinal heat of solar ginger as well as the acrid,
burning passions of solar sulphur. Amber, honey, cinnamon,
gold and saffron — all teach me other secrets of solar nature. I
can also learn to recognize Sol's dazzling and desiccating power
in the ultra-rational abstractions of scientific prose. Or, I can
meet its dark underside in the form of the swift jaws of the
crocodile of spiritual fanaticism. Or, I can witness its nobility in
the lion that "roars at the enraging desert" (Wallace Stevens).
   The Ficino-Moore revisioning of astrology makes it supremely
psychological, reclaiming the Zodiac as a theatre of soul, a Memory
Theatre-in-the-Round, an alchemical vessel for the planetary
workings of the imagination and a container for the sufferings
of psyche — psychological not just in the introverted, introspec­
tive sense. Psyche, as World Soul, according to Ficino, and
following Plato, is scattered throughout everything; everything
manifests soul's interiority and depth. The planets mirror their
metaphors within. They are also persons with characters,
physiognomies, styles of speech and action, who form complex
relationships among themselves. Psychology thus finds a cos­
mology for soul.3 The Gods are embodied, astronomically, in
the planets, but psychologically in myths and in the phenomeno­
logical texture of the sensible world. Ficino's psychology is one
which would imagine the divinity within each thing, the God in
each event.
   The fourth reason why this book is important is because it
deflates the explanatory compulsions of psychological theory
and directs our attention to our lived world, calling into play the
aesthetic, that is, the sensing, imagining heart. Nearly one
hundred years of psychoanalysis does not seem to have awakened
this heart; in fact, psychoanalysis seems to have colluded with
the collective tendency to an-aesthetize this sensitivity, this
openness to the actual qualities of the environment we inhabit.
Psychotherapy needs to relocate the patient within the psyche,
not assume that the psyche is stuffed inside the patient. We are
in psyche, not psyche in us, as C. G. Jung so often pointed out.
   Ficino's ideas of accommodation, arrangement, imitation,
devotion, tempering and tuning are all based on the recognition
of the qualities and characteristics of the archetypal modes. For
Ficino, human temperament, musica humann, was the "proper
arrangement of one's life so that all concrete experiences resonate,
like overtones, the fundamental octave of possibilities represented
by the planet-tones. Psychotherapy would be musical then
insofar as one would temper and tune the planetary tonal centers
                      The Planets Within

so that each would hum within the surface events of life."
   It is a delight to observe the subtle alchemy with which Moore
transforms Ficino's astro-musicology into a musical psycho­
therapy relevant to our own time. With Moore, our understand­
ing of Ficino's contemporary significance for practice resonates
even deeper into soul than the brilliant pioneering work of the
previous generation. This is our Ficino!
   The last chapter of this book, "The Well-Tempered Life," is a
beautifully crafted hymn to the essentially aesthetic nature of
Ficinian psychology. Returning to the ancient idea of harmony
(based on well-tuned intervals, whether consonant or dissonant)
as imputed traditionally to Pythagoras, Moore evokes, I feel,
the archetypal presence of Orpheus within the "Ficinian" practice
of archetypal psychology and psychotherapy.5 For, "Ficino was
writing, not philosophy as has been supposed, but an archetypal
psychology."1’ This psychology, like the Orphic hymns to the
many Gods, is polytonal, polytheistic. Psychological sensibility
is achieved through being attuned to the multiple powers of the
psyche, the planets, and their overtones in the material world.
And, in "polytheistic psychology there can be no final point of
view, no one reason for anything, no ending in therapy, no goal
achieved. Though it is most difficult for a senex ego to accept
such continuous variations, an imaginal ego finds in it variety
both in logic and beauty" (p207).
   This superb re-presentation of Ficinian astrological psychology
ends with Angelo de Gubernatis' fitting image of the deep blue
firmament shining with a thousand brilliant eyes: a cosmic
peacock in all the splendor of its eye-bespangled feathers. Cauda
pavonis as the perennial primavera of every renaissance, a rainbow
reminder of our inherent multiplicity and our celestial roots.
   In my library this volume takes its rightful place beside those
other classics of archetypal psychology after Jung: James Hillman's
Revisioning Psychology; David Miller's The New Polytheism; Patricia
Berry's Echo's Subtle Body and Mary Watkins' Waking Dreams.

Noel Cobb
London. January 14, 1989.
                            Preface


"What is the stars?" asks a Sean O'Casey character, finding the
edge of the cosmos farthest removed from him to be the heart of
his own mystery. With the fifteenth-century Florentine Marsilio
Ficino, we might ask the same question of essence about the
planets, knowing that our real concern is not the physical consti­
tution of those heavenly bodies but the puzzles of our own sub­
jective experience. Yet the two, planet and person, play a
dialectical drama, a reflecting dance in which one cannot exist
without the other. So, to use the word within in the title of this
book is simply a way of distinguishing it from studies in physics.
The planets of Renaissance astrology and of this modern formu­
lation of psychology are not "within” as if they were merely
symbols for personality traits: Mars for anger, Venus for sex. They
are "out there" because it is out there in things and in relationships
that we find our souls. Nor are the planets within as though we
contained them, as though they were a subcategory of our own
subjectivity. They contain us as well; for we find our own con­
sciousness and will immersed in patterns of thought and feeling,
known by the names of planets, that we neither have conjured up
nor have the power to dismiss. "What is the stars" but a constant
invitation to expand the borders of imagination, to depersonalize
subjective experience, to become attuned to a World Soul (Anima
Mundi) "within" which the planets whirl.
   If the first problem confronting the reader of this book is to
place the planets, the second is to deal with the illusions of
historiography. Since Ficino, the subject of this study, published
his relevant writings exactly five hundred years ago, it will be
tempting to slide into a fantasy of history while reading about his
ideas. Indeed, when I first began to read Ficino in a quiet corner of
the library at Syracuse University, I thought of him as an intrigu­
ing heirloom, like an antique piece of furniture whose shape and
material are immediately appealing but whose function remains a
question. But now in my mind Ficino has been unpinned from the
                       The Planets Within

corkboard of history. It is not necessary to be stuck in that habit of
thought which turns people of the past into tabs to be inserted into
the slots of our systematized historical curiosity. It is possible to
realize how thin the ether of historical time is, and what a splendid
conductor of thought and imagination, allowing Ficinos to speak
directly to our modern, everyday concerns. This book does not
aim at positioning Ficino historically; it treats him as a living
psychologist with something to say about the modern psyche.
   In a number of ways the book tries to be true to Ficino's own
style. For example, though he was an influential, widely published
intellectual, he was not an academician, except in the Platonic
sense. This book, too, is not as academic in style as it could be;
rather, as Ficino says of his own writing, it is a laboratory full of
experiments and remedies. Also, as Ficino's major task was to
transmit a neglected tradition with translation and commentary,
this in turn is an interpretive revival of Ficino himself. Finally,
since theoretical and practical attention to soul was central in
Ficino's work, he may be seen above all as a psychologist; and in
spite of sections of the book that look like history, art criticism,
and zoology, it is throughout a psychological study of human
experience.
   Although I found Ficino by accident, that is to say by Mercury,
I did not understand his language or get this commentary into
print without the help of many imaginative persons. The Hermetic
guide who pointed out the right roads and made subtle suggestions
was David Miller. Other guides at Syracuse University were
Stanley Hopper, Huston Smith, James Wiggins, and Richard
Pearson. I am also grateful to Donald Vorreyer and Alan
Donovan for moral support and help in obtaining a modest grant
from Glassboro State College. I am especially indebted to James
Hillman, whose writing was the Mercurial wand that opened a
way into Ficino and into psychology itself, and whose friendship
and support have guided this book into print. I wish also to
acknowledge Lonnie Kliever, John Loudon, and the editors at
Bucknell University Press for appreciating the value of this
idiosyncratic approach to history and psychology.
   The manuscript was completed before the appearance of
Charles Boer's translation of Ficino's De Vita; therefore, except
where otherwise noted, the translations are mine. But I enthusiasti­
cally recommend the Boer translation for its accuracy and style
and for its helpful glossary.
                           Preface

  It takes a certain Hermetic madness to see the soul of the
planets, and so it is to my mad-hatted friends that I owe the
greatest debt.
   Introduction: The Recovery of Soul


The night sky has always been a source of wonder. Its dark, black
space hovers over us as a constant reminder of the mysteries that
impregnate nature, while its brilliant ornaments, the stars and
planets, especially the sun and moon, nourish a deep curiosity
about other forms of life. Some nights the sky teems with stars,
while at other times the darkness is unmitigated. Low-lying clouds
may cast a misty barrier between us and that deep darkness; but
when we can see the sky, and if we have studied its patterns, it
turns up at night like a familiar face. We can either recognize this
sky by its patterns, or conversely, knowing its habits we can find
ourselves and establish our own position.
   If all this is true of the sky we behold with our eyes at night, it is
also true of a dark universe we can see within ourselves with an
inner eye. In that other universe we find ourselves in the midst of
an inner darkness where are contained all memories of the past
and fantasies for the future. Like the night sky, that deep inner
space is full of mysteries; yet its darkness and distances too are
spotted with patterns, lights, and recognizable figures. It can
become familiar, like a face, and from it we can find our position.
It would seem that we stand between two infinitely vast universes:
the cosmos of the outer world still chary of revealing its many
secrets, and the microcosm of the inner world of the psyche,
equally possessive of its mysteries.
    These notions, of course, are by no means original, since people
for millennia have been looking into the night sky as into a mirror.
 Identifying the lights and moving patterns felt within as planets
and stars, they have fashioned an astrological portrait of the
psyche. Only with the arrival of the science of astronomy, with its
 technology and mathematics, did the sky truly begin to recede
 from our most intimate grasp. Finally, when through the omni­
scient eye of television we could all see the dust of Luna, the
 imprint of a human foot, wellheeled of course, and later a golf club
 teeing off on the body of what once was a daimon, a god, a
                        The Planets Within

 celestial governor or archon, then deeply felt ties with the planets
 were severed. Now they are the object of scientific fascination,
 which is not without its own sense of wonder and adventure, but
 they have lost the power to mirror the deep self, to stand as elegant
 metaphors for the vast space and regular movements we feel deep
 inside. In our day the night sky has a different kind of fascination,
 a more literal concern. We wonder about traversing those
 distances and worry about the creatures we are bound to meet out
 there when we go traveling. We hesitate to guess the implications,
 with respect to our own cosmological, physical, and even moral
 beliefs, of other worlds and especially other peoples.
   But if this transformation of awareness from astrological to
astronomical consciousness has hardened somewhat our thrill at
 the night sky, it has done more extensive damage to that space we
familiarly call inner. Those patterns and shiftings formerly
identified as movements of gods and daimons affecting our souls
now become instincts, drives, unconscious tendencies, condi­
tioned reflexes, learned behaviors, and cathected complexes.
While we have certainly gained something in the move away from
superstition and ignorance, we have also suffered a loss. Whereas
once the vast cosmos aptly mirrored the depth and vast extent of
human consciousness, now many of our "shrinks'' —an appro­
priate term perhaps—reductively tell us that our souls are really
only the complex dynamics of electrical currents and synapses.
Subjective experience, they say, is an epiphenomenon of that
marvelous computer, the human brain. The brilliant planets have
been exchanged for electrical sparks. Or, maybe the soul is the
unraveling of childhood experiences, the nuclear family exploding
in a mushroom cloud of symptoms and problems. Instead of
recognizing, as did intelligent people in ages past, that there are
movements within that are bigger than ourselves, superhuman,
self-willed, and irresistible, we take it all on ourselves. Where
before a person might acknowledge the onslaught of Venus or
Saturn and in some humility try to deal with the overpowering
situation, today we search for a pill to still the inconveniencing jab
of a mood or "mental problem." Or, we become inflated. Where
before Mercury or a Muse might inspire one with a new idea or a
novel creation, today we speak of an individual's genius as if it
were as much a component of his individual identity as the color
of his hair. We have stuffed the microcosm of the psyche into a test
tube and corked it with ego and scientific rationalism.
   I am not going to suggest a return to the old ways of antiquity.
We now have new information about the cosmos, and some new
              Introduction: The Recovery of Soul

insight into the nature of the cosmos within. But, having felt the
increasing sterility and soullessness of the purely objective scien­
tific view of the world, can we not return to antiquity with new
eyes? Can we not avoid superstition and literalism and yet recover
what has been lost of antique sensibility? Is not a cosmos
peopled—not the precise word—with daimons and deities more fit
for humans than a world objective and lifeless? It is curious that an
age we call the Renaissance, an era praised for its humanism, was
also a time of the rebirth of the classical deities. Gods and humans
go together. Take away the gods and dehumanization sets in.

   All this is to say that the macrocosm may be allowed some inter­
play with the microcosm, and that entails a high estimation of
human imagination; for it is only in imagination that the gods and
their starry sky can be reborn without anachronistic literalism.
   The purely physicalist view of the universe that has come to
captivate consciousness is evident in spontaneous reactions of
ridicule toward groups that today profess belief in an earth-
centered cosmos. From one point of view such convictions seem to
border the psychotic, so out of touch are they with the modern
perspective. But from another point of view these non-
Copernicans hold onto a valuable realization: that for most
human purposes the ground on which we stand is the center of the
universe. Human being'is at the center of its own consciousness,
where a centripetal imagination makes human contact with an
otherwise cold, objective world.
   Multiple perspectives are required if one is to affirm at the same
time a geocentric sensibility and a Copernican cosmology, and it
may take the same kind of flexible viewpoint to give a place in
psychology to astrological symbolism. But this would not be a
radically new vision; for, in the psychology of medieval and
Renaissance man, the psyche was understood to be a microcosmic
reflection of the universe. Many of those beautiful paintings of the
gods and their mythologies that grace Renaissance villas and
churches originally served an astro-psychological purpose. Every
period has its spokesmen for the psyche. Even the Enlightenment
era, that time when men stole the light of the planets and turned it
literally on their microscopes and figuratively on their reasoning,
had its challenge in William Blake: "Tyger, tyger, burning bright
in the forests of the night.” He brought the living light back to its
dark abode. Sensitive to imagination and to the psyche, Blake
knew that in order to see the stars there has to be darkness; indeed,
the darker the better. Our psychology, too, needs light and
                        The Planets Within

darkness if it is to encompass the full range of man's days and
nights on earth.


                   The Psychology of Antiquity


   One hears an occasional complaint that the twentieth century is
mad in its cult of youth. Aging is an embarrassment, something to
cover up with powders and face lifts. But there is an extra­
ordinarily subtle and insidious intellectual youthful myopia that
touches upon the problem of this book. Exhilarated by the
creations and progress of science and technology, we cultural
young adults tend to think that there is nothing not new under the
sun. Even students of psychology exhibit this shortsighted
thinking, typical of the adolescent who thinks he is the first to step
out on the earth, the first to do this and feel that. These students of
psychology are apparently taken in by the modern instruments
and jargon, the hardness of research and the certitude offered by
numerical values. To be sure, the fifty-minute hour, the fifty-
dollar session, the cocktail-party vocabulary of complexes and
neuroses, the mounds of statistics and algebraic formulae, the
orderly and systematic desensitizing vice-exterminating procedures
of behaviour modification, to say nothing of lobotomies and
shock therapies—these are the proud achievements of our century.
But all of this does* not mean that psychology as such is an infant.
   Perhaps the reason a college psychology major would boast that
he had traced the history of psychology all the way back to the
nineteenth century has to do with a common modern bias. In our
world science equals knowledge. A statement is true when it is
scientific. When it has been cataloged, quantified, repeated,
programmed, and published, then a theory or hypothesis is
considered true. Other kinds of learning, such as the Liberal Arts,
enjoy the blessings of Eternal Truth, but that kind is not very
reliable. However, once one is willing to look beyond the positiv­
istic, scientific method for knowledge, then one finds psychology
not beginning in the nineteenth century, but only wearing
down—momentarily.
   Indeed, there is a wealth of psychological insight and creative
thought to be found in our very unscientific heritage of religion,
myth, philosophy, art, and literature. In archaic sources these
areas are not sorted out in a way that would please our pigeon­
holing minds, but nonetheless the information is there. In fact, the
               Introduction: The Recovery of Soul

true complexity of psychological reality is reflected precisely in
those ill-sorted sources.
   This book centers on one of the most soul-centered—psycho­
logical—movements of the prescientific age, in Renaissance Italy,
where a group of varied and talented individuals clustered during
the fifteenth century. Their explorations of the inner world, their
maps and ingenious methods for surveying the inner life were not
applauded as were those of their contemporaries, daring Colum­
buses who wandered into far-off, unknown regions. But these
people may have found inner islands, land masses, and channels
which would give us today a better sense of where we are, where
we have come from, and the right routes to take toward fertile
places and unexplored territories.
   These psychological navigators, the "Florentine Platonists,"
were a band of poets, philosophers, artists, and theologians who
were captivated by the spirit of Plato. Their quixotic leader,
Marsilio Ficino, guided them in their Platonic studies, but his
interests were broad and far-reaching. In everything, from philos­
ophy to medicine, he taught them to see all things in the light of
soul. Today, in our language, we could say quite accurately that
Ficino held and taught that a psychological attitude ought to
pervade all our researches and ideas.1 Ficino not only influenced
artists, poets, and philosophers with his ideas, he also developed
what we today would call a practice of psychotherapy. As we shall
see in some detail, he taught his clients and followers to imagine
deeply and constantly. In fact, it is clear that Ficino considered a
person to be in good psychological condition to the extent that he
or she enjoyed a well-nourished and practiced imagination.
Serious attention to images and knowledge about their subtle
characteristics form the basis for a Ficinian psychotherapy.
   What I propose to do in this book is to step back in time, to
those strange days of the Florentine Academy, and particularly to
some quite unusual esoteric writings of Ficino. This is what a
Freudian analyst might call a "regression in service of the ego." It is
hoped that this retreat will broaden and deepen our knowledge
about psychology and serve as a refresher course for our cramped
psychological attitude. But this step backwards in history is not
taken without some problems. For one thing, Ficino used an
entirely different language for the inner life. His terms were less
abstract and less mechanical than ours tend to be. Rather than
referring to love and anger as if these were simple circulatory
movements of the psyche, like squirts of plasma or adrenaline, he
alludes to the realms and powers of Venus, Mars, and other
                        The Planets Within

planetary deities. He sees the source of our troubles and successes
not in instincts and conditioned responses but in deeper factors
represented by the gods and goddesses.
    How are we to take these references to the gods of Greece and
Rome? Or, how are we to interpret his quaint and occasionally
downright insane remedies? He advises a person lacking in the
spirit of Jupiter, for example, to add peppermint to his diet. Is this
legend, folklore, precocious pharmacology, or pure metaphor?
Where does Ficino the psychologist end and the physician begin,
or the theologian, or the magus, or the astrologer? How are we to
distinguish between concerns of psychology and those of
religion —that strange matter of the gods?
   Two tactics would clearly be ineffective. We could understand
Ficino literally, eat peppermint and do the other unusual things he
advises—worship the gods, undertake the serious practice of
astrology, and so forth. Or, we could translate his theories and
suggestions for therapy into the language and practice with which
we are familiar today. When he mentions Mars, we could substi­
tute anger, and so on. But neither of these approaches will do; for
there is more to Ficino's bizarre remedies than psychology as we
know it, and it is not all superstition. Literalism will lead us only
into occult quackery, and translation into some modern system,
making of Ficino a Skinner, a Freud, or a Jung, would be to reduce
and rationalize what is basically a transrational appraisal of the
life of the psyche. To make Ficino's psychology into a brand of
psychoanalysis would amount to cutting off his footing in the
world of imagination, placing him on a modern-day Procrustean
bed of scientific rationalism.



            A Modern Reading of Ficinian Psychology


   It may be difficult but it is not impossible to carry Ficino's
insight forward into the twentieth century. Our first guide is
Ficino's own fundamental tool—imagination. Ficino's psychology
is expressed in images rather than logical, linear statements. So we
may treat these images as we would others, as for example the
images we find in literature, art, poetry, and even dreams. Strange
as they are, Ficino's images are not entirely foreign to our history
or to our art. The classical deities to whom he refers constantly
appear in art, drama, and literature throughout the centuries.
Their characteristics, the varied hollows of nature these gods rule.
              Introduction: The Recovery of Soul

the deep centers of the psyche they personify—all of these have
been depicted by poets and artists. Even the quaint medicines, the
gems and animals Ficino associates with the various deities, and
therefore with various tendencies of the psyche, have been sorted
out and elaborated in lapidaries and bestiaries of the Middle
Ages and Renaissance. The trouble is that we do not usually read
these kinds of books psychologically. As we do with art, we view
them as curiosities or as entertainment or as objects of scholarship.
But these images—the precious stones and the real and imaginary
beasts—are like the figures of our dreams. They are fashioned by
the psyche and therefore reveal something of their maker. Like
dream images, they require a sensitive, modest imaginative play so
that their significance may emerge.
   Besides our own imaginations freely playing (seriously nonethe­
less) with Ficino's imagery, we fortunately have guides: C. G. Jung
and James Hillman. These specialists in matters psychological and
symbolic will not be claimed as authorities so much as exemplars.
Their writings show us how to dive deep into images without
strangling them, without giving them a Midas touch transforming
them into our favorite golden theories.
   When I first read Jung, and especially later than when I read his
more orthodox followers, I vehemently rejected the tack of finding
"Jungian" concepts like "anima" and "shadow” in literature and
art. It seemed softly and elegantly reductionistic. But as I read Jung
carefully and more extensively, I discovered in him a true concern
for the integrity of images. Jung bends the glow of an image
toward personal experiences, feelings, and thoughts, but unlike
many psychologists who deal in images he does not reduce the
image to the personal level. Mars is ever more than human anger,
Venus infinitely greater than human love. He knew that to
interpret images is simply to search for other images that are
similar, expecting to find in the similarities deeper understanding
and insight. In his own hands, his favored terms—shadow, anima,
wise old man. Great Mother—are mere helpful tools, metaphors
for seeing through and into traditional words and pictures handed
down to us through the centuries. In the face of any mysterious
image, we may either stand mute and unaffected, we may slice and
beat the image in order to make it fit our familiar patterns of
thought, or we may delicately compare, search, and probe with an
artist's eye, teasing some significance away. One of Jung's great
contributions to art, and to religion in particular, is to demon­
strate that images of tradition need not remain as lifeless, opaque
hunks of matter. With imagination we can vivify them, rendering
                        The Planets Within

them more transparent by comparing them and restating them in
the metaphors congenial to our modern perspective.
   If in Jung there is the suggestion that psychology has to do with
more than the personal life, that it is more than the ordinary
person usually imagines it to be, then in Hillman's work this
suggestion is repeated, amplified, and underscored. Hillman lays
stress on soul and wants to bring psyche back into psychology. He
has gone his own way, yet, like Jung, Hillman directs our attention
to depth. For Hillman an image is bottomless, and the way to let
its significance seep into our skin is to dive into it. Hillman also
accents the pathological currents in psychological experience,
veering away from normative ideals too tight, too optimistic, too
one-sided as reflections of the way psychological life proceeds. He
also opts for a polytheistic rather than a monotheistic view of the
world. There are many legitimate perspectives on experience, he
suggests, and a single one becomes dominant only to the detriment
of the psyche.
   Hillman's concern for soul and his polytheistic position place
him shoulder to shoulder with Ficino. In fact, as I have read the
two of them I have had an eerie feeling that a mysterious dialogue
was taking place across the reach of centuries. I have also con­
ceived of this book as a kind of dialogue, a constant movement
between the laconic remarks of Ficino and suggestions for giving
those remarks a life and context for our day. This book is not
intended as a running commentary on Ficino's text, nor is it an
historical or philosophical analysis. It is rather an effort to explore
and unveil significance in selected images found in Ficino's work.
It is meant to be a kind of depth psychology—an exploration of
imagery with a clear psychological attitude behind it. I do not
intend to stop at a comparison of Ficino's words with other
historical concepts or curiosities. I am asking what his strange
philosophy and remedies have to say about the psyche today.



                             The Planets


  To study Ficino seriously is to put oneself in rather extra­
ordinary company. Although Ficino's writings are not well
known—only a few have been translated into English—histori­
cally he influenced a number of significant artists and philo­
sophers. We can trace a direct line from his Neoplatonic fancies to
the paintings of Botticelli, for example. He also influenced
               INTRODUCTION: THE RECOVERY OF SOUL

Giordano Bruno, that exceptional philosopher who theorized
about multiple worlds and extraterrestrial civilizations, studied
Egyptian religion piously, and found himself imprisoned,
tortured, and executed by an Inquisitorial church. Bruno was an
avid student of Ficino's esoteric writings. Another outstanding
philosopher familiar with Ficino's writings was Robert Fludd.
Fludd, like Ficino, planted his speculations in the imagery of
music, and in other ways he tried to map the interplay of body,
soul, and spirit. Like Ficino, Fludd was known as a magician,
astrologer, philosophical musician, and physician.
   Now, following Hillman's lead, I am suggesting that we allow
the extraordinary Ficino to influence our perspective on psy­
chology. Specifically, I am interested in the same text which
charmed Fludd and Bruno, a three-volume work entitled Libri de
 Vita Tres—Three Books about Life. These three books are about
life and health, physical and psychological. They are full of
suggestions for healthy living and warnings against certain
inadvisable practices. The third volume is especially interesting for
its natural magic, astrology, and musical symbolism. It is this
volume, De Vita Coelitus Comparanda—How Life Should be
Arranged according to the Heavens—that serves as the primary
source and stimulus for this book. Since the title is long, and since
''heavens'' in Ficino's writings refers primarily to the planets, I will
refer to the work simply as The Planets.
   The title itself adumbrates some of Ficino's insights into
psychology, insights developed chiefly through arcane images in
the work itself. For example, the word arrange suggests both
multiplicity in the psyche—you have to have many parts in order
to make an arrangement—and a musical notion about psycho­
logical health, a notion Ficino develops quite ingeniously in The
Planets. Furthermore, the planets bear the names of gods and
goddesses. These, advises Ficino, can be arranged for the good
health of the person. A healthy life is a musical life—a strange
suggestion that demands a good explanation.
   But a good explanation does not explain everything away. It
does not define, in the literal sense of setting limits; rather, it
extends the limits and deepens one's familiarity with the material.
Our job is to keep imagining, drawing closer to the elusive core of
the image. Ficino's text is not unlike a dream which calls for
familiarity and increasing intimacy if the atmosphere and aura of
its secret are to be sensed.
   Ficino's little book affords us an opportunity to take a fresh look
at the planets, not the planets of the night sky, but rather the
                       The Planets Within

planets within. His philosophy of soul and his practical instruc­
tions for healthy living send us off into deep exploration of those
dark spaces of the psyche and the occasional lights. Before
examining each of the planets we will look closely at some of
Ficino's basic assumptions, review the building blocks, the vision
out of which he creates an astrological view of psychological life.
We may see then, through his eyes, that astrology is not only a
superstition, not only a faddish delight. It is also a way of
imagining our inner world, complete with our flights of visionary
intuition and our painful pathologies.
                        PART I

    Poetica Animae:
   A Poetic of the Soul
I have noticed how easily an image of someone
mourning moves many people to pity. And just as the
image of a lovable person is moving and has an effect on
one’s eyes, imagination, spirit, and humor, so the
heavenly visage is no less vital and effective. Does not
the gentle and happy face of a prince uplift everyone in
a city? Does not a mean and sad face terrify? What
about the face of the heavens? Do you think it is
possible to resist the lords of all things earthly?
                        —Ficino, The Planets, chapter 17
To the extent that the ruling heavens favor your
beginnings and further life, you will pursue the promise
of your birth; especially if Plato is correct and antiquity
with him, in saying that when anyone is born they are
given a certain daimon, a life-guardian—destined by
one's very own star.
                       —Ficino, The Planets, chapter 23
                                 1
 Marsilio Ficino: Physician of the soul

As our view of Western history becomes more sophisticated and
complex and as we aquire new information and apply more
subtle theories of history itself to the facts, broad and simplistic
categories of time give way to smaller and overlapping periods and
eras. We can find patterns of rise and fall, decay and rebirth, in
almost any selected segment of time. "Renaissance” seems to be an
eternal pattern happening always at some level. Nevertheless, that
remarkable era we know as the Italian Renaissance still stands out
as an extraordinary moment in our collective past. An inexhaus­
tible curiosity and spirit of exploration led to world-shaping
discovery and invention, and at the same time a revivified
imagination produced unequaled art, architecture, music, and
literature. In all of this we see a rebirth of Greek and Roman
classics, or, to put it more precisely in the words of the distin­
guished Renaissance scholar Paul O. Kristeller, this was a time of
the "rebirth of the arts guided by antiquity.”1
   The guidance of antiquity, however, extended beyond the
realms of art and literature. We find a return of the classical gods
and goddesses not only on painters' canvases and in sculptors'
stone, but also in shadier places, in books concerning magic and
occult mysteries. Antique philosophy, a delight to many a
Renaissance thinker, provided not only the groundwork for philo­
sophical and theological design and argument, but also a source
for speculation about such things as alchemy, astrology, magic,
and occult medicine. Indeed, historians like Panofsky, Wind, and
Seznec assure us that even in the highly visible and widely pro­
claimed works of artists deeper mysteries are hidden.
   Marsilio Ficino was the admiring inheritor of both streams of
knowledge—the humanistic and the occult. Today, on those rare
occasions when his name does appear in books and essays, Ficino
is recognized chiefly for his translations of Plato and the
Neoplatonic philosophers and for the influence of his Platonic

                                 29
30                     The Planets Within

thought in art and literature. But he had that darker side, too.
Though he was certainly a scholar and lofty-minded philosopher,
he was also obviously concerned with practical matters of living.
In this exceptional but telling work of his we are about to explore,
Ficino reveals his attention to practical techniques for making his
speculative views on the soul connect with daily living. Indeed, he
was a philosopher, but he was also concerned to spell out a
practical yet psychological way of life. Along with his philo­
sophical ideas he fabricated a remarkable amalgam of music,
magic, medicine, astrology, art, and ritual—all directed toward a
release from materialistic shortsightedness and the establishment
of a soul-focused life-style.


                     Florence and the Medicis

   Ficino saw himself as a physician of two sorts. In the preface to
his books on health he refers to his double birth. As the god
Bacchus had two mothers, he writes, he himself had two fathers.
His physical father commended him to Galen, physician of the
body; and his other father, Cosimo de’ Medici, from whom he had
been reborn, dedicated him to Plato, physician of the soul.
   Ficino’s soul-father, Cosimo de' Medici, was perhaps the most
influential and productive member of that outstanding family, in
spite of the fact that his grandson, Lorenzo, was called "the Magni­
ficent." The Medicis were merchants and bankers in a society that
was self-consciously cosmopolitan and internationally significant.
The republic of Florence meandered along its twisting historical
path governed by various councils and other bodies. In or out of
office the Medicis were, of course, influential, if not always to
their advantage, as in Cosimo's costly ill-fated support of Pope
John XXIII. Cosimo had a passion for giving all sorts of ideas
concrete form; so he gave financial backing for architectural
projects and he supported artists like Donatello, Fra Filippo Lippi,
and Fra Angelico. His son, Piero, provided shelter and patronage
for Botticelli.
   Besides his generous concern for the papacy, art, and architec­
ture, Cosimo had his less rational side as well. His friend,
Vespasiano da Bisticci, the bookseller, records for us another
curious interest, one we shall see developed in Ficino. Vespasiano
writes: "Astrologers found him well-versed in their science, for he
had a certain faith in astrology, and employed it to guide him on
certain private occasions."2 Here we encounter a deeper, more
              MaRSILIO FlCINO: PHYSICIAN OF THE SOUL               31

complex notion of "Renaissance man" than the popular notion of a
person who can paint, play music, write poetry, and design
weapons. In their speculations and probing discussions the men of
the Renaissance were blending concerns of reason and unreason,
of philosophy and magic; more importantly, they were aware of
the substantive connections between the arts and between the arts
and religion. On the model of Cosimo and Ficino, we might say
that a Renaissance person as a type is someone who, by virtue of a
sensitivity to image, sees an interrelatedness among all things.
   Although Cosimo's largesse as an art patron and his assiduous
care in building libraries play significant roles in the full story of
Ficinian cult of imagination, his most practical gift was one of time
and space. He provided Ficino with a villa outside Florence, at
Careggi, where the scholar could do his work of translating and
composing free of cares and interruptions. That is not to say that
the villa was a quiet place of never-ending study. There gathered
around Ficino artists, philosophers, and poets who were inspired
by his intellectual and psychological leadership. They were so
taken by Ficino's revivification of Plato that they modeled their
association on the Platonic Academy, and each year on November
7 they would festively reenact the Symposium. Marsilio, the
dwarfish, humpbacked, notoriously ugly "physician of the soul"
translated and taught, but he also cared for the psychological life
of his friends. We have a hint of this care in a letter from Cosimo
to Ficino. Ficino was a musical therapist, having developed a
highly sophisticated theory and practice of music in the service of
psychology. For his patients he would carefully select music tuned
to the needs of their soul and play it on his lyre. In his letter
Cosimo invites Ficino to visit him: "Do come then, and do not
forget to bring with you the Orphean lyre."3
   Ficino himself tells us that Cosimo conceived the idea of an
Academy when Florence was host to a portion of a great council of
Eastern and Western churchmen. The council had begun in Ferrara
but ran into trouble; so Cosimo persuaded his friend, Pope
Eugenius IV, to transfer the meetings to Florence, a move that took
place in 1439. The council brought prestige and commerce to
Florence, but more importantly it provided a connection with the
East. Cosimo's library of rare manuscripts grew quickly, and
through the presence of scholars unusually well versed in Greek
and Eastern thought his own mind was fertilized. Particularly
influential was Giorgius Gemistus Plethon (1360-1452), a philoso­
pher who had been born in Constantinople and had spent many
years in Mistra, in the region of ancient Sparta. He was not only
32                      The Planets Within

acquainted with Greek philosophy in its own language, he was
also a student of Zoroastrianism and Chaldaic astrology. The light
of reason and the darkness of the occult often traveled close
together in those fertile times.
   Ficino was only six years old at the time of Plethon's visit—he
was born in 1433—when Cosimo de' Medici became intrigued with
the notion of an ancient wisdom contained in the works of Plato
and the later "Platonists," actually the Neoplatonists. His
enthusiasm and curiosity were more deeply aroused decades later,
two years before the founding of the Academy, when a monk
from Macedonia visited Florence. The monk brought with him an
incomplete copy of the Corpus Hermeticum, containing fourteen
of the fifteen treatises. Cosimo had Ficino interrupt his translations
of Plato in order to make accessible as quickly as possible this
exciting esoteric compilation. Once again, Plato and occult studies
run into each other, and this time the darker partner takes first
place.
   Under Cosimo's enlightened patronage, unfailing intuitive
judgment, and clever political moves the Florentine intellectual
community thrived. In this atmosphere the followers of Plato
could pursue their cultivation of "virtu," the individual's total
development of himself beyond all limits and the shaping of his life
into a work of art.4 Ficino frequently exhorted his friends and
followers to live the best life possible. "Optimo" and “optissime"
continually qualify the phrase "modus vivendi" in his books and
even in his private correspondence. His expansive view of the
possibilities for human life appears again and again in his writings,
as when in his major work, Theologia Platonica, he writes: man
"spans the heavens and the earth; he plumbs the depths of
Tartarus; nor are the heavens too high for him, nor is the center of
the earth too deep."5
   At Cosimo's death in 1464 he was proclaimed Pater Patriae,
father of the country, and for Ficino he had truly served as a
spiritual father. Cosimo's son, Piero, called II Gottoso — "The
Gouty"— took over leadership of the family, but he died five
years later leaving his son, Cosimo's grandson Lorenzo the
Magnificent, in charge. Ficino named Lorenzo Figlio del Sole, "Son
of the Sun", for, though his style and interests were different from
his grandfather's, nevertheless, the Florentines flourished with
renewed vitality under his enthusiastic patronage and stimulation.
Lorenzo was tutored by Ficino, Landino, and other exceptional
intellectuals, and not surprisingly he became an intelligent and
perceptive patron. He nurtured young artists like Botticelli,
              MaRSILIO FlClNO: PHYSICIAN OF THE SOUL              33

Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci, transferring to their
sensitive minds the Platonic and Hermetic thought of his teacher,
Marsilio.
   These few historical remarks about Ficino leave us with an
image of a most unusual person living in a remarkable time and
place. It is both a historical portrait and a fantasy of a city, an
academy, and individuals working diligently but with great excite­
ment in the midst of fundamental ambiguities and paradoxes.
They were attempting to care simultaneously for intellect and
body, philosophy and religion, and they knew, following Ficino's
fundamental insight, that such a deeply pluralistic effort would be
possible provided concern for soul were central. In effect, this
means that psychology was at the core of their wide-ranging
endeavors. Today, since the scope of psychology has been so
truncated, to place psychology as it is usually theorized and
practiced at the centre of study and work, would be reductive. But
Ficino found soul to be the proper mediating factor in all his
studies—in philosophy and theology, in medicine and psycho­
therapy, and in his religious devotion. His major philosophical
work. The Platonic Theology, constitutes his attempt to reconcile
the interests of philosophy, psychology, and theology at the
speculative level; while his more pragmatic efforts to do the same
appear in the work we are about to study. Even as a priest, it is
recorded, he performed exorcism, a way for caring for the soul
through religious ritual.6
    The populace of Ficino's Florence must have had a vital psycho­
 logical sense as well, for it was customary for them to celebrate
 publicly the completion of a painting or fresco. Also, we find in
 Medici architecutre an uncommon complexity blended with purity
 of form—a style remarkable for its liveliness and depth of impact.
 Florence itself excels among cities for its embodiment of soul-
 values, evident in the total environment. Finally, where there is
 psychological awareness, there is attention to death. Incessant
 wars and threats, poisonings and intrigues, disease and epidemics
 made death visible and familiar. Death, of course, was given due
 attention in poetry and in art, and in mimed rituals the triumph of
 death could always be assured an attentive audience in the streets
 of Florence.7 It was a time and place where images were taken
 seriously, where art and religion blended lofty theological
 argument with deeply felt and keenly respected superstition.
    In the next chapter we will take a close look at the nature of the
 psyche, and we shall see that the soul is always in a mediating
 position between spirit above and matter or body below. Looking
34                     The Planets Within

at the historical setting in which Ficino's psychology developed,
we can see the upward movement tending toward theological and
philosophical speculation. Existing English translations of Ficino,
as well as commentaries on his work, dwell upon this upward
region of his thought. However, to some extent this emphasis on
the spiritual misrepresents Ficino's own writing, since even in his
speculative works he makes connections constantly with the
psychological realm. There is also the danger of taking the ideas
too literally, of getting lost in arguments concerning the purity of
religious tradition and the existence of God. Historically, the
climate around Ficino also favored an oblique movement toward
superstitution and magic. Here too, we have to avoid literalism.
As long as there is a connection with psyche, a sustaining
metaphorical attitude, then the dark side of magic can be
understood as the expression of psyche as well.
   Related to the problem of keeping reason and the nonrational
alive in our consideration of Ficino's psychology is the enigma of
interrelated internal and external worlds. Ficino's real contribution
to art and perhaps to psychology have to do with this problem.
For Ficino the external world is the way to the internal realm of the
soul. When Neoplatonism is interpreted too rigidly, one gets the
idea that there is no place for the body or the material dimension.
Ficino's Neoplatonism lies unconcealed in all of his writing, yet he
does not advise a retreat from the body. He does insist upon
acknowledgment of the centrality of soul, and therefore any
exclusive concern for the body would be a crucial mistake. But as
long as soul is at the center, involvement with matter is a means
for psychological deepening. Therefore, the very tangible pro­
ductions of art, and even the pleasure one derives from art, are
means for nourishing the soul. So too are magic and astrology. For
those with a mind to psychological reality, these occult arts serve
to draw the psyche into areas not otherwise accessible. They
ritualize and map psychological worlds which are impossibly
irrelevant and misguiding to the scientific mind but significant for
the soul.


                     The Hermetic Influence

  Before examining more deeply Ficino's idea of the soul, it might
be useful to consider briefly the Hermetic works which so
impressed him as he was writing The Planets.
  As important as the texts themselves was the atttitude of Renais­
             MaRSILIO FlCINO: PHYSICIAN OF THE SOUL              35

sance Platonists toward them. Cosimo, Ficino, and their circle
believed that these highly symbolic writings were the work of
Hermes Trismegistus. Hermes, they thought, was an extremely
ancient writer, the earliest in a line going from Hermes himself,
sometimes considered a contemporary of Moses, through Orpheus
and Pythagoras, among others, to Plato.8 In fact, these writings
probably date only from the second and third centuries of our era.
But, like people in any historical period, the Florentine group was
deeply impressed by the reputed antiquity of the mysterious texts,
a quality that only intensified their aura of mystery.
    Ficino was convinced that Hermes was the first to make a move
out of matter and truly engage in theological wonder. Ficino
writes: "Mercurius Trismegistus [Mercurius is the Roman form of
Hermes] was the first philosopher to raise himself above physics
and mathematics to the contemplation of the divine....
Therefore, he was considered the original founder of theology."9
For Ficino, then, there was something primordial about the words
he read in the Hermetic texts. Even for us these writings carry a
mythological tone, and their antiquity, if only fictional, has an
impact on the reader even today. In spite of all our modern sophis­
tication, there is no need for us to be unduly concerned about
Ficino's mistaken dating for the Hermetic material. In his imagina­
tion as in ours, Hermes may stand as a mythic figure, the personi­
fication of a foundational source of wisdom, not unlike Moses in
the Judeo-Christian tradition.
    In The Planets, therefore, we encounter an imagination in­
flamed and incited by archetypal imagery. As the scholar of Re­
naissance magic and esoterism Frances Yates observes, Hermetic
knowledge was not intended for leisurely speculation. On the
contrary, it was honored as gnosis, a saving kind of knowledge, an
apprehension of mysteries which run deep in nature and in the
person, a transforming knowledge which can only be acquired
through learning that is far beyond intellect alone. As Ficino
implies throughout The Planets, one can develop a psychological
attitude—that is, understand the processes of the soul—only
 through constant, daily, if not hourly, attention.
    Ficino was influenced by other authors interested in psychology
 but less arcane, such as Thomas Aquinas and Augustine. It is also
 quite likely that he had read Nicholas of Cusa, another imagina­
 tive thinker a generation removed, who placed high value on
 symbolic sources and what he called "enigmatic metaphors."10 But
 the most obvious source for The Planets is the Hermetic collection,
 as well as a later Arabic compendium of the twelfth century
36                      The Planets Within

known as Picatrix. A brief overview of these last sources will
prepare us for Ficino's own psychological theories and the
symbolic language he uses in presenting his psychology.
   The first book of the Hermetic opus contains a story with
familiar Gnostic themes.11 Pimander, the divine Mind, appears to
Hermes and describes the origin of nature. God brought forth a
demiurage, he relates, a god of fire and breath, who fashioned
Seven Governors "who envelop with their circles the sensible
world." All of the lower world depends upon the Seven
Governors. Then the Father God created a Man in his own image,
a Man so beautiful that God fell in love with him. He allowed the
Man to enter the sphere of the demiurge and there to behold the
Seven Governors. They too fell in love with him and gave him
part in their rule. Finally, the Man broke through the circles of the
Governors to know the power of God himself.
   Gifted with all of this power and knowledge, the Man revealed
to Nature below the beautiful form of God, and Nature loved him,
having seen his beautiful features reflected in the water and his
shadow on the earth. The Man, too saw a form like his own
reflected in the water and wished to be united with it—a wish
immediately accomplished. Nature and Man were united in love.
Thus, mankind has a double nature: mortal in his body, immortal
in the essential Man. His mortal nature is under the dominion of
the planets, but his immortal nature is not.
   Yates comments on this Hermetic story of Creation and Fall,
noting the intimate relationship between man and the star-
daimons or Seven Governors. This is a central idea in The
Planets—mankind is in touch with the planetary daimons. The
relationship between the "natural" or material part of the person
and that other part which is eternal and self-aware is essentially
erotic. For Ficino, all movement of the soul comes from eros. It is
also important to notice that the essential man is not under the
dominion of the planets. Keeping this in mind will help when we
come across statements of Ficino against astrology, confusing in
view of his frequent recourse to astrological phenomena.
   This first Hermetic book also implies, when read psychologi­
cally, that there is more to the person than ego. Natural man, or the
person living unconsciously, is moved to experience all kinds of
behavior according to patterns common to all humans. We all
love, hate, desire, strive, fail, wish, and wonder. But the essential
man, some non-ego part of the person, is initiated into the secrets
of the Governors, those sometimes tyrannical rulers of the spheres
of life, whose influence seems impossible to break. We are not
              MaRSILIO FlCINO: PHYSICIAN OF THE SOUL               37

entirely, that is, compelled, on the analogy of astrological com­
pulsion, to remain at the mercy of these Governors. We can vivify
the essential Man in us all and thereby transcend what seems
"natural." The life of the soul, in fact, may seem unnatural, the
famous "opus contra naturam," a working against what seems to
be our nature. When people say, "that's human nature," there may
be neglect of soul; because what seems natural may be only the
atmosphere of the archon, the Governor of that sphere of life lived
and felt unconsciously. A psychological attitude goes against what
appears to be only natural, peeking through that limited realm,
gaining a perspective on the planetary spheres where they are
revealed to be circles of glass. One may love, hate, and wonder
but know that one is doing so, seeing oneself from beyond the
Seven Governors.
   Another of the Hermetic books, The Mind to Hermes, contains
two additional ideas central to Ficino's thought. Everything is full
of soul, it teaches. In Ficino's writing, too, soul is ever at the
center, which is to say that it is thoroughly psychological. In our
day we have difficulty imagining that persons, to say nothing of
nature and material things, have soul. Yet Ficino is only echoing a
truly ancient notion, going back at least to Heraclitus and Thales,
that the world is full of soul. Historians and anthropologists
commonly treat animism as a backward mentality; yet animistic
religion, found close at home in American Indian traditions,
recognizes soul (anima) in everything that exists. In a very genuine
sense, once an individual acquires a consistent psychological
attitude, all things, every object- and every action, take on
significance to the soul. Writing a letter may be an expression of,
or a caring for, the soul. Something as simple and mundane as a
can of beer finds its place in the structure of the soul. Ficino's
astrology and certainly his medicine make no sense unless this
soul-centeredness is perceived.
   A second point in this book of the Hermetic texts follows from
the first. All beings are in movement. The presence of soul implies
movement—not simply the ability to walk and run as Aristotle
suggests, but an internal movement, a wandering and shifting of
the soul itself. As the experience of life deepens and becomes
focused in a wide variety of events engendering anything from
joyful ecstasy to depressing pain, soul itself seems to move. From
highs to lows, in depth and in superficiality, vanishing into thin air
or close to home, psychological vicissitudes can be felt as
movements of soul. Soul even seems to travel through the body
making its path traceable in a pounding heart, tingling nerves, or
38                      The Planets Within

throbbing headache. We move through decision and action, and
we are moved by passion and emotion.
   The planets are in motion, and if they do reflect our interior
lives, if we do indeed have planets within, then these are in
rhythmic motion. They form literally millions of patterns, which
an astrological chart can depict with only the crudest precision,
and with almost no sense of the unending motion. Perhaps this is
why Ficino was particularly fond of mechanical replicas of the
heavens—they could move and show the mobile patterns of the
planets and stars.
   Still another Hermetic text. The Asclepius, expresses ideas we
will find at the core of Ficino's theory of magic. It is breath or
spiritus, this book asserts, that keeps life in all things. Or, as Yates
puts it, air is the instrument or organ of all the gods. In Ficino's
theory spiritus is the means of magical effect between planetary
daimons and the physical world or the life of the individual. The
method by which this spiritus is conveyed from planets to the
individual is described in The Asclepius as a matter of image­
making. Any image, perhaps a statue, that represents characteris­
tics of a particular planetary deity may collect, hold, and
bestow the power of that deity on the person using that image.
Images have deep, archetypal power. We may take this part of the
theory somewhat literally and consider the value to soul of images
and art, or we may look more psychologically and examine
imagination itself, its power to connect the ego to the larger
movements of the psyche.
   Other Hermetic texts describe correspondences between planets
and animals, plants, talismans, and medicines. They also suggest
the possibility of drawing power from one planet in order to offset
the troublesome dominating influence of another. Finally, the
Picatrix provides detailed descriptions of talismans, amulets, and
other objects useful in natural magic. Again, all of these unusual
notions appear in The Planets.


                        A Poetic of the Soul

   Ficino's work is sometimes called ''poetic theology," a phrase
offered by his star pupil, Pico della Mirandola. But his writing is
also a poetic psychology, a psychopoetics. His insights are
expressed imagistically rather than discursively. His psychology is
also poetic in that its purpose is to nourish and educate
imagination, the vital instrument by which the natural is rendered
              MaRSILIO FlCINO: PHYSICIAN OF THE SOUL              39

psychological, and soul is allowed a place in life. Why wear an
amulet signifying the speed of Mercury except to keep that quality
of the soul in mind? For Ficino the gods themselves are facets of the
soul requiring attention. Consciousness is not all rationality and
strong-willed ego-states; it also embraces "softer” functions like
memory, recognition, acknowledgement, reverence, respect, and
awareness.
   Let us proceed then to study more closely the images of Ficinian
psychopoetics, avoiding literalism of either the intellectual or
superstitutious kinds, in search of a psychology relevant to
twentieth-century life. If we find talk of talismans, archaic or
otherwise, inaccessible, we may translate them into modern
forms—perhaps a cherished photograph, painting, piece of
jewelry, or clothing. The point is not to get stuck in archaic
details. We have to approach Ficino's psychology of imagination
with imagination if the substance of his vision is to come through.
This attitude may jar one's historical and philosophical
sensibilities, but if done carefully it should enhance rather than
detract from these other legitimate approaches to the same
materials.
   The study of psychology remains elusive if it is not entered into
psychologically. Ficino's writings are permeated with attention to
soul, which is not surprising since he himself wished to be known
as a "physician of the soul." But it is possible to look without
seeing. Writings such as those we are about to examine often fall
flat under the historian's nose and the philosopher's scalpel, and
yet psychology by nature has a dimension of depth. We have to
bring a psychological attitude to Ficino's words if we are to have
any chance of perceiving his psychological insights. Therefore, we
must unabashedly work with his images, relate his archaic and
abstruse statements to modern life, and even occasionally treat his
consciously conceived words as if they were the products of
dream.
                                  2
                  A World with Soul

        Not in the entire living world is there to be found
        anything so deformed as that which does not have the
        gift of soul.
                                     — The Planets, chapter 1

uoul is an elusive word. For many, soul is an invisible but finite
essence, made of some spiritual substance, that keeps the body
together and functioning in life and flies off to another dimension
at death. In relation to the body, it is like a genie in a bottle. We
read legendary stories of people selling their souls to the devil, and
taking these tales at a rather literal level we might imagine the soul
as a piece of merchandise. In Sunday school or elsewhere we may
have been taught that the soul can be blackened, soiled, and
spotted and that it can be laundered, made pure and white again.
This soul is often the chief concern of religious practice, and even
today Christian psychologists want to distinguish this
metaphysically substantial soul from the merely psychological
psyche.1
   The soul Ficino places at the center of his professional and
personal life is not this creature of folk religion. For him soul is a
quality of existence, and the human soul is precisely that which
makes one a human. Soul is a quality rather than a quantity. For
that reason it is better to speak of soul rather than a soul. When we
say that a person has soul, we usually mean that he shows
evidence of internal movement. The vegetative soul of Aristotelian
tradition is said to give the body movement, but the human soul in
the Platonic tradition gives the person movement. People who
clearly have soul show a certain depth, vitality, individuality,
familiarity with pain and death, and good humor. Even objects
can have soul, or so our colloquial speech has it. Books have soul
when they are not excessively technical, abstract, and dry. Music
has soul. Food has soul, and not only the food of a single culture.

                                  40
                        A World with Soul                           41

The character of our soul is even written on our faces and
sculptured into our bodies.
   Soul is also depth, a metaphor we use to point to a certain
intensity of experience. Having soul, we feel a reverberation and
resonance carrying through beneath the surface of everyday
experience. With soul, events are not merely two-dimensional;
they carry an invisible but clearly felt dimension of depth. These
resonances do not appear as meaning and explanation, nor even as
understanding—that would be height, the work of intellect. Soul
cannot be fabricated by evaluating experience, trying to figure it
out, or through intense introspection. The significance of soul is
clearly downward, away from the head, closer to the stomach
where the outside world is absorbed, internalized, and broken
down; toward the intestines where in an extensive labyrinthine
journey the introjected world becomes partly self, partly waste;
down toward the lower orifices where what is not made into self is
eliminated; down near the organs of sex where the pleasure,
relational, and sensation fluids are focused.
   The depth of soul can also be seen in cosmic imagery. In Greek
mythology the natural world accessible to our senses is mirrored
by an underworld where there is no flesh or bone but only
phantasms or immaterial visages.2 Here again are labyrinthine
passages leading to numerous chambers where strange happenings
reflect the world above. For the Greeks, depth was associated with
death. Demeter, the mother who gives the world its beauty and
fruitfulness, is inseparable from her daughter Persephone, who is
dragged into the underworld, to become the queen of death, the
personification of depth.3 Soul, then, involves a dying to the
natural world, and indeed imagination is not unlike digestive
transformation. To live with soul requires a willingness to descend
into the depths of events, to let their literalness and our own literal
reactions die in favor of another perspective, to see the world as if
from below. Like Orpheus, we can sing of our exploits, having
become acquainted with the underworld through a descent.
   A peculiar story of descent often told and interpreted is the
journey of the hero who traces the night journey of the sun from
West to East in the waters of the ocean, in the belly of a great fish.
Here the tomb seems much more like the womb and is experienced
as a state of confusion, uncertainty, darkness, regression,
immersion, and anxiety about future activity to follow the passive
containment of the fish. I once knew a young man who said he had
never heard of this story of the big fish, not even the biblical
account of Jonah and the whale. At the time, he was experiencing
42                       The Planets Within

a tenuous, brushing touch with the social world. He seemed on the
verge of abandoning all attempts to deal with the pressures of the
external world, especially the world of his family and the beatings
and humiliations his father and brothers gave him regularly. He
told me one day that he had had a strange dream. He had been
swallowed by a large fish and was held in its stomach for a long
while until he was able to cut his way out, whereupon he found
himself on a beach in a strange country. This man's suffering urged
him downward toward the waters below, toward the chaos that
precedes creation,4 the regressive return to a state prior to one's
origins, far away from the natural world and deep in the
geography of soul. Ficino's fantasy of Hermes, the first theologian,
seems to have had a similar effect upon him. By starting over, in
fantasy, he could create new syntheses and feel that he was always
in touch with powerful, efficacious ideas.
   Although pathology and suffering reveal soul starkly and pier­
cingly,5 it is also felt in the more ordinary resonance of daily
events. For example, when one gives attention (one meaning of
religion) to clear products of depth—to dreams, fantasies, wishes,
moods, slips of tongue, and other nonrational expressions, or, of
course,     even    to    decisions,     plans,    explanations,    and
strivings—then, even in waking life, in the very heat of daily
business, one can sense the reverberations. It is as if life on the
surface had a resonating chamber, a musical underworld, like the
hollow bowl of a lute or the tube under a chime. Then there is
depth, felt subjectively and recognized by others. Depth of soul
becomes a quality of character and personality.
   But soul is more than a quality of human character. When an
individual with imagination encounters the world, then the things
around him have soul. What we usually call ''external reality" is
seen to have depth and transparency. Nothing is only what it
appears to be. The human imagination is always at work, though
often below the threshold of awareness, making metaphors of
everything. Sometimes this play of imagination takes a rather
simplistic form and borders on superstition. When I lived in
Ireland I was impressed by this kind of imagination. A mountain
in Tipperary has a ragged gouge in its ridge, and to the local
people this is the "Devil's Bit," a sign that the devil had taken a bite
out of the mountain and had spit a huge rock onto a low-lying
plain. I was once walking down a narrow country road in Ulster
when I noticed a circle of trees out in a field. I started to walk
toward the ring of trees when an old man came up to me and
advised that I stay away from this place where the fairies danced.
                        A World with Soul                         43

   These examples are the stuff of legends and superstitions, and
there is no doubt that these are not necessary for a soulful world.
But this not so subtle work of imagination makes the point that
phenomena easily explained scientifically and reductively by
empirically minded persons can just as well have a more fantastic
character, and through legendary fantasy even so obvious a
natural form as a mountain ridge can bring alive human feelings
and fears.
   When Ernst Cassirer defines man as a "symbol-making animal,"
and when Norman O. Brown ends Love's Body with the laconic
remark that "all is poetry," it is easy to give quick but superficial
intellectual assent. But the implications of these insights are quite
extensive. They imply that all day long, day after day, everything
we do, see, and touch has more than a pragmatic significance. At
the very moment that we make use of any object or talk to any
person, they are being transformed into memory as metaphors.
The friend I talk to at lunch appears at night in a dream, now not
the friend but an image of an attitude or spirit within me.6 In
imagination, perception is never one-dimensional or at one level.
Events always have deeper significance. Therefore, in our
encounter with the world there can be no absolute separation
between our imagination and the people and objects we meet
existing in their own reality. Indeed, the layers of significance and
the skeins of memory and fantasy at work in every activity build
the depth I am calling soul. As James Hillman has written:
"Phenomena come alive and carry soul through our imaginative
fantasies about them. When we have no fantasy about the world,
then it is objective, dead. . . . [Fantasy] is a way of being in the
world and giving back soul to the world."7
   Let us be clear about this word fantasy. Fantasy consists of the
images and stories we have within us as we go about our daily
affairs. For example, a teacher in a classroom may have the
fantasy of being a father to the young people in front of him. Or,
as sometimes appears to be the case, the teacher may enjoy the
fantasy that he is a little dictator, or an orator, or an actor. The
fantasy is the image, conscious or unconscious, lying beneath the
behavior or permeating the action; and it is the fantasy that truly
tells the expectations one has or explains the satisfactions or
frustrations one feels in the performance of an action. Perceiving
the fantasies at work in our lives we can draw closer to the depth
and to the soul-dimension.
   In the introductory chapters of The Planets, Ficino establishes a
theoretical base for his astral magic and medicine, and there he
44                        The Planets Within

suggests that all things have soul. Not only is there a human soul,
he points out, there is also a soul of the world, vivifying the body
of the world. He adds a warning: “Every body easily grasped by
your senses, as if it were suited to your senses, is crass; for it falls
far short of the divine soul" (Chap. 3). In other words, simply to
grasp the things of the world at the level of sensation is to overlook
their soul-dimension. Of course, it is possible to encounter the
world body, material things, as if it did not have soul. It takes soul
to perceive soul. It is fairly easy, for instance, to fell a redwood in
order to build a house—a material action for a material end. But it
takes fantasy and imagination to see the sacredness of the
redwood, to appreciate its age, its vulnerability in a society
hungry for building materials, and its natural beauty. When we
allow fantasies to flow, the sacredness of common things again
becomes evident. There is indeed a relationship between soul and
religion, between psychology and religious awareness; for without
soulful fantasy all is profane and secular, a world reduced to serve
as fodder for our pragmatic intentions. With soul comes an intense
sense of value, an ordering of desires, and a respect for common
things because they have such impact upon the human spirit.


                           Soul as Mediator

     If there were only these two in the world —intellect and body —
     but there were no soul, then the intellect would not be drawn to
     the body (for it is entirely immobile and is not supplied with a
     principle of movement, although it is far distant from the body),
     nor would the body be drawn to the intellect since it is just as
     incapable and ineffective in moving by itself and is far removed
     from the intellect. But if soul is interposed, conforming to both,
     there may be an easy attraction from one to the other. (Chap. 1)

   It is common for people in general, and even psychology
students, to understand “psychology" as the study of the mind.
But neither in etymology nor in the history of philosophy and
psychology can psyche be identified with mind. Ficino makes the
distinction between the two clear at the outset of his book. Not
only are they distinct, he says, but they may be quite distant from
each other, though some connection between the two is essential.
The intellect, for example, requires the soul in order to keep it in
touch with body. Soul is “adapted" to both mind and body, like
Janus—a favorite image used often by Ficino—soul faces both the
world of intellect and the realm of matter.
                         A World with Soul                            45

   If there were no soul, but only mind and body, says Ficino,
there would be no connection between them. For example,
without soul ideas would remain ideas with no connection to the
human world. We all know people who are very clever working
with words and ideas, who can trace the history of philosophy and
compare whole systems of thought, but whose reasoning seems
incomplete. There is no body in their thinking, no grounding. I do
not mean that thought has to be related consciously to the
practical world, but thinking can take place in an upper region
that is far removed from what we know to be human. With soul,
the severest speculation can have body and depth. It can be
significant on some level other than the purely intellectual.
   On the other hand, it is notoriously easy to live at the level of
the body and be cut off from ideas. We can respond automatically
to immediate or somewhat removed physical needs and set aside
the requirements of mind and spirit. If the isolated mind is
excessively conscious and rational, the severed body is
characterized by unconsciousness. We can be very active caring
for the body, exercising remarkable practical intelligence, without
benefit of ideas or thoughts about what we are doing, what is
behind our actions, or what our true values really are.
   We do not have to look far to find a world without soul. It is all
around us. On one hand we find gross materialism in economics,
politics, values, and life-style. On the other we see vast
educational systems for people of all ages and a large segment of
the population involved in religious institutions. Yet the two
spheres seem separate, joined only when one serves the limited
purposes of the other. In universities the liberal arts, studies in
explicit expressions of soul, are being squeezed out by swelling
schools of business and technology. Young people go to college
mainly for their bodies—to get a good job and enjoy the creature
comforts (by which we mean body) accessible only through
vocational training. A few individuals commit themselves to
intellectual learning, most with the intention of teaching others
like themselves.
   It is clear that what is missing in all of this is the third mediating
factor, soul. Even liberal studies—the arts and humanities—have
the soul intellectualized out of them, so that a Shakespeare sonnet
may be dissected in the work of historicism, linguistic criticism, or
soulless symbol-analysis. One would think, or hope, that at least
in our schools of higher learning attention might be given to the
soul, but that is not the case. A student on a college campus is
bifurcated into a mind crammed with information in a classroom
46                      The Planets Within

and a body frantically served by the social life of the campus. An
indication that a similar split has occurred in religious life is the
tendency for psychology-minded clergymen to establish groups
for sensitivity training and sensory awareness. In religion the spirit
has reigned high and supreme and readily falls into its
opposite—plain physical expressions of emotion. There is nothing
wrong with either spiritual experience or sensory awareness, but
when they are so far separated from each other, without benefit of
the mediating consciousness of soul, then individuals and societies
feel alienated and split. Schizophrenia, the psychopathological
term characterizing this generation, has many meanings in popular
conversation; one of them is the sense of being split, torn apart,
cut off from something, God knows what, that would make sense
of our confusion and strenuous activity. That something is soul,
the connecting link between mind and body.
   Soul, however, is not simply a linking factor, a way of bringing
mind and body together. It unites spirit and matter in its own way.
In adapting itself to both, in its Janus character, soul draws unique
qualities from mind and from body, creating its own "style."
Instead of abstract thought and unconscious actions, soul
expresses itself in images, dreams, and stories. These have
significance something like the intelligence of mind, and they have
body similar to physical reality, but they are uniquely different. A
dream is experienced much like waking life, yet it is clearly less
substantial. It is as if the metaphorical layers of waking life had
been stripped of their foundations in actuality and experienced in
themselves. Stories sound like narratives of actual events, yet they
may have no relation to any historical event at all. Dreams and
stories have significance, but it is not clear and orderly.
   Feelings, too, are part of soul, but feelings can be disconnected
from fantasy, and then they seem to be nothing but body. It is
easy enough in group therapy, for example, to stimulate intense
emotion, and some feel that the upshot of such emotion is
therapeutic. But "letting the feelings hang out" is not in itself a
soulful activity; it may be achieved without insight, without
relationship to the content of the emotion, and without a
connection with ideas. It is noteworthy that many psychologists
who advocate "emotional catharsis" also betray characteristic
anti-intellectualism.
   Yet emotion is an important factor in the life of the soul. As the
word itself suggests, emotion moves: as Jung taught, emotion
creates value and moves us to action, while it also can be identified
as the movement of the soul itself.8 Indeed, emotion and fantasy
                       A World    with   Soul                    47

are like two sides of a coin. At times we may feel an emotion
without having any idea what it is all about, while at other times
we may have fantasies without feeling. Usually the two go
together, as in memory or expectation when images of the past or
the future bring with them emotions that are pleasant or very
unpleasant. In any case, emotion with fantasy draws us into deep
reflection and therefore toward soul. The arts can either move us
so that we feel manipulated into fear, relief, or sympathy, or in a
way that leads us deeper into reflection, providing us with further
fantasy for our emotion. In a sense, emotion is like behavoir—one
has to grasp the fantasy behind it in order to grasp it in its
wholeness. Emotion stands out as a signal of the soul, but to
perceive the nature of that signal one has to reflect upon the
fantasies contained in it.
   Soul also appears, of course, in relationships where we
dramatize our fantasies. It seems that soul cannot escape the
entanglements, the highs and lows of human intimacy, without
betraying its very nature. Soul appears too in physical symptoms
of disease and in body language and physical mannerism.
The body can be seen as the expression of soul, since it is like
sculptor's clay. The human body reveals subtle shifts in minute
forms, telling the movements of the soul. A quiet woman once sat
in a therapy group frequently stroking her throat softly with her
fingers. One day the group took an imaginary journey into the
body, and afterward she told how she tried to imagine herself in
her stomach, but she couldn't get past her throat. She found
herself there, trapped in that narrow passage which was filled with
obstructions—broken glass, furniture, metal, and other sharp
materials. She couldn't stay there long, even in fantasy, because
her throat began to hurt. Discussing this fantasy later she talked
about memories and wishes associated with her family, focused
especially in an overwhelming sorrow that seemed stuck in her
throat. She expressed the hope that some day she would be able to
look at those sharp pieces one by one, cry them out of her throat,
and finally open the passage to the rest of her body.
   Psychology is the study of everything from the point of view of
the psyche. That is its etymological meaning, and that is the
traditional meaning espoused by Ficino and by his predecessors
and followers. To see a sore throat simply as a physical
manifestation is to look at the world, as Ficino says, as if it were
suited only to our senses. We can also look from the viewpoint of
soul—psychologically. Perhaps the trouble we have developing an
effective discipline of psychology, to say nothing of nurturing a
48                        The Planets Within

genuine psychological consciousness, is that soul is so simple and
obvious. We are not yet attuned to the language of soul; we are
not comfortable thinking metaphorically. We like to take the
direct path saying that things are what they are, not realizing that
things are not only what they are. We overlook the wealth of
images all around us by seeing only physical containers of those
images. In spite of exceedingly complex technology, we miss the
obvious signs of soul: a physical complaint, an animal in a dream,
a witch in a fairy tale, a god in mythology, a tear in laughter and
sadness, the lead weight of a depression. There are the signs of soul
waiting to be seen for what they are.


                        Mediation of the Spirit
     The whole world is alive, and we may drink in its spirit. But this
     spirit is properly absorbed through the person's own spirit,
     either naturally attuned to the world spirit, or even better,
     rendered more suitable by art, that is, by becoming as celestial
     as possible. (Chap. 4)

   With these words Ficino introduces another puzzling factor
involved in the relationship between person and world—spirit. If
soul is a difficult word to use, spirit is more so. We speak of spirit
as a ghost, as the effusive quality of a confident football team, as a
fluid flowing at a cocktail party, as the spirit (Zeitgeist) of an
historical epoch, as that which moves us to action — “the spirit
moved me." More important and more confusing, in the Platonic
tradition and therefore in Ficino's writing, we equate spirit with
the highest region of the threefold cosmos: body, soul, and spirit.
But this spiritual realm is something different from the spirit Ficino
alludes to in the passage quoted.
   In Ficino's writing spirit is an element essential to all
psychological life. It is the factor which accounts for the activity of
soul in the material world. Without spirit you cannot have soul.
Just as soul is the link between mind and body, spirit is the
medium between soul and the world. As D. P. Walker, the
distinguished Renaissance historian, has noted, Ficino's basic
notion of spirit is that of the early physicians who conceived of it
as a subtle substance in the blood. He writes, quoting Ficino
directly:

     Spirit by the physicians is defined as a certain vapor of the
     blood, pure, subtle, hot and lucid. And, formed from the
                        A World    with   Soul                       49

  subtler blood by the heat of the heart, it flies to the brain, and
  there the soul assiduously employs it for the exercise of both the
  interior and exterior senses. Thus, the blood serves the spirit,
  the spirit the senses, and finally the senses reason.9
Spirit is like a subtle, invisible vapor, therefore not unlike the
spirit bubbling out of a glass of champagne or bubbling over in a
football team. It can't be seen, but it can readily be felt. In The
Planets Ficino tries to find a place for it:

  It is a very subtle body, almost not a body, indeed it is almost
  soul. Or, it is almost not soul, as it were, a body. In its power it
  is less of an earth nature and more like water, or air, or most of
  all the fire of the stars. (Chap.3)


Spirit can be perceived by the senses, but it is not something
physical. For that reason, it is not taken too seriously in the
modern world. We consign all those interested in distinguishing
spirit to the circles of esoteric religion. Yet for Ficino spirit is an
ordinary phenomenon essential to all life. If one were to assign to
it one of the basic constitutive elements of physical and
psychological existence, it would definitely not be earth, more like
water or air, but most like fire, the fire that constitutes the stars.
   It is curious that Jung mentions in his autobiography his
attempts to understand spirit when he was young. "Spirit, of
course, meant for me something ineffable, but at bottom I did not
regard it as essentially different from very rarified air.''10 We may
get the idea that spirit is like air from common language as well.
We say that a person has an "air" of authority, and we talk about
the atmosphere of a place or surrounding an event. This is very
much in the "spirit" of spirit.
   Spirit can be felt as an emanation, a subtle "substance" that
emerges from bodies and situations. A walk deep into the woods
conveys a spirit different from the kind generated by a walk down
the main street of a large city. A horror film has a spirit quite
different from a PeLer Sellers comedy. A flower emanates a spirit
different from that of an automobile engine.
   This may all seem obvious and unimportant; yet Ficino builds
his entire psychotherapeutic system on this notion of spirit. He
believed that soul needs spirit, in all its variety, in order to thrive;
therefore, psychological care and exercise involved for him
thoughtful exposure to various types of spirit. In order to do this,
of course, one would have to be able to discern the varieties of
50                      The Planets Within

spirit, and then make a conscious effort to expose oneself to the
right kinds. Although there are innumerable kinds of spirit, they
may be ordered around the fundamental characters of the planets.
As Ficino expresses it, the planets issue forth "rays" of spirit
peculiar to each of them, and these rays are absorbed by objects in
the world, either natural objects or man-made artifacts. Every
single thing with which we come in contact, then, exposes us to
one or another planetary influence. We absorb and take on the
spirit of that planet, as we go about ordinary living, perhaps
unconscious of the varieties of spirit.
   Ficino refers to spirit as the food of the soul; through spirit, soul
is continuously being created and nourished. As he says, this all
may happen naturally (unconsciously), or by art, that is, by
conscious intention. This is not to say that we can simply fashion
our psychological life at will; the process is more indirect than
that, but we can develop an awareness of soul, a psychological
attitude, by which we can cooperate and indirectly influence the
character of our psychological life. We can nourish the soul and
live psychotherapeutically by having our psychological life reflect
the heavens. That is what Ficino means by becoming as celestial as
possible. We can have depth and variety, movement and form, in
our inner world. We can have planets within, with all of their
benefits of spirit, like the planets of the outer cosmos.
   We arrive here at the crux of Ficinian astrological psychology.
This is no superstitious playing with birth charts and sun signs,
though even these have a place in Ficino's practice. More
importantly, through an astrological consciousness we may
recognize the polycentric nature of the psyche and become aware
of the impact of even minor objects and events on the spiritual life
of the soul. The planets, signs, houses, and aspects of technical
astrology are only a means for imagining the multiple facets of the
psyche. Applying Ficino's insights to modern life, these technical
aspects may or may not be used. One may turn to art, to dreams,
to alchemy, to religion, or to psychology itself for paradigms of
the soul and the imaginative discernment of spirits. The essential
point is to make connections beween everyday experience and the
deeper life of the soul.
   In order to make these connections, it is necessary to cultivate
that neglected but essential faculty—imagination. Imagination
allows of a vision that penetrates the surface of things and grasps
those factors that have significance for the psyche. In imagination
events appear not only in their particularity or at the level of idea
and concept; they are also seen to contain certain images of
                         A World   with   Soul                     51

importance to the soul. Ficino recognized the importance of what
we call imagination, but in his theory of knowledge he uses
different terms to describe this faculty.


                  Idolum: The Idol of Perception

   We have to sort out some confusing terms Ficino employs in
placing imagination in context. He does speak of imaginatio, but
that Latin word does not mean the same as the English
imagination. Imaginatio in Ficino's scheme is more like the
Aristotelian sensus communis, the faculty of perception that unites
all the disparate sense impressions into one. Ficino's word for
imagination is idolum, a term used by Plotinus. In the writings of
the Church Fathers idolum has the pejorative meaning of "idol"
and is related to our world idolatry. The Greek root is eidos,
Plato's "idea," which literally means an image or likeness, or an
image reflected in water or in a mirror (OED, "idol"). It is essential
to keep this notion of image in mind which examining Ficino's idea
of imagination.
   Ficino divides the functions of the soul in the following manner:

                 Mens              Mind
                 Ratio             Reason
                                   Fantasy
                 Idolum            Sense Perception
                                   Nutritive Power

Mens is the highest part of the soul, given to Saturnian contem­
plation. Reason, in the middle, gives soul its human aspect; in
spite of all the nonrational factors of soul we will investigate,
rational consciousness is still the hallmark of humanity. Con­
sciousness and self-awareness make connections between the
realm of ideas and the sphere of physical experience; so Ficino
claims that Reason can move between Mind and Body. Lowest in
the hierarchy, idolum nevertheless is given the power to animate
the body; for, in the end, it is the image that stimulates a physical
response. Indeed, Ficino calls idolum itself the image of the
rational soul, a reflection of our conscious reasoning powers,
which can entertain and make judgments, says Ficino, about
52                     The Planets Within

images, even if they are not embedded in concrete objects.
Fantasy, an aspect of idolum, holds a kind of conception called
"intention", which can be stored in the memory. Ficino observes
that "the fantasy is full of the individual forms of things."11
Imagination — idolum and fantasy—therefore has its own reasons
and logic; it contains the seeds of experience which are planted in
external experience and impressions.
   If we remember the "idol" in Ficino's idolum and the "image” in
imagination we will have the important kernel of this epistemo­
logy: images play a central role in our contact with the world, and
the idea that when we encounter something outside ourselves we
are passive or receptive is contested by Ficino. In every event we
bring a storehouse of images which are activated by external
objects. The outside world works on our memory, and memory
colors the manner in which we perceive the world; it contains the
seeds, the seminal fantasies by which we enter a fully human
experience. It would be a mistake, then, to think that we as
subjects encounter a dead world as object; rather, there is a
mutually efficacious dialogue between memory and fact. The
seeds of imagination transform a measurable event into a
subjective experience, which results in a certain cultivation of the
world but also in a nourishing or depriving impact on psyche.
   As if to accent the fact that imagination is a world unto itself,
that it is different from the dimension of ego and objects, Ficino
retains the ancient idea of an astral or ethereal body. The soul has
its own vehicle more subtle than the crass physical body. Round in
its natural shape, it takes human shape in the individual, and
finally it returns to its source, round. Once again the imagery of
circles and roundness suggest that imagination is somehow trans­
human, its seeds not restricted to human experience and certainly
not to the life of the individual. It has its own body not dependent
upon the life of the human body.
   Most psychologies reduce imagery to personalistic dimensions,
suggesting for example, that the work of an artist may be traced
directly to his childhood experience or to a later trauma. Such a
reductive view is alluring because it seems to make sense that in
our "impressionable years," as the cliche goes, we gather the seeds
for later life. But Ficino's consistent and puzzling references to a
circular soul-movement or the roundness of the ethereal body
remind us that the life of soul is not entirely dependent upon
personal experience; it is not all contained within our skin. We not
only have "collective memories," we also experience certain
patterns that shape all of life. When we crave for dependence like a
                       A World with Soul                          53

child, find ourselves using language of childhood and having
thoughts of mother and home, or maybe even dream of children,
we may see here not simply the return of a concrete memory, but
the presence of a deep, recurring pattern, imaged well as childlike­
ness, but not necessarily related to the personal experience of
childhood. Such a pattern might be found in everyone, in animals,
and even in other parts of nature. The fantasy of child in this case
has an existence removed from personal experience.
   The soul is not simply an epiphenomenon of the body; it has its
own laws and habits, and the images we behold in fantasy reflect
this life of soul, not human life as it is embodied. Ficino says as
much in rather obscure imagery: "As the light of the moon in a
cloud produces paleness out of itself, so the soul produces in the
celestial body the idolum, as a comet produces its tail."12 Images in
our mind's eye radiate like moonbeams or a comet's tail from the
activity of the soul. To glimpse the images is to catch sight of the
soul, whose movements are connected to but distinct from the
experiences of the ego. We might say that as our deeds reveal the
character of ego, imagination and its images tell the nature of the
soul.
   Therefore, the soul in Ficino's thought has three vehicles: body,
spirit, and imagination (idolum).13 Each of these carries the
movements of the soul, in each we can find the soul's activities.
There is psychological significance, therefore, in the spirit we feel
and sense in ordinary life, in the human body and the material
world, and in the products and processes of imagination. These
are vehicles of the psyche, although we tend to overlook this fact.
It is easy enough to reduce imagination to aesthetics, body and
matter to "objective reality," and spirit to occasionally interesting
but essentially esoteric beliefs.
   Since imagination is such an important faculty of the soul,
Ficino keeps it in mind even in his "natural magic," which consists
chiefly in drawing down the spiritual rays of the planets through
image-making. An image associated with one of the planets, say a
solar amulet, has the power, says Ficino, to transmit to the
individual using it the spiritual power of that planet. We will
discuss this further on; here notice the role of imagination. By
keeping in mind the characters of the various planets, knowing
especially the spheres of life they "rule," and the images associated
with them, we may organize life imaginatively. We may see deeper
fantasies permeating experience and therefore glimpse the life of
the soul more directly. Basically, what Ficino proposes as a
technique of psychotherapy is an astrological art of memory.14
54                      The Planets Within

   We have seen that imagination and memory are inseparable,
that images in memory play an active role in perception and in the
apprehension of significance and meaning. For Ficino memory has
at least two functions: first, the individual is educated to employ
practical means for remembering fundamental images. Amulets,
charms, paintings, poems, ceremonies—all of these serve to
remind the individual about basic structures of life. Secondly,
memory may be less personal and more collective. By recalling the
nature of the gods and goddesses, for example, we keep in mind
those profound spheres of significance. On one hand, memory is
an imagistic mnemonic device, on the other it is a means of making
connections between discrete events and larger patterns. As
Frances Yates has explained in her study of the Renaissance art of
memory, this art may have begun as a mnemonic technique useful
in oratory, but it became something much more profound.
Perhaps it would be helpful to recall the nature of this art as we
study Ficino's astrology, which may be seen not as a simplistic
naive belief in planetary influence, but as a technique of enlivening
imagination and memory. The signs and planets of astrology
provide a means for ordering experience and inner movement, just
as any system of imagery might help us see through surface events
to their fantasies. In Ficino's own words: "the soul, when
stimulated by images of bodies, brings to light forms that are
lurking in the recesses of the mind."15
   It is not surprising, then, that Ficino would have had a re­
markable influence upon the art of his time. Although he was not
known himself as an immediate admirer or sponsor of art works,
his ideas placed art at the center of life rather than at the
periphery. In his philosophy art would not appear as entertain­
ment or aestheticism; it was a means for nourishing the soul, an art
of memory. In the spirit of "art for art's sake" we may validly
criticize those forms of art still practiced today where art serves as
propaganda or for ideological expression, but we may also place
art outside the concerns of true quality in life. Following Ficino's
premises, we may say that art serves a significant psychological
purpose: it literally feeds the soul, keeps its archetypal memory
supplied, and ultimately serves to order life at the psychological
level.
   Of course, if we approach art or other symbol systems with a
superficial eye, with an eye "suited to the senses," then what we
will see has no relation to soul. It takes soul to perceive the psy­
chological. After advising his clients how to make the proper
images, Ficino adds an important warning: "Do not merely look,
but reflect in the soul" (Chap. 19).
                       A World with Soul                         55
                         Self-recognition

   While imagination is the sine qua non of psychological living, a
second step consists in imaginative awareness of oneself. We are
not all alike, and at different times in personal history one factor
or another may be predominant. In Ficino's regimen for healthy
living, a person has to know who and what he is so as to know
what particular things to avoid and what to pursue. In The Planets
he writes:

  Whoever discovers his own genius through the means we have
  stated will thus find his own natural work, and at the same time
  he will find his own star and daimon. Following these begin­
  nings he will do well and live happily. Otherwise, he will
  experience misfortune and feel the enmity of heaven. (Chap. 23)

Notice that he is not suggesting that we ought to begin with our
own ego-desires and tendencies or the direction indicated by
personal history. Self-knowledge begins with discovery of one's
own "star” and "daimon." The soul's work {opus) does not take
off from an ego self-concept but from a recognition of an inner
spirit, guide, or daimon. Psychological movement is a response,
not an initiative.
   Heraclitus, the original depth psychologist, had professed:
"Man's character is his daimon." This is not to say that "daimon"
is simply a fanciful, imaginative name for character.16 Rather,
one's character is determined, at least in part, by some non-ego
factor in the self. It is impossible to define the nature of this
daimon—one might investigate the claims of Plato's Socrates,
Plutarch, Goethe, Rilke, Yeats, and many others who have
claimed their relationship to an inner vital fantasy. But one can
recognize an inner as well as an outer necessity, felt not only as
fate but also as in some sense a personal force. This daimon is
often associated with the persons who visit us in
dreams—personifications of psychological reality irreducible to
impersonal concepts or definitions. For Plutarch the daimon is like
a star floating above earth, connected to the soul.17 The daimon
resides in the head, the locus for the later Roman version of
daimon —genius.18
   If daimon is related to demon, it could be that the daimon, like
Satan, ;s an adversary to the ego. When the daimon seems to bless
the life of ego, he appears as an angel; when he takes the role of
adversary, he is the devil. In either case, Ficino advises us to
discover the peculiar nature of our daimon. Daimon in ancient
56                      The Planets Within

Greece was sometimes called god, but the daimon was a nameless
god. Therefore, the daimon may be our own, perhaps like the
guardian angel of Christian lore. The daimon is a guiding spirit,
whether friend or adversary, who calls for a response. To know
oneself, it is not sufficient to know one's personal history and
character; one must also be able to recognize this daimonic factor.
   One's own daimon may be sensed, like that of Socrates, as an
inner voice, or it may be less definite: an urge, a longing, a deep
wish, a persistent fear, a recurring dream theme or image, perhaps
a daimon of accident or trickery like Kerenyi's Hermes who caused
him to find abandoned books, take the incorrect but fortunate
road, train, and so on.
   The daimon need not be nameless; indeed, one's daimon, in
Ficino's analysis, might be represented as one of the planetary
archons, and here is where astrology assists imagination. If a
horoscope is not seen as a literal guide to behavior or a super­
natural portrait of the personality, then it may be taken as a
symbol system heuristically drawing us into reflection upon
identity and fate. In this latter case, the natal chart brings forward
certain planets for particular attention: by zodiacal position, ruler-
ship, or aspect. Today when people ask about each other's sun
sign, could there not be a sense that one indeed does have a
daimon, that there is an inner necessity to which one is res­
ponsible? A significant psychological advantage to the birth chart
is the ritual sense of establishing one's uniqueness in a cosmic
setting. Going to the trouble of finding latitudes and exact times,
getting in touch with relatives, checking with histories of daylight
saving time and war time—all of these activities have psycho­
logical impact, refining a sense of uniqueness that is not simply
egoistic, although it could obviously be shaped that way. But once
again we run into that parallel and paradox of the macrocosm and
microcosm. When a person places his birth in relation to the
planets out there, could be not also be establishing a connection
with the planets within and with that vast universe of the interior
life?
    Clearly, the astrological system is not an essential or necessary
way for discovering one's genius, but it serves as a good model or
metaphor. One might accomplish the same goal by paying close
attention to the figures appearing in dreams and to the nonrational
components of everyday life. The daimon may betray his appear­
ance in fascinations and projections, or possibly in fears.
    To discover one's daimon and genius is also to find one's
weakness, the vulnerable spot of the soul; for a generally
                        A World with Soul                           57

recognized characteristic of a god or daimon is jealousy. Although
a god may represent the vital center of a definite sphere of life, like
Venus and her sensuality, the god may also wrap its arms around
the devotee and keep him from other possibilities, other deities.
This is what Ficino knew to be sickness, true sickness of the soul:
to be under the domination of one planetary daimon, caught in the
embrace of a single jealous deity.
   In Euripides' Bacchae, Pentheus, the conservative, controlling,
repressive king, is offered a release from his deadening character
through Dionysos, the god who loosens and dismembers. But
Pentheus swings from his former kingly, domineering role toward
identification with Dionysos. He is finally and completely undone
in his new allegiance to an attractive but terrifying deity. And in
Peter Shaffer's ritualistic drama Equus, the young man, Alan
Strang, has been freed from the domination of his parents by the
god Equus, only to be engulfed by that same deity whose jealousy
will not allow a passing sexual liaison between Alan and a
sympathetic stable girl. The gods are jealous, each ready to assume
a monotheistic hold on the individual.
   Therefore, one's daimon might appear in one's weakness and
vulnerability, at the tender place of fear and concern. But of
course that is the gift of woundedness: to discover one's genius,
one has to be receptive and attentive to one's vulnerabilities and in
them find ultimate strength. Obviously, this psychology is very
different from those which advocate ego-strength. A truly strong
ego is an imaginative one that does not have to be occupied with
defending itself but can search out its genius, make contact and
cooperate with the multiple possibilities the daimons represent and
provide.


                            Constellation

   In Ficino's psychology illness comes in the form of
monotheism,19 life dominated by one god, imagination fixed in a
single kind of consciousness. Such a domination could appear as
an inclination toward depression (Saturn), a constant
preoccupation with relationship and sexuality (Venus), or an
abiding and interfering temper or aggressiveness (Mars). Ficino's
advice is twofold: find a way to offset the tendency by inviting an
opposite kind of spirit; and, at the same time, experience the
powerful daimon to the hilt. For Ficino himself, the daimon that
plagued him was Saturn, as prominent in his horoscope as in life.20
58                     The Planets Within

Ficino followed his own advice, taking practical precautions
against increased Saturnian spirit, while at the same time entering
deeply into Saturn's heaviness.
   The first tactic may sound like compensation, ego-manipulation
and defensiveness. But Ficino's intention is to maintain variety of
spirit without getting rid of the dominant one. The quality of soul
created by multiplicity is the important element: avoiding single-
mindedness with its static and rigid character. In his books on
health Ficino frequently advises people to watch out for the
dangers of Saturn, suggesting, for example, a turn to Jupiter to
assuage the desiccating assaults of Saturn. He particularly advised
scholars, whose work is largely Saturnian, to find concrete ways
of drawing other kinds of spirit into their lives. He alludes to the
practice of Pythagoreans, who engaged in this kind of psycho­
logical effort: "The Pythagoreans, who feared the tyranny of
Saturn because of their zealous study of philosophy, dressed in
white clothes and daily used songs that were Jovial and
Phoebean."21
   Another factor that distinguishes constellation from compensa­
tion is the indirect nature of the former. Compensation is an ego
activity, an attempt to find harmony and balance. Constellation is
a more imaginative act aimed at making a cosmos of variety and
multiplicity in one's psychological environment. As anybody who
has ever been depressed knows, you cannot simply "put on a
happy face'' and feel free of Saturn, and certainly you cannot gain
the benefits of depression that way. The purpose of constellation is
to provide other spiritual nourishment; to constellate is to make a
"starry sky" of one's consciousness. It requires a psychological
awareness in the sense of knowing the many facets of the soul,
recognizing in everyday objects and activities their characteristic
spirits, then providing oneself psychologically with a cornucopia
of possibilities. It all demands imagination and attention to a level
of the ordinary that is psychological rather than pragmatic. As a
result, to the psychologically attuned, individual activities and
things having little or no practical worth might become quite
important. A trip to the zoo, an hour in the garden, even a moist
Venusian movie might well serve the soul, even though it may
interfere with pressing practical concerns.

                            Cultivation
  While constellation refers to an inner patterning, the provision
of various kinds of spirit for the vitality of psychological life, it
                         A World with Soul                             59

implies a corresponding "cultivation” of the environment. Ficino's
therapeutic advice constitutes an "ecology of the soul," the
creation of an environment designed for the soul, an arrangement
of external life to correspond to the soul's requirements. An
outstanding factor in Ficino's system is his awareness of the
psychological values inherent in the material world. Matter is
spiritual to him insofar as various material objects are capable of
providing as many different kinds of spirit, and that variety
nourishes the soul. For example, concerning spirit he writes:

  Every spirit, since it is naturally rather fiery, and light and
  volatile like air, is also like light, and therefore similar to colors
  and vocal airs and odors and movements of the soul. For that
  reason spirit can be moved quickly and formed through these
  things. (Chap. 11)

These phrases sound like sympathetic magic, treating like with
like. But there is something more than magic at work here, or at
least a very natural kind of magic.
   Since spirit is so subtle, he seems to be saying, like fire, light, air,
odor, song, then those things in the environment that have such
subtle properties and significance are important sources of spirit.
   From the way we design our cities to the choice of the clothes we
wear, we are creating an environment with a particular kind of
spirit. Clothes, for example, not only reflect something of the
nature of the soul, they also nourish it with a particular kind of
spirit. When our cities are planned for optimum functioning and
cost efficiency but with little regard for soul qualities, then psyche
suffers. In architecture nonfunctional space and impractical niches
and vaults may well serve the soul and therefore, at least at the
psychological level, be of true "functional” importance.
Decoration is also significant to the soul—the columns and
statuary of medieval cathedrals, and the colors and shapes
imprinting such idiosyncratic character on the buildings of that
highly spiritual architect and city builder, Paolo Soleri.
   In contrast, a few years ago I toured the headquarters of a major
financial institution located in a suburb outside Chicago. The
place seemed designed with great effort to exclude spiritual
multiplicity. Outside and inside were white—walls, ceilings,
corridors. By order of the president of the company, I was told,
there was not one painting, sculpture, photograph, or plant to be
seen. It was a place with one whitewashed spirit, built and un­
ornamented for the computers and automated, programmed
60                         The Planets Within

workers. There was no soul because there was no color, no curves,
nothing to disturb the single spirit of sterility.
   The soul feeds on images because images are the source of spirit.
The varieties of spirit are as many as the varieties of images,
though images can be grouped thematically as can the kinds of
spirit. Certain images and certain spiritual characters seem
especially important for the life of the soul. In one of the later
chapters of The Planets, Ficino describes quite carefully the most
important image a person ought to have close at hand, preferably
in his home. This is an image of the universe, perhaps an astro­
logical portrait of the zodiac or horoscope. Ficino tells when to
begin work on such an image and which colors to use. Finally, he
notes that a person blessed with such an image will go out into the
world aware of the presence of the planetary daimons behind
everyday events. He concludes this description with a remarkable
comment: "The makers of images may see these things."
   Makers of images can see through the otherwise opaque shell of
the sensible world. But who are the image-makers? Artists and
architects, musicians and sculptors? Yes, these are the image-
makers important for the soul of a society, artisans whose spiritual
significance was once recognized so that they were associated with
churches and pastors of the soul. But insofar as each one of us has
the capacity to imagine and to entertain fantasies, we too are
image-makers. We can also ornament our bodies and our homes
and cities in a way that nourishes soul. It is sometimes said that we
make the universe into a cosmos when we give it order. But
cosmos also means "ornament," and it is also by ornamenting our
inner and outer lives that we make a cosmos, a domain for
psychological living. Insofar as we neglect imagination and images
in our environment, to that extent we suffer neglect of soul and
expose ourselves to psychological trouble.
   What Ficino describes, then, is a circle of spirit. Our concern for
soul and spirit reaches into the material world where we make our
images, and these images in turn nourish the spirit that made
them. Ernst Cassirer, the noted historian of Renaissance philos­
ophy, noticed this circle. He first quotes Ficino:
     "It is also characteristic of our soul that it is concerned not only
     for its own body but for the bodies of all earthly things and for
     the earth itself, to cultivate them and further them."

Then Cassirer comments:

     This cultivation, this "culture" of the sensible world constitutes
                        A World with Soul                         61

  a basic moment and a basic task of the spirit. . . .The spirit
  descends to the sensible and corporeal through love, and love
  raises it again out of this realm.22

   Even in our ubiquitous spirit of functionalism and pragmatism,
and in our concern for profit and commerce, the culture we build
is also a house of images, the visage and efficacious channel of
spirit. The question is, is this spirit we produce or evoke, con­
sciously or unconsciously, vital food for the soul or a bland, mal-
nourishing diet? Does it mirror and affect the soul in a supporting
way, or is it an image and source of sickness?
   I asked a group of university students to take a close look at
their campus and its buildings, inside and outside, and report on
what they found. Which deity did they suspect was presiding over
the consciousness of the architects and designers? Recall Ficino's
dictum that the god is a facet of the soul. They went out and saw
Greek and Georgian buildings, indicating devotion to an idealized
past. They saw an administration conceived along a rigid pyramid
form. They saw many compartments: colleges, schools, divisions,
departments. They saw classrooms—colorless, pictureless, desks
uncomfortable, hard, arranged in rows; they saw teachers
standing at the heads of classrooms dispensing information, testing
and grading. They saw much analysis at a distance, little concrete
involvement in matters discussed. They saw buildings of stone and
a campus divided by cement into geometrical forms. All these
clues pointed to one god, Saturn.
   When a whole society or a subsociety like the university
establishment is dominated by a single structure of consciousness,
in this case Saturn, the cold, heavy, distant deity, then all of this
outward form seems natural, the only way it can be done. But
consider a college campus informed by the spirit of Venus or
Aphrodite. I am not saying it would be better for learning, but it
would definitely be different. There would be no dry lectures or
dry books coming from this moist goddess. Growth in new ideas,
new forms, new styles would be prominent. Relationship, sen­
suality, concern for beauty and comfort, gracefulness, care for the
body and for emotions—these would be both the benefits and the
problems of this kind of dominance.
   Thus we learn from a Neoplatonist of the fifteenth century the
importance of a material world perceived and shaped for the good
of the soul. His suggestions for psychotherapy are broad and
embracing, including a reintegration of an aesthetic sense into the
main concerns of human life. Furthermore, his astrological
62                     The Planets Within

imagery offers a unique way of developing a religious sensibility, a
way of imagining the gods deeply immanent in every facet and
turn of experience. Thales, the early Ionian philosopher, had
proclaimed: "The whole world is full of gods." Ficino's psychology
echoes this claim and centers even the gods around the needs and
characteristics of soul. He presents a curious psychological
theology and a theological psychology.
  The English words health and wealth come from the same root.
For Ficino, psychological health is being achieved when the soul is
enjoying the wealth of spirit offered by the many gods. The soul is
wealthy when it reflects in its innermost structure the night sky
with its slow, steady, variegated, rhythmic dance of planets.
Individual and social culture has a psychological dimension; it is
an ecology of soul. We will now turn our attention to processes in
that ecology—the dynamic of eliciting and maintaining psycho­
logical life through procedures of psychological alchemy.
                                 3
             "Dissolve and Congeal":
              Psychological Alchemy
In one of his last writings C. G. Jung related a recurring dream
he had had years before.1 In this series of dreams he was always
discovering a part of his house he had never seen. Frequently it
was an annex or a wing, old and unfamiliar, containing a labora­
tory and antique furniture. In one of the last of these dreams he
found an old library with books full of symbolic pictures. About
the time of this dream he bought an old text from a book dealer, a
volume dealing with early Byzantine alchemy. The pictures in this
sixteenth century book reminded Jung of the illustrations he had
seen in his dream, and so, excited by this correspondence, he
began to study alchemy in ernest. Several books of his own
followed upon this unusual discovery—Psychology and Alchemy,
The Psychology of the Transference, Mysterium Coniunctionis,
and others—in which he offered a key for opening some of the
mysteries of this ancient ritualistic, mythical, and visionary art.
   In spite of Jung's efforts to suggest a way toward understanding
this strange practice, alchemy remains dense and difficult. Some
still see it as a mere rudimentary form of chemistry, the work of
adventurous but primitive minds ignorant of the laws of chemistry
and forced to express in archaic symbolic pictures and phrases
their insights into the workings of metals and minerals. But Jung
saw in alchemy a principle evident in many sectors of human life,
in astrology as well as in human relationships: faced with the
unknown, human imagination gets busy, finding in the dark
surface of the mysterious, reflections of its own enigmas. So it is
that one's soul can be moved to paranoid fear or fascinated interest
at the sight of a stranger in a passing automobile, and the dim
night sky can give rise to fantasies of flying saucers or a zodiac of
animals and planetary deities. So too for minds uncontaminated
by the knowledge of atoms and protons, the colors, smells, tastes,
and visible transformations of chemicals heated and fermented stir
the imagination. The imagery of alchemy is, in Jung's view, a
portrait of the soul doing the imagining.

                                 63
64                       The Planets Within

   If we accept Jung's hypothesis—and there is plenty of evidence
in the alchemical writings themselves to support it—then we may
turn to alchemical literature for psychological insight. This was
Jung's purpose in translating and puzzling over difficult passages
for years, and he claims that for many alchemists themselves the
spiritual or psychological values were most important:

     For many alchemists the allegorical aspect undoubtedly
     occupied the foreground to such an extent that they were firmly
     convinced that their sole concern was with chemical substances.
     But there were always a few for whom laboratory work was
     primarily a matter of symbols and their psychic effect. As the
     texts show, they were quite conscious of this, to the point of
     condemning the naive gold-makers as liars, frauds, and dupes.2

It is a general psychological fact that work of the soul can take
place, even with such extensive system and tradition, with or
without self-awareness.
   Alchemy is not, however, simply another, albeit unusual,
source for knowledge about the psyche; it has its own unique
perspectives and problems, and it illuminates a specific dimension
of psychological life. Many symbolic systems speak about the
soul, but they do not all deal with the same issues.
   Although in The Planets Ficino refers to alchemy rarely, the
nature of his concerns, especially relationships between body,
soul, and intellect, connects closely with the aims of alchemy. One
of the major objectives of the alchemists was to overcome the
illusion that the entire world is nothing but a complicated mixture
of solid matter. They wished to achieve a steady consciousness of
the distinction between mind, soul, and body. As one alchemist,
Michael Meier, put it: masters of this art want to change the
square into the triangle; which is to say, their work aims at trans­
forming the four elements of material nature—earth, air, fire, and
water—into the three elements of human existence.3 From the
alchemical point of view, psychological life begins with the
separation, not the mere distinguishing, of body, soul, and spirit.


                        Two Faces of the Soul

     Unlike that which is concerned either with things divine or
     with things of this life, soul is moved by an affection for both.
     (Chap. 1)
        "Dissolve and Congeal": Psychological Alchemy              65

   Often when psychologically attuned writers point out that we
live in a world where soul is largely missing, they imply more than
mere absence. Soul may not only be missing, it may be lost or
stuck somewhere. In many traditions throughout the world it is
believed that the soul can wander and get lost; it can take a
vacation (vacatio) from the body and never come back. Or the
soul can become too much embedded in a world of dense
materialism. Soul, a quality of existence, can disappear then in the
ethereal heights of spirit or in the gripping, blinding,
overwhelming attractions of the body and its world. Jung was
quite impressed by traditional societies who feared loss of soul,
while he recognized the same danger in modern industrial life.
Thus he entitled one of his popular books Modern Man in Search
of a Soul. Ficino noticed that the soul's affection for the body is
like the love of a mother for her child or like the pull of gravity on
a stone tossed into the air.-1 Both Ficino and Jung speak of an
"affection" of the soul for body and for spirit. "Since the soul
animates the body," Jung observed, "just as the soul is animated
by the spirit, she tends to favor the body and everything bodily,
sensuous, and emotional.... She must be called back by the
counsel of the spirit from her lostness in matter and in the world."5
Here Jung is commenting on the views of a sixteenth-century
alchemist, Gerard Dorn.
   One of the tasks of alchemy, therefore, is consistent with a
prime concern of Ficino in his work on health: keep soul in the
middle. Do not let it disappear in mind or in body. When soul is
lost in either of these extremes, gone too are the benefits it brings
to experience. When soul is absent, gone are internal values, a
sense of significance, and a sense of self. Physical and intellectual
labor proceed without vitality, enthusiasm, feeling, and a sense of
inherent purpose. Without soul, relationship and connectedness
with people suffers. Nations, cities, families, and marriages retain
the appearance of cohesiveness, but without soul genuine
involvement is missing. Of course, on the other hand gone too are
the problems soul brings: emotional entanglements, hurt feelings,
depressions and suspicious exhilarations, pain and longing.
Without soul we walk through the busy, crowded areas of daily
living like "the dangling man" or like "the stranger" who sees it all
as if it were happening behind the glass panels of a museum.
Physically present, even analytically active in mind, psychologi­
cally he is cut off, distant, uninvolved, unmoved.
   In Ficinian psychology, as we have seen, spirit is the subtle
substance connecting soul with the inner and outer cosmos. In the
66                      The Planets Within

 presence of soul, spiritual substance is picked up, amplified, and
 received. An example is music. Music can be received as an
 intellectual achievement, or it may be received at the sensory
 level — the more decibels the better. Or, finally, the spiritual
evanescence of a piece of music can be caught with the antennae of
soul, in which case the decibels and intellectual cleverness may fit
 into a pattern that makes sense of it all. People with soul betray
the coming and going of spirit. A person with soul has presence
and is free of ego rigidity and protectiveness; he is not problem-
free, but he can give soul room to play in pain or pleasure. It is
interesting to compare spiritual masters who are lost in the ethereal
regions with those for whom spiritual discipline has been a
nourishment of soul. Intellectuals need not seem isolated in the
cold corridors of their ivory towers either. With soul the house of
intellect breathes with vitality and communicability.
   Soul can get lost in psychotherapy as well. Those weekly trips to
the analyst ought to be founded on a true care for the psyche, but
too frequently such "psychological attention" amounts to nothing
more than mind-play—the fun of figuring out why life is so
difficult. Soulless, intellectual therapy can go on forever because
two people will never run out of reasons for problematic behavior
and feelings. But the client, if not the professional, should know
that all the reasons in the world make no difference. Nothing
happens. Worse, psychotherapy of this kind, concerned more
with intellectual insight and the application of that insight to life
(no mediating soul) might well cure a person right out of the very
movements of soul that promise psychological existence.
   We have already discussed the way in which soul can be
neglected and forfeited in psychotherapy that is primarily
sensational —in every sense of the world. The outpouring of
feelings is attractive to soul because the soul has an affection for
the body. It may be satisfying, but that is not to say that it is
genuinely psychological.
   All of this confusion stems from an alchemical problem: keeping
soul separated from body and spirit (mind). To keep them mindful
of the issue, the alchemists had an interesting motto: "Solve et
 Coagula." Dissolve and congeal! It is an alchemical concern both
to rescue soul from flight into spirit, and to draw soul out of the
confines of materialism. Alchemy moves in two directions: it
spiritualizes what is otherwise dense and literal, and it concretizes
that which is excessively intellectual or spiritual. It speaks to both
affections of the soul. Another alchemist, Arnold de Villa Nova,
underscores this dual perspective and purpose, though he stresses.
       "Dissolve and Congeal": Psychological Alchemy             67

as did Ficino, the special importance of dissolving physical and
literal encrustations of the soul:

  Unless the bodies become incorporeal, and the spirits corporeal,
  no progress will be made. The true beginning then of our work
  is the solution of our body, because bodies, when dissolved
  become spiritual in their nature, and are yet at the same time
  more fixed than the spirit, though they are dissolved with it. For
  the solution of the body means the coagulation of the spirit and
  vice versa; each gives up something of its own nature; they meet
  each other half way, and thus become one inseparable sub­
  stance, like water mixed with water.6

This passage is worth closer study, since it expresses precisely the
middle region of psychological reality. Alchemical work begins,
Villa Nova says, with the solution of our body. Body in this
context can mean many things: attention exclusively to physical
and materialistic concerns, a tendency toward literalism in our
understanding of events, or excessive involvement with ego
defenses and projects. As Freud pointed out, ego is an extension of
the body, an unnecessarily limited sense of identity based on a
body fantasy. The first task toward a psychological attitude,
toward the recovery of soul, is to dissolve these extreme
literalisms.
   Arnold assures us that when these materialistic concerns are
dissolved and become more spiritual, they will not lose all body.
Alchemical solutio does not have to involve Fieraclitean enantio-
dromia—a rush into an opposite problematic. In solutio each gives
up some of its nature. Spirit takes on body, body assumes some
spirit. Lofty ideas lose their abstraction and distance and appear
psychologically as fantasies, wishes, wonderings. Actions and
projects take a rest in solutio and out of them pour the same psy­
chological issues.
   In the language of elements, airy ideas and earthy projects melt
into watery fantasies. In the middle psychological realm spirit and
matter meet "like water mixed with water." The alchemists knew
the connection between their solutio and the waters of baptism.
They knew that the water of the psyche not only dissolves, it also
forms a uterine matrix out of which something new is born. The
alchemical solutio involves an ending and a beginning, it is in fact
a process of initiation into a different level of understanding and
an unfamiliar dimension of experience.
   According to the alchemists solutio breaks the bodily substance
down into its parts, even to its atoms.7 Psychologically this
68                     The Planets Within

amounts to a breakdown of literal experience and understanding
into fantasies and images. When our attitude toward our own
experience turns from earthly literalism and fixity to a more
watery awareness of unconscious movements of the soul, then
behavior seems less solid and substantial. The difference between
reality and dream shrinks. The surface membrane of life gives way
to depth, another dimension. It becomes apparent that our actions
are all movements in a psychodrama, in many psychodramas—
worlds designed by imagination, the sets through which we walk
peopled by characters authored at least in part by our fantasies, in
part by the imaginations of others, in part by something quite
mysterious. It is a truism in our Freud-tinted age to note that we
often marry our fathers and mothers. Jung deepend this aware­
ness, suggesting that we also strike out in anger against the collec­
tive shadow we refuse to claim as part of our human inheritance.
He also picked up on Freud's observation by noting that we try to
unite with our alienated souls by marrying alluring likenesses and
projections. All our actions, in fact, involve us in deep mysterious
themes and plots. The alchemical process of drawing soul out of
matter aims at showing us the fantasies that are congealed in our
actions and in our thoughts. Dissolved, they rise to the surface, to
the screen on which we behold our dreams and reveries, and there
we can see the characters and motifs which animate—ensoul—our
lives. Alchemists looked at the chemical reactions in their retorts
and saw mystical marriages, dragons and peacocks, and scenes
from the Biblical book of Genesis. With a more penetrating insight,
we too can behold in the retort of our reflectiveness the characters,
human, superhuman and subhuman, the mythical themes and
stories, and the religious devotedness and ritual which form the
elements of experienced reality.
   This very process of reflection establishes the mid-region of
soul. For in imaginative reverie and wonder, dry ideas about our­
selves and our world are moistened with a relatedness to our own
inner life, and habits of behavior lose their hardness, becoming
more moist and fluid. In psychological reflection mind and body
have a place to meet. The square of unconscious life becomes the
triangle of psychological awareness.
   But what are the advantages of this "triangulating of the
square"? First, the psychological attitude gets one off the carousel
of self-improvement and compulsive activism. Most people turn to
psychology in order to change. They want life to be different, but
this goal is rarely achieved, if ever. If a determined person consults
a psychoanalyst for inner reconstruction, he should know that the
        "Dissolve and Congeal": Psychological Alchemy               69

classical Freudian position holds that human beings fortunate
enough to be civilized are ipso facto neurotic. All available
techniques aim at making him less neurotic. If he consults a
behaviorist he may find that a symptom like overeating or
smoking may be rooted out, but what is left is a hole, an empty
spot where once there played an enacted fantasy. If he goes to a
humanistic psychologist and directs his efforts toward personal
growth, he may find that growth can be suffocating, that however
positive he thinks and lovingly he relates, pain is still an
inescapable part of experience. On the other hand, the psycho­
logical attitude provided by alchemy "only" offers a deepening of
experience. One becomes less caught up in and attracted to the
surface of events and begins to see through to the deeper layers.
Alchemists were patient workers: an alchemy of the soul demands
patience and subtlety in appreciation. Sensational cures mean
nothing. But there is in the alchemical process freedom from the
binding intellectual knots, the psychological moralism, and the
feverish activity of the ego associated with "square" living.
    Solutio, again like baptism, also involves a cleansing, a puri­
 fication, a washing away of debris, allowing a clearer perception
of essentials. In The Planets, Ficino typically relates purification to
 the psychological process of becoming celestial: "A person
 becomes celestial when he is purged of impurities, completely
cleansed of those things which are in him but are different from the
 heavens" (Chap. 4). What could be in a person and different from
 the image reflected in the planets and stars? For one thing, there
could be so much debris in one's life, unsorted and unreflected,
 that no movement of the soul can be felt. The planets are in
constant motion, as are the spheres of psychological existence
 represented by the planets. "In solution," the movements taking
place deep within can be felt and recognized; that is, when
 fantasies are allowed to flow and the psychological dimension is
given some attention, one senses a kind of purgation, a removal of
blockage.
    But purification can take place by "putting things in order," not
just by removal of obstructions. The commonly held interpreta­
tion of Aristotelian "catharsis" sees it as a flushing out of
emotions. According to this interpretation, drama is effective
because by participating vicariously in the action on stage we
experience emotions—pity and terror—which have been blocked
within ourselves. But more recent readings of Aristotle explain
catharsis as participation in drama by which we gain the play­
wright's perspective on the life-situation presented, and with that
70                      The Planets Within

fresh viewpoint feelings and fantasies involved are "cleared up.”*
Returning to Ficino's leitmotif of the sky, we may say that
catharsis takes place when the many details of psychological
experience are given points of focus and related to patterns, like
the designs of the zodiac. It is not a matter of putting one's life in
order in some egoistic, rational, controlling manner; rather, it is an
imaginative comparison of one's experience with images and
patterns. Why read a novel unless the story provides a fresh view­
point on actual experience? Once again we find a profound con­
nection between psychological vitality and imagination.


                    Sublimation/Condensation

    In popular imagination the alchemist is a seeker of gold, not
unlike prospectors of the Old West, ever hoping to extract that
precious substance from base metals. While apparently there were
those "puffers" who minted coins and sought wealth and fame
from the laboratory work, some of them at least were after an
inner gold, the golden self, the inner person who endures and
sparkles with spirituality. They sought to distill from the chaos of
materialistic life a precious element.
   The various phases of the alchemical process were variable,
shrouded in mysterious symbolic language, and connected to
other esoteric systems such as the Kabbalah and Gnosticism. I do
not intend to give any kind of systematic interpretation of
alchemical processes, but simply to highlight a few procedures
which relate closely with Ficino's psychology. Besides "solution,"
which, as we have seen, is part of Ficino's process of constellating
the psyche, there is also the process of sublimation, a phase Ficino
would associate with movement away from literalism toward the
spiritual.
   As the alchemist set about his task of translating the secrets of
his tradition into laboratory procedures, he would heat various
mixtures and notice their odors, often pungent and rancid, as well
as changes in color and shape, and the cloudy mists and beads of
moisture that would condense in the retort. He watched as a
twofold process unfolded: a vaporizing of what was solid and
moist, and a condemnsation of that which was misty and airy.
Solve et coagula. Psychologically, flighty ideas and spiritual
schemes need concretization (condensation), while excessively
literal matters require vaporization (sublimation).
   Sublimation aims at a result similar to the goal of solutio: the
       "Dissolve   and   Congeal": Psychological Alchemy           71

extraction of fantasies and feelings which lie congealed in literal
actions and beliefs. But this is not the kind of sublimation Freud
developed in psychoanalysis. For him sublimation is a raising of
sexual impulses to a higher level where the sexual instinct acquires
a new object, one more important to society. In alchemy sublima­
tion does not lead to a new object; quite the opposite, by allowing
congealed fantasies to loosen and rise into awareness, one
discovers the essence already present in literal events. There is no
escape from worldly experience, but the soul-values inherent in the
physical world come into consciousness. As Heraclitus taught:
"Soul is vaporized from what is moist." Soul begins in the moist,
solid earth, the realm of ordinary experience. Without this
embodied world there could be no soul. Ficino especially develops
this idea in his commentary on Plato's Symposium—love of the
highest things is nourished by love of the physical world. A
psychological attitude does not come about through escape from
the tangles and problems, or the joys and pleasures, of ordinary
life. Like the clouds, psyche remains close to earth but not
embedded in it. It has the moisture of mist, feeling and passion
leading not simply to action but toward deep reflection.
   Heating, cooking, boiling, and baking are alchemical proce­
dures—literally and figuratively. Dense, solid experience can be
cooked with thought and reflection until its subtle elements,
trapped within, escape. Under the heat of passion, knotty
problems in life rise into consciousness in the forms of images and
moods. As a person "stews over" predicaments and plans, life may
become less productive but its soul-value deepens. In therapy, or
in any psychologically moving situation, what has been stagnant
and heavy begins to bubble. Dormant memories of the past rise to
the surface, and feelings formerly kept covered and quiet break
through. On the "hot seat" of confrontation with formerly
neglected issues, memories and feelings begin to loosen and move
about. What has been allowed to settle as sediment, causing heavi­
ness and immobility, under the heat of alchemical attention
becomes unsettled and unsettling.
   At various times in psychological life it seems appropriate to
boil, bake, roast, fry, or just keep warm. Sometimes a fantasy
needs incubation—warmth and containment. The alchemical
vessel was seen as both womb and tomb, a place for birth and a
place for decay, but always a place for containment. In us the
retort is the vessel of memory and imagination, holding events and
fantasies where they can be subjected to the heat of passion and
feeling or to the simmering of thought and reflection. In this retort.
72                        The Planets Within

events of life decay, losing their literal form, but they also ferment,
acquiring taste, bite, and body. A good cook of the psyche knows
the best combinations of temperature and time, when to let things
simmer and when to bring them to a boil.
   Anyone, however, who knows anything about alchemy knows
that it was not meat and potatoes the alchemists were stewing in
their ovens and test tubes. Their combinations were more like the
mixtures children sometimes concoct, mixing together anything
they can find. Alchemy begins with a mess, with garbage and
waste, the alchemical massa confusa, the bloody mess which is the
raw material, the prima materia of the golden self.
    Ego does not help much in this matter, since it prefers neatness.
To ego cleanliness is next to godliness. Ego spends a good deal of
its time and energy trying to make life neat and cleaning up the
mess we inevitably get ourselves into. But alchemy, a thoroughly
non-ego work, suggests that the way to soul is through the mess,
not around it or in spite of it. And, according to many alchemists,
if you don't have a mess to begin with, you had better work hard
to get one. You may need a phase of putrefactio, a word that
doesn't need translation or explication. In recent years people have
described psychotherapy as "getting your shit together"—a rather
alchemical notion. And you can't get it together if you don't have
it in the first place.
   All of this, of course, is unbelievably uncouth to ego—down­
right unhealthy and noisome. But even some counselors and
therapists are now beginning to see that people who really need
therapy are not those whose life is a mess but those who have been
avoiding and covering up the mess. Jung claimed that the mess was
necessary for the discipline of psychology itself:

     No wonder that unearthing the psyche is like undertaking a full-
     scale drainage operation. Only a great idealist like Freud could
     devote a lifetime to such unclean work. It was not he who
     caused the bad smell, but all of us—we who think ourselves so
     clean and decent from sheer ignorance and the grossest self-
     deception. Thus our psychology, the acquaintance with our
     own souls, begins in every respect from the most repulsive end,
     that is to say, with all those things which we do not wish to see.9

  Sublimation is in no way a turning away from things repulsive
and shadowy; on the contrary, sublimation begins with acknowl­
edgment of this lower part of humanity. There, says Jung,
acquaintance with our soul begins. Sublimation and vaporization
of the fantasies active in our messy lives are essential, continuing
       “Dissolve   and   Congeal": Psychological Alchemy           73

processes in the maintenance of the psychological perspective. In
the minds of many, apparently, the goal of psychotherapy is to
clean up the mess once and for all, but in a therapy influenced by
alchemy, as is the Ficinian approach, psyche's garbage will always
be present, available for incubation and cooking—the ever-present
raw material for the creation of soul.


                   Quintessence: The Elixir of Life

  You may ask why, if elements and living things generate beings
  similar to their spirit, stones and minerals do not. They stand
  midway between elements and living beings. The spirit in them
  is held by a more crass material. When it is properly separated
  and kept separate, it has the power to produce seeds similar to
  itself, when applied to certain materials of its own kind. Natural
  philosophers carefully separate this spirit from gold by a certain
  sublimation in fire and apply it to metals to make gold. This
  spirit properly drawn and separated from gold or something else
  the Arabians call an elixir. (Chap. 3)

   From the depths of the heights, we may now leave the malodor­
ous phase of putrefactio and move on to the elixir of immor­
tality. For alchemy is not all putrid and foul; it strives for the
highest possibilities. As Ficino says, the elixir is a spirit extracted
from gold or some other precious substance through a process of
sublimation. Once extracted, it can be applied to others things,
thereby propagating itself. The elixir was also known as a panacea
and source of eternal youth. The elixir, therefore, is the secret of
secrets, the key to all psychological creativity. In the first chapter
of The Planets, Ficino says more about the elixir, although there he
calls it the "quintessence" — that element of spirit transcending the
four elements of the natural world:

  Remember, as the power of our soul is always applied to the
  members through spirit, so the power of the World Soul is
  diffused in all things through the quintessence, which flourishes
  everywhere as spirit within the World Body. It is contained in
  those things which have the most spirit. We could absorb this
  quintessence more if we knew how to separate it, pure, from
  other elements. Or, we could absorb it more through more
  frequent use of things rich in it—things exceptionally pure like
  choice wine and vinegar, balsam and gold, precious stones,
  myrobalan; things which smell sweet and glitter, especially
  things with a subtle essence, things warm, moist, and clear; not
74                       The Planets Within

     only wine, but also the whitest sugar, or especially gold or the
     fragrance of cinnamon and roses.

   The secret of the elixir is actually quite simple: surround your­
self with things and immerse yourself in activities that have the
most obvious spiritual significance. Remember that for Ficino
spirit is a subtle substance that emanates from ordinary things, and
in fact the materials he lists are all quite solid in themselves, but
they all also give off a subtle fragrance or brilliance. He is not
suggesting, therefore, a quest for spiritual development outside
ordinary life, on a mountain top or in a monastery. What is
essential is to have the proper perspective on life itself. In a letter
to his friend, Antonio Hyvano, Ficino complains that the soul is
daily sold to the earthly body, and "the only person truly alive is
the one who lives most remote from this false life, at least in
attitude."10 The immortality granted by this elixir of spirit is not
unending physical life or life after death, but life outside life itself,
the life of the soul that transcends personal biography and the
limits of ordinary time.
   We may look at vinegar, wine, and precious stones either as
concrete methods, like amulets and charms, for keeping imagina­
tion alive to the spiritual dimension of things, or we may see them
as metaphors for all those objects and activities in life that have
clear spiritual import. On the surface at least, reading a book
would be a more spiritual activity than brushing your teeth.
Ficino's prescription advises filling life with clear spiritual
activities, then bringing that spiritual awareness to more dense
activities. The spiritual attitude gained from art, reading, serious
conversation, ritual, celebration, camaraderie, athletics and other
"spirited" activities is itself the elixir than can transform all of life,
making everything food for soul. The elixir is elusive because it is
not a substance but a perspective. It is a panacea in that this pers­
pective can transform everything, and it contains the secret of
perceiving the immortal dimension behind all mortal events. The
elixir is of the realm of the soul, not a material thing.
   Discussion of the elixir brings up an issue important to certain
psychologies today, especially those not caught up in the empirical
and experimental fantasy—the problem of the relationship
between religion and psychology. More and more psychologists
are taking an interest in religious practice because it is evident that
spiritual masters have insight into human behavior and feeling.
The trouble is that the craving for spirit, valid and necessary in
itself, threatens a reversal of the old problem of materialism. Soul
       "Dissolve and Congeal”: Psychological Alchemy                75

can get lost in those high regions of pure spirit. Meditation and
other spiritual disciplines may offer the spirit the soul requires, but
they may also lead us astray psychologically. Ficino's attitude,
while strongly spiritual, overcomes that tendency. He advises a
search for spirit contained in the concrete world, not outside of it.
His is not a flight psychology, alluring to many since spiritual
flight can draw us up and away from the problems of the soul. In
his description of the elixir he makes it plain that spirit can be
found in daily living, and through the elixir all of life can be trans­
formed into a source of spiritual and psychological nourishment.
This is only a more immediate reflection of his intellectual effort to
reconcile the soul of Platonism with the spirit of Christianity.
   It is evident, then, that certain alchemical principles play a
significant role in Ficino's theory and therapeutics of the soul.
These principles keep soul separate from, though connected to,
intellect and body, that is, intellectualism and materialism. The
alchemical perspective affirms the value of the most ordinary
affairs of life as prime matter for psychological realization. It also
demonstrates from another viewpoint the immanent nature of the
spiritual, and the dynamics involved between spiritual and
psychological realities. It helps maintain psychological conscious­
ness, a middle arena, a hollow space for reflection and incubation,
a chamber of resonance and, like the alchemist's retort, a theater
of images.
   This sketch of alchemy also prepares us for a very curious and
fascinating piece of imaginative work in Ficino's psychology: his
psychological interpretation of the four elements. Here we find a
further spiritualization of matter and another resource for the
creation and increase of soul.
                                 4

             The Elements of Psyche

       You know well that the gross body is nourished by the
       four gross elements. Know then that the spiritual body
       is nourished by its own kind of four subtle elements:
       wine corresponds to earth; the aroma of wine takes the
       place of water; songs and musical melodies are air; and
       light stands for the element fire. Spirit is especially
       nourished by these four.
                                    — The Planets, chapter 24

We have seen how the alchemists tried to transform their con­
sciousness so that the world, formerly appearing as solid stuff
accessible to the senses, might be seen as a mixture of body, soul,
and spirit. To apprehend the World Soul, “Anima Mundi," is in
essence to see with a psychological eye. To use James Hillman's
phrase, one "sees through" the literal facade of thoughts and
actions, conscious of the fantasies embodied in them. It ought to
be clear by now, however, that seeing through the otherwise
opaque surface of things is not a simple intellectual investigation.
Psychological perception is different from sheer mental insight in
that imagery and emotion play significant roles. Ambiguity and
paradox, multiple meanings and unfinished reflections are proper
to this kind of awareness. Psyche is basically quite simple and
evident, as obvious as a dream, yet its language is sufficiently
different from rational thought that it can be extremely difficult to
cross the narrow chasm that separates the psychological from the
intellectual.
   Ficino clarifies the peculiar nature of psychological reality with
an imaginative twist of imagery. He takes the four elements of
nature classically identified as earth, air, fire, and water; and he
translates these into the world of psyche, substituting for each of
the four an element more suited to the subtle nature of psyche.
These new elements are themselves images which set a scale for
psychological matters, marking out a range for psyche somewhere

                                 76
                      The Elements   of   Psyche                   77

between gross material objects and abstract thought. Ficino leads
us to imagine an intermediate world which has its own kind of
body, but which is clearly more spiritual than the physical realm.
   Jungian psychologists are familiar with a psychological inter­
pretation of the natural elements. They customarily transfer the
traditional terms to a psychological level. A person's psychological
makeup might be mapped accoring to the elements: one might be
dominant, another lacking. Astrologers evaluate personality
according to these elements as well, of course, since each sign of
the zodiac is imagined to have an elemental character: Aries/fire,
Taurus/earth, Gemini/air, Cancer/water, and so on. Psychologi­
cally then, an individual might reveal an oversupply of the
element air—perhaps someone extremely intellectual, full of ideas,
lofty schemes, plans, and wishes without body and substance. Or,
quite the opposite, a person may seem extraordinarily earthy-
immovable, fixed, conservative, practical, and maybe dense.
These elements have no ultimate, metaphysical significance, but as
a complex image they serve the imagination in its exploration of
psychological patterns. Understanding the imagery of these
elements also helps clarify sometimes the underlying imagery in
dreams. When water appears in a dream, for example, it might
help to see it as one of the basic elements constituting the psychic
world of the dreamer.1
   Ficino's approach is similar in that he uses the idea of applying
the four elements to psyche, but he changes the imagery.

 Elements of Nature             Elements of the Soul

        Earth                     Wine
                                                           Bacchus
        Water                     Aroma of Wine
        Air                       Music
                                                          Apollo
        Fire                      Light


Ficino's choice of these new elements of the psyche is consistent
with other imagery we have seen him use. Each of these is at once
solid and substantial in some way, yet it also emanates an invisible
quality. Wine is certainly a substance, but its effect is felt in the
soul as well as in the body. The aroma of wine is subtle but un­
mistakably perceptible. Music pours out of an instrument and
light is clearly visible, yet both are intangible. These are metaphors
78                      The Planets Within

for the psychological dimension — the world of the psychological is
as real and perceptible as the aroma of wine, but it is just as subtle.
   Ficino presents his four elements not merely as building blocks
of a psychological or spiritual world but also as nutriments for the
psyche. Just as we have to take in and digest the physical world in
order to survive, these spiritual elements have to become food for
the soul in order for it to thrive. Again, this seems to be a funda­
mental, almost naive notion, yet it is a widespread fact that
personal and social values simply overlook these subtle needs. An
outstanding example is education: parents are concerned and
vocal these days about the training their children are getting in
reading, spelling, and arithmetic; and the government is quite
concerned about school lunch programs. But what about the
psyche of the child? Attention is given to social adjustment, when
problems appear, but at this point it seems a futuristic fantasy to
imagine an educational system staffed with experts on the
processes of the soul and structured to care for the profound psy­
chological needs of children. In this area people we call primitive
are far advanced, providing their children with important and
efficacious rites of passage. Ficino's language and his whole
approach to psychotherapy may appear quaint and irrelevant; but
beneath his curious imagery lie important insights that do in fact
speak to modern social and personal crises.


                                Wine

   The word Ficino uses for the process of absorbing spirit from the
world around us is haurire—"to drink." As we go about our
business in the daily routines of life, we might, if properly attuned
or "accommodated," drink in some food for the soul. We have
seen that one of the best ways of doing this is to surround our­
selves with fertile sources of spirit. One of the obstacles standing in
the way of spirit, frustrating our "thirst" for spiritual vitality, is
the resistance of ego.
   In its most fluid and minimal conception, ego is simply the
power of agency an individual enjoys. A person has a desire and
acts it out. Fritz Peris, the founder of Gestalt therapy, defined ego
as the point of contact between subject and object, a point existing
in time only momentarily. But clearly ego is much more than a
function. The sense of "I" involves as well an extremely sensitive
awareness of individuality. Perhaps the Freudians are correct, who
identify the ego as a fantasy projection of the physical body. "I" am
                      The Elements of Psyche                         79

obviously contained within one skin; my body makes me distinct
and separate from other "its" and other "I's." The fantasy of ego as
we commonly know it seems to be motivated to bolster that sense
of uniqueness, if not superiority. What Freud called "narcissism,"
a tendency to bend attention and energy back upon ego, appears
to be such a common cause of distress that one is tempted to label
the twentieth-century sense of identity as the narcissistic ego. In
love, war, and politics, in the midst of involving international or
personal projects, a whisper is almost audible: "How am I doing?
Am I accepted?"
   The narrow role of ego is further strengthened by personal
history. "I” includes all accomplishments and failures of the past.
We see in the history of the ego causes of present problems, and we
are concerned about the future development of this ego. Indeed,
there seems to be something essentially conservative about ego as
we know it. It is fairly easy to imagine that habits and manners of
an early period remain the same in the ego's old age. In a sense,
ego seems to age much faster than the physical body, so that
a ten-year-old may sound like an old man. Identifying with
personal experience of the past, an individual readily freezes his
possibilities, limits his potentiality to what is "tried and true."
Rather than multiply the directions for personal biography,
frequently ego, narcissistic and defended, maintains a straight and
narrow path. It is no wonder that ego and soul seem to be at odds.
   Because ego is so often narcissistic and defensive, when
phenomena from the outside world or from the larger self make an
appearance, ego may experience these as violation and threat. Ego
resists movements of the soul. Repression is not motivated simply
by moral sensitivity—the ego fears change because change is
death to an immobile sense of "I." In relation to ego, change is not
really transformation but simply flexibility. If one is moved in soul
toward anger, but the ego-pattern does not admit of this emotion,
conflict arises, and of course ego can win out, at least temporarily.
If one is moved toward grief, but the ego is structured only for
strength and a "stiff upper lip," then that spirit is kept from the life
of the psyche. Eventually, it seems that these lost spirits make their
imprints unconsciously—in disease, compulsions, posture, facial
expression, obsessions, and dreams.
   This ego we are discussing, all too commonly, is not only
narcissistic, it also appears as an avator of the senex, a pattern of
consciousness we will discuss in the chapter on Saturn. Basically,
senex is a fantasy of kingship, of senile rule over a warring
kingdom. As an attitude of soul, senex is cold, distant.
80                      The Planets Within

conservative, and rigid. Among scholars, for instance, the senex
attitude betrays itself in language: they advocate "rigorous
scholarship," "rigorous logic," "rigorous self-control," and even
"rigorous exercise." Yet, inextricably tied to all this senex rigor is
"rigor mortis," the hardness of death so characteristic of an ego so
influenced.
   "Rigor mortis" brings us to the first nutritive element of spirit in
Ficino's scheme: wine. It takes little research to gain entry into this
image, especially since Ficino himself gives us an important clue
for interpreting the elements. He divides them according to two
gods he calls brothers: Bacchus and Apollo. The first two
elements, of course, are those of Bacchus or the Greek Dionysos,
the god of wine, among other things. Dionysos is the dying and
rising god, a reflection of the Egyptian Osiris, worshiped as god of
the Underworld, the god whose chief characteristic, found in his
own myth and in the lives of his followers, is dismemberment.
   Dionysos is the god of being-torn-apart; or, put in another way,
to be torn apart is to experience the god Dionysos. Dionysos is the
grape crushed and fermented to resurrect as wine, and wine is the
god taken into the body, affecting the soul. Profound paradox can
be found in the nature of most deities, but in Dionysos paradox is
of the essence. In Dionysos death and life are practically
indistinguishable. To experience the Dionysian affirmation of life,
proclaimed and championed by Nietzsche, one has to be torn
apart. Touched by a Dionysian spirit, ego feels the stupor of
drunkenness and the pain of dismemberment, but these are only
phases in the process of the reestablishment of life. The tight hold
of ego loosens, with Dionysian wine-spirit—stiff joints are oiled,
the brittle paste that holds together the unified personality
dissolves, revealing an inner multitude of possibilities along with
their very "unrigorous" virtues: ambiguity, paradox, contradic­
tion, amorality, ambivalence, and uncertainty.
   Wine, therefore, as an image, is the answer to the hard
defensiveness of the narcissistic ego. It parallels the earth element
in nature, for in the natural world substance, cohesiveness, and
stability form a true foundation. But in the psychic realm, one's
base has to be fluid like wine, and it has to support, not stability
and security, but multiplicity and movement.
   By introducing the element wine under the patronage of
Dionysos, Ficino makes it clear that Bacchic insanity and illogic
are fundamental to the psyche. But the character of Dionysian
consciousness is intricate and vast, requiring volumes of
exposition. One can find the modern role of Dionysos elaborated
                     The Elements of Psyche                      81

in numerous outstanding authors: Nietzsche, of course, Norman
O. Brown, Carl Kerenyi, Walter Otto, and James Hillman, to
name a few.2 The Dionysian modality described in these authors
serves as an antidote to that excessively masculine—particularly
Apollonian and Saturnian—attitude that so petrifies ego. To say
"yes” to life without avoiding life's death and pain creates a
drunken, androgynous, sensual, polymodal response.
   The dismemberment motif in Dionysian consciousness demands
much more exploration, but let us leave that for other contexts and
look more closely at Ficino's image.
    Wine, corresponding to the element earth, is the psyche's body
and represents things physical and sensual—body experienced
psychologically. Both wine and its god have long been associated
with sensuality, being close in touch with physical existence.
Dionysian physicality, though experienced in soul, is an attribute
of the real body, not some visual projection of the body. Isadora
Duncan freely admitted the role of the Dionysian in her life, but
she felt this God as a continuing threat to her sanity; Dionysos is a
stirring of the soul and body, an eruption of life from its vibrant
source, a simultaneous brush with the terrors and ecstasies of life
and death.
    Body is truly a fundamental source for psyche's imagery; it is
only our bias for the visual that leads us to expect psychological
imagery to appear as pictures. A fully experienced image is a
synaesthetic impression, to use a term favored by art educators
 today. That is to say, an image is a total sensation: seen, heard,
 felt, smelled, and intuited. The sound of a familiar voice in a
strange crowd creates an image of itself. Emotion electrifies the
 touch of a lover's hand creating an image irreducible to physical
 factors. Having a late winter cold with all the attendant feelings
 and remedies and memories creates a complex image in which we
 participate with body and soul.
    If a person wishes to overlook certain psychological factors at
 work in his life, he may have to become desensitized to his body,
 for the body is a psychological resonator. Conversely, as one
 becomes more sensitive to the body, subtle expressions may
 increase awareness of the soul. The sensory awareness techniques
 of humanistic psychology, if not confined to the physical realm
 alone, can serve as exercises for increase psychological perception,
 but sensory awareness ought to direct us more fully to the image,
 not to crass sensation. An alert body is not only good for mental
 activity, it is a body ready for imaging.
    Still another characteristic of wine, so simple that it is easily
82                     The Planets Within

overlooked, is its capacity to bring pleasure. Pleasure is for Ficino
a remarkable and important capacity of the soul, for it leads the
soul out of constant activity. Pleasure brings a halt to ego-projects
and acts as a bridge between activity and contemplation. Ficino
identified these as the three fundamental forms of living: activity,
pleasure, and contemplation; and, although the last he considered
the highest form of life, pleasure came a close second. The motto
of the Florentines at the Academy read: “Laetus in praesens"—
"Joy in the present.” We find this phrase as a salutation in Ficino's
correspondence, and it was inscribed on the walls at Careggi.
Pleasure, like a glass of wine after hard work, stops the world,
preparing an individual to be more receptive to the subtle nuances
of his environment, luring him into reverie and reflection.
   Bacchic in nature, pleasure intervenes in our plans and efforts.
Pleasure is time-out. Pleasure teases us to discover who we are
instead of who we are trying to become. Laetus in Praesens.
Pleasure brings the present to the foreground. As a delay and
detour of our past and future ego perspectives and plans, it creates
some havoc and minor disturbance—just enough for the opening
spirit needs. In pleasure time slows down. Reflections in the pool
of the soul come into focus. Pleasure in doing nothing allows for a
more receptive posture toward the creativity of the soul.
   Taking time out for pleasure differs, naturally, from the
egomaniacal pursuit of entertainment. Originally entertainment
meant "to keep hold of”—intertenere; so we speak of "entertaining”
ideas or suggestions. Allied to pleasure, to be entertained is to be
held passively in a fantasy—a football game or a light drama, for
example. But the vessel of entertainment itself usually discourages
the kind of movement vessels can prompt, processes like
fermentation and incubation. Pleasure does not strive toward
goals and accomplishments, quite the contrary; yet pleasure is an
inducement further into some fantasy. Entertainment, on the other
hand, in the popular sense at least, is a way of avoiding soul. This
is not to say that the many forms of entertainment that play such
an influential role in modern life do not in themselves have soul;
rather, one's attitude toward entertainment can be soulless. In
fact, sentiments surrounding the search for entertainment often
seem to express the soul's affection for the body and its potential
for unconsciousness. Pleasure lies deeper. It cracks open the soul,
while entertainment keeps it soothingly shut.
   Wine of the psyche, therefore, offers a pleasurable, sensual,
inebriating dismemberment of the materialistic attitude, thus
establishing a foundation for psychological participation in life.
                     The Elements   of   Psyche                   83

All those things and activities which lead us out of literalism,
reorient the logical mind, and bring a pause to active projects are
made of the atoms of this wine element. At the root of the
psychological perspective stands the ancient god of the vine, the
deity who simultaneously embraces both life and death.


                       The Aroma of Wine

   While discussing alchemy and Arnold de Villa Nova's image of
“water mixed with water,” we alluded to the fact that earth,
interpreted as density and literalism, has to be broken up,
dissolved in solution, if the fantasies congealed in literal activity
are to be released into consciousness. Now Ficino’s second element
of the psyche parallels water, and it too represents the continuing
Dionysian process of dissolution. The aroma of wine, clearly a
more subtle image, stands in relation to wine itself as water to
earth. Here Dionysian dismemberment through sensuality,
pleasure, and drunken madness (the dissolution of reason) appears
more complete, and consciousness has been rendered more
psychological.
   Onians informs us that in classical Rome it was believed that
wine was the very sap of life; indeed, in the words of Petronius,
"Vita vinum est"—Life is wine.3 Onians also observes that wine
was believed to go to the head, literally, where the genius or
daimon resides. Therefore, wine was not only the source of
physical longevity, it was also the nourishment of the soul. The
Romans had a curious custom of smearing wine on the temples,4 a
practice Ficino recommends in The Planets. He also advises
drinking wine twice a day and taking each day equal portions of
wine and light, a mysterious prescription the meaning of which
might be apparent when we have considered the Apollonian
elements of the soul.
   Onians explains the practice of dabbing wine on the temples as a
way of getting the wine directly to the head where it is needed, but
in view of Ficino's image of the aroma of wine, one might imagine
that having wine on your head would keep that aroma with you
and fully in consciousness. Although wine affects the soul and, as
we say, does go to the head, nevertheless it is rather crass. The
aroma of wine is more suited to the nature of soul itself—invisible,
but perceptible and efficacious.
   If the element wine is an image for those things which break up
our literal perspectives, then the aroma of wine depicts those more
84                     The Planets Within

 subtle things which maintain the psychological attitude. The
 aroma might be those fantasies and memories which surround
 objects and actions, like a fragrance; keeping them in mind keeps
 us removed from the literal objects themselves. If we know, for
example, that whenever we get a craving for buying things, the
 fantasy behind that is a search for vitality or a sense of power or
novelty and freshness, then we may not have to literalize that wish
in the way it is fantasized. It may be possible to stay on the
psychological level and respond to the needs of the psyche more
directly. These needs are more like fragrances, not as obvious and
substantial as literal behavior. A dab of wine keeps the soul in
mind.
   Aromas and fragrances, as Cirlot reminds us, are both
stimulants and symbols for memory, a faculty of the soul we keep
running into.5 Like the fragrance of flowers or of incense, an
aroma reminds us of the recent presence of an object. The object is
no longer present, but there is a trace left behind. In the human
realm a fragrance is like an impression, a thought, or a brief
memory. Even more literally, fragrant objects have a relationship
with memory. It is well known that odors have an uncanny power
to bring up memories of events long forgotten. The smell of a
schoolroom can revive images from years past, or the scent of
outdoors, of freshly cut grass or hay, or certain flowers, or even
machines and gasoline—these aromatic traces bring forth
memories of forgotten pleasure or buried traumas. The right
combination of food cooking on the stove can speed us back to
childhood experiences and feelings for parents, brothers, and
sisters.
   Opening the chest of personal memories is a mild Dionysian
experience that peels off the boundaries of the present, letting in
lost ways and hopes of being. Worlds of the past, even though
they may be only present fantasies of the past, intrude upon a
different present, revealing perhaps the narrowness of our
thoughts in the present. Neglected values, unfinished situations,
and forgotten ideals return to inebriate the soberness of the
present. These stories and images of the past have an aroma, a
spirit and tone, which can nourish the soul. They are fragrances of
the psyche, a bouquet that comes from aging and slow fermen­
tation. They are related to the cooking and fermenting of alchem­
ical processes.
   The soul is nourished by memories because they are the stuff of
the psyche. They are events transformed from their literalness into
fantasy and feeling. They continue to have the power to move the
                     The Elements of Psyche                       85

soul because, even in concrete events, it is the fantasy in which we
participate that is moving to the psyche. Nor is it only the personal
memory that gives fantasy to events; it is also the "memory" of the
basic pattern behind the action that conditions one's psychological
experience. If, in marrying a sweetheart, as they used to say, one is
really trying to get hold of the sweetness of one's own heart and
soul, then it is that fantasy that is so moving and overwhelming.
These fantasies flow like currents through imagination and
account for the vicissitudes of psychological experience. In other
words, it is the fragrance of events that waft their way to the soul,
not the concreteness of events. Psychological values imply a
certain death to literal experience. As we have noticed, the world
of psyche is an underworld to the world of surface meanings.
  For the Greeks, psyche exists in the underworld, and in popular
imagination the inhabitants of this underworld are ghosts. W. B.
Yeats, writing with typical Irish sensitivity to the ghostly realm,
connects ghosts with the fragrance of wine, echoing Ficino's image
quite directly:

      A ghost may come;                                          110
      For it is a ghost's right,
      His element is so fine
      Being sharpened by his death.
      To drink from the wine-breath
      While our gross palates drink from the whole wine.6

There is the whole point: the element of psyche is so fine,
sharpened by death, enjoying the breath of the wine while we in
our unpsychologized bodies, to use an awkward phrase, prefer the
whole wine. We prefer, typically, plain experience, or at most
matters of cause and effect, while the ghost—psyche—is fed best
in images and fantasies. Stretching a point and a pun, one might
say that Ficino calls for the revival of a neglected sense, an
olfactory awareness used to make "scents" out of this world.


                               Music
   Dionysos and Apollo are brothers, Ficino says: they both serve
the same goal we have been examining from many points of
view—the creation of a psychological perspective. But, of course,
they accomplish this feat in different ways, Dionysos through
direct experience of the physical or fantasy world; Apollo, the
Far-Shooter, through a more abstract, distant process.
86                       The Planets Within

  The third elemental building block of psychological existence in
Ficino's paradigm is music. Music has an important place in all of
Ficino's writing as it had in his practice. Music is generally
recognized as a spiritual phenomenon, though it is quite difficult
to say why and how music could be so important for the soul.
After surveying the planets in the next section of the book, we will
take a close look at music as a factor in the health of the soul,
especially as a means of tempering the soul, maintaining its
polycentricity; so, for now, we will consider a few of Ficino's more
general remarks on the subject.
     Since song and music come from the mind's thought, from the
     impulse of the imagination, and from the passion of the heart,
     and, together with the broken and shaped air, move the air-like
     spirit of the listener, the bond of soul and body, music easily
     moves imagination, affects the heart, and penetrates the
     innermost sanctuary of the mind.7

   We saw earlier that in Ficinian psychology spirit is much like air,
even an individual's spirit is airlike. Since music is also like air, and
is carried on and through the air to the ear of the listener, it is only
natural that music should have easy entry to the person's spirit.
But more than that, says Ficino, music is also the product of mind,
imagination, and feeling, and therefore it readily stimulates these
same faculties in the listener. Music is well suited in a number of
ways to the soul.
   Philosophers, theologians, and music theorists of the Middle
Ages and early Renaissance distinguished three kinds of music:
musica mundana, musica humana, and musica instrumentalis. The
first kind of music they believed to be created by the movements
of the universe itself: the steady, slow rhythmic movements of the
planets and stars, the coming and going of the seasons, and so on.
Musica humana they imagined in a similar way, movements of the
macrocosm reflected in the human soul. Theologians, especially
those influenced by Augustine, identified as music patterns of
virtues and other spiritual qualities within the human psyche.
Last, and least of all, stood musica instrument alis, what we know
today as music, tunes and melodies played on instruments or sung.
   The psychological element of music, with which we are
concerned here, is clearly an example of musica humana, but to
understand its meaning it will be necessary to refer to the music of
sound. In one case, Ficino was interested in using the sounds of
music in order to affect the soul. Music was another art of memory
or imagination, a way of getting thesoul in touch with various kinds
                      The Elements    of   Psyche                    87

of spirit. But in another sense music was, for Ficino, a quality of
the soul itself, an elemental factor in its constitution, parallel to the
air element in nature.
   We might begin an examination of this element by inquiring into
its specific nature—how does this art differ from others? What are
some particular characteristics common to both the sounds of
music and the soul?
   One of the most striking powers of music is its capacity to
produce a multidimensional image. Earlier we discussed the
synaesthetic nature of some images, how they are constructed out
of several sense impressions. The total impression produced by a
piece of music has dimensions of space and time qualified by a
specific spirit or atmosphere, a highly differentiated sense of
movement, and accompanying emotion. It also has, of course, an
intricate structure appealing to the intellect. The one thing music
itself does not produce is a visual image, a factor which has both
advantages and disadvantages.
    The multidimensional image produced by music corresponds to
the kind of fantasy at work in ordinary human situations. In any
setting in which we find ourselves in a day's time, we respond
psychologically not merely to a visual impression, but to the total
environment as it strikes our imagination. Two people in the same
setting can be expected to have different psychological reactions,
because even though their physical environments are the same,
they are contained within different images. Some settings, of
course, make typical impressions on most people: a cathedral and
a ball park may be expected to create unique psychological
reactions in most people. Sitting in a doctor's office places the soul
within a multidimensional image: the quiet, white uniforms, an air
of efficiency and professionalism, a mysterious labyrinth of offices
and examining rooms, shiny silver instruments associated with
pain and opening the body, memories of past visits and problems,
a stream of expectations—all of these go together to make the
image which impacts upon the soul. Music has the unusual
capacity to create such a multidimensional image and therefore
differs from purely visual arts like painting and sculpture (allowing
for touch in sculpture). Other arts, of course, like drama and
dance, also create full images, so we will have to dig further to find
the unique character of music.
    What is special about music is that it can produce a rich image
without visual content, and since visual impressions are closely
related to language and can be quite specific, music is of its nature
rather ambiguous. It is difficult, if not impossible, and likely
88                      The Planets Within

 undesirable to produce musically a specific, concrete meaning or
 referent. Occasionally composers will attempt to stimulate in the
 listener a visual impression through the use of a title or subtitle or
 mimicry in sound. Psychologists, too, use music as a means of
 priming visual impressions in people. But this programmatic and
 therapeutic use of music is just that: making music useful. This is
 not the inherent nature of musical expression.
    Music leads the listener primarily to the contemplation of the
 qualities of time, creating at the same time, in the words of
 Susanne Langer, a secondary illusion of space.8 Musical terms give
 us an idea of the qualities of experienced time that music creates
 and reflects: music has movements, episodes, motifs,
counterpoints, scales and modes, melodies, harmonies, fugues,
and fantasies. The emotions of its movement depend upon
expositions, developments, reprises, tensions, climaxes, and
cadences. On the whole, therefore, music abstracts from specific,
individual content to portray the dynamic patterns of life and of
the soul.
    In music we can hear the dynamics of psychological movements
and feel the emotions connected with them. Music, then, provides
a kind of catharsis, as we discussed before, a way of helping
imagination sort out and find order or pattern in experience. The
terms used in music could fairly easily be applied to the soul, to the
extent that music theory is itself a potential archetypal image-
system for the psyche. Like music, life is built up of episodes and
motifs, these are based on more universal scales and modes
(patterns we will explore in a later chapter), counterpoints and
harmonies fill life as do climaxes and cadences, and finally
melodies correspond to our unique personal histories—what Jung
would call a process of individuation built upon collective
materials. It is difficult to say, then, which comes first: music of
the soul or music in sound. In the latter we recognize the music of
the former, or, in Ficino's own words: "Through the ears the soul
perceives certain sweet harmonies and rhythms, and through
these images it is exhorted and excited to consider the divine music
with a more ardent and intimate sense of mind.”*
    Ficino places music among the Apollonian elements. According
to the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, Apollo learned the art from the
child Hermes. Therefore, music, even in Apollonian hands, is a
kind of hermeneutic, a mode of interpreting life midway between
blind experience and distant explanation. But music does abstract
from the concrete content, the individual material of the soul, and
is for that reason quite properly within the domain of Apollo, the
                      The Elements of Psyche                       89

Far-Shooter. Apollonian consciousness, if not in the classic period
at least in modern literature, is high in the sky, removed from the
action so as to gain a broad perspective. It differs from the
Dionysian in that it keeps a distance from the concrete. But the
Apollonian art of music, though interpretive of the dynamic
factors of experienced life, is not so abstract as to be noninvolving.
Indeed, the image produced by music is remarkable precisely
because of its singular capacity to hold the listener's attention
within itself. The listener cannot stand back, as from a painting,
and analyze. Music professors and students do that as a strategy in
pedagogy, but even they, when they truly listen to music, must
become absorbed by it. One is in the image, not outside of it.10
   Not all music is Apollo's; indeed, there seems to be an
archetypal contest between those who prefer Apollonian music to
that of Dionysos or Pan or some other god or goddess. Apollo's
music is by nature subtle and spiritual, but it is nevertheless
exciting and moving and offers all the psychological advantages
we have seen. Bach wrote a cantata on the theme of the contest
between Apollo and Pan, showing in text and music the different
character of these two, but finally Apollo wins the agon and the
judge declares: "Phoebus, your melody was born of grace itself.
And he who understands this art, will lose himself in it." Apollo's
music interprets for our soul's ear the patterns of life as it moves in
time, but it takes us into itself, allowing us to feel not only the
various mixtures of tempo and movement, the tension and release,
but also the feelings and deeply felt fantasies associated with those
movements. Music in sound meets itself in the music of soul.
   If the soul is nourished, as in the aroma of wine, with concrete
visual fantasies of the patterns underlying surface experience, it is
fed at a higher level with the spirit of its own music. To put it more
plainly, we gain psychologically when we perceive the various
patterns of the soul's life abstracted from content. When we sense
fast and slow rhythms, tensions and cadences, and dissonance and
consonance, we are nourished psychologically because our
consciousness and our participation in these realities of our own
inner life are deepened and differentiated. In order to sense this
level of life we must get away from content, from specific life
problems and even specific recurring themes so that we can
appreciate the dynamic of life itself. For this reason the aural
 metaphor is more appropriate than the visual, and Apollonian
 abstraction, in the sense described, plays a significant
 psychological function.
    In a letter to Francisco Musano, in 1473, Ficino tried to set his
90                       The Planets Within

friend's mind at ease concerning his interest in music and the soul.
He wrote:

     Do not be astonished, Francisco, if we mix medicine, the lyre,
     and the study of theology. You should recall, as the
     philosophers say, that body and spirit in us are joined to the
     soul. The body is cured with the remedies of medicine. But the
     spirit, which is airy, the bond of body and soul, tempers and
     heals the vapor of the blood with airs, odors, music and songs.
     Finally, the animus, as divine, is cared for by the mysteries of
     divine theology. Though nature is one, it is composed of soul,
     body, and spirit. The Egyptian priests had one occupation for
     drugs, faith, and mysteries........ Laetus impraesens.u

   Psychotherapy in Ficino's system involves a sharpening of
imagination, tuning the instrument of the soul so as to be receptive
to the various kinds of spirit available in season. In his chapter of
The Planets devoted to music, Ficino refers to the musical
phenomenon we call "sympathetic vibration." If two strings are
tuned to the same pitch and one is plucked, the other will sound as
well. So it is, says Ficino, with the soul. When the imagination is
tuned to the varieties of spirit, in the presence of that spirit the soul
will be set in motion, animated by that particular spirit. A person
whose imagination is tuned to pick up on those things especially
good for the soul will in fact get them. Without imagination we
remain stuck in a drab psychological state, deprived of the variety
of spirit soul requires for vitality. In a strange sort of way, we need
to be musicians of the soul, with taste and a good ear.


                                 Light

    Ficino was mightily impressed by the sky that arched over his
life day and night; he saw everything that happened in relationship
to that sky; we might say, in "light" of the sky. For it was the light
of the heavens that to his mind accounted for human dignity.
Through participation in that light we have knowledge of the
things of our world and of ourselves, because light is knowledge.
In his essay on light, De Lumine, he turns that phrase around and
gives us a hint as to the nature of light. The light of reason, he
writes, is the reason of light.12 Light comes first, then our
intelligence, because our powers of reasoning are only a
participation in a higher intelligence.
    If we take the phrase in its usual order, "the light of reason," we
                      The Elements of Psyche                        91

will be bound to end this discourse on the elements of spirit at the
dubious pinnacle of human rationality, hardly an adequate
conclusion to Dionysian mysteries and Apollonian musical
hermeneutics. But this mistake is frequently made, in intellectual
circles and among psychotherapists. In the light of reason, many
think, we will be saved from our follies. But we ought to know
from history, both cultural and personal, that "enlightenment"
often paints only a partial picture. Our Western historical era of
Enlightenment made, perhaps, some important advances in
humanism, but it also gave us an image of man as clockwork, an
image that still remains among enlightened technologists. Mystery
and depth in human experience are expunged by that light that
hangs above us like a glaring lamp used to intimidate criminals and
extract confessions, or so the movies say. Enlightened techno­
crats would doubtless confine Ficino and his like in a special
fenced hospital on account of his ravings. We also know the
pinched vision of enlightened liberals who claim to know how to
raise children rationally, cure neuroses rationally, and dispense
with religious traditions rationally. The light of reason shines
where it will, but its power seems severely constrained. Apropos
here is the famous Sufi story of the man squatting in the circle of
light cast by a street lamp looking for a lost key. "Did you lose
your key here?" asks a passerby. "No, I lost it over there," the man
replies, "but I can see better here by the light." This is the light of
reason so many like to use to explore the mysteries of our world.
    Ficino is recommending to us, then, not the light of reason but
 the reason of light, ratio lucis in his text. This is the crowning
element of psyche and its prime spiritual nourishment. It is not the
product of human ratiocination but rather the gift of the God
 Apollo, the sun God. His benefit to mankind is not simply
technical understanding or even philosophical elucidation; on the
contrary, the God offers us entry into an image of brilliance, a
fantasy of light. Psychologically, in the light we achieve a new
quality of understanding, an "in-sight," a view of the "eidos" of
 Plato, a vision of the interior of things. And the vision establishes
a relationship between ourselves and our world whereby we
perceive our place and sense the connection between human ego-
 mentality and far deeper sources of understanding. The quality of
 this kind of intelligence, far beyond rationality, appears in Ficino's
 descriptions of the light. The light of the heavens, he says, is an
 image of all the following: the fruitfulness of life, the perspicacity
of our senses, the certitude of our intelligence, and the
bountifulness of grace.13 These are all qualities of intelligence, the
92                          The Planets Within

way understanding is experienced. That is the gift and not the
simple power of thought. Ficino includes grace, a word not much
in vogue these days, but one which conveys our dependence upon
the mysterious gifts of life. It implies a spirit of receptivity and
humility, even in the face of intellectual accomplishment.
   We have seen repeatedly how Ficino sets as an ideal a celestial
pattern. In his essay on light he personifies that pattern to some
extent. He speaks of lumen, this transrational intelligence so
difficult to define, as risus coeli, the laughter of the sky. He
imagines the sun as the eye of the heavens, an eye that conveys
true spirit, as does the eye of the lover—an image Ficino uses in
his commentary on the Symposium—or eyes on a smiling face.
Obviously, then, the intelligence he is speaking of is spiritual, a
hint intuitively grasped rather than a conclusion planted in a
syllogism or a fact inductively discovered.
   Consider the difference between a communication received from
another person in words and the message conveyed through facial
expression or even a twinkle in the eye. This latter is the analogy
for the kind of spiritual insight Ficino would have us pick up in the
world itself—an awareness of the twinkle in the eye of the cosmos,
being clued in on its secrets, its underlying purposes and fantasies.
   When Ficino speaks of the "reason of light" he is stating in other
terms what we have seen all along: soul is central; even our
thinking participates in psyche. Behind our thoughts, or better,
permeating our reason itself, are the fantasies of the soul. The
rational is contained within the psychological.H If the
psychological derivation of our thoughts is not appreciated, then
we tend to take ideas literally, and spirit becomes as much a
quicksand for the soul as materialism. Ficino's image of light,
pervading all levels of knowledge, works against such a literalistic
perspective. We can see, in fact, how his imagery develops this
with some detail.
   In De Lumine he suggests several different paradigms showing
hierarchies of knowledge, all interconnected. In the fifth chapter
he distinguishes light in the following manner:

     Light   of   God—goodness and truth
     Light   of   Angels—intelligence
     Light   of   the Heavens—the abundance of life
     Light   of   fire—the propogation of the powers of the heavens

   Here the image of light, taking different forms in the hierarchy,
allows us to apply a process James Hillman has called "reversion"
                      The Elements of Psyche                         93

to our thoughts and behavior. By reverting back along this line we
can find the deeper psychic containers for our ideas and behavior.
The light produced by a simple, earthly fire reflects in a simple
way the fire of the stars; our individual ideas and wishes can be
traced back to larger movements of the soul, to multiple structures
of consciousness and habits of thinking represented by the many
planets "burning" in the night sky. Our present wish for a speedy
sports car might take its place among other wishes contained in a
larger movement toward youthfulness, which itself might be held
in a deeper fantasy of freshness and beginnings. Ficino traces this
beam of light all the way back to the sun, the sun god, or to the
Christian God, where the differentiation of the fantasies ends and
one simply encounters psychic life itself.
   Another paradigm, in the thirteenth chapter of De Lumine,
shows this mutual containment more clearly. "The spirit enjoys
greatly its own clarity and that of the sun. Animus enjoys the
clarity of the spirit and mind. But it appears that this light is the
mind shining through the body, reflected as in glass, and so made
visible."15 Here we move from the sun, to the spirit, to the animus,
to the body. We ought to be able to see the workings of one in
another.
   Finally, Ficino offers an even more elaborate hierarchy in nine
stages, corresponding, he says, to the nine Muses of Apollo:
1. the sun
2. the firmament, bright because of its fineness, hidden to us.
3. the stars (visible)—white
4. the stars—red
5. the stars—mixed
6. simple, uncomposed sublunar things, translucent
7. translucent sublunar things composed of glass or crystal,
translucent but holding less light
8. things composed but translucent, like carbuncle, or oily things
that hold light
9. colors and colored images, which may in the extreme be white
or black, or in the middle, green.
   Earlier in this essay on light, Ficino had mentioned that the light
of the sun contains all colors. Similarly, all nine of the phases listed
contain light, but all in different proportions and in different
degrees of perceptibility. Remember always, of course, as Ficino
mentions several times in the essay, that light is intelligence, a kind
of knowing. Therefore, he is saying that there are many levels of
psychological perception, and, according to his theory of the
94                      The Planets Within

elements, to perceive these is to nourish the soul. Our
understanding of the many personal and cultural events of life
may be more or less concrete, so that in one case we may see only
as far as the motley colors of individual situations and at other
times we may perceive deeper patterns shining through as in
crystal.
   It is quite clear, then, that in Ficinian psychotherapy the goal is
to develop an Apollonian, lucid insight into the deep patterns at
work in ordinary experience. The soul itself is fed by these deeper
"lights," by our perception of soul-values lying deep within, just as
the lights of the universe are deep in space. Ficino's image of light
sustains his psychology of depth. Toward the end of De Lumine he
mentions that the Pythagoreans found the vestal fire burning in
the center of the world—another fire and another source of light.16
In this psychology we are concerned not with turning the light of
reason on the dark, unknown, and troubling phenomena that
seem to invade life fairly regularly, but rather to discover within
events and within ourselves the reasons or patterns or seeds, as
Ficino sometimes calls them, of that inner light, that internal
universe and vestal fire.
   The Apollonian movement clearly directs us upward toward
spiritual insight and the large patterns of human life—the musical
movements of the soul and the light that pervades psychological
experience. The Dionysian movement is closer to earth, deeply
involved with the experienced world. Both perspectives are useful
and significant; it is not enough simply to experience with
imagination, nor is it sufficient to leave the experiential level and
engage in psychological analysis. Like Apollo and Dionysos, these
are brother perspectives. As Ficino says: "I do not know how,
having arisen first from Apollo, we fall into Bacchus. Indeed, we
go from light to heat, from ambrosia to nectar, from insight into
truth to ardent love of truth. Phoebus and Bacchus are indeed
brothers—individuals and companions" {The Planets, Chap. 24).
   If we are to develop an archetypal psychology based on Ficino's
view of the soul, we would have to attend to both the experiential
and the analytical, understanding the latter as an exploration of
images and fantasies at various degrees removed from concrete
experience. All too often psychology chooses only one of the
brothers, emphasizing either primal screams and hot seats or cool,
intellectual analysis. Neither of these, of course, are the categories
of Ficinian theory, since in both Dionysian and Apollonian
activities psychological reality is the focus of concern. Experience
for its own sake—crying, screaming, raging or caressing—and
                     The Elements of Psyche                     95

abstract introspection or theorizing both evade soul. Archetypal
psychotherapy is, as its name implies, a caring for the images that
permeate human experience. They may be perceived with
immediacy or with distance, one in the heat of experience, the
other when things have cooled down. Both approaches are useful,
both shift our attention from mind and body to the soul.
                                   5
                  Necessary Madness

N4ost current notions of psychological health are mere transfers
from the medical fantasy of homeostasis and resistance to
invading aliens. A psychologically healthy person is one who has
built strong psychic muscles of ego-strength and willpower and a
talent for avoiding pain and risks. Good mental health is
equivalent to sound social and personal adjustment. We expect all
normal people to "keep an even keel," even when the waters are
choppy and the winds of spirit reach gale force.
   The individual psychological lifeline may be graphed as a sine
wave or a host of sine waves out of sync than as a straight line.
Only a small portion of ordinary human experiences fit within the
strict confines of the stable life; indeed, the most significant
experiences seem to fall far above or far below the median line of
normality and stability. The "peak experiences" Maslow studied
and advocated may not be all that he touted them to be, but they
seem important for the animation of life, for infusing needed
nourishing spirit. But the "lows" and the "blues" may also serve
the soul well, pushing us to extremes where fresh vision and
altered perspective afford new spiritual discoveries.
   According to a frequently told Gnostic tale, the soul, in the
process of a person's birth, descends from beyond the planetary
spheres, where it exists in bliss, quite free of materiality, and falls
into the body. It is born into a deep sleep in the material world as
in a great fluffy down bed. There the soul slumbers forgetful of its
vital past. Only when occasional vague feelings of nostalgia and
homesickness arise does the soul stir and move in the direction of
its origins.
   Ficino's Neoplatonic mind knew and appreciated this attitude
toward existence. He warned about the soul's affection for the body
and for things material. He observed that the soul "in embracing
the body too much goes a long way from that purity in which it
was born."1 In other words, it is quite easy to live as if physical

                                  96
                        Necessary Madness                           97

survival and fulfillment were the whole point. Yet, occasionally a
feeling of longing will make itself felt—a very important yet often
overlooked emotion, one which can draw the soul back towards
its needs.2 The feeling may seem as natural and as persistent as the
instinct of the salmon returning to its spawning place, though the
backward goal is often vague and undefined. People say, "I have a
feeling of dissatisfaction, even though there is no reason for it.” Or
they will simply express a gnawing, disturbing longing. The feeling
of nostalgia might even appear in memories of past episodes, of a
Golden Age in the personal past. The past often serves as a
metaphor for authenticity, whether it is the personal past or
cultural history. We think back sometimes in order to feel deeply
and to recover something which seems to be lost. A tone of
melancholy sometimes colors cherished memories, a feeling tone
Freud defined as a sense of loss.3
   What is lost, its absence felt in these moments of nostalgia, is the
soul itself, a state of being animated and spirited, filled with anima
(soul) and spirit. The soul is asleep and needs to be wakened. But
the soul's sleep is supported not only by materialism but also by a
commitment to ideals of sanity and stability. It is not only the fluff
of materialism that soothes the psychological unconscious, the
steady, monotonous hum of the sane, adjusted life gives its
support as well.
   It follows, then, that the awakening of the soul may entail some
kind of insanity and instability. In relation to what is commonly
taken to be normal and sane, there are psychological potentialities
that must appear at least mildly insane. Ficino does not deal with
this way to soul in The Planets but he does consider it briefly in
his commentary on the Symposium, and since the imagery he uses
nicely complements the other aspects of psychological awakening
we have examined, it might be useful to give some attention to
this—the theory of divine madness.
   Ficino's theory is built upon Plato's "four frenzies,” an idea
discussed and expounded throughout the Platonic tradition. But
rather than compare various versions of the theory or summarize
modern interpreters, keeping with the purpose here of extracting
and explicating Ficino's quite practical psychology, we may focus
on the imagery Ficino uses in the exposition of this theory. For the
interesting point in this theory of "mania” is the suggestion that in
order to transcend ego concerns and materialistic unconscious­
ness, we require inner figures associated with specific kinds of
nonrational consciousness. These are: poet, priest, prophet, and
lover.
98                       The Planets Within

   Each of these figures personifies a mode of consciousness
sufficiently different from ordinary ego-awareness as to seem mad.
Yet, we need these figures constellated within our consciousness;
they provide necessary madness. As I have said, this madness is not
the same as psychosis, but we need a strong term to convey the
nonrational nature of certain structures of consciousness required
to maintain a psychological perspective. Ego is not coterminous
with the soul. Some states of consciousness transcend ego-
awareness, and for that reason they are beneficial to the soul. This
is not an exciting new idea in this age of "altered states of
consciousness," interest in meditation and fantasy, and the like.
But here in Ficino's psychology we find a place and purpose for
such extraordinary states of "mind," not simply for spiritual
development in the usual sense, nor certainly for the sheer
"entertainment" these states may bring. In Platonic madness the
soul is free of body and ego and may be quite creative in that state.
As Ficino says, "many poets compose in madness and afterwards
do not know what they have said, as if God had used them as
musical instruments."4
   Let us look, then, at four kinds of non-ego states, paying
particular attention to the spirit or atmosphere they provide for
psychological life and to the personifications associated with
them. These four represent four sources of spiritual/psychological
nourishment, four states of consciousness to which ego must learn
to respond, and four psychological activities necessary for
awakening the soul.


                           Poetic Madness
     The whole soul is filled with discord and dissonance; therefore,
     the first need is for poetic madness, which through musical
     tones arouses what is sleeping, through harmonic sweetness
     calms what is in turmoil, and finally through the blending of
     different things, quells dissonant discord and tempers the
     various parts of the soul.5
   What is immediately clear from this passage is Ficino's concern
for soul, not for poetic inspiration or good verse. His interest in
poetic madness centers on the soul itself, the psychological effect
of this transcendence of ego. Nor is he excited about the
enjoyment of a transcendental state of consciousness. E. R. Dodds,
that psychologically attuned classical scholar, noted in his essay
"The Blessings of Madness" that Plato himself was not interested
in poetic ecstasy in itself. Dodds rightly cautions against glorifying
                       Necessary Madness                         99

ecstasy and trance for their own sake.6 Anyone can let his mind
roam and come up with bizarre images; some people take pride in
this ability, others are embarrassed by it. The poet is the one who
deals with the images: gives them educated attention, tries to
become familiar with them, finds ways of verbalizing them,
deepens his own touch with life through them. These too are the
concerns of the poet within.
   Ficino describes poetic madness as a healthy response to a soul
filled with discord and dissonance. We have to be clear about his
meaning here, since later we will find him including dissonance in
the makeup of a healthy soul. In this context, dissonance means
faulty tuning, not a timely, invigorating departure from
harmoniousness. We will see later that a well-tuned soul is one in
which archetypal possibilities represented by the planetary deities
are carefully distinguished and all represented. It is a soul having
distinct, multiple parts, just like the tones of a tempered musical
scale. If some "tones” are missing or not carefully distinguished
from each other, the result is a fundamental dissonance, faulty
tempering, an instrument out of tune. Poetic madness tempers the
soul, especially by waking those parts that are dormant.
   Imagination comes alive through the peculiar mania of the poet,
who is one of the many persons who live in the psyche.7 When we
allow the poet in us to come to life, we get to work attending to
images, holding them in our fantasy, contemplating them and
enjoying them, being moved by them. By this very process the
soul is awakened, a psychological attitude begins to take form.
Images obviously are the fodder of the faculty of imagination; so
as images arise and are attended to, imagination grows more fertile
and active, giving one's psychology better economy and increased
potentiality. The possibility of good temperament is increased.
   In his self-professed masterpiece. The Interpretation of Dreams,
Freud explained that only a portion of our fantasy life comes to
consciousness, since a large part is repressed for moral reasons.8
But such a personification of the soul as the poet may be repressed
because of an undervaluation of that function. In other words, not
only our fantasies themselves, but the very fantasy of caring for
fantasies, our poetic potential, may be repressed. In his
commentary on the Symposium Ficino notes that when the lower
parts of the soul are hard at work, the higher functions may be
almost asleep.0 The inner poet, anesthetized for the benefit of
lower psychological concerns, cannot bring energy to images, and
as a result the soul loses its temperament and vitality. We become
psychologically distressed (distempered) and inert.
100                     The Planets Within

   Without access to fresh images we are compelled to relive
continuously the personal past: its habits, values, and patterns.
 When we seek help in decision making, when we look for
 meaning, when we feel the nostalgia for depth, we look to past
experience. The personal past can give the illusion of authenticity,
especially when it is idealized or romanticized. Even Freud's focus
on the family and on childhood, when taken literally, offers scant
resource for ensoulling the present. In his scheme there is one myth
(Oedipus), one love (a parent), one kind of energy (sexual), and
one enemy (another parent). The ultimate repetition-compulsion
appears in Freud's theory itself: the continuous attempt to
resurrect “mom and dad."
   The notion of a poesis of the psyche, however, suggests that the
past is not the only cache of available images. Fantasy is an
unending source of imagery, and the poet within can be more
creative than to translate it all into the family story. He can get
over the fascination with the past and find other ways to imagine,
to pattern and interpret the wealth of images at his disposal.
   As Ficino describes it, poetic madness has a certain destructive
aspect: “The most powerful emotions of the soul even dissolve and
disintegrate the body; this happens not only in the course of an
affect but also during intense speculation.''10 Like alchemical
solutio, alchemical atomizing, and the elemental fragmentation of
wine, poetics dissolves the body, that is, the materialistic, egoistic
attitude. New images given the soul in poetic reverie and work
stand over against established images of the world and self,
exploding them, dissolving them, more fully exposing their
interiority. Through poetic madness the opaque, brittle shells of
meaning we have built and protect egoistically shatter and become
visible as images themselves. That is to say, they are seen through
and perceived psychologically, from the perspective of soul. This
is one way to read Norman O. Brown's ecstatic conclusion to
Love's Body:

  The word within the word, the unheard melody, the spirit
  ditties of no tone. The spiritualization of the senses, a
  restoration of the unsullied sense-activity of man in paradise.
  Remain faithful to the earth; but the earth has no other refuge
  except to become invisible: in us."
“In us" refers to our poetic imagination, utterly essential if our
words and worlds are not to remain at the literal level.
   To pragmatic consciousness this pervastive poetic, metaphoric
attitude will seem bizarre, crazy. Attending to images can very
                       Necessary Madness                        101

well appear on the surface as madness, and empirical, pragmatic
minds can become quite resourceful finding language to say so.
Condescendingly we can watch “primitives" dance the images of
their ancestors, knowingly and tolerantly we can watch an artist
fall apart in a Bohemian life-style. But even such simple activities
as telling dreams, drawing fantasies, even acting out a bit some
pressing imagery—all of these can easily by regarded as suspicious
behavior. Colleagues of mine used to become quite concerned
when I would lead classes through a long, open-ended
dramatization of someone's dream; yet these "techniques" are
common to religious ritual from ancient to modern times, as in the
famous dream ceremony described by the Oglala Sioux, Black Elk.12
   Poetic madness is first in Ficino's paradigm because it is primary
in the work of psyche. Psyche expresses itself in imagery, day and
night. But imitating this definite psychological tendency may well
appear as madness; for, unlike the works of ego, images are not
linear and logical, they pile up on each other and defy reason.
Poetic reasoning leads not to satisfying conclusions, but to
unending sense of deepening. The poet typically appreciates and
praises, whereas the rationalist analyzes and affirms. Certainly the
poet in us is a madman, but his efforts are irreplaceable.


                        Sacerdotal Madness

  Multiplicity and diversity still remain in the soul. There is added
  therefore the mystery of Dionysus which, by expiation,
  sacrifices and every form of divine worship, directs the
  attention of all parts to the Mind, by which God is worshipped.
  Whence, since the single parts of the soul have been reorganized
  into one Mind, the soul is now made a single whole out of
  many.13

   This second madness of the psyche, focused upon the image of
the priest, brings up the extremely complicated issue of the
relationship between religion and psychology. That is the topic for
another book or series of volumes. We will have to remain here
within the confines of Ficino's hints concerning the role of this
religious fantasy in the life of the soul. We will not be concerned,
therefore, with theological or metaphysical questions; that is, we
will not consider religion as any kind of link with a separate
metaphysical reality but rather as a psychological phenomenon, as
a mode of soul-movement.
102                     The Planets Within

   As we imagined the poet to be a figure personifying our manner
of dealing with images, so the priest is also a personfication of an
inner attitude. Through this inner image of the priest we are
prepared imaginatively to grasp the sacredness and mystery of
ordinary life and to constellate for the soul that spirit which in
the past has been accessible through religious ritual and myth.
Ficino indicates that the poetic fantasy is not sufficient; in addition
to working with images it is necessary to establish a connection
with them, and that is fundamentally a religious action.
  What I have in mind is essentially an application of the theory
Jung proposed in his Terry Lectures given at Yale in 1937. There he
defined religion as a function of the psyche:

  Religion appears to me to be a peculiar attitude of mind which
  could be formulated in accordance with the original use of the
  world religio, which means a careful consideration and
  observation of certain dynamic factors that are conceived as
  "powers": spirits, daemons, gods, laws, ideas, ideals, or
  whatever name man has given to such factors in his world as he
  has found powerful, dangerous, or helpful enough to be taken
  into careful consideration, or grand, beautiful, and meaningful
  enough to be devoutly worshipped and loved.14

In the context of "priestly madness," and consistent with the
thought of Jung and Ficino, we may say that religion is "a careful
consideration and observation" of the fantasies and images
unveiled by poetic vision, in the sense we have just detailed, in an
attitude of devout worship and love. The religious attitude
surpasses simple awareness of the dynamic images at work in
experience; it involves a sense of being bound (religio) to them, an
acknowledgment of their importance, and a means, perhaps ritual,
for keeping them in mind and heart. We may interpret many
religious practices throughout history and around the world
psychologically precisely in this way. They are a means of keeping
the foundational fantasies of the individual and collective soul in
mind and maintaining their efficacious significance. In this way
there may indeed come about a certain unifying of the soul:
fantasies become focused through an attentive and reverent ego-
attitude.
   In this sense religion is not just something to take care of on
Sundays or Saturdays and in churchs and temples, nor does it
depend entirely upon an individual's belief. Religion is a
component of psychological life, related to but different from
poetic consciousness—perhaps an intensification of it. Psychologi­
                       Necessary Madness                         103

cally a person may be quite religious even though he never
steps into a church or professes any literal belief in God.
This is the way Ficino should be understood, when he says:
worship "is as natural for humans almost as neighing is for horses
and barking for dogs."15 In worship we encounter an image, not
from a distance, but close up; in fact, we participate in the image
itself. Mind, emotion, and imagination are given over in worship
to the atmosphere and eternal pattern represented by that
particular form of worship. To participate in a Good Friday
worship service is to enter deeply into the universal human
phenomenon of self-sacrifice, suffering, and death. Outside of
formal church structures, we can also enter imagery deeply, relate
to it seriously, and enjoy its spiritual rewards.
   Our attitude toward dreams, for example, might be poetic or
religious. At the level of poetics a person might be quite serious
about his dream life, keeping an account of his dreams and making
some effort to understand them. But a further step would be to
establish a relationship to the images appearing in dreams, to see
those images as constitutive in some way of psychological status
and posture. In Jungian active imagination these images are
revived and even addressed as persons or perhaps sketched in
water colors or clay—a kind of religious iconography. Like the
Virgin Mary in Roman Catholicism, these figures from dream and
fantasy may be revered and given a position of influence without
being made into idols themselves.
   Ficino presents his theory of divine madness in several of his
writings, and each time he uses a different vocabulary.16 Though
the priestly madness is always attributed to the god Dionysos,
which places it in the context of Dionysian patterns generally, he
names it alternately “sacerdotium," priesthood, and "mysterium."
The role of mystery Ficino clarifies somewhat in a letter written in
June 1491 to Piero Divitio. Writing about the four kinds of
madness he comments specifically on the priestly style of
consciousness. "Ancient theologians," he writes, "defined
Dionysian drunkenness as a departure of the mind (excessus
mentis), separated from mortal things but penetrating the secret
Mysteries of divinity.”17 To gain entry to the mysteries of the soul,
those elements that are more-than-personal, the soul's cyclic
patterns and unreasonable predilections, one has to depart in
drunkenness, not literal of course, from logical, literal, normal,
reasonable, and linear patterns of thought. As we saw in our
discussion of the elements, the Dionysian factors keep life
dismembered, broken into its fantasy components, and now we
104                     The Planets Within

find that this Dionysian process renders accessible transpersonal
mysteries.
    In some religious contexts a mystery is a sacred secret known
only to initiates; the secrecy itself separates followers of the cult
from those not initiated. But in the Renaissance period mysteries
were believed to be secret bodies of knowledge preserved in highly
symbolic and arcane texts and images. Ficino and his friends were
fascinated and mystified by the ciphers and symbols they found in
the Hermetic texts, and, in fact, they considered the texts
significant precisely because of the secret nature of their contents.
Some of Ficino's predecessors in the development of "poetic
theology" also thought highly of ciphers and emblems. Dionysius
the Areopagite, whom Ficino had studied, taught not only the
negative way to God but also the way of divine names and images.
Joachim of Fiore is another remarkable theologian who expressed
his deepest insights in iconographical form. Nicholas of Cusa, too,
closest to Ficino in time, sought imagistic containers for his
theological intuitions, writing books on the image of the face and
even on a ball game (De Ludo Globi) as means of approaching the
deepest mysteries. As Edgar Wind observed in his masterful book
on Renaissance mysteries: "Pico [Ficino's protege] held that pagan
religions, without exception, had used a 'hieroglyphic' imagery;
that they had concealed their revelations in myths and fables
which were designed to distract the attention of the multitude, and
so protect the divine secrets from profanation."18
   The true mysteries of the soul, those constant rhythmic
movements that rarely seem synchronized with our conscious
wishes and plans, are not easily expressed or understood. The
psyche moves by a logic different from the reasoning mind; so it
is logical to assume that rational logic will not bring us to the heart
of these mysteries. We have to depart from that kind of mentality,
as Ficino advised Divitio. He makes a similar point in The Planets,
where, in the twenty-first chapter, he ranks the seven planets in
order, tracing the steps the soul takes in its ascent back to its
original home. Seventh and highest is Saturn, representing "simple
and hidden knowledge, cut off from movement, joined to divine
things, governed by Saturn whom the Hebrews deservedly called
by the name 'Quiet'—Sabbath."19 In order to perceive at all the
mysteries deep within the soul, it is necessary to move away from
ordinary activities and usual patterns of thought. What is needed
is a state of consciousness or an attitude attentive to the eternal
rather than the temporal.
   Kerenyi has made some observations about mystery which may
                       Necessary Madness                        105

elucidate the psychological role of the religious attitude. Mystery
for fifth-century Greeks, he says, was centered in the atmosphere of
the ceremonial night, focused possibly in the smell of a burning
torch. Recall Ficino's aroma of wine, our discussion of the
multidimensional image, and personal experiences, perhaps, of
ceremonies that have been gripping and memorable because of the
"atmosphere.” In Greek religion, according to Kerenyi, there was
"no serious intention of maintaining the secrecy of the secret. The
study of religions of nature shows that in the secret cults it is a
question of the same thing found, according to Goethe, in nature
itself: a sacred open secret."20 According to Kerenyi what was
concealed was the arreton, the unutterable. It was secret not
because it would not be spoken but because it could not be
spoken. Only later did this open secret become the aporreton, the
carefully kept secret.
   In Ficinian psychology we can blend these two notions of
mystery: sacred open secrets of nature enfolded in the arcane
imagery of myth and ritual. But the purpose of opaque imagery
may not be to hide the secrets; the images themselves may be the
best if not the only way to hold the secrets adequately. Dreams
seem to be expressions of the psyche's secrets. Freud proposed that
the reason for the opacity of the dream images is one of repression.
Dreamwork covers up the true, rationally conceivable content of
the dream in order to protect the dreamer, at least to protect his
sleep. Jung's approach to dreams is closer to the attitude of
Kerenyi toward religious mysteries. Dreams contain sacred open
secrets, not repressed through imgery but contained and revealed
to us through images, if only we were more familir with imagery.
   The mysteries revealed through Dionysian,                 priestly
consciousness are the eternal patterns of the psyche, the side of the
soul that is godlike rather than human, though through ritual a
connection is established between personal consciousness and
cyclic pattern. Again in the words of Kerenyi, "the cult
representation alone can raise my experience toward the universal
in such a way that it still remains my very own: my ineffable
mystery that I have in common with all men."21 Expressed another
way, if a person can find his way out of the conditioning of logical
thought long enough to consider the very different language of
imagery, he may begin to perceive the mysterious directions
psychological life takes, and he may establish a connection with
those movements. In this way, religious consciousness overcomes
the sense of alienation and confusion a person might well feel
when cut off from the rhythms of the soul. Religious sensibility in
106                     The Planets Within

this case is a binding, not to another metaphysical world, but to an
often neglected dimension of inner life.
   Jung believed that external religious forms, such as rites and
liturgies, could be quite important for the soul, since in these forms
the soul comes intimately into contact with its deep mysteries. The
problem here, as usual, is one of literalism—getting stuck in only
one psychological viewpoint because of the limited nature of one's
religious imagination. The psychological view of religious
sensibility all too briefly sketched in this section might also speak
to the problem of those who cannot any longer profess literal
belief in the religion of their childhood but still sense the value of
religious awareness. The world of the psyche may be the better
arena for making our bonds with the transpersonal.


                         Prophetic Madness

  Since the single parts of the soul have been reorganized into one
  Mind, the soul is now made a single whole out of many. But
  there is needed still a third madness to lead the mind back to the
  Unity itself, the head of the soul. This Apollo brings about
  through prophecy, for when the soul rises above Mind into
  Unity, it sees into the future."22

   The third significant figure of the soul who brings his own kind
of mania is the prophet. Following Ficino's schema we may
imagine the prophet within, one who sees far into the future and
predicts events. There is no doubt that this is indeed a fascinating
figure of imagination and no doubt accounts for some of the
success of astrology today. Reading teacups and noticing itchy
palms is not what Ficino has in mind for the psyche, but obviously
fascination with the future is common to all these claims of
prophecy.
   In his essay on divine madness Ficino makes it clear that when
he speaks of prophecy, which he calls vaticinium, he is not
referring to logical assumptions about the future. If an individual
predicts the future, he says, with "human cleverness and insight"
that is not truly prophecy but only conjecture or premonition.23
True prophecy requires a separation of the soul from the body.
Now we have to try to understand what kind of separation this is.
   Before looking into the more subtle aspects of this theory of
prophecy, bringing it up to date, so to speak, we should be clear
that Ficino did believe in prophecy at a very pragmatic level.
Kristeller has gathered together some historical facts that are quite
                       Necessary Madness                         107

telling. He notes that Ficino was particularly impressed by the
prophetic powers of his mother, who, for example, foresaw a
death and an accident among her relatives.24 His father, too, was
once informed in a dream of a dangerously ill patient. Ficino
himself was once seriously ill when he was told in a dream about
his recovery. And, of course, Kristeller mentions Ficino's frequent
use of astrology for the most ordinary situations, like determining
the best time to begin construction on a building. Although his
language is often quite abstract and perhaps anachronistically
imagistic, Ficino obviously lived his philosophy at its most occult
extremes. It all fits in with his psychological viewpoint—pervasive
in theoretical and practical affairs.
   Back to the theory: before Ficino outlines the theory of the four
kinds of madness in his work on Plato's Symposium, he mentions
the multiplicity of the soul: "Because it has fallen into the body,"
he says, "it is distributed among many functions, and it looks back
upon an infinite multiplicity of corporeal things."25 Then the
higher parts of the soul are dormant and need to be awakened by
poetic consciousness, by attention to fantasy. As we have seen,
then psyche requires a religious relationship to those fantasies.
Now the "unifying" function of prophecy is to draw one's
consciousness further from the deadening multiplicity of
individual actions and situations to a vision that transcends linear
discrete time. The soul has to be brought to a head, as he says,
where the categories of time are no longer limiting. The prophet
within sees things in way quite different from ego, that is his
madness. His perspective blurs time so that the past seems closer to
the present and the future not quite so full of surprises. In Ficino's
words, "The minds of all these searched through many places and
comprehended the three parts of time in one when they separated
themselves from the body."26 If we keep in mind that separation
from the body means the avoidance of a materialistic and
literalistic attitude, then statements like these make good sense. It
is when we have our minds only on the concrete, physical reality
that we are so caught up in the categories of time and see events as
discrete and sequential. From a higher perspective, patterns
emerge, repetitions are noticed, and even future developments can
be glimpsed.
   To see the three parts of time in one is to see a thing in a
perspective of timelessness, to see those characteristics not affected
by time directly. The soul is directed to its "head," where the
world exists in seed, in primordial and ever-recurring images,
stories, wishes, hopes, and fears. The prophet's vision is not really
108                    The Planets Within

forward but within. We are the prophet when we catch sight of
those fundamental fantasies we are continually acting out and
when we see how much the past inhabits the present, not as cause,
as so many psychologists would like us to believe, but as the traces
of patterns that never vanish. When we become more familiar
with the rhythms and images of the soul, of our own personal
inner life, then truly the borders of time melt, and we can abandon
feverish attempts to eradicate the past and build a new future.
External circumstances can obviously change, certain potentialities
become refined and prominent, and growth of spme kind does
take place in every human life;27 but the timing of the psyche is
slower than that of ego, and its course is not straight. It makes
many loops in the course of a lifetime, many reprises coccur,
patterns of character emerge again and again, more and more
artfully perhaps, but nonetheless in recognizable form.
   To speak so seriously of prophecy in our day may sound
absurd, or it may be rather dangerously misleading in view of the
irremediable itch so many have for occult powers. Yet, this is an
excellent image when properly understood for a genuine need of
the soul even today. The eyes of modern men and women
continuously dart at the clock and calendar. Time burns itself into
consciousness as if it were pasted in neon throughout our
environment. Establishing the psychological attitude, the whole
point of the psychology we are developing here, necessarily
involves a change in one's sense of time. Truths of the soul follow
a different clock. Psyche's episodes pile up on each other, so that a
pattern we may have acted out last many years ago in childhood
appears in a middle-aged marital spat. This is not to say that the
past, and especially childhood, determines the future; simply, the
pattern may be the same, returning like a large wave on the beach.
   Paradoxically, we might imagine that a prophet is someone who
has an excellent memory, both with regard to personal past
experiences and larger, basic human cycles. His memory may be
the kind that knows myth and prehistory, for these are the stories
that are timeless. Typically, in traditional stories, the prophet is
blind, like Tiresias, to the external world but has twenty-twenty
vision of the inner world. In modern life that outward blindness
appears in modified form as absent-mindedness, though there is no
reason for the prophet to negate the professional person in us. The
point is, if one has the psychological savvy proper to the pro­
phet within, one's insight is truly inward and in a sense back­
ward-aware of the past as a treasury of timeless patterns.
The nature of this past-sightedness was captured by Martin
                       Necessary Madness                         109

Heidegger when he wrote about Sophocles' Antigone. He speaks of
the "great might and strangeness” of the beginning of history,
concluding that "what comes afterward is not development but the
flattening that results from mere spreading out."28 1 would not
interpret Heidegger too literally here because, for example, the
fifteenth time one falls in love may not be all that different from
the first. But to see the fantasy at work in all those episodes might
well be a revelation of the "might and strangeness" of fantasy.
   These unusual factors at work in prophecy, making it appear
indeed as a madness, come through most forcefully in dreams—a
popular phenomenon among prophets. As might be expected,
Ficino was quite ecstatic about dreams. Of individuals who
normally live with a psychological attitude he writes: "While these
men are awake their Souls are freer [from the body] than those of
all others, and while they sleep, [their Souls] are completely free,
therefore the higher impulse is easily perceived by them.”20 In
dreams the categories of time obviously fall apart. In a dream we
may go for a ride with a cousin who died ten years ago and a
young man we met yesterday. The literal significance to ego, which
is bound to historical time, seems to be peeled off in dreams, and
only the significance to psyche remains. In dreams the very
patterns of psychic life themselves appear before our prophet's
eyes, placing us in touch with the "might and strangeness" of our
own seeds, themselves stored in the "head" of our soul where our
night visions dance.
   This is one reason among many why attention to dreams can be
a vital part of psychological awakening: the three parts of time
melt into one. It may also help explain both the curious capacity of
dreams to reach into the future, and the fascination of so many for
the question of dreams and prediction. At the deepest level,
prophecy is a vision from the highest perspective—it is the gift of
the god Apollo, say tradition and Ficino. It is a celestial viewpoint
from where one can behold the cycles that provide the material for
our individuality.
   That is the final point I wish to make, still following Ficino,
about prophecy: in it we find ourselves in our uniqueness.
Psychology often moves in the direction of personal history, either
dredging for the causes of current problems or making plans for
future trouble-free living. But these approaches are never truly
satisfying because no causal explanation is fully convincing or
efficacious, and troubles never seem to go away. Examining larger
patterns one finds rhythmically recurring in personal life, or
investigating images popping up in dreams and fantasy, may seem
110                     The Planets Within

on the surface to head away from individuality, but in fact they do
just the opposite. For these possible patterns are many and their
combinations innumerable. Tracing our behavior and emotions
back to their cyclic fantasies encourages a deeper sense of oneself
as an individual. One discovers the things that truly matter,
whether they take one form or another in enactment.
   Edgar Wind summarized this point rather more philosophically
by comparing the attitudes of Ficino and his pupil Pico della
Mirandola. Pico spoke of two kinds of happiness: natural
happiness, or finding traces of the divine in oneself; and supreme
happiness, losing oneself in God. Wind makes this significant
observation: "Ficino always held the two ways to be one, because
he believed that only by reverting to God do men achieve not
falling off from themselves.' Since transcendence was the restorer of
immanent virtue, man should find, not merely lose, himself in
God."30
   Without this prophetic sense to gather up the parts of time
before our inner eye, we may well "fall off from ourselves," know
the ennui and confusion of surface experience, and feel the psychic
bruises caused by conflicts between deeper movements and surface
expectations. What we call reality may be perceived as a dream:
the confluence of many times and places, a multitude of faces and
voices, and a strange amalgam of promises and regrets. Looking
back on the dream it is often difficult to know if it has to do with
current situations, past experience, or future hopes and fears;
usually a dream can be the imaginative backdrop for considering
all three. A dream seems to hold all of experienced life within itself
as within a cloud—the pieces floating around out of sequence but
joined by an inner logic. From the point of view of a depth
psychology, personal experience as well as cultural developments
assume these characteristics of the dream. We can see the heart of
the matter, or in Ficino's imagery the head, when we alter our
vision, "seeing through" the usual compartments of time,
beholding, with the prophet's hindsight and foresight, the dynamic
economy of the soul.


                          Erotic Madness

  Finally, when the soul has been made one, one I say which is in
  itself the very nature and essence of soul, it remains that
  immediately it recovers itself into the One which is above
  essence, that is, God. This the heavenly Venus completes
                       Necessary Madness                         111

  through Love, that is, through the desire for the divine beauty,
  and the passion for Good."31

   If it seemed strange to talk about poetry, religion, and
prophecy as madness, there should be no problem with love.
Anyone who has loved knows that it is a madness, a mania whose
meaning is elusive, its rules confounding, its goals and outcomes a
riddle, and its attractiveness overwhelming. As Ficino suggests,
and not too subtly, people who love don't know what they are
doing. But he also hints, in poetic language as usual, that there is
something to love, something behind it not readily visible. Love
may be painfully exhilarating and disastrously pleasant, but above
all it is necessary for soul—like religion and poetry, it has
psychological significance.
   In the passage quoted, Ficino defines love as "desire for the
divine beauty," and he speaks of ultimate unity and of God.
Again, we ought not to get caught up in literal readings of these
terms, especially since our goal is to focus on Ficinian psychology.
Too often Platonic ideas such as these are rationalized to the point
that there is no soul left in them —interpretation contradicts their
very content.
   For Ficino, "Love has the enjoyment of beauty as its goal."32 Most
Western psychologies have a more Aristotelian character, wanting
to know causes and origins, parts and mechanisms, and clear and
final reasons why people do the things they do. In short,
psychology generally has a desire for the truth; it applauds
conclusions reached, while it strongly discourages speculation.
Ficino's objective, in contrast, is to be led through beauty to
contemplation—no endings, no conclusions, and no final
intellectual satisfaction. James Hillman speaks of the goal of
psychologizing as a "deepening," but in gaining depth there is no
end. It is not a matter of problems solved, but rather mysteries
approached more deeply. The lure of beauty leads toward
contemplation and fantasy, and in Ficino's view that is the proper
goal of the soul.
   The core of Ficino's psychology of love, then, thoroughly
 Plantonic in origin, consists in the capacity of human love to entice
 the soul away from the mulitiplicity of materialism toward the
pleasures of soul-values. As he writes in the Theologia Platonica:
 "the soul is enflamed by the divine splendor, glowing in the
beautiful person as in a mirror, and secretly lifted up by it as by a
hook in order to become God."33 Of all the images used by
 Platonists to describe the lure of love, the hook certainly has to be
112                    The Planets Within

one of the most mundane. Yet it is not a bad image, especially
 today when we speak of persons getting “hooked" on something.
Lovers, says Ficino, are hooked in a madness which potentially
leads them out of the myopia of materialistic vision toward a true
care for their souls.
   I say “potentially" because not all forms of love represent the
movement of soul away from body—obviously. Ficino contrasts
noble love with lust, and James Hillman warns against interpreting
all forms of love as the movement of anima or soul.34 Love might
well reveal the work of Aphrodite rather than anima, he says, and
though both are significant expressions of love, still they are
distinct. And there are yet more loves, many ways in which people
are drawn to each other, signifying many different movements of
soul. Nevertheless, there is a kind of love which does draw the soul
toward its “natural" realm, a world quite unnatural to the ego.
   If a person could have the peace of mind and self-awareness
sufficient to distinguish the different kinds of currents which flow
through the psyche when he is “in love," he might find an
astonishing variety. He may find a desire for vitality, an urge to
fly out of the doldrums, maybe even a spirit of power and
violence. The objects in each case may be different, but love is the
wind blowing the soul out of present circumstances. As Socrates
says in the Symposium: "[Love] is a great spirit [daimon], and like
all spirits he is intermediate between the divine and the mortal. . .
He is the mediator who spans the chasm which divides them, and
therefore in him all is bound together."35 Therefore, although the
experience of love reveals some kind of movement taking place
between the deep sources of the soul and the ego, it is not always
easy to know what the true object and goal is. Ficino expresses this
idea in a familiar and effective image:

  Lovers never know what it is they desire or seek, for they do not
  know God himself, whose subtle incense has infused into his
  works a certain sweet aroma of Himself; by this aroma we are
  certainly every day aroused. We sense the aroma certainly, but
  we cannot distinguish its flavor, and so when we yearn for the
  indistinguishable flavor itself, being charmed by it sensible
  aroma, certainly we do not know what we desire and what we
  suffer."36

  The madness of being in love clearly shows many characteristics
of soul activity: interference with plans and projects, long periods
of time spent in daydream and reverie, projection of ideal fantasies
onto the loved person (by no means a modern insight),37 confusion
                        Necessary Madness                         113

about personal goals and values, a weakening of willpower—all of
these reveal an activation of the deeper strata of the soul. But we
have great difficulty distinguishing the flavors. If love between
two people is not just a matter of relationship, what kind of spirit is
being enlivened? And what about the relationship, does this talk
of soul-values diminish the relationship, psychologize it away?
   The flavors of the aroma hidden in the concrete experience of
 love can be known only in imagination. As is the case with any
concrete situation, its psychological meaning, that is, its
 significance to the psyche, can only be revealed through the work
of "reversion,” seeing the situation as a fantasy, against the
backdrop of other images. The infatuation and madness of love
encourages this work through the spontaneous unfolding of a
wealth of images. The main point is, however, that the spirit of
love can break open the psyche; the flame of Eros, for that is the
 God we are talking about, sets off an explosion of fantasies and
feelings which may be more significant to the psyche than the
relationship.
   That could be a difficult statement to accept. Yet most of us
must know those occasions when this erotic madness flares up like
a blaze of magnesium and quickly dims. Afterward we wonder
what happened, why we took our feelings so seriously, perhaps
why secure and cherished relationships were threatened or maybe
destroyed. Too quickly it becomes clear that it was not the
relationship—a conscious union of two persons—that was so
important, but rather the significance of the event to the people
involved. If poetic flight of mind can be destructive, erotic mania
can only be described as brutal. No doubt the soul is seduced by
the beauty of Love himself, as the Eros and Psyche story tells so
effectively, but as the story also reveals, there is genuine suffering
in store for those who give assent to this god's fire.
    On the other hand, do we not also justify, explain, and even
 romanticize a love relationship as a means for the soul-nourish­
 ment of the persons involved? Jung and some of his followers
 quite properly warn against the illusions of love, but they also
 at times suggest that we ought to grow mature and get beyond
 this adolescent penchant for blind love.38 We can look at this
 another way, however. Relationship may well be the container—
 Eros's boudoir, the alchemical vas—in which Eros and Psyche
 meet, sleep, wound, chase, and eventually give birth. Such
 relationships may be episodic—why establish a norm for these
 vessels? And in fact the value to the individuals might be their
 satisfaction in creating and sustaining a place of containment for
114                    The Planets Within

psychic movement. There are indeed illusions and delusions,
ecstasies and disappointments in these "aromatic” loves, but that is
 the madness of it all. One wonders about the quite reasonable,
rational, well-conceived relationships, sometimes fixed by written
contract, one finds in modern society. Could it be that madness,
essential to "true love” and therefore to the containing relation­
ship, has been ruled out by agreement and "mature” judgment?
    Of those loves which do not have "divine madness” in their
structure Ficino writes rather harshly, although his remedies for
getting out of such relationships are quite interesting: he suggests
that the person keep busy, have his blood thinned, consume large
quantities of wine even to the point of intoxication so that new
spirit may come in, work up a heavy sweat, and finally,
following Lucretius, have sex frequently.39 The only advice Ficino
doesn't mention that is part of even modern folk wisdom is a cold
shower. Of course, Ficino sees these remedies as means toward
psychological catharsis, for starting afresh.
   Even though the image of erotic madness is tied to the actual
experience of love, especially love between a man and a woman,
and although this phenomenon still reigns as one of the chief
conundrums of life, still we should also see this human love as a
metaphor.40 Our experience of human love creates a
multidimensional image, deeply felt in body and soul, that gives us
an idea of the movement of the soul away from concreteness and
literalism toward image and fantasy. The soul is lured by beauty,
for the beauty of the world reflects the beauty of the heavens—a
central idea in Ficino's Platonic thinking. Therefore, erotic
madness finds its place with the others.
   Reviewing the four kinds of madness once more, we can see that
the poetic imagination withdraws from literalism, waking the soul
and establishing the basis for a psychological attitude. This
attitude is given due serious attention through a mode of fantasy
we have called "sacerdotal madness.” In this second phase, not
only fantasies but the deepest structuring patterns of the soul, its
true mysteries, are brought into view. Next, in prophetic madness
one experiences a shift in time perspective which moves attention
away from discrete events taking place in linear time to cyclic
patterns and fragments of imagery that do not fit the linear
scheme. Finally, eros draws us into contemplation through desire
for these soul perspectives. As in Apuleius's story, psyche is
initiated into its own "unnatural" world where it remains through
union with eros, giving birth to the pleasure suited to body and
soul, not merely the senses.
                       Necessary Madness                        115

                           Puffer's Gold

   We are now ready, finally to consider the planets themselves.
This and the previous chapters have laid foundations for
understanding Ficinian astrology and have suggested the relevance
of the planets and stars to modern psychology. If those suggestions
are still rather thin, they should thicken as we look closely at the
planets, one by one. What we must avoid is the astrological
equivalent of puffer's gold, the dubious achievement of those
alchemists who were more interested in making goldlike metals in
their ovens rather than the inner gold of spirit and soul.
   In alchemy we saw one remarkable varition on the single theme
weaving through all these preliminary studies: the establishment
and maintenance of a point of view we have called psychological,
meaning the term literally, "the logic of the psyche." Making, or
rather accepting from tradition, the all-important distinction
between spirit, soul, and body, we could separate and identify the
peculiar characteristics of the psychological dimension, especially
the central place of imagination and the processes needed to
develop a metaphorical view. For metaphor is of the essence of
psyche. Attending to the nature and needs of the psyche, we can
see that every action is an expression of something else. People
comfortable only in a literalistic attitude find this kind of
metaphorical thinking maddening, and we have seen that it is
indeed madness from the literalizing ego's point of view.
Nevertheless, the psyche's occasionally infuriating obstinacy,
never allowing a conclusion or a simple, direct statement, leads us
onward toward deeper understanding and more intense
participation in life.
   All of the psychological processes we have examined, all too
briefly, aim at keeping psyche in the middle, away from the thin
air of spirit and the sticky mud of matter. Since psyche can become
fixated in a single fantasy, which thereby tends to become
literalized, I have advocated a constellating of the psyche,
sustained variety and multiple, fluid fantasies. This process
parallels the poetic imagination with its job of keeping the soul
alert and awake. I have also suggested, following Ficino closely,
an ecology of the soul, a cultivation of the environment with
psychological needs in mind. We have seen that the role of
alchemical consciousness, an attitude that can be nurtured, by the
way, without practicing in a laboratory, also keeps soul in the
middle by dissolving materialistic and literalistic attitudes and by
congealing spiritual ideas and tendencies. Then, the very fantasy
116                      The Planets Within

of four elements of spirit supports once again the idea that soul has
its own properties and requirements, indeed its own constitutive
and nutritive elements. Finally, we have studied four kinds of
nonrational      consciousness      helpful    in    maintaining     the
psychological perspective.
   If there is overkill and repetition in all of these variations on the
theme, it is because psyche is so foreign to most of what modern
people take to be true and self-evident. We feel we have emerged
in an evolutionary manner out of the need for myth, imagery,
metaphor, and other psychological factors. Even, mirabile dictu,
psychologists resist the psyche, perhaps more than other scholars
and professionals. So it seems legitimate to make the point from
many angles. But in addition to providing emphasis, the various
psychological elements and processes we have examined each
provide a unique aspect of psychological reality.
   Now we turn to an even greater scandal in the eyes of modern
scientific thought: astrology. Investigating the imagery of the
planets with Ficino's psychology in mind and with the aid of his
sparse, enigmatic comments on them, we will try to understand
even more specifically the processes and requirements of the
psyche. Our purpose is not to espouse or support the actual
practice of astrology, but to constellate in our psycholgy some
ideas and images which promise to enhance both theory and
therapy.
                        PART II

    Radii Planetarum:
    Planetary Radiance
Trismegistus said that the Egyptians used to take certain
materials of the world and make images, and the souls
of daemons would enter them, even the soul of his an­
cestor Mercury. Apollo, too, and Isis and Osiris would
descend into the statues for either the good or ill of
mankind.
                     — Ficino, The Planets, chapter 13
According to Goethe, the alchemist discovers that what
he has projected into the retort is his own darkness, his
unredeemed state, his passion, his struggle to reach the
goal, that is, to become what he really is, to fulfill the
purpose for which his mother bore him, and, after the
peregrinations, of a long life full of confusion and error,
to become the filius regius, son of the supreme mother.
                — Jung, Psychology of the Transference
                                  6
                 Zodiacal Reflections

Although my interest in Ficino's astrological statements was
born of a concern to recover a more adequate psychology than the
reductive scientific one under which we now suffer, I am also
concerned about the attacks of scientists on forms of imagining
which lie outside the paradigms of science. Too often these attacks
are transparent forays against imagination itself.
   On the other hand, of course there are dangers in folk astrology
just as there are superstitious tendencies in folk religion. For many
the intricate procedures and intriguing interpretations of astrology
satisfy the desire for mystery with superficial hocus pocus; or they
respond to that wish to be free of choice and responsiblity —
surrendering to the influence of the planets; or, finally, they caress
the ego, placing it amid cosmic happenings and building up fresh
fantasies for personal destiny.
   Before dismissing astrology, however, with a knowing, moralis­
tic denial of egoism, perhaps it would be worth while to consider
what psychological benefits there might be even in the popular
attraction to astrology. Or, if "benefits” is too strong a word, at
least we might investigate the fantasies behind the widespread
fascination with the stars.



                 Sun-signs; A Theology of Grace

   Discussing one's sun-sign at a cocktail party and finding Cancer
and Leo on glasses, towels, charm bracelets, and underwear have
"flattened out" the mysteries of these ancient symbols. Yet, even a
fad stems from a fantasy, flat though it is, and the fantasy behind
sun-signs and planets hints at an otherwise unanswered need.
   There was a time when many of us lived within the fantasy of a
theology of grace. We believed that there were "wheels in motion"

                                 119
120                     The Planets Within

in the universe which threatened us with disaster but also
promised the occasional gift from the sky. Believing in grace we
assumed an attitude of receptivity, cooperation, gratitude, and
dependence. Schleiermacher's descriptions of religion in the
nineteenth century chiefly in terms of the sense of dependence are
still moving and seem to reach the heart of religion. But in the
modern world, where science and technology not only fabricate
marvelous instruments and gadgets but also create an imaginative
realm of meaning, that sense of dependence and grace is gone. In
its place is the narrow open window of statistical probability. We
might be the one in a thousand to live a healthy life or enjoy a
happy marriage. But we can no longer confidently pray for such a
grace or feel that we have any support beyond that which we build
and maintain. Even in philosophy the existentialist realism which
warns us that we make our own heavens and hells corrodes the
sense of grace-full living.
   But if my sun-sign is Aries I imagine that by some destiny
beyond my own power I will have the passion and initiative to
make life a success. I don't really know this, in fact I know that it is
not true, but by taking astrology half seriously I can imagine and
therefore feel that something in the universe is working for me.
Astrology becomes a thin vestige of formerly deeply felt reliance
upon grace. God may have disappeared from the sky, but that
canopy of infinite space, opened up and made more vast by
science, still catches my fancy and carries a share of my destiny.
   Although the feeling behind the fad of identifying sun-signs and
ruling planets often runs deep, betraying a desire for living life in a
larger context, popular astrology, both the kind found in the
newspapers and with many professional astrologers, is far from
adequate in responding to that desire. Astrology itself is only an
indicator of a fantasy and, in the best hands, a partial instrument
for picking at the surface of deep desire and longing. Although, as
I said, my interest is in using Renaissance astrology as a source for
deepening modern psychology, still I think that the ritual of
astrology itself, though in no way necessary and not even
important, might serve as a useful means for exploring one's
fantasies and life patterns.
    Besides creating in the individual a sense of connection with a
larger world, a world which might well be inside rather than
outside, astrological imagery also importantly creates an
imaginative awareness of one's own uniqueness. The birth chart,
for example, defines identity with images that stretch far beyond
ego, but it also emphasizes the unique space and time of one's
                       Zodiacal Reflections                        121

birth. We saw earlier that Ficino recommended that psychic
exploration begin with a sense of one's own daimon and destiny.
This daimon may be found in a planet on the horoscope, but the
chart as a whole also includes that image of unique individuality.
One is not simply a constellation of cosmic factors, one is a
person, on earth, with a particular culture determined by time and
place. Both the eternal and the temporal conditions of human
experience are taken into account; indeed, in true astrological
consciousness a person simultaneously imagines his uniqueness
and his common heritage.
   As I mentioned earlier, going through the process of gathering
information for the horoscope, setting up the chart, memorizing
positions and aspects, and working it interpretation can be an art
of memory, the work of imagination. The concrete process brings
forth significant fantasies: historical and family conditions at the
time of birth, parents and relatives, the town or house of birth and
early years. Qualities of all these factors become intensified when
viewed through the prism of planetary aspects and houses and
signs. At some time in life it may be a useful experience to go
through this rite in order to get one more psychological portrait of
oneself. It certainly would have as much validity, and much more
imagination, than a psychological, statistical inventory.
   The serious psychological danger in astrology, a danger found
in all religious and occult systems, is the temptation to lose soul in
spiritual literalism. Instead of using astrology as an art of memory,
people begin "believing in" astrology, and such belief takes this art
of imagination out of the realm of metaphor. "Believers" then
might make life decisions—from buying clothes to getting
married—according to the planets, not in order to keep their
imagination alive, which would be a psychological move, but in
order to be successful in their physical life. Spirit and body serve
each other, but there is no soul in between.
   When we read of American Indians or Castaneda's Don luan
thanking the earth before pulling up a vegetable or flower, we may
be impressed at the attitude created by such a practice. An entire
fantasy of relatedness to nature is fostered by such a simple rite.
But if the purpose of that little prayerlike attitude is to get the best
food, we again find spirit serving the belly. The same is true of
astrology. It may be one effective imaginative device among
many, for some people, to nourish imagination in the specific
 ways proper to it; but if the focus is not soul, then we dally with
faddish fundamentalism and move even further away from a
 psychological, soul-enhancing attitude.
122                     The Planets Within

                         Planets of the Soul

   Having alluded to astrology as fad, an imaginative device, and
as a fundamentalist spiritual practice, let us now leave the concrete
ritual and concentrate on the metaphorical value of astrological
imagery. By referring to the images of astrology, but not
advocating the practice, we may be able to unveil otherwise un­
differentiated facets of psychological processes. Let us inquire
into the fantasies behind Ficinian astropsychology without
necessarily mimicking his quaint life-style.
   Ficino's attitude toward astrology was ambivalent: he writes
against astrologers more than once, yet his writings are filled with
allusions to astrology, and The Planets is fundamentally an
astrological treatise.2 In a letter to Bembo in 1477 Ficino uses a pun
to put astrologers in their place: "As diligently as astronomers
measure the heavens [metiuntur], astrologers fabricate empty lies
[mentiuntur] about human life."3 But, as we have seen, Ficino
consults the sky for building projects, for making medicines, and
for constructing images. He also saw the general heaviness of his
own life marked by the planet Saturn in his horoscope.
   One way Ficino theoretically resolves the apparent contra­
diction in his attitude toward astrology may help us gain a
proper perspective on it for ourselves. As Kristeller explains,
Ficino's general principle holds that superior beings have power
over inferior beings. In Ficino's hierarchical universe the planets
and stars are higher than the human body, but not higher than the
mind. They could influence, then, the body without having power
over the higher faculties. And in fact. The Planets is a book on
care for the body primarily, though the soul is by no means
neglected.
   In a similar way, when we imagine the planets within to be
images for deep patterns and focal points of psychological life, we
do not have to consider these as metaphysical entities or as
determining factors in human life, as in the traditional belief in the
inescapable influence of the planets of the sky. There are indeed
felt movements of the psyche obviously not intitiated or even fully
controlled by the ego, but there is no need to turn these subjective
experiences into self-sufficient entities. In that case psychology
becomes an internalized theology, another two-tiered universe
turned inside out.4 Jungians tend to treat the archetype of the Self,5
for example, as a metaphysical fulcrum holding the psyche in
balance, but the planets and the archetypal fantasies of personality
are, to interpret Ficino somewhat, images that move the soul
                       Zodiacal Reflections                       123

without deluding the mind. We can know these images to be
metaphors without destroying their power to move us
psychologically.


               Accommodations and Arrangements

   In the second chapter of The Planets Ficino describes the world
as something alive, like an animal, and in this vital body lower
parts draw benefits from higher members. "The more powerful the
source," he writes, "the quicker it is to act, the more prone to give.
So, if we apply scant additional preparations, that will be
sufficient for acquiring celestial benefits. And if someone
accommodates himself [se accommodet] to this [higher world], to
him it will be especially subject."6 To accommodate oneself means,
as we have seen before, to expose oneself to those material things
rich in the kinds of spirit we need. Ficino expresses this whole
process in the following way. The planets are the source of various
kinds of spirit needed to nourish the soul. From the planets come
rays which strike the earth and are absorbed by objects, either
naturally or through human intervention—making images, for
example, obviously appropriate to a particular spirit. Living with
the needs of soul in mind, we would go about our daily affairs
making a special effort to expose ourselves—accommodation — to
the proper objects.
   Let us develop this idea first by noting carefully Ficino's own
description of planetary radiance:

   Rays can impress wonderful occult powers on images, as they
   do on other things. For they are not inanimate like rays of
   lamps; rather, they are living and sensate like eyes shining in
   living bodies. They bring wonderful gifts with them from
   celestial imaginations and minds, as well as strength and power
   from the configurations and rapid movement of these bodies.
   They incite in the spirit, effectively and appropriately, a
   reproduction of the celestial rays.7

If we imagine the planets within as images of deep patterns and
movements of the psyche, then, following these imaginative ideas
of Ficino, we are to understand that certain objects in our material
world will correspond to certain planets, and not only correspond,
they will radiate and convey to us the spirit of a particular planet.
The material world, both natural and man-made, is a source of
various kinds of spirit needed for psychological movement. In
124                     The Planets Within

Ficino's psychotherapeutic system, if we could only sort out the
objects according to their "planetary" (archetypal) characteristics,
we could take better care of the soul in everyday life.
   The notion that the material world has an inherent spiritual
dimension is to be found throughout religious and occult
traditions. For example, it is nicely described by the alchemist Basil
Valentine:
  Thus the power of growth I speak of is not imparted by the
  earth but by the life-giving spirit that is in it. If the earth were
  deserted by this spirit, it would be dead, and no longer able to
  afford nourishment to anything.8
Indeed, in our modern world, without imagination the earth is
dead, we treat the world and our own lives as lifeless pieces of
matter to be maintained and gratified. With imagination,
however, the spirit inherent in material things becomes evident
and efficacious. Roger Bacon made the point mythologically,
adding a note that leads us from alchemy to astrology:

  By Proserpine the ancients signified that ethereal spirit which,
  having been separated by violence from the upper globe, is
  enclosed and imprisoned beneath the earth (which earth is
  represented by Pluto) as well as expressed by those lines:
  Whether that the earth yet fresh, and from the deeps of heaven
  new-sundered, did some seeds retain, some sparks and motions
  of its kindred sky.0

Bacon, like Ficino, presents the image of the material world
containing within it some "seeds" of its relative, the sky. The
material world, in other words, holds the fantasies of our inward
souls, either in its man-made form or, in Hillman's words, in the
fantasies we have about it.
   "Accommodation," then, is another psychological process we
can add to constellation and cultivation. We accommodate
ourselves to the fundamental and varied movements of the soul
through our orientaton toward the material world. Astrological
consciousness thus becomes a mindfulness of the deeper,
archetypal significance of the most mundane events. The
otherwise undifferentiated, linear, and literal sequence of events
becomes ordered, not through reason alone, but through
imagination into patterns the significance of which appeals to the
soul more than to the mind. Rather than exert all our energies and
give every bit of attention to the mother's materialism, we give the
daughter, Persephone/Proserpina her due.10
                       Zodiacal Reflections                       125

   A good portion of The Planets consists of advice for
accommodating oneself to the various planetary centers. Each
planet is described roughly, then the material things associated
with each are listed, as we are advised to use the proper material
objects. Some of the objects mentioned have obvious physical
properties related to a particular planet, such as golden things
connected with the sun. Others have stories behind them linking
them to the deity of a planet.
   Interpreting this procedure of accommodation, we may
understand the details metaphorically. There are seven planets in
the classical system, but there are many more archetypal
possibilities one can imagine for the soul. We may begin to
understand the process of accommodation by studying the
planets, along with Ficino, as archetypal images, but we do not
have to stop there. An imaginative symbol system helps, and there
are many to be found in the religions of the world and even in art
and psychology, but sometimes we need only an idiosyncratic
metaphor against which to view an actual situation and glimpse
the fantasies congealed in it. A dream will do, or a novel, or
science, or a walk in the woods. Everything is metaphor and food
for the soul. All of the material world contains sparks of the
kindred sky, flashes of the psychological lumen.
   If accommodation is a posturing of oneself toward the world so
that the psychological dimension is revealed and put in action,
then what happens to the psyche itself is an "arrangement.” Recall
the title of Ficino's book: De Vita Coelitus Comparanda. I am
translating comparanda as "arrange," though it could also mean
"dispose" or "prepare.” The title of the book refers, then, to
arranging life according to planetary spirit, but we could also
think of the arrangement as a constellation of psyche itself, all
parts awakened and in place. When one's psychological life
reflects the sky, its planets are in motion. It is not stuck under the
domination of a single planetary focus. We will explore this
polycentric image of the psyche in the last chapter; for now we can
understand the context of our study of individual planets. The
ultimate purpose is to know the varieties of soul-movement so that
this variety can become part of psychological life. Movement itself
is essential to the soul, for without movement there is no feeling,
no valuing, and no vitality.
   It is apparent that Ficino's astropsychology suggests a picture of
the psyche which embraces many extremes of experience without
sacrificing any of them or, worse, rubbing them out through
harmonizing or reconciliation of opposites. Ficino affirms both
126                     The Planets Within

sides of pradoxes consistently, always keeping a Janus face. He
affirms the role of cyclic, transpersonal factors (planets) in human
life while at the same time emphasizing the important task of
disovering one's uniqueness nd individuality. Among the planets
he recognizes those which are particularly painful to the soul, like
Mars and Saturn, but he doesn't suggest flight from these
influences—they are part of life. True to his pervasive Platonism
he strongly advocates a dying to materialistic attitudes, yet his
theory remarkably places great value on the ordinary, the
mundane, and the worldly.
   One final point should be made about the interpretation of the
planets and their characters. I am suggesting that we read all of this
astrology in terms of a sky within. The planets correspond, then,
to deeply felt movements of the soul and not to either ego
attitudes, that is, conscious values and positions, or to persona
qualities. I mean the latter in the Jungian sense: social, gender, and
ego roles we play. Mars is not simply a surface tendency toward
anger, nor is Venus the trappings of body awareness. These
planetary centers are deep in the psyche, generating many
complexes, fantasies, and behaviors. They sky within truly seems
as vast as the sky without, and the planets are just as massive,
mysterious, and unearthly.
                                  7
                                Sol
Of all the heavenly bodies revolving rhythmically around our
physical world (astrologically speaking we on earth are still in the
center of the universe), the one so important for maintaining life,
so visible in its brilliance and influential in its warmth, and so
obvious as to be taken for granted, is the sun. These days we are
especially aware of the generosity of the sun as it daily showers us
with raw energy, but we probably rarely consider the impact of
this huge, golden brilliance upon our psyches. If everything in the
world, including pencils and ants and chicken soup, find
themselves "metaphorized” into our unconscious stores of images,
the sun cannot rise and set with such grandeur and color our
skins and expose our world without having immense
psychological impact. Worldwide devoted worship of the sun
attests to its spiritual significance, and this inner influence was not
lost on Ficino and his forerunners. Ficino not only refers to Sol
frequently in all of his writings, and especially in his direct
astrological passages, he also wrote a seprate monograph on light
(De Lumine) and another on the sun itself (De Sole).
   As we study the various planets in search of their psychological
significnce, we will be particularly interested in distinguishing the
kind of spirit they represent, in Ficino's imagery, the kind of rays
they shine into our lives. Each planet will be seen to depict a
distinct spirit, but the sun, in addition to having some unique
distinguishing features, represents spirit itself. So we can say that
Ficinian psychology is above all solar in character on account of its
emphasis on the role of spirit in the care of psyche. Ficino develops
this idea in The Planets:
  Our soul, besides maintaining the particular powers of its
  members, promotes the common power of life all through us,
  but especially through the heart, source of the intimate fire of
  the soul. Similarly, the World Soul flourishes everywhere, but
  especially through the sun, as it indiscriminately unfolds its
  common power of life. (Chap.l.)

                                  127
128                      The Planets Within

Then, in the fourth chapter, Ficino offers a step-by-step plan for
the care of body and soul and comments there on the healing
power of Sol. Cure begins with the separation of infecting vapors
and their banishment by means of purging medicines. Next, the
patient is illumined by bright objects. Third, he is cared for so that
he might become stronger. And finally, he is exposed to heavenly
rays and to the direct influence of the sun. "In this way," advises
Ficino, "the spirit, though in us, pours heavenly benefits into our
body first and then into our soul—benefits, I might mention, that
are entirely celestial, for everything is contained in the sun."
   The sun is an image, then, of spiritual power itself, the "heart”
of the life of psyche. Like the gold of alchemy, it is the spirit to be
found in all things spiritual. In Ficino's words, "gold is like the sun:
it is present in all metals just as Sol is in all planets and stars.”1 Sol
is the center of the planetary system, not as a geometric focal
point, but as an ever-present quality. In the Hermetic texts Ficino
had read an intriguing description of God, one quoted many times
in later literature: God is the center of a circle whose center is
everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere. A poet directly
and deeply influenced by Ficino, Guy le Febvre de la Boderie, who
had translated Ficino's Libri de Vita Tres, including The Planets,
applied this definition of divinity to the sun:

      The infinite sun, whose prime roundness
      Perennially produces rays of light:
      Thus from the roundness as well as from the precious ray
      Comes forth eternally the eternal warmth.
      It is the unlimited Round, of which the central point
      Is found in every place, whose spherical contour
      Is found nowhere, and from whose center and circuit
      The rims or rays ensue all around.2

Solar spirit comes, interestingly, from the roundness of the sun as
well as from its rays. Like the soul, circular when not in personal
human form, spirit is round; that is, spirit is not something
produced or even educed directly by human intention and effort.
It is transpersonal and transhuman.
   Jung had many occasions to discuss the role of Sol in alchemy,
and, pairing Sol with the alchemical Luna, he tends to identify the
former with consciousness and the later with unconsciousness.3 In
this interpretation Sol is the light of consciousness shed on the
dark mysteries of nature, so that an increase of solar influence
corresponds to a heightening of consciousness. According to Jung,
"Thus the concept of Sol has not a little to do with the growth of
                                 Sol                                129

modern consciousness, which in the last two centuries has relied
more and more on the observation and experience of natural
objects.”4 Jung has much more to say about Sol, but this is the gist
of his comments on the bright side of the sun—he makes other
interesting remarks on the shadow of the sun and the sun in the center
of the earth, Sol Niger. In the peculiar Ficinian notion of spirit,
one we have studied at some length, Sol is imagined as spirituality
itself, not unlike the alchemical elixir, the secret of secrets, the
most mysterious yet most open secret of all. From the heart of
spiritual conciousness radiates the transforming spirit of the sun.
Given solar consciousness, all the other varieties of spirit may
follow, but general attention must be given to spirit itself first and
above all.
      Although Ficino's psychology is primarily "celestial,”
concerned above all to effect a "tempered” psyche, he frequently
emphasizes the role of solar spirit so much that his theory might
well be called "solar" as well. For example, he claimed to follow
the Arabian philosophers who considered Sol to be the
fundamental "human" planet. We can see this, Ficino writes, in
man's beauty, the subtlety of his humors, his clarity of spirit, and
his insight and imagination.5 These qualities of human beings,
similar to those of the objects he lists in The Planets as solar, are all
signs of spirit, an evanescence of the person beyond materialism.
His solar psychology, then, is aimed primarily at developing this
human imagination so that it can use the material world for its
spiritual potentiality.
   Now we have to distinguish this kind of solar, spiritual
approach to psychology from others that have solar charac­
teristics but are essentially different. Roberto Assagioli's "psy­
chosynthesis," for example, is a solar psychology in many
ways. He himself called his approach "height" psychology in order
to distinguish it from depth psychology. In his diagram of the
personality, he depicts the "higher Self" as a sun, the source of
insight and creativity for the ego.6 In practice, this solar, higher
 Self is treated as an oracular source (the Delphic oracle in
Apollonian psychology?) of fantasies to which one turns for
guidance in life decisions. Other aspects of the psychosynthesis
regimen, its meditation techniques for example, ally this approach
with spiritual disciplines in which the notion of spirit is quite
different from that of Ficino. For them spirit is an upward region
removed from body and often preferably set apart from fantasy
and emotion, an arena of the mind and intellect similar to Ficino's
Mens—a mentality quite removed from the concrete. The
130                    The Planets Within

humanistic movement in psychology instigated by Maslow and
others has in recent years spawned a "transpersonal psychology/ a
movement interested largely in assimilating meditative techniques
and other spiritual practices from the world's religions.
Psychosynthesis and the other transpersonal psychologies, eager
to transcend the "inferior" problematics of ordinary psychological
reality, pursue spirit in a manner Ficino would label "intellectual,"
although they probably would not, since the awareness they seek
is beyond conceptualization. At any rate, transpersonal
psychologies and their devotees employ solar imagery and often
speak in the imagery of "light" in order to denote the high regions
of spirit, whereas Ficino conceives of spirit as an emanation of the
material world. For him spiritual increase is truly a psychological
process, necessarily attached to the concrete life and to the
entanglements of soul. Therefore, his solar spirit is immanent, a
sun whose center is everywhere within our most mundane
experiences, and decidedly not a reach above the mid-realm of
psyche. In practical terms, then, one cultivates Ficinian solar
psychology by attending to the spirit or atmosphere of everyday
affairs, extracting fantasies and concretizing vague moods and
lofty ideas; one does not practice yoga or mediation, as useful and
these might be for other purposes, in order to move beyond the
ordinary.



                  Sun and Earth, Soul and Body

  This peculiar way of dealing with spirit lies at the heart of
Ficinian psychology and more than any other aspect of his theory
makes his approach valuable in our modern world, where we have
more psychologies than we need and more spiritual paths
becoming popular than any individual can assimilate. With the split
between spirit and body and passionate advocates of each, we
have no soul. Ficino's notion of spirit is truly psychological, as I
have said, and therefore gives us a way of imagining and effecting
a union, finally, of body, soul, and spirit. We can picture this
union yet another way, borrowing a schema from Bachofen, the
nineteenth-century anthropologist and mythologist. Even if his
historical opinions are now questionable, his mythic paradigm of
solar consciousness still has heuristic value.
  Bachofen delineates three stages in the evolution of solar
consciousness. In the first phase, the radiant son (sun) is ruled by
                                 Sol                               131

mother (earth), and day is like night. Spirit is dominated by
matter. The second stage is Dionysian, an era of father-right, an
age of the god who fecundates the earth, a phallic Sol forever
seeking receptive matter in order to give it life. The third stage is
Apollonian, of which Bachofen writes:

  The phallic sun, forever fluctuating between rising and setting,
  coming into being and passing away, is transformed into the
  immutable source of light. It enters the realm of solar being,
  leaving behind it all idea of fecundation, all yearning for mixture
  with feminine matter.... Apollo frees himself entirely from any
  bond with woman.7

Bachofen's first phase or image of solar consciousness clearly is
one Ficino is arguing against most strongly. Values of the spirit are
not perceived because they are blocked by materialistic
shortsightedness. Individuals, neglecting soul, are compelled by
unknown movements of the psyche, as Jung so often complained,
not knowing why they feel empty inside, never satisfied with their
incomes, unhappy in relationships, drawn to alchohol, or
gambling or some other compulsion.
   The third phase of Bachofen's paradigm I have already
discussed—an ascent into spirituality cut off from psyche. This
ascent generally takes one of two forms: escape into
intellectualism or into spiritual discipline. In traditional
mythological language, Apollo's immaterial masculinity would
have no commerce with the feminine material world. In this
mentality there may be concern for the body, but not a
psychological concern. A person can be a body-builder and at the
same time a devoted practitioner of transcendental meditation, but
that isn't sufficient for soul. In another way of keeping the mind
clean, emotion, which can give body to ideas, may be ruled out as
feminine, a stain on pure thought.
   Bachofen's second stage is closest to Fician solar psychology.
Though Bachofen places this sensibility in the domain of Dionysos
and Ficino consistently speaks of solar consciousness as
Apollonian, still we can recall that these two deities in Ficino's mind
are brothers, inseparable. Bachofen describes spirit in this phase as
fecundating, though it remains at some distance. Psychologically,
the individual neither flees contact with body and feminine reality,
nor does he immerse himself in the material world to the neglect of
spirit. Ficino himself employs imagery compatible with that of
Bachofen:
132                      The Planets Within

   Heaven, the bridegroom of earth, does not touch her, as is
   commonly thought, nor does he embrace her; he regards
   (illuminates) her by the mere rays of his stars which are, as it
   were, his eyes; and in regarding her he fructifies her and so
   begets life.8

Solar consciousness, an awareness of the spiritual values in
material things, brings these things to life, fertilizing them,
animating them, giving them soul; for spirit is the food of soul.
Consciousness then, or imagination, is efficacious; to behold spirit
is to take a step toward receiving the benefits of spirit. But in
addition to having the ability to discriminate spirits, one still has
to get in touch with the world in order to make life fertile. It may
be necessary to take action on fantasies; if they are merely
entertained in one's fancy, their full character may never to
revealed and their spirit may never be communicated. A
Dionysian abandon must overcome Apollonian distance and
defensiveness if the spirit is to be assimilated. Gnawing
fascinations and compulsive infatuations cannot easily be
dismissed in favor of the clean, white life without sacrifice of
spirit. Or so the imagery of Ficino and Bachofen suggests. Psyche
needs the sexual touch of spirit and matter if it is to be fed,
fertilized, and embodied.


                       Sources of Solar Spirit

   Several chapters in The Planets make the reader feel that he has
entered a bizarre apothecary, filled with rare and aromatic
substances and sparkling with radiant stones and gems. Indeed, in
the preface to the book Ficino pretends that this volume is a
laboratory: "Our laboratory here—this book—offers for different
kinds of people a variety of antidotes, drugs, poultices, salves and
remedies. If any should be unpleasing to you, I will skip over those
and include others."9 He was particularly concerned about
resistance to astrological matters, but the modern reader might
also have trouble with most of his examples of spiritual, solar
objects. For example, among the substances he mentions as
particularly solar is nutmeg, a spice whose color and tang suggest
the spirit of the sun. Peppermint, by the way, he says contains the
spirit of Jupiter. The list of solar objects gets even more interesting:

  Anything which is from stones and plants called heliotropes
  because they turn toward the sun is solar. So too are gold, gold
                                 Sol                              133

  pigment, gold colors, chrysolite, carbuncle, myrrh, incense,
  moss, amber, balsam, honey, aromatic reed, crocus, corn,
  cinnamon, aloes, and other aromatic materials; Aries, Astur,
  chicken, swan, lion, beetle, crocodile; yellow-skinned people;
  people who are curly-haired, bald, and magnanimous.10

   In the case of most of these items it is fairly easy to see why they
would be considered solar. Usually they are either sun-colored or
aromatic—exuding spirit. Others need some clarification. But we
should not overlook the basic point, Ficino's "natural magic,"
which is really a school of imagination. By surrounding ourselves
with objects which look like something as profound as solar spirit,
we keep that spirit in mind. As if by sympathetic magic, these
metaphorical objects can in fact bring to us the spirit they
represent. We can either bring imagination to the natural world (to
spices and gems) or make things resembling the spirit with which
we are concerned. It is the image that effectively communicates the
spirit.
   Obviously, it is not necessary, as I have said before, to imitate
Ficino exactly and surround our bedrooms and studies with spices
and herbs, although I wouldn't rule that out. But there are other
similar ways to tutor imagination—paintings, hangings, plants,
records, books, colors, architecture, furnishings, clothes, and so
on. Our physical enviroment can be cultivated even in this way
with psyche in mind. Activities and people around us, not just
bald or curly-haired friends, can bring into our lives needed spirit,
naturally. Conscious of these spiritual values in the ordinary we
become, like Ficino, a modern magus, a magician of the soul,
working marvels not for profit or recognition but for
psychological animation.
   Let us take a look at some of the less transparent items Ficino
has on his list of solar objects.
   Chrysolite is an example of a substance related both to gold and
to spirit. The name comes from the Greek chrysos, gold. In the
fifteenth-century North Midland Lapidary it is said that chrysolite
signifies the gifts of the Holy Ghost and that it is the color of water
and of gold. The lapidary refers us to the Book of Revelations
(21:15) where the seventh precious stone of the New Jerusalem's
foundation is identified as chrysolite. The brightness of this stone,
associated with the "aroma of the Holy Ghost," signifies not only
spirit emanating from matter, a basic solar image, but also the
pristine, archetypal nature of that spirit—a foundational element
in the City of God. Like Bacon's earth, which retains some sparks
134                     The Planets Within

from the sundered sky, matter like this holds traces of the spirit of
an even higher heaven. In other words, spirit we may glimpse or
"smell" in the things of ordinary living may have a place at a much
deeper level, at the very foundation of the psyche's character.
   Other substances on the list suggest some dangers in the basically
positive ''heliotropic'' attitude. The rays of the sun, powerful and
all-encompassing, have great amplitude, and although, says
Ficino, they are basically beneficial, they can be toxic. "They may
have a drying effect in the closed hollows of dry matter."11 To be
too much in the sun is to have an overdose of spirit. Spirit can be
desiccating, producing arid universities, tinder-dry lectures and
books, experts of spirit high and dry in ivory towers, and parched
personalities. This highly desirable quality of solar spirit needs to
be doused in moist darkness now and then.
   There is in fact a curious relationship among some of the solar
objects listed in the solar apothecary between sun and water. For
example, according to the Sloane Lapidary carbuncle or the ruby
"driveth away all taches [blemishes] and ill conditions. It is sayd yt
this stone is in ye fleme [river] of paradise."12 Furthermore, three of
the animals listed are amphibious; like the sun (according to many
traditions among people living by the sea) they spend part of the
time in water, part in air. These animals are the swan, the beetle,
and the crocodile.
   The thirteenth-century bestiary of Guillaume Le Clerc says of
the crocodile:

  Never was seen another such beast, for it lives on land and in
  water. At night it is submerged in water, and during the day it
  reposes upon the land. If it meets and overcomes a man, it
  swallows him entire, so that nothing remains. But ever after it
  laments him as long as it lives.13
  In spite of all we have seen in support of a consciousness of
spirit, the sun cannot always shine; night fortunately comes along
with its refreshing darkness and relief from the heat of day.
Psychologically, there are times for unconsciousness, for not
giving a care about the spiritual rewards involved in what you are
doing. There is a time for pure experience, for plain physical
absorption and enjoyment, and, again in spite of what was said
earlier, a time for entertainment. These times offer a rest from
solar heat and light, establishing a natural rhythm, like the
imagined path of the sun across the heavens and under the sea.
Without this rhythm the spirit can swallow a person up "so that
nothing remains." Excessively spiritualized persons walk about
                                Sol                              135

disembodied, like Echo of the frail voice and wasted body, or like
the Cheshire Cat. More often the "refreshment" is indeed
darkness, not so pleasant, but a necessary counterpoint to the light
of the sun.
   One can think of other connectious between sun and water:
water as the matrix of the unconscious from which spirit comes,
water as emotion to balance the thinking of solar attitudes, water
as the nighttime of dreams and the reflecting pond of the
Narcissus-like soul, water as the sea of the hero-sun's night
journey. Like an amphibious animal the soul must learn to live in
different habitats and to tread on unusual and varied soils and
waters.
   Another allusion to the nighttime of the sun is the swan which
moves brightly and gracefully over the water during the day and is
also known to pull the sun's barge at night, as it towed the knight's
boat in the Lohengrin story. Its serpent-shaped neck also hints at
its dark, chthonic side. There is a time for the sunset of the soul, a
dark period where, as Jung points out, the sun is black. In his essay
on the sun, Ficino notes that when the sun is ascending to the mid­
heaven, there is increase of vital and animal spirit, but when the
sun descends these spirits are diminished.14 Here we find another
advantage to the astrological image-system: it takes into account
the movements of the heavenly bodies, their rhythms of ascent
and descent, increase and decrease.
   The story of the lion, another solar animal, hints too at the dark
side of the sun. Le Clerc tells us that the lion has three outstanding
characteristics; it lives on a high mountain, it sleeps with its eyes
open, and "when the lioness brings forth her young, it falls to the
ground, and gives no sign of life until the third day, when the lion
breathes upon it and in this way brings it back to life again."15
During the Middle Ages this last characteristic of the lion was
interpreted as a reference to Jesus' three days in the tomb before his
resurrection, but it undoubtdly also refers to the sun giving birth
to the moon after three days absence—the time before the new
moon.
   The three days before the birth of the young lion, the new sun,
represent the three days Jesus spent in hell, in the underworld
working for the freedom of souls in limbo. An anonymous
alchemist of the sixteenth century saw this analogy:
    All men had to descend into the underworld, where they were
    imprisoned for ever. But Christ Jesus unlocked the gate of the
    heavenly Olympus and threw open the realm of Pluto, that the
    souls might be freed.16
136                    The Planets Within

The night of spirit, the sinking of consciousness, the "dark night of
the soul,” is a necessary movement in the rhythm of light and
darkness. Included in solar sensibility, and therefore in a solar
psychology, is this downward movement toward twilight of
understanding and the sunset of brilliant spirit. When Heraclitus
made the obvious but profound remark "The sun is new each
day,” he implied the death of the old sun. Even though the sun is
that planet illuminating all others with its light, it too has its
rhythm of descent.
   Finally, Jung points to another negative side of the sun.
Alchemists, he reminds us, associated the sun with sulphur, the
corrupting material of decay and transformation. We should note
too that the sun not only nourishes and supports life, has its times
of descent, and threatens with spiritual dryness; it also causes
decay and fermentation with its heat. Here arise intimations of the
Dionysian factor once again: a principle which corrupts in the
service of new forms of life. Solar consciousness, sulphuric
sometimes in its capacity to dissolve the objects it illuminates,
brings endings as well as beginnings. Some of the solar psychologies
we noticed in passing seem to suggest the romantic notion that
spirit is always life-affirming, whereas in fact solar sensibility has
many points of contact with dissolution, darkness, and death.
Dionysos and Apollo are brothers. The goal of solar therapy is not
simply eternal happiness. It is not a "no-hassle" approach to
psychology. On the contrary, to enter the light of solar spirit is to
know the depths as well as the heights, to risk the danger of that
crocodile's mouth and to feel the sting of sulphur as well as the
tang of nutmeg.
   Thus the very central radiance of Ficino's model of the psyche
embraces opposites and suggests a realistic approach to therapy. In
the sun's light we see the houses of spirit which sustain the soul, we
feel the nourishing and corrupting processes of psyche's
movement, and we enter more deeply into the round of planets.
Therapy often appears as an attempt to avoid the unpleasantness
and the madness of one "planet" or another. But the solar
sensibility suggested by Ficino leads us deeper into these
inexplicable movements with their highs and lows, ecstasies and
depressions, fullness and emptiness. Each planet has its own brand
of such experiences, but all participate in the vicissitudes of the
central solar pattern.
                                 8
                             Venus

Ficino begins the nineteenth chapter of The Planets with instruc­
tions on how to make an archetypal model of the universe—
formam quadam mundi totius archetypam. It should be made of
silver, and gold and contain and three colors of the cosmos: green,
gold and sapphire, the colors of the Three Graces. The craftsman
should begin work on the model when Sol enters Aries, and he
should finish it in Venus. Astrologers, says Ficino, believe that the
world began in Aries, and for that reason the model should be
begun then. Naturally it should be completed under the guidance
of the goddess of beauty.
   In this particular case, Frances Yates supports the idea I have
been suggesting throughout our study of Ficino's images: this
archetypal model of the world was to be used as a means of
educating the memory.1 Yates suggests that if a person had such a
model or picture in his bedroom he could go through a day's
activities interpreting them through that familiar image. Jean
Seznec, in a study of astrological images of classical deities,
mentions that private homes, public buildings, and even churches,
indeed the Vatican itself at this period, often had detailed and
exact horoscopes painted on their ceilings and walls.2 What once
may have begun as a mnemonic technique to help orators
remember their speeches turned into an enterprise of natural
magic, or, as I have been suggesting, a school of imagination.
Yates suggests that Botticelli's famous painting of flowing bodies
and florid dresses—the Primavera—was precisely an image to be
used in the practice of natural magic, a means of exposure to the
spirit of Venus, especially useful, she says in full accordance with
Ficino's own thought, to circumvent the ravaging spirit of Saturn.3
   I propose, then, to look closely at this painting in order to grasp
the essential qualities of Venusian spirit as imagined by Fincino's
circle. We have already seen how intimately familiar Botticelli
must have been with Ficino's ideas, and we know that he painted

                                 137
138                       The Planets Within




Sandro Botticelli, La Primavera. (Uffizi Gallery, Florence)




this portrait of the goddess for a Medici, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco.
Art critics and historians have been as fascinated by this work as
has the public, and they have provided more interpretive informa­
tion than we need. In my remarks I rely heavily upon the summary
statements of Edgar Wind concerning traditional interpretations of
the work and upon his own ideas.4 However, I am interested in the
psychological significance of the image, in its power to tutor the
imagination in preparation for onslaughts and deficiencies of
Venus's benefits and pains.
   Let us regard the Primavera, then, as one of Ficino's amulets and
talismans, an image not just to admire aesthetically but to con­
template and use for spiritual increase. Pursuing this approach to
the planet and its goddess, we will be engaged in a mode of learn­
                               Venus                             139

ing prized by men of Renaissance Florence, for whom nothing
could be more stimulating than a cipher—an image packed with
mysterious symbols, waiting to be cracked open and explored.


                       Botticelli's Primavera

   The number “three" was one favored by poets, theologians, and
musicians of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, whether or not
they were Neoplatonists. Music texts of the period, for example,
refer to triple meter as "perfect" time, as we still sometimes do
today. Ficino, too, in Neoplatonic fashion frequently divides his
philosophical paradigms into threes and multiples of three. It is
not surprising, then, to find on Botticelli's canvas a trio of threes:
three nature spirits, three Graces, and three deities.
   On the far right side of the painting the wind of spring, Zephyr,
blows and pursues the earth-nymph Chloris. Frances Yates quite
properly sees this wind as Ficino's own spiritus mundi, the spirit
we have been trying to explicate all along.5 From the breath of
Chloris come forth flowers, as she is transformed into Flora, in a
kind of photographic stop-action in oil. Flora is the herald of
spring, the season of Venus. On the other side of the canvas the
three Graces do their round dance—Chastity in the middle with
her hair close-bound and a wistful look on her face; Pleasure, to
the left, has snakelike hair and loose garments; and close to
Venus is Beauty, moderately dressed. The three deities are; first
Venus herself, pictured with heavy breasts and swelling belly.
Rather maternal in appearance, she seems to be giving her
approval for what is taking place around her. Blinded Cupid is
above her, taking aim with his burning arrow. And Mercury
stands at the far left, pointing to the clouds.
   Concerning love and the process of life Ficino had written:
“There is one continuous attraction, beginning with God, going to
the world, and ending at last in God, an attraction which returns
to the same place where it began as though in a kind of circle."6
The painting shows this three-part circle, one of the circuits of the
soul: the spring wind blows in the beauty of the earth as it brings
forth its vegetation; the Graces dance in enjoyment of the world,
blessed by the fond gaze of a motherly Venus; and Cupid aims his
arrow at Chastity, who is already attracted by Mercury. There is a
strong feeling of movement from right to left. One can imagine
 that music is an element in the Graces' dance and in the movement
across the canvas.
140                     The Planets Within

   If there is music implied, it is doubtless played in the tonality of
Venus, though there has been some doubt expressed concerning
that point. One respected art historian, Erwin Panofsky, sees
Mercury as a dissonant note. In his opinion. Mercury represents
reason and has no direct access to the sphere of Venus. He turns
his back on Cupid, the Graces, the gifts of spring, and Venus
herself. "He may be said," says Panofsky, "to express the dignity,
but also the loneliness of the one psychological power which is
exlcuded from the precincts of Amor divinus and excludes itself
from those of Amor humanus."7
   This reference to the two kinds of love, human and divine,
brings forward the distinction Ficino and others drew from Plato,
a distinguishing of two Venuses. The heavenly Venus was said to
be the daughter of Uranus, the sky. She is immaterial, having
neither mother nor the limitations of matter. According to Ficino's
Platonism she lives in the Cosmic Mind. The common, earthly
Venus, on the other hand, was believed to be the daughter of
Jupiter and Juno. She lives between the Cosmic Mind and the
sublunar world—the Venus of earth rendering beauty perceptible
and imaginable.
   At first, accepting the idea of the two natures of Venus, it may
appear that Botticelli has painted the earthly Venus. Typically the
celestical Venus is depicted nude, while the earthly Venus is
clothed with garments, representing her bodily incarnation. Only
relatively late in history do Stoic and Christian morality cause an
inversion of this tradition. In the Primavera, at any rate, Venus is
clothed and she is surrounded by trees and flowers. She seems to
preside over the fertility of the earth, and, if this is the case.
Mercury could well turn his back on all of it and raise his eyes to
the clouds, to the region of pure spirit. The movement on the
canvas would then appear as a swift rush to the left side, off to the
clouds, to a more spiritual place. Implied would be the suggestion
that while earthly love and beauty are lush and fertile in a physical
way, there is something better. Earthly love would appear as a
contrast to the realm of the heavenly Venus, a region heralded
quite properly by Mercury.
   Isolated statements of Ficino would tend to support the view
that the Venus of the Primavera is indeed the Venus of heaven, or
that she is the goddess advocating a movement away from earth
toward heaven. For example, in his commentary on Plato's
Symposium he writes: "True love is nothing but a certain urge
striving to fly up to the divine beauty." But Ficino's writing, con­
sidered as a whole, does not simply advocate an escape from
                               Venus                             141

earthly existence, as we saw in our reflections on solar spirit. To
the sentence just quoted he adds: "divine beauty aroused by the
sight of bodily beauty." Full, sensuous involvement in the beauty
of body and nature "arouses" one to move to the higher regions of
spirit, but both are necessary. The Plato scholar Paul Friendlander
alludes to this difference in viewpoint, suggesting that in Plato the
movement toward beauty does not slight the body. Contrasting
Plato with later interpreters he writes: "in Plato, everyone taking
the right path must first love one beautiful body and 'generate in it
beautiful words'; then recognize the one beauty in all beautiful
bodies, becoming a lover of all. No one may omit these prelimin­
ary stages, beyond which leads the soul's path to beauty and
upward."8 It would appear that Ficino, like his soul-guide, Plato,
affirms both heaven and earth, both sides of Venus.
   Perhaps we can find a hint in Botticelli's Venus of the dual realm
of this complex goddess. In another painting, the Birth of Venus,
the nude heavenly goddess seems to emerge from the sea, where
she was born, and is about to be clothed in material flesh
symbolized by the colorful garment held out for her. In the
Primavera, too, we can find images of both natures. The lower
part of the goddess's body is clothed in rich material, while the
upper part is covered by a transparent cloth which clearly reveals
her breasts and the contours of her body, much as the sheer gowns
on the spirits—the Graces and Chloris—show their figures.
   The Venus of the Primavera is love in its celestial and terrestrial
aspects. If it contained only the latter, one might look for another
painting, a companion canvas, to show the heavenly side of
things. But the Primavera is both. It is a complete circle. There is
no need for Mercury to spurn anyone, not the spirits of the earth,
not Venus in either of her aspects. Mercury is there to keep the
circle in motion, to keep the music playing. He works with Venus
and plays an intimate role in her divine functions. Here Venus and
Mercury are in conjunction, as astrologers would say. They form
a combination, a union of two deities, two planetary centers
giving each other mutual support. The image of dual deities is a
common one in Ficino's writing
   Part of the scene upon which Venus gazes with apparent
pleasure is the dance of the Graces, an archaic image of the dance
of life embracing life's pleasure, beauty, and inherent reserve. All
 three seem appropriate in Venus's wooded realm, signifying a time
and place in the festivities for the steps of beauty and pleasure, two
 factors we have discovered to be important for the psyche, and for
 Chastity, that grace of human life offering a natural, timely
142                     The Planets Within

limitation on affection for the material world. Chastity prevents
the soul from "embracing the body too much," as she watches
against the temptation to become excessively charmed by the
pleasures of the senses. She doesn't oppose the embrace of body
and things sensual, but she watches for the opportunity to glance
at Mercury, the god of understanding and insight. Chastity's
posture is one of full participation in the dance but with an eye
beyond it.
   Chastity's glance is directed toward Mercury, Hermes Tris-
megistus, the grand interpreter, the one who knows the exciting
secrets held within simple material objects and pastimes. Chastity,
attracted to Mercury, offers a way, not out of the graceful dance
of life experience, but further into it. She leads the dance to
Mercury, the interpreter. He looks to the clouds, not because he
has no place in the scene or is not interested in life's graces, but
because it is his office and function to see behind the facade of
things, to find the signficance and value which lay hidden in the
folds of ordinary existence.
   The Venus of heaven and earth, then, guides and watches over
that realm of life which includes both full sensuous enjoyment and
understanding. She takes care of the two affections of the soul, for
body and for spirit. She performs her tasks through pleasure and
beauty, and she also nourishes an inner reserve that gracefully
turns the soul away from absorption in sensuality, directing it
toward insight and meaningfulness. Ficino's young friend, Pico,
had written of Venus: "Whoever understands deeply and intelli­
gently the division of Venus's unity into a trinity of graces will find
the proper way of advancing into Orphic theology."0 To be "in
Venus," to be under the psychological influence of this deep
fantasy and pattern, is to discover and treasure the kinds of spirit
and insight accessible through sensual celebration of life. This need
not be materialistic and deadening; on the contrary, entering the
dance of beauty and pleasure, without need of external repression
since Chastity is there too, unique spiritual rewards are made
available. Venus leads the soul into the body and through the
body to spirit. From spirit, to body, back to spirit —Venus's season
entails the circle of the psyche Ficino admired.


                        The Spirit of Venus

  The spirit of Venus has its unique character described imagisti-
cally in the ancient categories of hot, cold, dry, and moist. Venus's
                               Venus                              143

character is the last, associated as she is with moisture of many
kinds. Heraclitus, that enigmatic philosopher of the sixth century
b.c., has left us some sayings which pertain to the moisture of the
psyche. For example, in one extant fragment he says: "Psyche is
vaporized from what is moist." If moisture is imagined as a lower
element, signifying the matrix of life and psychologically the
source of our fantasies and the body of our emotions, then
according to Heraclitus soul is made when this down-to-earth
element is vaporized, sublimated in the language of the alchemists.
The reflectiveness and depth of sensibility we call soul emerges
from the material world felt sensually and experienced emotional­
ly. Psyche is not that world so sensed, but it arises from it.
Alchemical pictures show the retorts being heated as vapor forms
on the upper part of the glass, a vapor described in their texts as
the upper firmament of the Genesis story of creation. This sub­
limated vapor is not unlike the clouds Mercury points to in the
Primavera, a vaporization of the sensual world of Venus.
Heraclitus also warns that although soul takes pleasure in be­
coming moist, nevertheless a dry soul is best—an observation that
requires little comment.
   In The Planets Ficino ranks the planets according to the degree
of moisture they exhibit.10 He lists them in combinations from low
on the scale to high. Mercury with Jupiter is a moist combination
—an example of which might be social and political life interpreted
with imagination and intelligence. Next and more moist is Venus
with Luna. Luna, closest to earth, the lowest of the spheres sur­
rounding the arena of human endeavor, would clearly be moist. In
iconography Luna's moisture is quite simplistically depicted as
drops falling from the moon, as in the Tarot portrait of the Moon.
Venus is moist in herself, saturated with emotion and sensation,
but joined to Luna she becomes even more earthy and wet. Third
in the hierarchy is Luna with Venus, Luna the main ruler with
Venusian elements added: a dark; fickle world moved by pleasure
and beauty. Finally, the most moist combination of all consists of
Luna with Venus and Mercury. Mercury's interpretive abilities
add imaginative understanding to the Luna-Venus combination,
but his insight is moist, close to earth, involved with experience,
not distant like that of Apollo. Mercury's vapor of concrete insight
is added here to Luna's dew and Venus's body fluids.
   Venus's gift, then, is spirit, but it is a peculiar kind of spiritu­
ality, one quite sensual. There is spirit to be gained from her
sensuality, sexuality, and absorption in pleasure, and therefore her
domain is good for soul. Obviously Venus can entice the soul
144                    The Planets Within

 toward full absorption in sensuality, and there are plenty of stories
in mythology to warn us against this aspect of the love goddess.
But here we are interested not in the whole story, but in Ficino's
particular insights into great realms of soul experience. He paints a
subtle portrait of the Venusian territory and season, and he high­
lights the beneficial side of this tendency of the soul. Without such
an appraisal, we may be moved to suppress all that this goddess
stands for, recognizing her allurements toward unconsciousness
and disaster. But if Chastity and Mercury do indeed have a place
in Venus's dark woods, then there is no need for external
repression, only a watchful eye on the movement toward spirit.
   Ficino notes that there is an opposition between Venus and Sol:
"if we devote ourselves properly to Venus, we will not easily have
the sun. But if we are properly concerned with Sol, we will not
have done Venus well."11 This comment incidentally suggests the
problems involved in the polytheistic psyche; Ficino had no
illusion of psychic harmony and peace. But more specifically the
point is that Venus's moisture seems incompatible with the drying
effect of solar consciousness. It is difficult to think clearly and
rationally when a Venusian mood brings fantasies of moist
pleasures, for example. But the soul must host both planets
regularly.
   Ficino's cautionary observation suggests that in those times
when we are in the confusing, entangling grips of Venus, when
relationships swamp us in feeling and reason appears to be fogged
and powerless, it is useless to pretend that we are at the same time
in Sol — rational and clear. We cannot simply sublimate such
Venusian feelings into nicely shaped thoughts and thereby escape
the unhappy side of Venus. True sublimation, by which the soul
gains needed spirit and depth, is a vaporization out of moisture,
requiring patient endurance of the moist season. Psyche needs
moisture as well as dryness.
   Sandor Ferenczi, an early pupil of Freud, discusses this point in
his book on sexuality entitled Thnlassa ("sea"): "The first and fore­
most danger encountered by organisms which were all originally
water-inhabiting was not that of inundation but of desiccation."12
Ferenczi's comment may be applied to the psyche as well, since
psychic desiccation is as much a threat as excess of moisture. Ego
often prefers to remain dry because then it enjoys full control; we
wish to avoid being overtaken by feeling, we search for ways of
moderating our feelings and channeling their currents. A fluid
psyche, experienced as moodiness, a sense of being swept away as
by a wave, the flow of many fantasies and wishes, and a strong
                               Venus                             145

physical awareness of these changes, may not please an ego that
enjoys a firm grip on the rudder. But on the positive side, water is
the river of vitality and the stream of possibilities; to be in touch
with it is to be close to the currents of life, as dangerous and un­
predictable as they may be. Water is also an amniotic fluid or an
ocean from which arise all forms of life; to be dried up, by
excessive spiritual flight for example, is to lose contact with that
matrix.
    Ficino recognized the connection between moisture and fantasy;
so it is quite consistent with his theory to imagine the realm of
Venus as a state of luscious growth in imagery. In one of his letters
he makes the connection between vapor, fantasy, and the loss of
rationality: "We experience not only daily but almost hourly the
phenomenon of a little vapor, rather crass and humid, exuding
from the lower parts of the body. When it reaches the head and
fills the path of the brain, we are made heavy with sleep and are
soon deluded with images and dreams [in somniis imaginibusque
deludi]. Sometimes we also experience (if the vapor of black bile,
what the Greeks call melancholy, invades and takes hold of the
fortress of the body), our queen, reason itself, sink, and people are
overwhelmed with obvious insanity."13 The descent from dry
rationality to moist Venusian fantasy is indeed sensed as a down­
ward motion, and perhaps, as in Ficino's imagery, we may feel our
normally fortified and defended ego invaded and overwhelmed.
This state of consciousness, experienced as invasion, may also be
valued as an enemy and as an inferior condition. It is always best,
we say, to keep a clear head and "steer clear" of trouble. But these
moist fantasies have as much validity in psychic experience as dry
thoughts, and in fact they are important for granting Venus's
proper spirit to one's overall psychological condition: her psychic
body, sensation, aesthetic sense, growth, pleasure, and concrete
understanding.
    Although the domain of Venus transcends human limits, insofar
as she is the goddess of the generation and growth of all life, Ficino
gives her a special place, along with Sol and Jupiter, in human
experience. She not only watches over the fertile spring wind, she
also moderates the dance of the Graces—human grace. She allows
her own sphere to turn inward through Mercury, showing how the
gods work in tandem, and demonstrating that her domain has a
certain transparency and a degree of interiority, not bright like the
sun, but dark like the shady grove of the Primavera.
    Moreover, the numinosity associated with this goddess, that
atmosphere created by her spirit and influence, is not that of a
146                     The Planets Within

divine mind or creator; its mystery is more akin to that of sex, the
mystery of the body, dark wonder about the "private parts" of the
human body and of earth, the body of the world. But this peculiar
numinosity, sustained by fantasy and feeling when not scattered
by liberal rationality, is not superficial. The child's question —
Where do I come from? — marks an emergent quest for meaning,
an inquiry into origins other than plain physical. So, too, the soul
in Venusian curiosity asks: Where am I coming from? What are
my origins? Where is my spring? The soul seeks itself out amid the
foliage of its own fantasies and mysteries, in the Venusian green,
where it is always spring—primavera.
   Venusian psychology may well be caught up in fantasies of
growth and freshness. In the last two decades humanistic psychol­
ogy seems to have blown in on the wind of Zephyr, from the West
Coast, bringing endless fantasies of "personal growth,” sexual
exploration, absorption in feelings—imaged more concretely in
hot tubs, concern for relationships and especially groups and
marriage, and play with imagination itself.14 As one fantasy of
doing psychology among many, this clearly has its place, but as a
dominant image, and certainly as an exclusive spirit, even Venus
becomes an overbearing monarch.
   In other of Ficino's images all the characteristics we have seen
appear. Venus's minerals are corneolus, a fleshlike stone the
lapidaries say should be used to staunch the flow of blood in men
and menstruating women; and coral, useful for increasing the
yield of fruit (growth) and whose origin is in the morning dew
(pristine moisture). Her animals are turtles and turtledoves,
known for their powers of fertility (sexuality and growth). Ficino
stops short, unfortunately, of giving a full list of Venusian objects,
commenting: "the rest decency does not allow me to say." We can
easily imagine those fluids and facets of life too "indecent" for
Ficino to explore. His observation merely raises another of the
fantasies associated with this goddess—indecency, shame, and
dark secrecy.
   Hillman has suggested that the reason for our current compul­
sive fascination with Venus stems from our long neglect of her,
perhaps because of our prudishness and her indecency.15 If that is
the case, we might imagine a possible world climate which gives
the goddess her due. What I said about the university being more
Venusian would apply to life at large: it would be more conscious
of beauty, relationship, body, feeling, and fantasy; and its trou­
bles would be jealousy, overpopulation, excessive growth,
dimming of rationality, and venereal disease of body and mind.
                             Venus                           147

Regardless, she is a goddess to be reckoned with, lest, like Hip-
polytus of Greek tragedy, we find ourselves trampled by our own
decency.
                                  9
                           Mercury

In Botticelli's lavish portrayal of the season of Venus, a moving
counterpoint between a sensual presentation of nature's resurgence
and that regular inner season of the soul when it experiences
Venus's green, Mercury plays a role of crucial importance. He
points up and beyond the garden of the senses, turning the display
of color and texture inside out, exposing its inferiority. Now we
can focus directly on this fascinating figure and consider more pre­
cisely the nature of his office and the style of consciousness of
represents.
   Although Mercury offers a kind of knowledge, insight, and
understanding, his form of soul activity differs strikingly from that
of other deities associated with knowledge. Saturn, for example,
offers deep intuitive insight, but the way of Saturn is distant,
aloof, cold, heavy, and dark. Mercury, in contrast, is most often
depicted as bright, quick, and light; these are in fact the very
qualities which account for his peculiar kinds of insight. In the
Renaissance period Mercury's intelligence was also contrasted
with that of Minerva-Athena, goddess of intellectual speculation.1
As in the Primavera, Mercury is close to the action, pointing
beyond it perhaps, but still in the picture. Mercury can lift the soul
out of the limitations of a materialistic view of things, but in that
regard his role is limited. He is a relatively moist planet, close to
experience and feeling, and as he looks to the vaporous clouds his
feet are on the ground. Nor does Mercurial understanding involve
maniacal Dionysian penetration of experience or an irrational
inner voyage.
   Ficino observes, rather suprisingly, that Mercury is always
"filled with Apollo."2 There is a certain Apollonian brilliance and
levity in Mercurial knowledge, but the small wings usually attri­
buted to this god loft him only a short distance into the air. Of
course, in Greek mythology Hermes and Apollo had a rather
close, if not trouble-free, relationship. The Homeric Hymns tell of

                                 148
                             Mercury                             149

the infant Hermes stealing Apollo's cattle with precocious
ingenuity, resolved when Hermes teaches Apollo the art of music.
In Ficino's mind it would seem that Apollo teaches Mercury some­
thing about knowledge: perhaps how to use the light of reason,
and the reason of light, while keeping some distance from the
literal.
   For Renaissance polytheists Mercury is more closely related to
the Egyptian Thoth, god of secret wisdom, and to the Babylonian
Nebo, god of writing. Indeed, in late medieval and early Renais­
sance iconography. Mercury is pictured as a scribe and sometimes
as a bishop.3 Writing and speaking with clarity and wit was
regarded as a Mercurial gift, one Ficino especially acknowledged in
others, since he spoke with a lisp or a stammer. In a typically
quaint letter to a cardinal's secretary, in which by the way he
admits his stammer, Ficino gives an unusually concrete example of
how he saw the gods and goddesses personified in daily life. After
playing, in Mercurial fashion, on the name of the secretary,
Calderino, with references to heat (caldus), he tells the scribe:
"You are my Mercury. You speak, you interpret, you persuade,
you counsel, you explain."4 And in an earlier letter to the cardinal
himself Ficino is more specific: "Venerable Father, it is no secret to
you that Mercury is concerned not only with the communication
of words but also with the interpretation of the speaker's mind."5
Interpretation—hermeneutics—is of the essence of the Mercurial
spirit. Ficino goes on: "To Mercury is attributed the fortunate gift
of reminiscence—in no way an injustice. For when he stimulates
perception in the animus, one is seen to speak. But when he
provokes reason, one interprets. When he excites memory, one
raises up a reminiscence. What about all this? Our friend
Calderino seems to fulfill all the functions of Mercury for us: for
he not only writes your letters to me and conveys your words, he
also interprets your mind for me." Ficino closes this letter with a
hint at the difference between Mercurial wisdom and two other
forms: "What Mercury cannot explain," he writes," Apollo can
present in vaticinium (the prophetic state of consciousness) and
Jupiter can fulfill by deed."
   From Greek messenger of the gods Mercury descends to Renais­
sance secretary of noble pronouncements. But of course the image
runs much deeper; for, the soul is served by the virtues associated
with Mercury: eloquence, versatility, wit, acuteness, genius,
artfulness, imagination, and cleverness. These attitudes of mind
work events into images and remake images themselves, without
necessarily transforming fantasy into rationality and images into
150                     The Planets Within

concepts. A kernel of this facility appears in the Greek story of the
infant Hermes. Very soon .after his birth the little god finds a
turtle, kills him, and makes of his shell a lyre. Now one can let
imagination fly and speculate on the turtle shell as a version of the
cosmic egg, plucked into Orphic vibrations, but my point is
simpler. Little Hermes sees through the literal animal immediately
and imagines music, much as the famous anonymous sculptor of
philosophy beholds his statue in the marble while it is still
untouched. Hermetic knowledge is truly "in-sightful," imagining
possibilities fully invisible. Mercury enjoys the power of using the
concrete world for invention, which literally means "finding." He
finds the images congealed in the density of matter, and then he
tricks them out into the open; for Hermes is the crafty trickster god
whose magic and oratory can persuade to extraordinary effect
with little resource.
   The god Mercury supports in his imagery the basic intuitive
psychology of Ficino, for Mercury reveals an inner realm of things
without depriving them of their concreteness. If, in the Primavera,
he were pointing to a world beyond, suggesting that there is
something better on another "canvas," the richness and beauty of
Botticelli's image of Venus would be disqualified. Mercury, on the
contrary, affords a sublimation in which the movement "upward"
has limits. This kind of sublimation, now a form of interpretation,
Norman O. Brown defines as metamorphosis in the way of
Daphne. Daphne was the nymph desired and chased by Apollo.
As the god drew close to her in the chase she cried for help and was
changed into the laurel tree. Psychologically, this story is very
suggestive,6 and Brown sees it as a description of sublimation: in
our pursuit of sensate objects, their inherent spiritual value may
become evident. Brown elaborates:

  The spiritualization of sensuality is love. . . . Sensuality is not
  abolished, but fulfilled.... When our eyes are opened, we
  perceive that in sexuality the object is not the literal girl; but the
  symbolic girl, the tree. It is always something else we want. The
  object is always transcendent.7

As in the alchemical triangulation, the solid world becomes body,
soul and spirit—body is not lost, but soul and spirit are gained.
   The most common mode of interpretation, in some circles the
only way, is to dissect and analyze, freezing the components of an
insight into brittle pieces which are then easy to manipulate. But
the crafty sleight-of-hand of Mercury interprets without killing,
                              Mercury                              151

transforming our view of one image through another. The child
Hermes saw the shape of the lyre in the turtle shell, and similarly
the consciousness and imaginativeness he represents allows us to
see a wealth of images congealed in the concrete forms of everyday
life. Mercurial insight, then, is a tricky, crafty, clever, witty
vision, where wordplays abound and puns have profound value.
A character in Joseph Heller's Catch-22 has a Mercurial malady we
all might wish for. Every once in a while he yells out: "I see every­
thing twice!” Mercurial vision is multiple. Through it I see every­
thing many times, because through Mercury I see the many
fantasies which pile up on each other in my dreams and in my
actions.


                       Mercurial Awakening

   Soul comes to life in the turn from the literal into the imaginal, a
twist Mercury effects. Literalism, as we have already seen, is
tantamount to sleep, for in literalism the psyche doesn't have to do
its job of seeing everything twice, working for significance and
digging for depth. The wand of Mercury, visible in the Primavera,
points to the clouds, perfect examples of the shifting shapes of
fantasy, as on a windy day they produce a tableau of dreams
before our eyes. Ficino expresses this Mercurial power in a manner
perfectly compatible with the cloud imagery:

  Mercury has the power to put souls to sleep or waken them with
  his staff; that is, in some way or another, by putting himself
  into a certain shape, he can dull or sharpen the mind, or weaken
  or strengthen it, or upset or calm it.8

In Mercurial consciousness form is everything, the shape a thing
takes in our imagination betrays its significance. The words we use
to describe experience (eloquence and rhetoric), for example; the
image we bring to situations (imagination); the double entendres
that bubble up into our minds (craft and cleverness); the buried
meanings we discover (interpretation)—all these are the means by
which Mercurial consciousness wakens soul, turns ordinary literal
events into psychological realities. Ficino suggests that if we wish
to make an image reflecting the nature of Mercury, we should
portray a man sitting on a throne, dressed in a multicolored gar­
ment, witnessing to the many colors of Mercurial vision.9
   A basic law of psychological understanding is the Mercurial one
152                     The Planets Within

of keeping images in motion, letting them generate each other.
This leads to depth of vision, not in a logical, linear kind of
reasoning but in the richness of texture10 that emerges from such a
process. Once again we can refer to Brown, a Mercurial thinker
himself, for a description of this divine quick-change artist:

  ...it is important to keep changing the subject. The subject
  changes before our very eyes. It is important to keep changing
  our mind —

               The mind, that ocean where each kind
               Does straight its own resemblance find.

  The mind, or the imagination, the original shape-shifter: Thrice-
  Greatest Hermes.11

   "In Mercury,” the ruler of the sign gemini, one eye can remain
glued to the facts while the other constantly changes perspective.
Through him one can exercise double vision without sacrificing its
duplicity. There is no final interpretation in the hermeneutic of
Mercury, no satisfying conclusion; for there is always a new view­
point, another color in the motley garb of this consciousness,
another angle to consider. There is no ending and therefore always
the promise of more—deeper insight, further implication, other
applications, unexplored suggestiveness, hidden nuances, and un­
expected surprises. Of course, this perspective goes against the
grain of all that is true and scientific, but it is an option, one with
surprising results if given some practice.
  The idea of coming across unexpected surprises is Ficino's idea,
not mine, or, more accurately, it was an idea suggested by Ficino's
brilliant pupil, Pico, who believed it was important to surprise the
soul through interpretations of images and stories.12 Since
interpretation consists chiefly in discovering new images among
the old, the surprise Mercury brings is a new image or a new idea,
a gift from the cunning god who knows how to stir the soul.
   In the passage from Ficino quoted earlier, he pointed out that
Mercury's power to waken the soul may upset it. Therefore, Mer­
curial wit is not the kind that pleases with its own cleverness.
Anyone can play with puns, twist words around, the produce a
veritable euphony of language without disturbing a dormant
psyche. It would be a mistake to confuse the god Mercury with the
simple human talent for wordplay. The play of words and its
                             Mercury                             153

possible accompanying eloquence is important in Mercurial con­
sciousness as a means of turning images so that their significance
may be revealed; for the soul feeds on images. But cleverness for
its own sake is a mere egoistic exercise.
   Wallace Stevens defined poetry as "a pheasant disappearing
behind a bush," and that is as good a description of Mercurial in­
sight as any and has the advantage of suggesting the alchemical
mercury, the slippery silver substance so important to the alchem­
ist's endeavors.13 In Mercury, words are like crystals whose
facets are revealed in their turning, in the various perspectives
brought upon them. Whatever keeps our ideas and fantasies
turning and shifting, eluding our rational grasp and defying con­
clusive definition, is Mercurial. When we are the deft, interpretive,
eloquent secretaries of our own actions and ideas, then we are
Mercury; for then we interpret our own minds.
   This is an age generally unhappy with Mercurial insights. We
want conclusions and facts, not openings into never-ending mys­
teries. College students, for example, love one-dimensional def­
initions. Give them a multiple-choice examination, and they are
demonstrably happy and grateful, but confront them with a
thought to be reflected upon, to be turned in imagination, and
they almost unanimously complain that such knowledge is only
personal opinion and therefore of no value. They strongly resist
interpretation, even in the area of literature. Every interpretive
suggestion is "reading into" the author's work. They insist that the
final test of a reading of a poem or novel is the author's own
intention, conscious and recorded. They prefer endings to begin­
nings, conclusions to suggestions, a definition to an exploration, a
hard fact to a nuance. Mercury's motley coat is not in fashion.
   Yet the great advantage of Mercurial intelligence is its power to
keep the soul in motion, spiraling down toward a vortex of signifi­
cance. Mercury keeps the carousel of interpretation moving,
feeding wonder and curiosity instead of granting the stupor of
final conquest.
   With our fixed and sober image of the mind it may be difficult to
imagine all this while that the god we are looking at, complete
with his infant precociousness and adult instability, is truly a
metaphor for a way of perceiving the life we live and the world we
inhabit, that he authentically represents an unconscious and
untutored pattern of awareness. Yet we have only to open our
eyes, as Kerenyi suggests in his example of missed trains and found
books, and find that life itself is tricky. Kerenyi's further words on
the subject are worth quoting at some length:
154                    The Planets Within

  There is much trickery at large in the world, all sorts of sly and
  cunning tricks among human beings, animals and even
  plants. . . .
     The sum of the ways as the Hermetic arena; chance and
  mischance the Hermetic substance; its transformation through
  'finding and thieving' into Hermetic art (not mixed with
  artifice), into riches, love, poetry, and all the ways of escape
  from the narrow confines of law, custom, circumstance, fate; all
  these are not just psychic realities, they are the world around us,
  and, at the same time, a world revealed to us by Hermes.14

Through his craft and thievery Mercury wakens the soul, finds
holes in "law, custom, circumstance, fate." His many turnings and
the many paths over which he watches do not subscribe to rational
and moral limits—it was Hermes who laughed at the scene de­
scribed in the Odyssey of Aphrodite caught in adultery with Ares
and who wished to be there himself.
   While Kerenyi gives us an intriguing theology of Hermes/Mer­
cury, Rafael Lopez-Pedraza offers a wonderful psychology
founded in this god. Among the many inviting notions of Her­
metic reality he uncovers, perhaps the one most appropriate in this
context is the idea of "stealing from memory.” Recall Ficino's
remark that Mercury stimulates a reminiscence out of memory. In
Pedraza's analysis, Mercurial consciousness "thieves" ideas and
suggestions from two places: from other people, for example in
conversation; and from the complexes and archetypes of the
psyche itself. We steal from ourselves in our Mercurial
regression,15 we pilfer a reminiscence from memory that enriches
the present and opens and wakens the soul.
   Dreams are often Mercurial in this way: an image of one thing
tricks us into recalling another. Fascinations and infatuations, of
course, can do the same thing—trick us into an impressive world
of feeling, and just when we are in the heat of passion we may
discover that we have not seen the real object of our desire all
along: Brown's Daphne as the tree. Ficino meant something similar
wrhen he observed that lovers can't distinguish the flavors of the
aroma they pursue and enjoy. It is all a trick, a joke encouraging
the laughter of the gods, Hermes' the most hearty. Mercury's
legerdemain breaks open psychic depth by means of the most pro­
found puns and illusions of all. It is remarkable that perhaps one
of the most important qualities in a good psychologist is a taste for
wit and a talent for the double entendre; for only in such multiple
vision are the significant facets of life exposed to the reason of
light.
                             Mercury                             155

   We could develop the idea of Mercurial vision by exploring the
Greek mythological stories of Hermes as guide of souls to the
underworld. We would then see that Hermetic insight brings a
perspective of death, in the sense that the psyche's reality is lived
in the death of the literal. But Ficino's more mundane imagery
makes the same point: by discovering within ourselves that struc­
ture of consciousness by which we see the many dimensions of
significance that dwell in and through the literal, then psychologi­
cal consciousness is wakened. Ficino's imagery of secretaries and
scribes may give too light an impression of this planetary center of
the psyche; for Mercurial vision is something quite profound and
abiding. "In Mercury" we can habitually discover that things are
not always or usually what they seem to be; behind an apparently
simple act there may reside a deeply felt fantasy. To catch a
glimpse of that fantasy would be to grasp the soul-dimension, and
to do this habitually would establish a psychological attitude, the
sine qua non of care of the soul or psychotherapy in the broadest
sense.
   Mercurial consciousness, than, quite legitimately is placed as a
major focus in the psyche's round of planetary centers. Sol pro­
vides the necessary spirit and Venus the required sensual
experience, while Mercury provides the channel for Apollonian
light, allowing us to bring the psychological stratum of meaning
into our purview.
                                 10
                              Luna

Of all the mysterious heavenly bodies that fill the clear night
sky, the most intriguing and beguiling to the earthbound naked-
eye observer has to be the moon. Because it is usually watched as
part of the night scene, taking onto itself some of the eerie
atmostphere of the dark, and because it changes so much and so
often in color, size, and shape, Luna has impressed the human
imagination even more than its companion the sun. Poetry and
song, superstition and religion, mythology and symbology have
all found in the moon an ideal object for stimulating and fertilizing
the fantasy. For that reason there is a wealth of imagery connected
with the moon, suggesting several different psychological
directions and focused upon various aspects of the moon itself. We
will concentrate on those suggestive qualities which caught the
attention of Ficino and his circle and again see the image of this
"planet" within the context of Ficinian psychology.

                      The Moon's Moistness

   While we were discussing the "humidity" of Venus, we had
occasion to notice lunar moisture as well, noting that Luna is the
most moist of the planets, implying that she is close to earth, far
removed from the dryness of abstraction and thought, in touch
with experience, saturated with the feelings of the concrete, and
participant in other functions of moisture in nature and in the soul.
In The Planets Ficino makes this clear: "Since Lunar qualities are
more crass and moist than the subtle and volatile nature of spirit,
they are quite alien to it."1 Spirit is represented more aptly in the
sparkle emanating from a brilliant stone or in the fragrance issuing
from a bunch of flowers; Luna, on the other hand, chiefly because
of her position close to earth, is imagined to be more dense and less
spiritual. As modern astrologers assert, Luna has much to do with
the human body and with the processes of nature.

                                 156
                                Luna                              157

   In legend and tradition Luna is a planet important to farmers,
since her influence is responsible for agricultural increase or
failure. In the days when the planets were closely observed,
farmers used to plant according to the condition of the
moon—sow when the moon is waxing, harvest when it is waning.
Ficino, too, observed this natural significance of the moon, as
when in The Planets he writes: "Venus and Luna pertain to natural
and generative power and spirit and to growing things."2 We will
see later how lunar nature embraces the rhythms of growth and
decay, but first we ought to notice the particular kind of
generative power Ficino is talking about and the role that power
plays in psychology.
   As Kristeller explains, generation in Ficino's thinking is an idea
drawn from natural science and applied to philosophy,3 or, as I
might extend that notion, Ficino observes generation in nature,
associates it along traditional lines with the moon, then conceives
of this generativity in regard to the soul. His idea is expressed most
clearly, perhaps, in a letter to Lorenzo de' Medici. It was in Ficino's
correspondence with Lorenzo, by the way, that he seemed most
free to give astrological advice and to consider the implications of
the various planetary characters. In this letter Ficino addresses the
important relationship between lunar nature and the other plane­
tary systems:

  Ancient theologians said that souls (animae) go into lower
  things through Cancer, the domicile of Luna. For, since by a
  disposition to generation they come into a region subject to
  generation, appropriately they were thought to make their way
  through the zone of Luna which favors generation. Therefore,
  the ancients called Cancer the gateway of mortals. On the other
  hand, they called Capricorn the gateway of the Gods, for
  through it souls, once cleansed, were believed to return to their
  heavenly fatherland.4

   Psychologically, Luna is the gateway to embodiment and per­
sonalization of fantasies, complexes, and archetypal possibilities.
She stands, true to her typical anima or soul image, as a bridge
between the personal and the archetypal. Bachofen suggests this
when he calls Luna "the purest of tellurian bodies, the impurest of
uranian luminaries.”5 From our personal perspective our Luna
within is sensed as that consciousness of suprapersonal or uncon­
scious realities which play a role in life but are not conscious crea­
tions; therefore, Luna seems "uranian" or celestial, though close to
earth. From an archetypal viewpoint, the connections between
158                    The Planets Within

archetypal possibilities and personal experience seem so uniquely
individual that lunar consciousness itself appears personal —
tellurian. In any case, this lunar activity by which collective
fantasies are made personal is a downward movement, a tendency
toward the concrete and individual.
   We find throughout Ficino's writing heavy emphasis upon Luna,
constant advice about keeping an eye on this fast-moving planet.
A good lunar aspect, he urges, is essential for the proper constella­
tion of the other planets. This lunar watchfulness ensures good
timing and a full awareness of both body and soul, their individual
movements and their motion in relation to each other. Luna
consists in a certain savvy about just when and how to bring some
movement of soul into action and imprint it with individual
embodiment. For both soul and nature Luna is a guide to
propitious rhythms and seasons.
   Ficino's letter to Lorenzo, merely suggestive as usual, also shows
the two-way street connecting the world of archetypal possibilities
with life experience. Fantasies become concrete in the moist,
feeling-toned, earthy zone of Luna, whereas the concrete world of
action and experience becomes psychological—soul returns to its
proper place—through the doorway of Capricorn, a sign ruled by
Saturn, god of contemplation and profound imagination. This
function of Luna forms the background for further discussion now
of other lunar processes: they all serve the basic purpose of genera­
tion.


                   Lunar Motions and Emotions

   In another letter to Lorenzo, Ficino makes an observation
quoted at the outset of this book: "We have an entire sky within
us: Luna symbolizing the continuous motion of soul and body."0
Anyone who has worked with astrological charts knows that of all
the planets Luna moves fastest; it takes careful reckoning of time
to be assured that Luna's position on the chart is accurate. This
speed of Luna's circuit on the Zodiac highlights a significant facet
of the relationship between body and soul: the ordinary time of
experience, the time of the ego and ordinary behaviour, seems to
move at a rate faster than that of the deeper movements of the
psyche represented by the other planets. The sublunar world spins
at a faster pace than does the deeper psyche.
   We can see this phenomenon in typical ego impatience with the
timing of the soul in contrast to its sublunar haste. Psyche grinds
                                Luna                              159

away slowly. We find themes in dreams developing slowly over a
period of weeks, months, or even years, and at the conscious level
we feel an urge to do something about the situation, take some
action, arrive at some conclusions and resolutions. But soul in its
heaven seems to move like the larger planets and not like Luna.
The moon's orbit is close to earth and takes its timing from earth,
while the other planetary rhythms are broader, playing largo to
Luna's allegro. Lunar consciousness implies an awareness of the
time zones of body and soul. Embodiment of fantasies may be
quite feverish in tempo, but soul's movements are more like those
of a clock, definite but hardly noticeable in their passing.
    As Ficino mentions in his letter about generation, we live
celestially in two circles, the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of
Capricorn, one the circle of generation and action, the other the
circle of spirit. To get these two circles synchronized is the trick of
lunar consciousness. For Ficino this meant keeping an eye on the
movements of the moon; for us it could mean keeping close watch
on our personal lives and on those rather personal and intimate
fantasies which serve as bridges between possibility and reality.
Much of the unnecessary pain of living comes from a lack of
coordination between these two circles, which is not too surprising
since we generally neglect the Tropic of Capricorn.
    An individual psychologically constellated, with a Luna within,
has a feel for the "natural" rhythms of soul, different from ego,
keeping watch as did the farmers who knew the importance of the
moon. Ficino goes so far as to say that "except for God, living
beings have no life except through Sol and Luna,"7 a statement he
clarifies, so to speak, by saying: "However safe the way may be,
nothing can be done without the benefit of Luna, because what is
called the "Other Sun" commonly, frequently, and easily sends
celestial things downward, making in any month the four seasons
of the year."8 The conditions of personal existence may not reflect
accurately deeper soul-movements. What makes sense on the
surface may be folly within. And that last phrase of Ficino's is
 particularly intriguing, confirming the notion that when through
 lunar activity deep fantasies are incarnated in experience, the slow
 rhythms of psyche are transformed into the faster tempos of
 life—the seasons of the year squeezed into one month.
    If we think of psychotherapy for a moment, not as it is often
 practiced, as an aid to personal adjustment, but rather as a pro­
 gram for becoming more "celestial," in Ficinian language, more
 aware of the processes of the psyche in modern terms, then the
 importance of lunar consciousness becomes evident. A signficant
160                     The Planets Within

early step in therapy might be to gain a sense of the soul's seasons
and rhythms, its timing and tempo. Therapy itself, as care for
soul, requires patience and time precisely because of this difference
in pace. This lunar sense itself may well constitute a foundational
plank in the construction of a psychological attitude which takes
into serious consideration archetypal motions. To begin to hear
the polyrhythms of psyche and experience is to begin to live
psychologically, with the good of soul in mind.


                        Waxing and Waning

   As is sometimes pointed out in discussions of the image of the
moon, lunar time exhibits not only unusally quick time quantities,
but also specific qualities of time. The moon waxes and wanes. It is
full, new, quarter, and crescent. During the Renaissance period and
earlier, astrologers and others found various ways to show graphi­
cally the parallel between celestial phenomena and human
experience. We can see this correspondence in paintings and
woodcuts, for example, that show each planet corresponding to a
part of the human body. Ficino assumes this kind of correspon­
dence throughout his three books on medicine and health. But in
The Planets he suggests another parallel, between the phases of the
moon and the stages in human life. In chapter seven he writes:

  From the new moon to the first quarter is youth. From the first
  quarter to the full moon is youth and maturity. From then to the
  fourth quarter is maturity and old age. From then to the con­
  junction is old age.p

As with most observations of this nature, we need not choose
between the surface meaning and the metaphorical possibilities,
but rather affirm both. The moon does indeed reflect in her
striking and obvious transformations the progress of a personal
life time: human life itself exhibits this lunar character. But it also
suggests the dynamics of episodes in the personal life—the waxing
and waning, the fullness and emptiness, the beginnings and
endings which shape and tone the ways in which we embody the
movements of soul. Becoming involved more intimately with the
processes of psyche entails familiarity with these lunar phases:
knowing the colors and aromas of beginning and of ending,
recognizing fullness for what is is—part of a rhythm, not a goal;
and appreciating emptiness.
                                Luna                               161

   These particular qualities of lunar consciousness appear in the
image Ficino recommends for attracting lunar spirit: "a young
woman with horned head, on a dragon or bull, with serpents over
her head and under her feet.''10 This image is reminiscent of the
Cretan women we find depicted in Minoan art, a culture in which
moon, bull, and serpent appear prominently in imagination.
Moon and snake have often been closely related because of the
moon's dying and rising and the snake's capacity to slough its skin
in an image of dying and rising. Moon and bull come together in
their power to fertilize nature and in their common visage—the
cradling crescent taking the shape of bull's horns. Bullish power,
like Luna's, is directed toward nature and the material side of
culture building.


                        The Reflecting Moon

   Connected with the rhythms of Luna is the obvious fact that
Luna's light is the light of the sun. Ficino says it plainly in The
Planets, and in that context we must read his statement with more
than a literal mind: "There can be no doubt that the moon's light is
the lumen of Sol."11 Lunar consciousness is by nature reflective,
leaving the intiative to Sol, in whom are held all the planetary
spirits. Though always in motion, Luna's function is to receive the
light of Sol, therefore she is rather passive and reflective. This
would be a point easy to misinterpret, but it seems that our lunar
nature, the gateway to embodiment, must essentially take a
receptive and reflective stance. Personality and all the moist
aspects of life reflect the deeper sources of spirit and channel these
spirits into personal life. There is something essentially indirect
about psychological awareness and "action." Ego does not take the
initiative except to prepare itself to receive the spirit. In this sense
the constellation of lunar consciousness might temper the tyranny
of the usual Saturnian ego, which always wants to build and rule.
One of the two feminine planets, Luna offers a necessary comple­
ment to ego's potentially useful but easily destructive Saturnian
tendencies. Open to the influence of Luna, the ego would by
nature receive energy and direction from the depths instead of the
surface, and those depths would be varied, for Luna channels the
spirits of all the planets through her zone.
   When we imagine the spirit of the planets passing through Luna,
who channels and reflects them, then personal experience does
indeed appear to be ?_ shadow of shadows: one of Plato's funda­
162                     The Planets Within

mental intuitions. And if that is the case, then the way back to the
light and to psychological awareness is through these shadows,
tracing them back to their origins. The purpose of studying
imagery and the often farfetched speculations of a Ficino is to find
a broader context for experience, to see unique events against the
background of more embracing images. If, as Ficino implies at
every step, personal experience is a reflection of a larger spirit,
then perhaps we can speculate (speculum: mirror) and reflect on
our reflections. Magic, they say, is accomplished by means of
mirrors. If we could find that imagined depth behind the mirror,
we might find that of which our lives are a reflection.
   Another feature of the moon, related to its reflecting powers, is
its tendency to pour itself out. Traditionally the moon is believed
to empty itself as it approaches the sun and begins to wane.
Among the emblems of the alchemist, Michael Meier, for example,
is one showing a toad sucking a woman's breast. The motto
accompanying the picture reads: "Put a toad to the breasts of a
woman, that she may feed it, and the women may die, and the
toad grows big from the milk."12 This is an image of lunar
emptying—kenosis. The idea is not one of self-sacrifice in the
heroic sense, a giving up of personal pleasure for an ascetic need,
nor is it even a denial of self. Fantasies of self-denial usually betray
their deeper roots in images of inferiority and a striving for recog­
nition and self-importance. Kenosis, a lunar activity and therefore
a natural rhythm of the psyche, consists in an imaginative
acknowledgment and appreciation of processes of ending: wane,
rot, entropy, decay, and death. Unlike Saturnian obsession with
these processes, lunar sensibility acknowledges them as part of a
larger pattern. For Luna, as opposed to Saturn, it is the emptying
itself that is important. Lunar realism allows itself to imagine the
ugly toad sucking the woman dry and letting her die. The heroic
ego would step in and fight the threat of death, and Saturnian
fantasies might lead to an effort of preservation, keeping life the
same forever, which is not too different from eternal death.
   In lunar consciousness personal life is emptied as well as filled, a
round that has as much darkness as light. Luna would empty us of
those purposes and plans, as well as the interpretations and
explanations, that keep life busy on the surface with no guarantee
that there is movement within. Emptying, naturally, does not feel
as good as filling up; it seems uncreative and unproductive; never­
theless, the cycle of the psyche's moon requires an acknowledg­
ment of decay and death. Farmers who watch the moon know
when to let things ripen, fall off the tree, cure, and ferment. The
                                Luna                               163

psychologically attuned person observes the soil of his soul with
equal sensitivity, knowing that nature wanes with the moon and
falls into total darkness.
   Lunar imagination has been romanticized as a half-conscious
idyllic openness to the oracular messages of inner voices: the
moon's darkness as a bath of inspiration. But mythology tells too
of Hekate and other terrifying moon goddesses who assure us in
their savagery that lunar death is not always sweet. Imagination,
participating in the lunar pattern, is not to be equated fully with
glowing creativity, playful inventiveness, and inspiring reverie. It,
too, has its waning moon, drawing toward the three-day darkness
of death. Part of a fertile imagination is the capacity for enduring
the death of what has already been achieved.
   As we noticed in our allusions to Ficino's historical setting,
death is always close to creativity. We may imagine it metaphori­
cally, in images of Persephone and the underworld, for example,
as a state or a quality of attitude. In a sense, all of life experience
that has been "psychologized,” or stored in memory and viewed
from the perspective of soul, is dead. But this lunar dying is more a
process, a movement in the direction of emptiness, accompanied
by appropriate feelings of ending and loss. At any one time in life
one might expect feelings and fantasies engendered by the waning
of some spirit in oneself. In that case the image of the toad sucking
out the life of the young woman seems quite appropriate; for the
waning of what has been a vital spirit feels like a violation and an
ugly crime.
   This lunar sensibility that forms part of the celestial tempera­
ment differs strikingly from that fostered by psychologies based on
evolutionary and developmental models.12 Here psychological life
is not seen as a steady progress away from childishness and
ignorance toward maturity and happiness. Part of being celestial is
to experience cycles of growth and decay, of light and darkness.
The implication for therapy is obvious: expect movements of
decay as well as growth and don't interpret them as inappropriate.
In fact, a therapist with this planetary scheme in mind might look
for a loss of Luna, experienced as resistance to natural decay and
waning. Without the phase of emptying, there can be no vital
fullness. Besides, the moon is full for only a brief moment in its
month; yet we so often imagine an ideal state of psychological
health when one's moon is always full. And finally, as I already
mentioned, we do not have to imagine these lunar rhythms as
sequential plots in time but rather view them as archetypal
images of the psyche. Waning or waxing, full moon or sliver-
164                    The Planets Within

crescent may be sensed at any time with reference to one of the
many motions of the psyche.
   In The Book of Secrets of Albertus Magnus, a collection of
legends about the planets, among other things, we find a descrip­
tion of Luna. The moon, it says, is the conveyor of the virtue of all
the planets—a Ficinian notion as well—it promotes qualities of
honesty and honor, but it is also inconstant and loves wet and
moist places.13 The danger in moist planets, of course, is the
tendency to "embrace the body too much," to become preoccupied
with the physical and the personal. But, as Albertus assures us,
Luna also keeps us honest, down to earth, blessed with the com­
mon sense of the farmer. These are all virtues psychology as a
discipline too often lacks. The best psychotherapists, in my
opinion, are those rare people who have the down-home horse
sense of the farmer, who can put their fingers to the wind or glance
at the sky without any instruments and know the weather well.
They know some secrets of common living that are irreducible to
conceptual formulation. They are not anti-intellectual by any
means, but in addition to sharp thinking they have a talent for
catching sight of obvious but extremely subtle signs of spirit in its
progress, like a seasoned farmer noticing without much display the
tawniness and dip of an evening moon.
                                11
                            Saturn

Among the seven planets that form the circuit of psychological
processes, two in particular offer dangers to the soul—Mars and
Saturn. We have already seen the ominous disposition of Saturn in
Ficino's own natal chart and have noted his obsession with the
implications of that disposition. In his three books on life, De Vita
Triplici, he keeps returning to the motif of Saturnian malevolence,
although it is in these books that he also brings back to life the
ancient idea that within Saturn's heaviness lay the treasures of
deep religious contemplation and artistic genius. Both of these
tendencies in Saturn, associated with the peculiar Saturnian
malady, melancholy, have been studied historically, interpre-
tively, and with a substantial discussion of Ficinian theory by Fritz
Saxl, Erwin Panofsky, and Raymond Klibansky.1 James Hillman,
too, has used the insights of Ficino as he has been developing over
the years a highly differentiated image of senex, the Old Man of
the psyche so influential in modern personal and social life, and
imaged especially in the mythology and iconography of the god
Saturn.2 With so much excellent work already done elaborating this
dominant image in Ficinian psychology, it remains for us here to
explore a few more images of Saturn we find in Ficino's
correspondence and in his medical books, place his theory of
melancholy within the context of earlier chapters of this book, and
possibly suggest some concrete ways this promising but ominous
planet influences modern life.


                   Atra bilis: The Black Humor

  Saturn is the god of Roman religion and mythology about
whom little is known except that he was the deity presiding over
winter sowing, the winter solstice, the festival of late December,
and agricultural activities in general. In medieval and Renaissance

                                 165
166                    The Planets Within

iconography we find more elaborate portraits of “Saturn's
children," those people who in their habits and occupations reflect
the spirit of this planetary deity. Among these children of the
hoary god are geometers, carpenters, latrine cleaners, and grave
diggers—all occupations we will see indicating a facet of Saturn's
spiritual influence.
   Saturn was identified in the syncretistic amalgamation of Greek
and Roman religion with the Greek Kronos, from whose story
were derived many of Saturn's positive and negative characteris­
tics. Kronos began as a young man rebelling against his father,
assisting the revenge of his mother, Gaia, by taking a sickle in
hand and castrating his father, Ouranos, the sky. Ouranos had
offended his wife by shoving back into her womb the children she
was bearing, causing her great pain, naturally, and planting in her
the feeling of hate and a fantasy of revenge. The sickle by which
Kronos separated the union of father and mother, sky and earth,
remains with him and appears later in pictures of Old Man Time
and in the astrological glyph or symbol of Saturn, a crescent shape
beneath a cross.
   Even in this early story, therefore, we find extreme ambivalence
in the character of Saturn; for, when he grows old and becomes
father and king, he swallows his sons with the same motive with
which his father had violated his mother—in order to maintain his
rule and authority. When he finally lost that position through the
trickery of his wife, Rhea, and his son Zeus took command of the
Greek pantheon, Kronos was left to rule the kingdom of the
Golden Age. So Saturn has in his story elements of puer, the
young man as rebellious son, and senex, the senile old king jealous
of his authority and monarch of a golden past.3
   The relationship between the puerile and senile aspects of Saturn
is not simply one of opposites in tension or even of paradox,
though a sense of ambivalence is sustained consistently. Ficino is
quite specific about the attitude we ought to take toward this
planetary center: we must at all costs avoid his harmful influence
and especially his power to desiccate the soul; on the other hand, it
is only by going through Saturn, experiencing his spirit to the hilt,
that we can gain the positive benefit he has to offer. Just as within
the story of Kronos we find the young man who dares to create a
space between sky and earth, opening up a middle realm where
perhaps the soul can exist, so in other stories and images of Saturn
we find a shining reward within the darkness of his malevolence.
   Dark hues surround the image of Saturn: in alchemy Saturn was
identified with the process of putrefaction and as the Black Sun,
                              Saturn                             167

Sol Niger, of the nigredo, the phase of blackening, psychologically
that phase of the soul's work when the mess that has been made is
allowed to settle, rot, and putrefy. Among the classical humors of
the body, Saturn is atra bilis, the black bile responsible for
depression and melancholy. Death and darkness penetrate the
realm of Saturn, and, as Ficino warns, either blackness will attract
the influence of Saturn, or Saturn will bring with him feelings of
death and decay.
   A young woman I had just met once told me of a strange dream
she had had. She dreamed that she saw the sun in the sky, only it
was all black except for a yellow glow around the edges. For her
this black sun appeared after a long siege of depression, an image
of her darkness but with a promising indication of the gold that lay
within the black mass of melancholy. More recently, a young man
came to me complaining of incessant feelings of depression and an
inescapable proximity to death. Just before he came to see me he
had gone into the city to walk through a park, hoping to find some
relief from his heaviness, but he no sooner walked into the park
than he tripped over the body of a vagrant, an old man who had
apparently died right on the street. When this young man came to
talk to me, he was wearing a black shirt and black pants, and his
hair was long and black, meeting a flowing black beard. Planetary
imagery is often subtle, but sometimes it blares, clearly and
unmistakably.
   Not surprisingly, Saturn's metal is lead, a traditional notion
readily proven when depression comes along and we feel "heavy”
and weighed down. Saturn is also always at the edge, far away
and distant, as when in depression our eyes tell those around us
that though our bodies are present our spirit is far removed,
turned inward. Ficino points out this isolation of the melancholic
in The Planets: "Saturn does not easily symbolize a quality and
power common to the human race, but a person cut off from
others—divine or bestial, blessed or overwhelmed with extreme
misfortune."4 In the story of Kronos, his final fate is to rule at the
end of the world, far from the activities of ordinary life.


                    Carpentry and Construction

  Clinically, depression may include a sense of powerlessness, not
only in relation to the outside world but also with regard to
thought, memory, and introspection. At least on the surface, it
appears that the melancholic can do nothing; all his energy and
168                     The Planets Within

ability to focus his attention seems dissipated. Yet, as Freud pointed
out, melancholy denotes a time of external inactivity and internal
labor.5 Deep within, it would seem that something is going on,
attention is being taken from the outside world and applied
elsewhere.
   We may get some idea of what kind of work occupies Saturnian
consciousness, either in its form of melancholy or in its less
striking manifestation as dry conservatism, control, rigidity, and
orderliness in ordinary life, through some simple comparisons
with other planets. Ficino observes that both Saturn and Mercury
are constellated through study and work in literature and science,
but Mercury is not nearly as dry as Saturn.6 We might also notice
that though Saturn was not known as a God of the harvest, as
such, he looks much like the "Grim Reaper," and his sickle is used
to cut down growing things for the harvest. In this respect he is
quite opposite Venus in spirit, another moist planet whose
unbounded fertility can well use the blade of old Saturn. But what
Venus grows in her moist soil Saturn leaves dead in his own barren
ground. Not having the moisture that supports new growth,
Saturn is compelled to live on what has long been rooted and
flourishing.
   True to his conservatism and dryness, Saturn lives on old and
outdated fantasies, which, since they have no inherent signs of
vitality, he must bolster, patch, and defend. So Saturnian souls,
like those carpenters who are his children in the ancient woodcuts,
are quite involved in construction: building, ordering, collecting,
analyzing, planning. Could this be a fantasy behind the binding
fascination people have with collections of bottles, stamps, classic
automobiles, and just about everything else that can be brought
together? Behavior that has no clear object among ego-values must
be nevertheless the enactment of serious business. Are collectors
trying to put order in their cosmos, and is their god Saturn? And
what about more practical construction jobs—city-building, the
voracious attempt to eat up nature (Gaia), to swallow her
children, transforming them into the body of Saturn himself in his
own conservative image?7 Deprived of the moisture of fresh
fantasy, we are forced to build worlds out of old and dry ideas,
giving a definite Saturnian cast to much of our culture. The stone
buildings, geometrical forms, and styles from an idealized past,
features found on many campuses and government complexes,
betray signs of Saturn's rule.
   For the individual, internal work is similar: an attempt to build
on archaic materials and to survive without life-giving moisture.
                               Saturn                              169

The turn inward in melancholy is a move to a distant place within,
to the cemetery of the soul. Cemeteries are usually located at the
edge of cities, and that is where Saturn takes the soul. In alchemy
he was imagined as a tomb, and his children were grave diggers, as
we have seen. Not only is there construction taking place "in
Saturn," but also burying. The melancholic feels the grim task of
working in the land of the dead, dry soil all around, all vital spirits
gone underground. Freud says that melancholy is essentially a
feeling of loss, and though he takes us through too many
contortions to find out what is lost, that feeling is an important
part of the complex.8 Being in Saturn, we have lost touch with the
movements of soul: the planets, lunar reality, and the surface of
earth. We are far away within, in Saturn, the most remote of the
planets and the coldest. We have not lost something so much as we
ourselves are lost at the rim of our inner zodiac, at the end of the
world.
   Now we may consider, as usual, the image Ficino presents in
order to draw down the spirit of Saturn:

  The ancients made an image of Saturn for long life in Feyrizech
  stone, that is, in Sapphire, at the hour of Saturn, with Saturn
  ascending and well disposed. Its form was this: an old man
  sitting in a high chair or on a dragon, his head covered with a
  dark linen cloth, his hands extending above his head, holding in
  his hand a sickle or fish, clothed in a dark garment.0

Here we find images for all the qualities of Saturn we've discussed
so far. First and foremost, Saturn is an old man, felt in the
mentality we may associate with old men. Though it would be
absurdly literalistic to label all real old men Saturnian, they often
fit the role. One only has to look at a photograph of our assembled
senators and congressmen to find the leading image of our
society —Saturn on his throne, dry and cold. He sits on a chair as
on a throne, or on a dragon—both images of the mother as earth
and nature. The Old Man side of Saturn would dominate the
chthonic and earthly powers of Mother Nature; though, as we
have seen, he doesn't hesitate to engulf the children of nature for
his own purposes. His head is covered with a dark linen cloth, an
image of death. Onians, that insightful historian of ancient
imagery, informs us that the Romans veiled their heads if they
knew they were about to die, and they covered the heads of the
dead with a cloth, believing that psyche was housed in the head.10
   A fascinating modern source for Saturnian imagery is the work
of Samuel Beckett, who, among other things, depicts the dry and
170                     The Planets Within

barren quality of a culture cut off from its fertilizing roots. His
settings, in novels and plays, are often, in accordance with the
nature of Saturn, stark and pale, lonely, and indeed melancholic.
We could look at several of his works from this viewpoint, but it is
in the drama Endgame that we get the clearest portrait of Saturn.
As the play begins, Hamm, ancient as the son of Noah his name
suggests, sits in a chair with a bloody handkerchief covering his
face. During the course of the drama his action is limited, as, never
leaving his chair, he moves about geometrically on the chessboard
of the stage, giving harsh directions to his young companion and
speaking cruelly to his parents who pop up out of trash cans. He
represents that tyrannical consciousness that dominates all times
of ending—endings of a life phase, a belief system, a body of
values, and an attitude toward onself. He wants full control over
the past and the future, and his first and often repeated words—"it
is finished"—identify him with a dying god, an eternal moment of
death.
   Saturn is indeed the god of a closing time, of endgame, when
what has been in play for a fruitful period ought to end; but, as in
Beckett's play the game never ends, so in Saturn there is no ending
point, no conclusion, only a frozen, dried-out state of death.


                            Saturn's Gold

    Saxl, Panofsky, and Klibansky's Saturn and Melancholy began
as an attempt to show that Diirer's engraving Melancholia I
crystallizes a tradition, revived by Ficino, according to which
there is treasure to be found in the foul wastes of Saturn and in the
heaviness of his leaden weight. Much of Hillman's work, too,
shows that depression and other manifestations of Saturn play a
productive role in the economy of the psyche. Both of these
directions are prefigured in the work of Ficino whose allusions we
will consider now in order to understand where Saturn's
malevolence leads.
    First, however, we must underscore Ficino's insistence that
Saturn is to be avoided when his spirit would dry out the soul and
adversely affect the body. We have already seen that he
recommended the practice of the Pythagoreans—to wear white
clothes especially when engaged in study to offset Saturn's dark
influence. He also suggests turning to Jupiter, god of civil and social
life: "Jupiter arms us against Saturn's influence which is generally
foreign to and somehow unsuitable for mankind."11 Recall the
                               Saturn                              171

fundamental principle that guides Ficino in all of these
recommendations: certain activities tend to draw to the soul
particular kinds of spirit associated with that activity. In the first
and third books of De Vita Triplici he addresses the literati,
warning scholars and others who spend energy and time on ideas
to watch out for Saturn's spirit. They should turn to more jovial
pursuits now and then and become involved with society and
social affairs in a remedial process of constellation.
   Ficino's statement, however, continues: "But those who escape
the baneful influence of Saturn, and enjoy his benevolent
influence, are not only those who flee to Jupiter but also those who
give themselves over with heart and soul to divine contemplation,
which gains distinction from the example of Saturn himself."12 So,
besides running away from the painful conditions of Saturnian
melancholy, one can profitably stay with them and find, in Saturn
himself, a degree of contemplation equal to the severity of his
malevolence. Stated simply, Ficino is advising us to get deep into
our depressions, stay with them long enough to allow their work
to have an effect. But we still must inquire into the manner in
which depression and melancholy can offer a gift. It is not
sufficient merely to accept the legend that the greatest authors and
artists have been by nature melancholic. What is there in
depression that can offer the soul not only a useful benefit but
something extraordinarily positive?
   James Hillman was once lecturing to university students when
he was asked about depression. Why is it, the students inquired,
that his psychology refers so often to depression in a supportive
manner, to the point that some critics think that he and his
followers must be depressive types? Hillman's response was that
depression is an answer to widespread manic activism and is a
dying to the wild world of literalism. Feeling low and heavy we are
forced to move inward, turning to fantasy rather than the literal
action of the ego. And that turn inward is necessary for the soul,
for it creates psychic space, a container for deeper reflection where
soul increases and the surface of events becomes less important.
This response connects with his essay on senex consciousness,
where he says that Saturn pushes us to the edge where our imagery
becomes primordial, refined, and removed from our usual
 patterns of reflection, our accustomed imagery, and personal
 reference.13 The comment on Hillman's followers being depressive
 recalls a curious fact about Ficino and his friends. Their inner circle
 called themselves "Saturnians," and they knew their place of
 meeting as Mons Saturnus, the Mountain of Saturn.14
172                    The Planets Within

   The authors of Saturn and Melancholy seem to have caught the
spirit of this Ficinian insight, for they write: "As enemy and
oppressor of all life in any way subject to the present world,
Saturn generates melancholy; but as friend and protector of a
higher and purely intellectual existence he can also cure it."15 I
would take exception only to the world "intellectual," given the
very first statement in The Planets: intellect without soul has no
relationship to the body. Soul must stand in the middle. More
accurately, therefore, Saturn takes us to the higher regions of the
soul.
   Ficino, too, makes some observations which complement
Hillman's idea about depression leading us away from the surface
realm of particulars. In De Vita Sana he writes:

  It seems to be a natural phenomenon that pursuing difficult
  studies it is necessary for the spirit [animus] to go from the
  external world, within, to move from the circumference to the
  center, and while reflecting in itself to remain securely in the
  center of the person. But to gather oneself from the circum­
  ference and move to the center is like earth, to which black bile
  is quite similar. Therefore, black bile provokes the spirit to
  gather itself together, remain together, and assiduously
  contemplate. Like the center of the world, it draws to the center
  of each thing to be investigated and stretches to the heights
  those things to be comprehended, when it is most like Saturn,
  the highest of the planets.16
   There seems to be a contradiction here: Saturn takes the soul to
the edge of its inner firmament, to the end of the world, away from
human life; yet here we see Saturn described as a movement to the
center. But of course the center here is not the midpoint of the
psyche but rather the center of "each thing to be investigated." In
Saturnian heaviness and deep fantasy we are drawn deep into the
imagery of the soul—not always vivid visual pictures, often
simply the vague image of a mood or atmosphere. The concerns of
ego and an active imagination no longer hold attention. In Ficino's
theory of knowledge Saturnian consciousness is proper to Mens,
the highest part of the soul, that function farthest removed from
the material world. This is neither the spirituality of Sol nor the
rationality of Mercury, but rather a function of deep contempla­
tion, distant from the concrete, and it is an achievement in
consciousness which Ficino celebrates highly:

  Those lunar people whom Socrates describes in the Phaedo,
  inhabiting the highest surface of the earth and still higher in the
                              Saturn                            173

  clouds, watching prudently and content, in moderation, and
  dedicated to the study of secret wisdom and to religion, enjoy
  the happiness of Saturn. They live a prosperous and long life, so
  that they are considered not so much mortal persons as
  immortal daemons, whom many call heroes and the Golden
  Race enjoying the age and reign of Saturn.17
Elsewhere Ficino writes in a similar vein: "Instead of earthly life
from which Saturn himself is removed, he confers celestial and
eternal life on you."18 In his own way Saturn brings us out of the
world of the literal, away from plain life experience, into the realm
of eternal patterns, the true home of the soul, or more plainly, to a
state of consciousness in which the psychological dimension in its
purest can be perceived and appreciated. When the gnawing
painfulness of Saturn is avoided and his influence appears simply
as senile crustiness and imperial control, we do not find our way to
these primordial fantasies so far removed from moist experience.
The Golden Age then is simply some idealized personal past. But
when we submit to this god and endure his melancholy, that
Golden Age pushes past personal history to a consciousness of
much larger patterns. Our heroes this in his collective, archetypal
memory are not merely important persons of youth and child­
hood, but true heroes and ancestors, much bigger than life. The
melancholic feeling associated with this fantasy may well be, as
Freud intuited, a feeling of loss occasioned by the abandonment of
one's personal history as source of meaning. A person becomes
more concerned with the images than with the people who
occasioned them and becomes more centered in those images than
centering the images in himself. This, says Ficino in many
contexts, is the very height of soul involvement, the ultimate
meaning of contemplation, and in a genuine sense a religious
phenomenon.
   The reward to be found in feelings of melancholy, depression
and heaviness stems directly from the withdrawal from life those
feelings encourage. This is evident in the list of experiences Ficino
provides in The Planets as examples of conditions that might elicit
Saturnian spirit. "We are subjected to Saturn,” he writes, "through
leisure, solitude, and sickness; through theology, secret philos­
ophy, superstition, magic farming, and through mourning."10 All
of these involve a withdrawal from ordinary offairs, either
physically through leisure and solitude, or bodily through
sickness, or through the study of things that are themselves far
removed from what we would consider ordinary and usual.
 Saturn weakens energy and enthusiasm for the common life in
174                     The Planets Within

order to highlight the extraordinary, the very depths of the soul.
   When the power of ordinary living to provide a sense of
meaning and vitality fails, feelings of sadness and temptations
toward withdrawal invade consciousness. This is a natural move
of the psyche, a turn in the round of planets; for that sadness may
be a call for deeper roots. Jung claimed that every significant
psychological problem presented in this day of confusion and
meaninglessness is fundamentally a religious distress.20 In one
sense at least it may be a Saturnian situation, religion at its deepest
in Ficino's view, because we finally confront, in our melancholy,
the finite potential of the ordinary and personal, and search out
something transcendent. This is not to say that only in depression
do we find religious significance and satisfaction, but we find it
also there. Saturn is not simply a troublesome planet to be
avoided; with perseverance and endurance we may find in his
dark, heavy, ambivalent moods a way through and beyond the
shallowness of the present.
                                 12
                             Jupiter

 the last two planets we have to consider bear the names of
deities that have a rich history in mythology but in Ficino's system
called forth little elaboration. Jupiter and Mars both represent
areas of psychological significance no less important than the
others, but their functions appear so direct and straightforward in
the Ficinian zodiac that one finds little resource for imaginative
development. The two are quite opposite in character; indeed, in
Ficino's writings Jupiter is simply called upon as a benefactor to
solve all problems and Mars is presented consistently as a
threatening power to be avoided. Therefore, we cannot expect
very much in the way of suggestions for a Jovial psychology.


                          Seeds of Fantasy

   If we found in Saturn a way of withdrawal from the ordinary
life, we find in Jupiter entry into precisely that which is most
common and ordinary. He is, in Ficinian astrology, the god of the
common life, the deity who represents, above all, those things
which keep life moderate, especially laws and government, the
maintenance of social and civic life. Among Ficino's letters we find
a brief statement on Jupiter, written interestingly enough in 1492.
Here he gives some advice for making an image of Jupiter and in
the process tells something of Jovial character and spirit. ''Jupiter is
intellect,” he writes, "from which the universe is produced'';1
therefore, he may be symbolized with spheres or round forms. Or,
he may be imaged as a man, since essentially he is mind {mens) and
"produces all things with the 'seminal ratio.'"
   This is the "seminal ratio" Ficino describes in the opening lines
of The Planets in quite convoluted language,2 and because this
notion is basic to his astrological theory, it deserves a brief
comment here. According to Ficino, the World Soul, essential at

                                  175
176                     The Planets Within

the cosmic level for uniting mind and body, has as many "seminal
 rationes" as there are ideas in the divine mind. Species of things
take their forms from these ratios in the soul, and in fact when
things degenerate they may be revived through the soul's seeds,
and further, this process can be accomplished through material
forms in which these gifts of the World Soul have been stored.
These material forms which correspond to the seeds in the World
Soul Ficino advises us were called "divine allurements" by
Zoroaster and "magic decoys" by Synesius. Ficino goes on to
explain that we can make such "decoys" in material forms capable
of attracting the influx of the cosmic soul; they work either as
exemplars or like generative seeds.
   One of the guiding principles in this study has been a shift in
perspective: seeing soul as a quality rather than a substance. It is
one thing to place psyche within a metaphysical scheme and quite
another to imagine soul as a dimension of consciousness. If it is
true, as I suggested earlier following Hillman, that the World Soul
is the world itself enlivened through fantasy, then we may read
these abstruse statements of Ficino as having to do with fantasy.
Indeed, it would be quite appropriate to translate "ratio" in this
context as "fantasy." "Seminal rationes" then become the seed
fantasies that germinate in imagination and fertilize life. To say
that they are cosmic fantasies takes them out of the personalistic
realm, placing them in the circular astral body.
   What Ficino seems to suggest is that life can become routine and
unconsciously stuck in materialistic projects; it degenerates
because it has been cut off from its generative fantasies. But life
can be revived and ensouled again, says Ficino, through the
skillful use of images; for it is in images that we will find the seed-
fantasies. Reflecting on Jupiter we return once again to that
Ficinian leitmotif: soul is re-created and nourished through the
spirit contained in material forms, in the images that permeate life.
The things of this world, so obvious and overlooked, are the
"magic decoys" that can lure us back to a psychological
perspective and once again put us in touch with the very seeds of
experience, the deep fantasies we have about our world and
ourselves.
   Jupiter's role is to provide the specific intelligence needed to
build a culture and to keep it vital. He is that form of imagination
by which we transform our visions into the realities of collective
living. Ficino says that our images of him should show that his
power is stable and unchanging, that his creative intelligence is
visible to intelligent and superior beings but hidden to inferior
                              Jupiter                           177

creatures. His is, in fact, "the most spiritual [spiritualissimum]
domicile of life.''3 Ordinarily we might think of culture building
and maintenance as simple hard-core pragmatism; a project of
physical survival. But in Ficino's view culture is a source of spirit
and the imaginative creation of fantasy, and that is not to say that
culture is automatically a wonderful source of psychological
creativity. The spirit and fantasy may be quite negative and flat.
Nevertheless, Ficino is suggesting that we do have in Jupiter a
planet within, a "vivifying spirit of the world,” the capacity to
create a social environment that is psychologically nourishing.
  The seedlike intentions that fill our minds as we build our cities
and nations, care for the world's government and commerce,
establish structures of education, law, politics, communications,
and other forms of the common life—all these are not merely
"natural" products of reasoning people, they also have deep roots
in the psyche; they can be traced to a god who is the profound
spirit that gives birth to culture and sustains it.


                      A Grace of Human Life

   It was in the spirit of Jupiter that Ficino saw his own age and
culture as an outstanding achievement; in a letter he called his era
"the age of gold." "We have brought back to light," he boasted,
"the liberal disciplines: grammar, poetry, oratory, painting,
sculpture, architecture, music, and ancient songs sung to the
Orphic lyre."'1 These are doubtless not the kind of claims
twentieth-century enthusiasts would boast; they are all "solar"
achievements, full of spiritual significance, nourishing to the soul
and not just aimed at the mind and body as so many of our
successes are. So it is for Ficino a Jovial extravagance to cheer his
time so enthusiastically; for he considered Jupiter the source of the
most humanly significant spirit. Along with Mercury and Sol he is
among the most human of the planets, or so Ficino says in The
Planets. In a letter to Lorenzo he adds Venus to the list and, by
coupling Jupiter with Mercury, ends up with three planetary
"Graces." The letter is worth quoting at some length:
  At first the poets among us depicted the Graces as three young
  women embracing each other. These three are most powerful
  among the highest planets: Mercury with Jove, that is, disposed
  to the gift of Jove, Phoebus, and Venus, companions together in
  the heavenly circuit with mutual advantage. The names of the
  three Graces are: Viriditas (Green), Lux (light) and Laetitia
178                    The Planets Within

  (Joy), most suited to the same stars. So disposed in the heavens,
  these stars especially favor human temperament. For that
  reason, they are called the Graces, not of animals but of
  humans. In fact, they are not the servants of Venus but of
  Minerva. When you hear that the first of the Graces is Jove, you
  should not think of Jupiter but of Mercury-Jove. For Mercury
  incites Jupiter with his lively and timely mobility, so you should
  carefully investigate these things. Sol makes accessible every
  discovery to you who are searching by his light. Finally, Venus
  always adorns whatever is found with the most gracious
  charm.5

This letter, written at Careggi on October 18, 1481, several years
before the publication of The Planets (1489), gives us an important
insight into Ficino's understanding of these planets. He was
especially conscious of their interrelationships, which is to say, he
knew how various patterns of consciousness interact. Jupiter's
concern for culture-making requires the services of the spirit of
Mercury in order to "keep changing shape," to see behind the
work of culture so as not to get stuck in empty structures. Venus's
green, Sol's spiritual light, and Mercury-Jupiter's optimism and joy
all fit together to create a nourishing human climate. They are the
three Graces who dance together and embrace each other. And
they are servants of Minerva, says Ficino, therefore close to
Jupiter; for Minerva-Athena is the intelligence of the polis, the
genius of the city and state, who knows how to charm both
passion and reason into a civil setting conducive to human life.
   According to the title of the fifth chapter of The Planets Jupiter
is the middle sister of the Graces, the Grace most suited to us
(maxime nobis accommodata).6 Jupiter is that spirit most
important to human life because it both shares in the spirit of other
nourishing planets and moderates them for human tolerance. For
example, through Jupiter the spiritual intensity of Sol is mollified.
In The Planets we read:

  Although Sol accomplishes the same things more effectively,
  Jupiter does them with Sol's power. In both heat thrives and
  overcomes moisture, though in Jupiter the effect is moderate
  while in Sol it is powerful. However, in both the effect is
  beneficial.''7

  Solar people find innumerable ways to touch directly upon the
world of spirit. They may join a monastery or climb a mountain,
hook up with a political cause, learn some system of meditation.
                               Jupiter                             179

or join a church. Others prefer the indirect path to spirit, the way
of Jupiter. Restoring old houses in a city may not look much like a
spiritual activity, but it is in fact an involvement spiced with the
peppermint of Jupiter. Whatever contributes to gracefulness in life
and rebounds that grace upon the psyche is essentially Jovial in
Ficino's typology. This is a spirit that enjoys favorable
"conjunctions” with Mercury, the more moist planet. There is less
danger in Jupiter than in Sol of drying out the soul in its lofty aims;
Jupiter remains close to the flow of life, the excitement and
traumas of social involvement, and the mundane, concrete details
of fabricating and fashioning culture.
   Jupiter not only has these solar capacities, worked out in his own
moderate style, he also tempers the lower tendencies of the soul.
As Ficino says, this spirit contains elements of Sol on the one hand
and Venus and Luna on the other. In The Planets he says:

  While the rays of Venus continuously join Sol's light, and
  transform it, Sol's rays, since they are warmer, temper her
  moisture. But Jove's rays require no tempering; for what is
  Jupiter but Sol tempered especially from the beginning for the
  well-being of human affairs? Or what else but Luna and Venus
  made warmer and more powerful?8

Human culture, founded in this image of the planet Jupiter, aims at
fulfilling the two extremes of human concern — spirit and body —
and it gathers them at a midpoint that is psychological. Thus, the
"moderating”      that   Jupiter accomplishes is essentially a
psychologizing; the extremes of solar spirit are mixed with the
earthy, feeling-toned fantasies of Luna and Venus. Jupiter, then, in
his way accomplishes exactly what so many of the other processes
we have examined intend: establishing a space for psyche, as in the
alchemical dissolving and congealing and the triangulating of the
square. In the case of Jupiter the process is the making of culture, a
blend of spiritual concern with fantasy and body. In Ficino's
imagistic words, "Mix solar things with the things of Venus, and
you will have made a Jovial figure from both.”9
   The crucial point, however, in constellating a Jovial spirit is the
level of consciousness at which culture-making goes on. We saw
earlier that an American Indian thanking the earth for a piece of
fruit might do it with a mind toward getting more food for his
body, or, more likely, he performs this little ritual in order to
maintain his consciousness of a relationship he has to the earth. In
the latter case his action is psychological, feeding his psyche more
than his body. So it is with the work of culture — making laws,
180                     The Planets Within

building cities and cultural institutions and so on — this work may
be done with a psychological attitude, with care for the psyche
foremost in mind. Now this may be quite a rare phenomenon in
our modern world, but such an attention to psyche does show
itself clearly now and then. An example might be the work of
architects who build their constructions for human beings, and not
just functionally but with human feeling and values in mind.
Architects, for instance, who are building hospices for the dying
are obviously concerned with physical comfort and care, but they
are more preoccupied with the significance of space to the psyches
of the people they are working for. They may take into
consideration the need for privacy, the fantasy of death the
building suggests, the gradual approach of relatives and friends to
the dying.10 This kind of work on behalf of a social institution may
be done in a Jovial spirit, serving the psyche, so that we might well
imagine not only music and people with soul, but buildings and
social institutions as well.
   The functional, pragmatic attitude so prevalent in modern times
screens other more important tasks of the culture. Society is not
only a collection of people, it is also a theater of images. When we
put up buildings or establish a social agency, we are also creating
an image. I don't refer to the kind of persona image advertising
people speak of. Even in our functional attitudes, in spite of
ourselves, we make images everywhere, and those images
determine to some extent the quality of psychological life of a
people. A city's plan or lack of it speaks not merely to the physical
requirements of its people, it adds or detracts form its life of
psyche. A city that has soul will nourish the psyche of its
inhabitants, and one without soul might well suck the life out of its
people.
   Ficino's descriptions of "seminal ratio" and the World Soul may
sound like so much Neoplatonic mysticism, but in fact his insights
are quite relevant and down to earth. The things of culture are
indeed "magic decoys" that draw forth a spirit that strikes deep in
the psyche, deep enough to be represented by a cultic deity. The
images we find all around us in our manufactured world do serve
as exemplars and as generative fantasies for our personal
consciousness. It is almost a truism to note that we are to a large
extent an internalization of our culture. Our values and wishes and
fears develop from our imaginative encounter with the human
world around us. So, Ficino suggests, why not cultivate that world
for soul. Why not recognize the role of this planet Jupiter in the
rhythms of the psyche? Society itself can be a source of
                              Jupiter                            181

psychological creativity, but, as we have seen before, in order to
get soul we have to bring soul with us. In order to do that we have
to have imagination, and . that is the purpose of Ficino's
astrological therapy: to enliven imagination so that we might be
conscious of the psychological implications of all that we make
and do. Ficino calls Jupiter "the helping father to all people living
the common life."11 He is such a father because he provides the
impetus for a cultural accommodation of spirit and body in a final
psychological milieu.
   In Jean Seznec's study of the Renaissance gods, an image of
Jupiter is reproduced, a picture taken from Mantegna's Tarocchi, a
series of engraved cards believed to have been made in the mid­
fifteenth century for a group of ecclesiastical dignitaries, including
Nicholas of Cusa.13 Jupiter is pictured as a king, his eagle just over
his head. Instead of a lightning bolt he holds an arrow, and
beneath him on the ground lie vanquished soldiers. Jupiter sits
within a mandorla, a geometrical figure made from the intersecting
of two circles, and within the mandorla, just beneath his feet, is a
young child, apparently protected by Jupiter.
   This portrait of Jupiter, from Ficino's time and place, reveals the
essence of Jovial spirit. The two spheres of spirit and matter meet
in the middle realm, the space of the mandorla, which is the
containing space of psyche. Jupiter's eagle, as Ficino informs us in
several places, represents his close connection with the sun and his
authority over all beings; but, like the lightning bolt or arrow, the
eagle also shows that Jupiter can traverse the distance between
earth and sky. With this middle region established, the child, that
defenseless growing part of the psyche, is protected and the threats
of heroic fantasies are set aside. This last point is especially
significant. When the work of culture is not understood in its
psychological dimension, that is, as a work for and by the psyche,
then an unfettered spirit of militancy and heroism is let loose.
Nationalism replaces concern for a human society; money and
energy go into projects whose aim is to overcome the powers or
mysteries of nature, but with no depth purpose.
    Stated simplistically, Ficino's social psychology runs like this:
What we do is what we get. If we set to the task of cultural
activities with soul in our minds (memoria), even if we have to
paint our horoscope on our bedroom ceiling so as not to forget,
then soul will be nourished by the "magic decoys" we have made.
 If all of culture were to be a "magic decoy" or a "divine
allurement," then psyche would be fully cared for and we
wouldn't suffer the separation of mind from body. Perhaps then
182                      The Planets Within

our churches and universities — now serving mind in itself or a
refined sense of spirit — would mesh more closely with the worries
of politics, now for the most part materialistic. Perhaps what we
need, among the processes of the psyche, is the mandorla of
Jupiter where these two circles intersect.
   What Ficino suggests in a few subtle, enigmatic references to
Jupiter is a social psychology that far outweighs that discipline as
we know it today. In the Ficinian context, social psychology has to
do with the impact society has upon the soul and the means of
giving soul back to society. The implications of both for the task
of culture-building and for the discipline of psychology are
immense.
   And amid all this discussion of Jupiter's role in the psyche's tour
of the planets, we should not neglect the common-sense meaning
of "Jovial.'' In the social setting just described, in a society that has
soul, one might indeed expect to find a jovial climate, one perhaps
both alluring and magical.
                                13
                             Mars

After summarizing Ficino's De Vita Triplici in her book on
Renaissance hermeticism, Frances Yates offers her own fantasy of
what Ficino's therapeutic practice might have been like: "We might
be in the consulting room of a rather expensive psychiatrist," she
says with the acumen of an imaginative historian, "who knows
that his patients can afford plenty of gold and holidays in the
country, and flowers out of season."1 The "Laetus in praesens"
atmosphere of Ficino's villa, the wealthy patronage of the Medici,
and the kinds of remedies Ficino recommends support this picture
Yates suggests. It would also seem that Ficino and his friends
would fit well in the atmosphere of those far western counties of
California. Surrounded by artists, intellectuals, travelers from the
East, touring aficionados of things occult and mystical; finding
every excuse for festivals; available for private psychotherapy,
especially for wealthier patrons; and finally equipped with what
today would be an electronic acoustical Orphic lyre, Ficino, for all
his physical unhandsomeness, would cut a striking figure. Perhaps
this updated picture gives a hint as to why Mars should be the last
and least of the planets studied in this circulatio of the zodiac.
   Like some modern psychologies which might have "flowers out
of season" as their logo, Ficino's mind found little place for this
god of anger, violence, and audacity. Throughout his writings,
whether in The Planets, in his philosophical works, or in his
letters, he warns against the influence of Mars the relatively few
times this planet is mentioned. He often groups Mars together with
Saturn, but in the case of the god of melancholy he was able to
find positive traits, as well as negative. Mars remains for the most
part a negative factor in the life of the psyche, to be avoided or at
least mollified.
   Ficino had good reason to warn against Mars: anger, violence,
hatred, war, aggression of all kinds, bitterness, and heroism —
these are the manifestations of the god. Ficino clearly knew these

                                 183
184                     The Planets Within

in the flesh during his lifelong sojourn in Florence, where intrigue
and murder, civil strife and war were common problems. His
patron Cosimo had been imprisoned and threatened with death
before he was banished from the city.
   In our world, too, one can go on to find the positive side of
Mars only after facing the full potential of his other side. War and
violence are still so widespread and are pursued with such self-
righteous spirit as to threaten our very existence daily.
Unrestrained heroism accompanies ideological fervor to such an
extent that the religious nature of Mars-worship lies thinly
concealed, especially in terrorism politically motivated. In
domestic settings too we read daily of spouses, parents, lovers,
friends, and neighbors crazed by an onslaught of anger, a
possession by Mars, turning into violently mad creatures. Finally
and more subtly still, one comes across so many instances where
apparently a person is truly at war with himself. Ficino himself
said it: "A person rages against himself in Mars.''2 It is not only the
pressure of a well-armed superego that torments the ego, although
superego does seem to have a tough Martian spirit and power, but
conflict between many parts of self have the flavor of warfare.
   The records of twentieth-century life often read as accounts of
Martian turmoil. Newsreels and newscasts that chronicle the
century sometimes stream before our eyes endless varieties of war
materials and weapons. Newspapers, as I said, tell the stories of
murders, sometimes as interesting as detective stories, but more
often plain narratives of blind rage and regrets. Even many of the
century's memoirs and diaries shock us with their revelations of
the rage that burns inwardly, gutting out the interior of a life that
looked serene from the outside. Mars, too, is a planet to reckon
with.
   In the next chapter we will consider some ways of dealing with
the fierce negative side of the various planetary spirits, suggesting
with Ficino that ''tempering'' might be a solution. But here, in the
case of Mars especially, let us recall a fundamental rule. Jung held
that any unconscious factor, if neglected and repressed, would
become so overwhelming that it might wipe away all ego
involvement. It might appear at times that Mars himself takes over
a body and commits murder, or Venus swamps the ego and drives
esteemed senators to burlesque stages and massage parlors. Jung's
solution is to establish a relationship with our dark fantasies, find
those little people — the complexes — who inhabit the flophouse
of our mind, and see if we can make some deals.3 In order to do
that it is necessary first to become acquainted with those inner
                               Mars                               185

personified figures who appear nightly in our dreams and
occasionally pop out in uncharacteristic behavior and action.
Often people not accustomed to outbursts of anger will find
themselves hurled into a rage and afterward they invariably say:
"What came over me?" Maybe the proper question is: "Who came
over me? Who overcame me?"4 The figure within who rages may
be a composite of many things: past experiences, identifications
with friends, or perhaps an uninvited but proper resident in the
house of the personal psyche. Beneath and beyond these personal
factors there is the archetypal, essentially human and transhuman
force of conflict, battle, and rage — Mars himself.
   Mars is a collective fantasy at work in the lives of us all as a
natural force — Strife, a most fundamental reality posited by early
Greek naturalist philosophers. Mars is the collective culprit of the
psyche, who causes much havoc but who also plays an
irreduciable role in the total economy of the soul. We find hints in
Ficino concerning the nature of that role, although, as I said, Ficino
leaves Mars for the most part among the outlaws of Olympus, a
spirit to be avoided more often than confronted. Nevertheless, he
does suggest some important functions for this fiery deity.



                        Fortifier of the Soul

   While investigating the service Mars renders psyche in his place
among the planets, we do not want to sidestep his true character
and change his burning red to a delicate pink. Ficino shows us the
proper way in The Planets. First, he says, "Martian things are like
poison, natural enemies to spirit."5 Then he warns that Mars can
have a disastrous effect on the intestines; "You ought to avoid a
bad aspecting of Saturn or Mars with Luna; the former bothers the
stomach, while the latter destroys [dissohit] the intestines."6 It is
usually better not to interpret Ficino literally when he makes
statements like this; in astrology the body itself serves as a
metaphorical system. But it might be worth investigating a
possible connection between intestinal problems and the work of
Mars. In any case, the spirit of Mars is a fiery spice, not easily
digested into the body of psyche.
   Then Ficino gives us a way into a more positive evaluation of
Martian spirit: "If anyone believes that Saturn and Mars are
poisonous by nature, I would not agree, for these too should be
used just as physicians sometimes use toxic materials."7 Therefore,
even though the spirit of Mars is essentially toxic and often
186                     The Planets Within

 harmful, it too has its place. Jung's celebrated theory of the
 "shadow" parallels this statement of Ficino's; for, even though a
psychic element may be offensive and even a severe threat, at least
from the ego point of view, it may have a significant role to play in
the total constellation of the psyche. We may tend to keep Martian
spirit out of our "temperament" because we find it morally toxic;
yet, perhaps by keeping anger outside the realm of moral
possibility, we allow for incursions of more violent forms of
Martian spirit. Mars contains a great deal of shadow, at least for
some. This is especially true among people whose religious
upbringing has led them to such a pacific general attitude that any
sign of Martian red rage or militant force is a sure signal of evil.
Today Mars is warded off by phrases such as "I didn't want to hurt
anyone." Martian spirit is indeed forceful and feelings can be hurt
when his spirit is present, but often the result of keeping feelings
placid is simply another form of Mars, the rage against self. It is
curious that Mars and Saturn are often linked together, for they
correspond to two kinds of depression: melancholy as we have
studied it, a manifestation of Saturn's lead; and rage against self,
the feeling of having been vanquished by our own power.
   Ficino provides an appropriate astrological comment on these
problems: "To offset timidity, at the first hour of Mars, with
Scorpio rising, make images of Mars armed and crowned."8 To
that part of the population in whom Mars is well constellated, it
may seem strange and even questionable advice to suggest means
for acquiring Martian spirit. But not everyone has such a vital
Mars; indeed, in a culture which often rewards passivity and
obedience in the extreme. Mars may be far removed, to the
detriment of individuals and the society at large. Recent
psychological studies have recorded the capacity of our society to
remain passive in the face of absurdity, crime, and personal
violation. Granted that these phenomena are complex, could it not
be that a failure to acknowledge Mars in the pantheon of the
psyche accounts for a measure of this unrealistic tranquillity?



                       The Fire of Audacity

   The color of Mars is red, of course; his metal iron, his element
fire, and his temperature hot — he is the hottest of the planets in
Ficino's paradigm. This red hot spirit not only provides directly
for an attitude of militancy, overcoming timidity and passivity, it
also intensifies the spirits of other planets. In The Planets, Ficino
                               Mars                              187

claims that "Mars warms the coldest things and energizes the
sluggish."9 In a letter he says that "Mars, ruler of Ares, inflames
the fervent spirit."10 And in his essay De Arnore, Ficino ascribes to
Mars the power to "excite the winds."11 Ficino often recommends a
combination of the spirits of the Sun and of Mars in any human
endeavor requiring intensity. In general, then, we might imagine
this intensifying power of the red planet to be rooted in the same
source from which come our problems with violence and rage, but
when the God is acknowledged and given his due, his heat and
energy turn toward more creative ends. Once again, then, we find
in Ficino not a theory of repression and therapeutic advice to "cool
it," but rather another way of imagining, and therefore
experiencing, what can easily be a toxic spirit.
   In the relations of the planets, the one most curious from the
point of view of Mars is Venus. These two have long been
considered opposites whose reconciliation would be one of the
miracles of all time. In mythology the two deities unite and have a
child, Harmonia; but as Edgar Wind wisely warns, we should not
think that in this coitus the spirit of Mars is swamped by the
moisture of Venus.12 Ficino, in a passage noted by Wind,
elaborates on this, adding some further insights into Martian
character. I quote this passage at some length:

  Who is bolder than a lover fighting for his loved one? Mars
  surpasses the other Gods in fortitude since he makes people
  strong. Venus tames. For when Mars is aspected, or in the
  second house of nativity, or in the eighth, he portends evil.
  Venus, often in conjunction, or opposition, or reception, or in
  sextile or trine with Mars, as we say, checks his malignity.
  When Mars rules a person's birth, he bestows greatness of spirit
  as well as irascibility. If Venus comes near, she does not impede
  that greatness of spirit given by Mars, but she represses the
  strength of the anger. She seems to tame Mars and make him
  more mild. But Mars does not tame Venus. If she is leader, she
  provides the affect of love. If Mars leads nearby, he renders the
  heat of Venus's power more ardent. So, if anyone is born with
  Mars in a house of Venus, in Libra or Taurus, because of the
  presence of Mars whoever so born will enjoy the most
  passionate loves. But Mars follows Venus, Venus does not
  follow Mars, since audacity is the lackey of love, love is not the
  servant of audacity.13

Renaissance painters took pleasure evidently in showing us how
easily Venus tames Mars, but, as Ficino points out, she does not
interfere with the magnanimity he provides. Aphrodite's love can
188                    The Planets Within

obviously wield immense power, charming our senses and souls,
but she need not root out our magnanimity, the presence of Mars.
Mars can intensify love and embolden the lover, says Ficino, but
Venus does not serve Martian spirit. On the whole, then, we see
here a beneficial spirit that "makes people strong," even fortifies
our love. Love and strength are not incompatible, though love
tempers the emotions of Mars. Indeed, without the troublesome,
undervalued attitude of Mars, love might well shrink the spirit,
numbing the feeling of strength Mars bestows and cooling his
desirable heat and passion. A modern psychology of love and of
marriage might take this ancient couple into account, reviving the
tradition that would give Venus priority without loss of Martian
vigor. It would appear that in love relationships, when the needed
role of Mars is excluded on the grounds of morality or
sentimentality, his ugly side rises in fits of anger, spouse beating,
and verbal abuse. Yet it would be quite unusual to find a minister
blessing a wedding with a prayer to Mars, or the equivalent
thereof. We seem consciously dedicated to the ideal of the placid
life, and all those couples in attendance at weddings, knowing full
well the temptations of Mars, keep the doors shut on him. Would
it not be better, in true polytheistic fashion, to render him his due
in ritual and celebration so that his inevitable presence as an
archetype of the psyche would not shatter the house Venus built?



                  A Thrust toward Multiplicity

   Finally, in Ficino's commentary on Plato's Philebus he gives
Mars a role in the act of reasoning. Mercury, he says, defines,
Saturn resolves, and Mars divides.14 He does't explain this further,
to my knowledge, but in the context of Martian spirit in general
we may interpret his role in rationality.
   In spite of all the positive points we have seen, Mars is still
poison, even if the kind doctors use to cure ailments. For many the
process of division in imagination and thought, especially in
matters psychological, is a highly suspect notion. We readily join
the bandwagon of integration and wholeness and neglect the
forceful realism of Martian multipicity. Harmony, the daughter of
Mars and Venus, is not a pleasant blend of the two. She is more
like the taut string of the lyre Rilke describes in his Sonnets to
Orpheus; she is the tension between the two poles, created out of
their opposing force, not from their blending. Mars does provide a
kind of harmonia, but one we shall see in the following chapter to
                                Mars                               189

be in its essence a spread of multiplicities. Mars in his fiery realism
counters sentimental ideals of integration and wholeness, and he
allows the psyche to exist in the brilliance of its many centers. The
planets themselves are multiple, reflective of the many facets of the
psyche which resist harmonization. It takes, it seems, the
forcefulness of Mars, with his shadowy nature and toxic spirit, to
affirm this fundamental pluralism of the psyche. His strength splits
the psyche like a diamond into its glittering parts, allowing wishes,
moods, feelings, and thoughts to sustain their creative conflict
instead of finding a soporific peace in harmony.

   We will turn now, in the final section, to a direct study of
psychological polytheism. This is an idea not directly approached
by Ficino at the level of philosophy and psychology in The
Planets, but one suggested in his chapter on music. Mars,
strangely perhaps, leads us on to musical harmony and a
discussion of the gods as tones on a scale. Mars plays a significant
role in establishing that harmony and in creating the magnanimity
of spirit equal to a polytheistic psyche. Indeed, all the planets, as
we have seen, bring their own gift to the creation of the
psychological attitude, or soul. They all have potential extremes,
and some are on the surface malefic, like Saturn and Mars. But
all are to be given their due if this attitude of soul-consciousness
and psychological imagination is to be nourished and supported.
In Ficinian imagination the psyche is pictured as a round of
planets, all simultaneously contributing to the music of the soul.
                       PART III

      Musical Humana:
      Music of the Soul
The united personality will never quite lose the painful
sense of innate discord. Complete redemption from the
sufferings of this world is and must remain in illusion.
The goal is important only as an idea; the essential thing
is the opus which leads to the goal: that is the goal of a
lifetime.
                —Jung, Psychology of the Transference
Gods should be iridescent, like the rainbow in the
storm. Man creates a God in his own image, and the
gods grow old along with the men that made them. But
storms sway in heaven, and the god-stuff sways high
and angry over our heads. Gods die with men who have
conceived them. But the god-stuff roars eternally, like
the sea, with too vast a sound to be heard.
               —D. H. Lawrence, The Plumed Serpent
                                14
             The Well-Tempered Life

We may collect our thoughts on astrological sensibility and
summarize Ficino's idea of psychotherapy by giving close
attention to the metaphor of music, as Ficino does in the twenty-
first and twenty-second chapters of The Planets. I do not intend to
turn to music as some grand romantic image for the soul, making
of psychotherapy a powerful orchestration of life's diversity or
picturing the psyche as a symphony of possibilities. The art of
music contains some precise forms and structures which reflect the
life of the soul with a high degree of differentiation. Furthermore,
music inherently expresses the dynamics of life, so that the
metaphorical value of music is not something external to it or
added on. To participate aurally in the complex patterns of a piece
of music is to enter deeply into an image that conveys sensations
and perceptible patterns in life itself.
   This close connection between the mobile patterns of life and
the structural forms of music was once widely acknowledged, but
that connection was lost in the turn in Western history from a
mythological to a scientific view of the world. It is apparent to
many people interested in mythology, art, and religious systems
that in two fields we have studied, astronomy and chemistry, a
rationalistic, scientific reduction began to take place toward the
end of the medieval era. Astronomy was drawn pure and clear
from the murky myths of astrology, and chemistry developed in
precision and mathematical rigor, leaving behind the occult
hallucinations of the alchemists. It is less recognized that music
suffered a similar purification, losing its religious and
mythological foundations to become a refined art. From the point
of view of a psychologist who values imagery, of course, these
developments were hardly evolutionary in any positive,
progressive sense. What was lost is at least equal in importance to
what was gained.
   In the case of music, in the development of the fine art as we

                                193
194                    The Planets Within

know it today, we lost two-thirds of its scope as it was practiced
and theorized in the medieval and early Renaissance period. We
have already had occasion to note the three fold paradigm offered
by Boethius in the sixth century and held firmly in musical
treatises down to the time of Ficino and beyond. In that scheme
musica instrumentalis, or music in sound as we know it today, was
rated lowest in the hierarchy. More important manifestations of
music were musica mundana, the music of the cosmos played in
the seasons of the year and in the rhythms of the planets; and
musica humana, human music or the music of the soul, sensed in
the moving patterns of subjective experience: in moods, feelings,
thoughts, values, and, in the minds of medieval churchmen,
virtues—in short, in human temperament.
   Naturally, Ficino emphasizes musica humana, but the
connection with cosmic music is natural and clear. If we have a
sky within and planets making their "music of the spheres" in our
very soul, then music is to be found in the rhythms of these
planets. "As above, so below,” the alchemists were fond of saying.
As the planets of the soul enter and fade and play through the
psyche in varying counterpoints, their movements, felt in emotion
and fantasy, give musical form to the very structures of our
consciousness. Seeing this correspondence between music and the
planets, Ficino was only following his mentor, Plato, who in the
Republic (book 7) called astronomy and music "sister sciences.”
Socrates makes the claim: "As the eyes are designed to look up at
the stars, so are the ears to hear harmonious motions; and these
are sister sciences.” Ficino would capitalize too on the long-
appreciated coincidence by which the number of planets equalled
the number of tones in a musical scale.
   The idea that music has a close relationship to soul would not
startle anyone; music obviously affects the emotions and "calms
the savage breast." Aristotle provides an early detailed description
of the psychology of music:

  Rhythms and melodies contain representations of anger and
  mildness, and also of courage and temperance and all their
  opposites and the other moral qualities, that most closely
  correspond to the true natures of these qualities (and this is clear
  from the facts of what occurs—when we listen to such
  representations we change in our soul).1

Later, in the sixth century, Cassiodorus speaks of these virtues and
moral qualities as musical in themselves, making the psyche itself
                     The Well-Tempered Life                      195

musical.2 For him music of the soul consists in the harmony of
good habits and virtues—a virtuous life is a musical life.
   Ficino takes into account and enhances both of these
approaches, bringing the ancient tradition of musica humana in
line with his theory of spirit.3 He conceives human music as the
proper arrangement of one's life so that all concrete experiences
resonate, like overtones, the fundamental octave of possibilities
represented by the planet-tones. Psychotherapy would be musical
then insofar as one would temper and tune the planetary tonal
centers so that each would hum within the surface events of life.4
This key notion of "tempering” calls for further analysis, but first
it will be necessary to examine another difficult musical term,
harmony.


                      Pythagorean Harmonia

   The goal of Ficinian theory and practice is a kind of spiritual and
psychological harmony; qualities of the soul as well as the body
need to be "tempered to a celestial consonance {ad coelestem
consonantiam temperato)"5 But the notion of harmony implied in
Ficino's vision differs from that popularly conceived. Ordinarily,
in music theory harmony is a blending of several tones sounding
simultaneously to form a chord. In such a blending, for most ears
individual tones lose their identities as they contribute to the
overall sound. The harmonic aspect of the chord concerns this
blended unit and not the sounding or movement of the individual
tones. The idea is expanded metaphorically when we speak of
ideals of "world harmony," "living in harmony with nature," and
"being in harmony with oneself." We usually imply a lack of
conflict and dissonance. Ficinian harmony flows from a different
conception, specifically the musical theory traditionally attributed
to Pythagoras.
   We can find the essence of the Pythagorean meaning of
harmonia, a term we may now use to distinguish this from the
popular view of harmony just discussed, in a passage from the
Odyssey (5.248). Homer describes the timbers Odysseus "joins
together" (harmonia) in order to construct the platform of his
sailing vessel or raft. This image of lashing together several logs is
closer to Pythagorean harmonia than memories of fifty-voice
choirs singing rich, pleasant chord progressions. Harmonia in the
Pythagorean sense consists of a lateral or horizontal arrangement
of tones, while later harmony is a vertical phenomenon.
196                      The Planets Within

   Ficino evidently drew his musical ideas from his study of Greek
literature rather than from the music theory and practice of his
day. In Ficino's Florence the rich polyphony of the Burgundian
composers could be heard; for example, a Dufay motet was sung
to inaugurate the cathedral in Florence in 1436.6 Also, the great
Flemish composer, Henricus Isaac, whose Choralis Constantinus
constituted the first complete cycle of religious motets, was at the
court of Lorenzo de Medici around 1480.7 Nevertheless, the older
notion of lateral harmony was much in evidence in the texts Ficino
was reading, translating, and commenting upon.
   The discovery of the relationship between musical intervals—
 the "distance" between tones—and certain numerical ratios
is credited by legend to Pythagoras. The story was told that
he was passing a blacksmith hammering on anvils when the insight
suddenly hit him. He is also said to have experimented with tones
and numbers on a simple musical instrument, the monochord, a
single-string instrument. Basically he discovered that small-number
ratios correspond in music to the consonant intervals, an awesome
finding for someone predisposed toward finding a unifying
principle in the universe.8 The entire problem of temperament and
tuning is much more complex in modern music, and even working
out the Pythagorean scales and ratios is not so simple; still the
basic idea of Pythagorean harmonia rests on the simple ratios
"sounding" with purity of tone. The art of making the proper
ratios is the essence of all later Pythagorean systems,0 and we find
this art applied in such diverse areas as architecture, writing,
philosophy, magic, and even psychology.10
   Out of the simple ratios and their corresponding pure intervals,
the Pythagorean scale was formed; and it is this scale, a careful
arrangement of tones in which each is tuned to be distinct from its
neighbor, that I am identifying as Pythagorean "harmonia." A few
specific characteristics of this scale account for its metaphorical
importance as an image for the tempered psyche: (1) each tone is
distinct, not lost in the blend of a chord; (2) the scale is theoretical,
not a piece of music in itself; (3) the ratios have a certain natural or
given purity about them; and (4) the final pleasing effect is
achieved by keeping the tones distinct and multiple. If we imagine
the planetary psychological processes we have examined to be
tones on a scale, then these four points apply to the psyche as well:
(1) each of the planets must be given due regard, they cannot be
blended in some overarching ego-plan; (2) as Jung claimed,
archetypes of human life do not exist in themselves, we only
assume their natures from concrete situations; (3) the planets are
                     The Well-Tempered Life                      197

poetic images for processes we find at the foundation of life, they
are not ego-products; and finally, (4) to keep the music playing we
have to keep these processes in tune, accessible, and active.
   Many medieval and Renaissance philosophers and theologians
grasped this notion of a world constructed according to simple
ratios, saw its beauty, and worked out their own applications of
the theory, attributing the basic insight always to Pythagoras.
This is true of writers like Athenaeus, Cassiodorus, Boethius, and
Isidore of Seville," and of Ficino's followers, notably Robert
Fludd.12 Ficino himself frequently acknowledged his debt to the
Pythagoreans and characteristically ranked the study of ratios in a
curious hierarchy: he conceived a progression from arithmetic to
plane geometry to solid geometry to music. Music has to do with
figures and bodies in movement.13 Music, then, in this Ficinian
hierarchy is a fourth dimension, one that takes into consideration
both the importance of proportion and the peculiar problems of
movement. In The Planets he makes it clear how broad his concept
of music is:

  But let us return to the proposition that music consists first in
  the ratio, second in the fantasy, third in speech, followed by
  song, making music with the fingers, the music of the whole
  body in gymnastics or in dance.... The Pythagoreans, the
  Platonists, Mercurius, Aristoxenus—they all say that the soul
  and body of the world and of all animals consist in musical
  ratios. Even the sacred writings of the Hebrews hold that God
  disposes all things in number, weight, and measure.14

Music of the psyche, at least in this Pythagorean aspect, is made
by giving each process of the soul its place on the scale. In tuning a
musical instrument, each tone has to be given an exact proportion
of vibrations if it is to ring true and clear. So with the psyche, it
resounds with the cosmic music when each planet sounds its true
pitch through the experiences of life. If one is in Saturn, his
heaviness is acknowledged clearly and given space and time to
resonate; if Venus presses, her voice is allowed to sing through
with its own timbre, not made presentable through some pretense
that Venus is other than she is. A musical soul is tempered, not
tampered with.

                Tempering the Instrument of Soul

   In order to fulfill the Ficinian ideal, then, of becoming "as
celestial as possible," one also has to become profoundly
198                    The Planets Within

musical—well-tempered and tuned. The question remains, how do
we get ourselves in tune so that our lives have resonance and
harmony of the Pythagorean type?
  Ficino gives us a few ideas how we might go about tempering the
soul:

  Whoever imitates by devotion, study, life and habits celestial
  benefits, activities, or order, insofar as he is more like the
  heavens he will receive more abundant gifts. But people
  unnaturally dissimilar to the heavens and discordant [discordes}
  are secretly miserable, though publicly they may not appear
  unhappy.15
Each of these kinds of "imitation" deserve some attention, since it
is through them that the planets are constellated.
   "Devotion" once again raises the issue of religion. Obviously, it
is not necessary to worship the planetary deities as did the Greeks
and Romans; yet they do call for a certain amount of dedication
and absorption. The traditional way of speaking of these gods is
for an individual to say that he is "in Mercury" or "in Venus.” The
idea is that the mood and atmosphere accompanying the
archetypal posture of the god take hold of the person,
commanding his attention and coloring all his perceptions. One
does not simply waken Mercury in one's soul by writing some
doggerel or playing at dream interpretation. It is Mercury who
wakens the soul, urging one on toward understanding and insight.
The gods are not out in the sky but neither are they merely poetic
terms for personal experiences. Ego senses the shadow of the larger
embrace of the god, though the god is a psychological reality. A
person can, then, truly take a religious attitude toward these
movements of the psyche, acknowledging their influence and
power, and drawing their spirit into the fabric of life. As Jung said
in his definition of religion, religious sensibility involves giving
attention to the contents of psychic life, whether they be known as
spirits, gods, demons, or unconscious fantasies.
   A second way of tempering the soul is through study, a simple
technique almost too obvious to be taken seriously. Yet, it appears
quite certain that Ficino blended in his mind and practice forms of
education and therapy. As he wrote, "it is a special discipline to
understand properly which spirit, force, or powers these planets
symbolize." Then he goes on to warn against "adoring" the stars;
rather we are to "imitate them and through imitation capture
them."16 In a limited sense, study of the planets would include
reading about these seven deities, knowing what they represent
                     The Well-Tempered Life                       199

and which spheres of life they influence. In a more general sense,
one way to temper one's life is to become familiar with imagery,
through reading in mythology and religious traditions, giving
some attention to poetry, fiction, and the other arts, noticing the
imagery of dreams and waking fantasies. The goal is to get to know
the imagistic expressions of soul. In our society we think it terrible
if a person cannot read, spell, and perform basic mathematical
procedures; but even our adult population is illiterate when it
comes to imagery. Yet images crowd our consciousness day and
night, provide religion and art with most of its content, and
determine our values and understanding of our world.
   Giving some time and attention to dreams is another effective
way to temper the soul, for through study of our dream images
our own personal mythology, complete with heroes, villains,
demons, and deities, is brought into consciousness. Often serious
attention to dreams is considered superstitious, or it is left to
psychotherapy, where dreams are typically interpreted entirely
with reference to personal history. But anyone may take note,
literally, of his dreams and find, over a priod of time, recurring
images and themes. It is not necessary to look to the dream for
guidance (Ficino warns against such adoration) or to find
conclusive interpretations of them; it is sufficient to give them
attention, study them, turn them over in imagination, and have
them at least vaguely in mind as we go about our daily business.
Such "devotion” to the figures of dream tempers the soul by
providing imaginative references for our feelings, fantasies, and
expriences. If, for example, a theme of being abandoned appears in
dreams over a period of time, that seed fantasy may organize in
imagination a series of experiences, moods, wishes, or the like. We
may "hear" the tonality of abandonment sounding through a
number of otherwise opaque events.
   One of the results of giving some care to dreams is the discovery
of the importance of images in experience. One finds that there is
not the broad breach between dream and reality one always
assumed. Indeed, appreciation for the images that shape life has an
effect on our very sense of self; for one discovers rather quickly
how fluid this "self" is, how fantasies are fought, befriended, and
identified with quite regularly, either internally or in projection.
Ficino observed that tempering not only highlights the world's
variety and its imaginative depths, it also affects the person.

  But you may make a finer image in yourself. Since you
  understand that nothing is more ordered than heaven and that
200                     The Planets Within

  nothing can be considered more tempered than Jupiter, you
  may expect that eventually the benefits of the heavens and of
  Jupiter will follow if you show yourself ordered and tempered in
  your thoughts, feelings, activities, and way of life.17

Here, the particular example concerns Jupiter and Jovial spirit:
when one imitates Jupiter's characteristics, one's sense of self takes
on qualities of that image. In Ficino's language we may not feel the
full impact of what he is suggesting; for once we begin to realize the
power of images, we discover that not only the world at large but
our very identity is determined by imagination. My perspective on
the world and on myself determines who I am, the way I act, and
the significance of events that happen in my life. Nothing exists
free of my imagination, including myself. Therefore, careful
tuning of the images and processes that go to make up my
psychological activity tempers my own soul.
   Ficino's example is complicated, since Jupiter is the God of
tempering. With Jupiter's image constellated in the psyche, the ego
loses its sene:c desire for control and defense and becomes more
imaginal and flexible. It tolerates ambiguity, contradiction, and
movement precisely because these are the processes of
temperament. Jupiter is that dimension of consciousness through
which we find concrete images for our experience without aiming
for a single dominant image. Jupiter tempers by constellating all
the major processes of the psyche, tuning them to be distinct and
effectual. A tempering consciousness does not preclude the
dissonant rub of paradox and contradiction that is bound to arise
from multiplicity in perspective.18 In music the bite of a good
discord is always sharpest on a well-tuned instrument, and a well-
placed dissonant note enhances rather than detracts from the music.
So, too, in psychological temperament, tuning not only does not
rule out dissonance—suffering, confusion, enigmas—it actually
emphasizes them.19
   Although dissonance is desirable in the composition of the
psyche, nevertheless the soul can be poorly tempered, and this dis­
temper is a sickness of soul. Distemper may be simply a lack of
tuning due to faulty imagination: life makes no sense, there is little
sense of value, internalized social values substitute for
individuality, and so on. Or, perhaps more common, one
perspective dominates to the point that consciousness may be
considered monotheistic.
   Alcmaeon of Croton, a Pythagorean physician of 500 b. c., held
that "equality of rights between the qualities of moist, dry, cold,
                     The Well-Tempered Life                     201

hot, bitter, sweet, and the rest, preserved health, but the rule of
one among them [monarchia] produced sickness."20 We have seen
that these are qualities associated in various degrees with specific
planets, so we may apply Alcmaeon's observation to the planets as
well. The dominance of one signals the sickness of soul known as
monarchia, a tyranny that serves to exclude multiple perspectives.
Ficino declared outright, in a similar way, that "in heaven there is
no excess of any single elemental quality." Nor is there any excess
of spirit issuing from any one planet, for in such a case
psychological life would have no music, it would be the incessant
drone of a single tone—monotony.


               Polytonality: The Music of the Gods

   It would doubtless be fruitful, but beyond our scope here, to go
more deeply into the psychological correlates of specific
phenomena in music history and theory. For example, it is curious
that in Western history, during the period of enlightenment and
rationality, almost all music was founded in what theorists call
"functional harmony." Every phrase and note in a piece, no matter
how long, could be heard and interpreted as a "function" of the
tonic note. Everything that happens musically in a symphony in C
is integrated by its relationship to that note. In the twentieth
century, during a time of upheaval in society and in personal
understanding, Arnold Schoenberg developed his "atonal" music
and his system of "serial" composition. In this music, complicated
rules and procedures are followed precisely to avoid giving any
note dominance over the others. Schoenberg's music is truly
polytonal: each note is a center unto itself."21
   Schoenberg's "polytonality" reflects the Ficinian tempered
psyche better than the traditional tonal system; for each tone (god)
is given its due, and it is the ratios or intervals of the
precompositional scales that determine the unfolding of the piece.
In the hands of some modern composers, Schoenberg's twelve-tone
system gave birth to arid, intellectual music, lacking as much in
expressiveness as it gained in technical complexity. But it can be
eminently expessive, and that is a quality one would want to carry
over analogously into the music of the psyche.
   One advantage among many of the polytheistic/polytonal psyche
is the variety of psychological experience it allows. As Ficino
remarks in the language of astrology and natural magic: "Since
different stars have various powers, their rays too are
202                     The Planets Within

differentiated. When these rays fall, making an impact here and
there, distinct powers are brought into being.''22 A tempered,
polytheistic psyche, containing all the planets and their
rays/spirits, enjoys a variety of powers otherwise precluded by a
monarchical consciousness or simply by lack of imaginative
depth. All the processes we have seen associated with the planets
are accessible in such a constellated, tempered soul, regenerating
in their various ways soul itself. From the moist pleasures of Venus
to the dry intensity of Mars, soul thrives on the variety of
sensibility and perspective available to it.
   Another advantage we have seen several times in passing is
release from moralism of all kinds. Religious and ethical moralism
can often suffocate soul when it is rigid and narrow, but modern
forms of psychological morality can be worse. Today individuals
whose consciousness is awakening feel unusual modern pressures
to grow, self-actualize, let their feelings hang out, enjoy a liberated
sex life, keep no secrets, be happy and active all the time, produce
something creative, raise children without "hang-ups," and so on.
A polytheistic psychology, in which all the gods and all sides of
them, are tempered or tuned in, does not appear so insanely
wholesome and positive, and in fact it does not impose such a
glorious yet demanding morality. James Hillman has summarized
the values of the polytheistic approach, underscoring its virtue of
tolerance:

  Polytheistic psychology obliges consciousness to circulate
  among a field of powers. Each god has his due as each complex
  deserves its respect in its own right. In this circularity there seem
  no preferred positions, no sure statements about positive and
  negative, and therefore no need to rule out some events as
  "pathological." When the idea of progress through hierarchical
  stages is suspended there will be more tolerance for the non­
  growth, ono-upward and non-ordered components of the
  psyche.23

  The implications for therapy are extensive. Without concern for
maturing, development according to some norm, a hierarchy of
psychic values, expectations of advance and change, projects and
goals of self-improvement, and a deeply rooted fantasy of
adjustment to a senex society, then the therapist is free to let
imagination do its work. The god of tempering, Jupiter, a deep
inner tolerance and appreciation for multiplicity, might better
bring imaginal order to fantasies and feelings than the patient, the
therapist, or the society. Ficino was rather indirect as a therapist,
                     The Well-Tempered Life                      203

 to put it mildly. He played his lyre, dispensed spices and perfumes,
directed his clients on walks through the countryside, and chose
for them just the right amulets and stones. Even taken quite
literally, his example is a good one to follow; for he knew
intuitively and in theory that psyche needs imagination. By
natural magic — that channel of spirit flowing between objects and
consciousness—psyche loses its distemper.
   A modern Ficinian therapist might well follow the master's
example and find all kinds of things that might turn imagination
on psychological experience. Nothing is out of range: herbs,
photography, music, dance, travel, plants, perfumes, artworks of
all kinds, museums, airplane rides, novels, meditation, massage,
isolation, school, reading, drama, acting, construction, sports,
astronomy, and astrology. All of these or none of them may be
used in tempering the psyche, depending upon the presence of
imagination and a genuine concern for soul. Whatever the psyche
presents in dream, fantasy, wish, desire, fear, longing, dread,
regret, or love may be imagined and thereby drawn deeper. Such
is the process of tempering, and such is the meaning of
psychotherapy, care for soul, in the Ficinian context.
   The imagining psychotherapist looks writh his client into the
skein of images contained in the skin of events. He may play the
alchemist helping his client cook up the garbage that has been
lying around half-rotting for years. He may be the astrologer
mapping the planets and charting the constellations. He may be
the magus practicing some ancient or modern art of memory by
which the "sacred open secrets" hidden in the images that permeate
life and crowd consciousness lie revealed.
   Most psychologists, of course, favor a well-integrated ego
and a life without loose ends; some criticize polytheistic psychol­
ogy as an irresponsible, laissez-faire approach to psycholog­
ical suffering. They interpret it as advocating the dissociated
personality, schizophrenia, and all forms of "flipping out.''24 But
the imaginal25 or aesthetic ego inhabits a middle ground, usually
unappreciated, between the strong-willed ego and an ego
overwhelmed by its alienated fantasies. Many of the problems
people present in therapy are precisely the symptoms of a rigid
ego, typical and expected in a senex culture such as ours. Surface
values of the society demand order and conformity and the
guardians of sanity can even hospitalize those who do not measure
up. Therapies bent on will power, ego strength, and social
adjustment only compound the problem, adding another layer of
denial upon the urge toward polymodal expression of the psyche.
204                    The Planets Within

The therapist concerned more with imagination, deepening and
true insight into behavior and fantasy, can encourage flexibility
and a softening of self-judgment, thus favoring both increased
consciousness and acknowledgment of pressing fantasies. The
mere process of becoming familiar with the powers that move us
and drive us into compulsive actions and weigh on our souls eases
their destructive power. Knowing the incubi that haunt the
hollows of our hearts, we may move with them rather than engage
them in useless struggle. Unless we enter into some kind of
dialogue with these inner demons, we have no way to discriminate
among them and deal with them. Without imagination, ego is too
far removed from these inner figures to know threat from promise.
   Tempering therefore requires a light touch, whether it occurs in
formal or informal therapy or in the course of dealing with one's
own fantasies. Unlike most psychologies, this Ficinian approach
neither advocates repression nor advises compensation, both
senex measures. Faced with a variety of dynamics in the psyche, it
seeks to gain the benefits of all. Ficino encouraged this accepting
attitude by referring in several of this writings to the story of the
Judgment of Paris.
   According to the myth, Paris was to choose among three
goddesses: Hera, Aphrodite, and Athena. When Aphrodite simply
loosened the clasp on her tunic, that was enough for him. He chose
her and won Helen and the Trojan War. Ficino interpreted the
goddesses as allegories of wisdom, pleasure, and power, and the
warned his friend and patron, Lorenzo, that those who favor one
deity over others end up paying a penalty. Socrates himself, says
Ficino, chose Minerva and won his death. But Lorenzo "may
disdain none of these higher beings. He may behold three and
worship three for their gifts.”26 When confronted with a choice
among the gods, choose them all. That is Ficino's practical,
polytheistic advice. Put up with the ambiguity, confusion, and
illogic of the polytheistic vision; for one wins clarity and control,
integration and a sense of wholeness at the cost of psychological
vigor.


                      Sympathetic Overtones

  More in the spirit of modern psychology, Ficino directs his
musical attention to empirical studies. In The Planets he advises a
careful use of music as a form of treatment, a practice he not only
advocated but became involved in himself with his lyre. Certain
                      The Well-Tempered Life                      205

kinds of music, he thought, would capture the spirit of a particular
planet and make it accessible to the person in need of that spirit.
He offers three rules for determining the planetary nature of a
piece of music: (1) find out characteristics of the planets and insert
these into the text of a song; (2) find out which planet rules a
certain region, study the music of that region, and incorporate
these elements into the music required; (3) find out how people are
affected by various astrological patterns and incorporate these
findings into the songs.27 Here is an early form of music therapy,
an efficacious art of memory by which the spirit of the planets
would be infused into the psyche of the listener, tempering his soul
with its tempered tunes.
   Musica instrumentalis serves in this method as a means of
establishing musica Humana, and its theoretical basis is thoroughly
polytheistic. Now if we would shift to a metaphorical viewpoint
we would see that the therapist as musicus, musician of the soul,
has to know the gods extremely well—their characters, the effects
they have on people, their rhythms and patterns. Thus the
therapist becomes the guide of a musical psyche, sensitive
especially to the multiplicity of its deep structures.
   One further "musical” talent is required of the Ficinian therapist:
he must have a good ear for the subtle tones of the psyche. After
offering the three rules for an astrological music therapy, Ficino
makes the following observation:

   You will procure one of these four (the four musical planets) by
   his or her songs, especially if you apply music fitting the songs,
   so that when you call by singing and playing in their style, they
   will seem to respond immediately, like Echo, or like certain
   strings on a cithara vibrating when other strings are struck and
   tuned alike.28

Ficino is referring here, of course, to the acoustical phenomenon
known as "sympathetic vibration," and he uses this as one more
example of natural magic—the power of causing a spiritual effect
through material means. Sympathetic vibration occurs when two
strings are tuned to the same pitch, or when one is tuned so as to
contain strong overtones of the other. Then when just one of the
strings is plucked, the other will vibrate "in sympathy." Ficino's
point is that when the music characteritic of a certain planet is
played, that planetary spirit will be set in motion and make its way
to the listener.
   Robert Fludd developed the metaphor of overtones further, and,
joined to Ficino's sympathetic vibration image, it suggests a subtle
206                     The Planets Within

but truly significant notion abut psychotherapy. In one of Fludd's
charts, "On the Internal Numbers and Harmony of Man," a
human body lies within a circle labeled "Earth." Above him are the
other three elements, water, air and fire, all encompassing what
Fludd calls "diapason materiale"—the material octave. This is the
level of matter, the arena of physical events perceptible by our
senses. A second octave extends, however, above the first, like a
series of overtones that sound faintly but perceptibly in any
musical scale. This is, according to Fludd, the “diapason medium"
or "mediating octave," the realm of soul. Fludd divides this into
the seven planets, the stars, and the Prime Mover. So here we have
a correspondence between this image and Ficino's theory of
musical planets. Finally, there is a third and even more subtle
octave, "diapason spirituale," the spiritual overtones which
emanate more faintly from bodily events. Here Fludd places the
nine choirs of angels. Embracing all three octaves is the following
inscription: "The essential harmony by which the human soul
takes for its own constitution a portion of the three regions of the
world."20
   Fludd's diagram is fully consistent with Ficino's view of the soul
and its musical structure, and it presents a useful image for
psychotherapy. We have seen several tasks a Ficinian
psychotherapist might engage in when confronting the problems
of a client. Flere it is suggested that a therapist must have an "ear"
for the overtones of crass, physical behavior. In his role as
musician of the soul and magus, he may see with his eyes the
problem presented to him but hear with a special talent the
overtones of psyche and spirit. These overtones are essentially the
same as the aromas and fragrances we found among the elements
of the soul, and the sublimated vapors released through alchemical
operations. The overtones complete the fertile musical analogy
and bring us back to the fundamental Ficinian principle of
psychology: the soul is a hidden but perceptible dimension of
material existence. Soul lies in those strong vibrations, the
overtones of the material world, the mediating octave. Attuned to
those moderately subtle overtones we hear the music of the
spheres, the seven planets which represent the multiple powers of
the psyche, and achieve a degree of psychological sensibility.
   In music the tones of the scale lose their rigid ordering and turn
and twist in all directions as they combine to make melodies,
harmonies, and counterpoints. In serial music it is even clearer
that the fundamental scales revolve in unending variation,
creating the unique expressive quality of the music and its own
                     The Well-Tempered Life                       207

inner logic. In the music of the psyche, too, variation goes on
without end. The many planets and their combinations provide
countless perspectives, so that in polytheistic psychology there can
be no final point of view, no one reason for anything, no ending in
therapy, and no goal achieved. Though it is most difficult for a
senex ego to accept such continuous variation, an imaginal ego
finds in variety both logic and beauty.
   Variety can be an end in itself, as in the case of one of Jupiter's
animals, the peacock. The god of tempering is known in the image
of the peacock's multicolored tail, which, Jung informs us, is an
alchemical image of spring, primavera, the arrival of new life.30
This cauda pavonis appears after the dark night work of
blackening (nigredo) and, along with the rainbow, signals the
fruitfulness of the earth. Jung also refers to the classic work on
zoological mythology by Angelo de Gubernatis where the peacock
is joined in imagination to the brilliance of the sky:

  The serene and starry sky and the shining sun are peacocks. The
  deep-blue firmament shining with a thousand brilliant eyes, and
  the sun rich with the colors of the rainbow, present the appear­
  ance of a peacock in all the splendour of its eye-bespangled
  feathers.31

The eyes of the sky, so important in Ficino's natural magic, show
up here in the tail of Jupiter's bird. Jung ties it all together by
reminding us that in alchemy the colors of the peacock's tail
correspond to the seven planetary spheres.
   Once an individual begins to think polytheistically, words once
used in the context of integration and wholeness take on a new
diaphanous vitality. So it is with tempering. Rather than a term
for a process of narrowing and rigidly ordering, tempering
becomes the spreading of the peacock's tail, a revelation of the
beauty of multiplicity. Life, otherwise drab, opaque, and
unimagined, is given color and tone. If psychology as a discipline
were to value finally the variety in psychological life the peacock
represents, then maybe that long-sought elixir of the "liberated
life" might be found.
   A similar challenge must be made with reference to this book,
for there is little doubt that the rays pouring into its pages have
descended from Saturn and Mercury, leaving at least five other
ways to imagine Ficino's apothecary, and at least five other spirits
to acquire through his words. Some of these other deities are not
easily encountered on the printed page, but they have their proper
208                   The Planets Within

spheres of life, their planetary houses, where their rays may be
absorbed. In the end it takes a wide variety of travels,
experiments, and quests to temper the gods so that their high
overtones scintillate in tune and their low fundamentals quiver at
an honest pitch and at solid depth.
                                        Notes

                                         Foreword
1. James Hillman, Revisioning Psychology (Harper & Row, New York, 1975), 201.
2. Ibid, 202.
3. See James Hillman, "Cosmology for Soul — From Universe to Cosmos" in SPHINX 2
(The London Convivium for Archetypal Studies. London, 1989).
4. Cf. Hillman, "Anima Mundi — The Return of Soul to the World" in SPRING 1QS2
(Spring Publications, Dallas).
5. I have tried to develop this inkling in the paper "Who Is Behind Archetypal Psychology?"
in SPRING J988 (Spring Publications, Dallas).
6. Hillman, Revisioning, 202.


                                       Introduction
1. James Hillman compares the content of Ficino's philosophy with psychoanalysis and
suggests a psychological reading of his works in the following: "Plotino, Ficino, and Vico
as Precursors of Archetypal Psychology," in Loose Ends: Primary Payers in Archetypal
Psychology (Zurich: Spring Publications, 1975), pp. 146-69; and Re Visioning Psychology
(New York: Harper and Row, 1975), pp. 197-202.


                             Chapter 1: Marsilio Ficino
1 Paul Oskar Kristeller, The Philosophy of Marsilio Ficino, trans. Virginia Conant
(Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1964), p. 21.
2. Christopher Hibbert, The House of Medici: Its Rise and Fall (New York: William Morrow
and Co., 1975), p. 97.
3. Ibid., p. 77.
4. Marcel Brion, The Medici: A Great Florentine Family, trans, Gilles and Heather Cremonegi
(London: Elek Books, 1969), p 62,
5. Ibid.
6. Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 314. SeeC. G. Jung, Psychological Types. Revision by R. F. C. Hull
of H. G. Baynes's translation. C'W, vol. 6, Bollingen Series 20. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1971), pp. 126-27. Jung claims that the "aim of exorcistic rites is to
bring back the soul and release it from enchantment."
7. See Brion, Medici, p. 106; and Hillman, Re-visioning Psychology, pp. 204ff.
8. On this widespread misconception, see: Frances Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic
Tradition (New York: Vintage Books, 1969), chap. 1 ; D P. Walker, The Ancient Theology
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1972); and Kristeller, Philosophy, pp. 25-26
9. As translated in Kristeller, ibid.
10. Ibid., p. 14.
11. The following summaries are further contractions of Yates's summaries, Giordano
Bruno, chap. 2.


                          Chapter 2: A World with Soul
1. Such a distinction between "soul" and "psyche" and a corresponding distinction
between "sacrament" and "symbol" is made in Ann Ulanov and Barry Ulanov, Religion
and the Unconscious.
2 For a thorough study of the Greek underworld as an image for the containing space
of psyche, see James Hillman, "The Dream and the Underworld," Era nos jalirbuch 42 (1973)
[Leiden: Brill, 1975).


                                             209
210                             The Planets Within

3. Patricia Berry, 'The Rape of Demeter/Persephone and Neurosis," Spring 1975 (New
 York: Spring Publications, 1975), pp. 186-98. Berry interprets the rape of Persephone as a
pull toward depth imagined as the death-world over which Persephone rules. The
cosmology pictured is thus a two-tiered universe, but obviously not an ontological one.
The invisible world of psyche exists in tandem with the visible world of nature and what we
consider natural. See also Carl Kerenyi and C. G. Jung, Essays on a Science of Mythology
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1969).
4. An idea presented in a lecture by Patricia Berry entitled "What's the Matter with
Mother?"
5. Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology, chap. 2, "Pathologizing."
6. On the dream as a transformation of the natural to the imaginal, see Hillman, "The
Dream and the Underworld,” and Patricia Berry, "An Approach to the Dream," Spring
1974 (New York: Spring Publications, 1974), pp. 58 79.
7. James Hillman, "Anima," Spring 1973 (New York: Spring Publications, 1973), p. 122. As
I am using the terms here, "fantasy" is the subjective aspect of the world experienced
imaginally, while "image" connotes the specific imaginal world in which I may find myself,
in the past, present, or future.
8. June, Psychological Types, p. 287.
9. Marsilio Ficino, Opera Omnia, 2 vols. (Basel, 1576; reprinted, Torino: Bottega
d'Erasmo, 1959), p. 196. Quoted in D. P. Walker, "Ficino's Spiritus and Music," Annales
Musicologiques 1 (1953): 133.
10. C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams. Reflections, ed. Aniela Jaffe; trans. Richard Winston
and Clara Winston (New York: Vintage Books, 1963), p. 82.
11. Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 236. In this imaginal epistemology, the external world when
perceived takes its form from fantasy, not vice versa.
12. Quoted in ibid., p. 372. The comet's tail is an exceptionally suitable image for various
psychological phenomena related to Ficino's theory of idolum. Dreams, for example, seem
to pass through the soul in the wake of some central movement in the psyche; or various
conscious activities may take place, all part of the tail of some stirring in psyche. People
often report several life experiences all of which seem to enact the seed fantasy glimpsed in a
dream.
13. See Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 373.
14. Frances Yates, The Art of Memory (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966).
15. Quoted in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 237.
16. Rollo May, Love and Will (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1969), p. 135. The
daimon, like any figure in psyche, may be experienced as if external, though it is internal
insofar as it is in pscyhe. The notions of internal and external are not clear in May's
placement of the Heraclitean daimon.
17. In Paul Friedlander, Plato: An Introduction, trans. Hans Meyerhoff, Bollingen Series 59
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1973), p. 37. Friedlander and May offer useful
overviews of the notion of "daimon." Both, however, stress an existentialist viewpoint that
loses the image of daimon.
18. On the classical imagery surrounding "genius," see Richard Broxton Onians, The
Origins of European Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951), passim.
19. The problem of psychological monotheism will be discussed further in chapter 14
below. See also James Hillman, "Psychology: Monotheistic or Polytheistic?" Spring 1971
(New York: Spring Publications, 1971).
20. In a letter to Cavalcanti, Ficino provides some details about his horoscope and the
dominant influence of Saturn: "This melancholy temperament seems to have been imposed
on me from the beginning by Saturn, set almost in the center of my ascendant sign,
Aquarius (the Water-Bearer) and being met by Mars in the same sign, and by the Moon in
Capricorn—while looking toward the Sun and Mercury in the Scorpion, occupying the
ninth zone of Heaven." Quoted in Jean Seznec, The Survival of the Pagan Gods, trans.
Barbara F. Sessions, Bollingen Series 38 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1972),
p. 61.
21. Ficino, Opera, p. 534, The Planets, chap. 2.
22. Ernst Cassirer, The Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy, trans. Mario
Domandi (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1963), p. 133.
                                          Notes                                           211

                     Chapter 3: “Dissolve and Congeal"
1. C. G. Jung, ed., Man and His Symbols (New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1968), p. 40.
2. C. G. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy; CW, vol. 12, 2nd ed. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1968), p. 34.
3. Helena M. E. De Jong, Michael Maier's "Atalanta Fugiens": Sources of an Alchemical
Book of Emblems (Leiden: Brill, 1969), p. 168.
4. On these analogies and the theory of the affections of the soul, see Kristeller, Philosophy,
pp. 388-99.
5. C. G. Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis; CW, vol. 14, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1970), p. 472.
6. Quoted in Charles Lemmi, The Classical Deities in Bacon: A Study in Mythological
Symbolism (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press, 1933), p. 83.
7. Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis, p. 236, n. 606.
8. See David L. Miller, "Orestes: Myth and Dream as Catharsis," in Myth, Dreams, and
Religion, ed. Joseph Campbell (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1970) pp. 26-47; Leon Golden,
"Mimesis and Catharsis," Classical Philology 64 (1969): 145-53; and Leon Golden,
"Katharsis as Clarification: An Objection Answered," Classical Quarterly, 23, no. 1 (May
1973): 45-46.
9. C. G. Jung, Civilization in Transition; CW, vol. 10, 2nded. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1970), p. 90.
10. Ficino, Opera, p. 843.

                     Chapter 4: The Elements of Psyche

1. On the alchemical notion of psychological water, see Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis,
passim, e.g., Mercurial water, p. 503. On the phenomenology of the elements, also consult
the works of Gaston Bachelard.
2. See James Hillman, "Dionysos in Jung's Writings," Spring 1972 (New York: Spring Publi­
cations, 1972); James Hillman, The Myth of Analysis (New York: Harper Colophon, 1978),
Part Three, "On Psychological Creativity"; Carl Kerenyi, Dionysos: Archetypal Image of
Indestructible Life, trans. Ralph Manheim, Bollingen Series 65 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1976); Norman O. Brown, Life against Death (New York: Vintage Books,
1959); Walter Otto, Dionysus: Myth and Cult, trans. Robert B. Palmer (Bloomington,
2nd.: Indiana University Press, 1965).
3. Onians, Origins., p. 216; Petronius, Satyricon 34.7.
4. Onians, Origins, p. 228; Ovid, Metamorphoses 13. 929.
5. Juan Eduardo Cirlot, A Dictionary of Symbols, trans. Jack Sage (New York: Philosophi­
cal Library, 1962), pp. 6 and 240.
6. W. B. Yeats, "All Souls Night,” in A Vision (New York: Collier Books, 1966), p. 303.
7. Ficino, Opera, p. 651; quoted in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 308.
8. Susanne K. Langer, Feeling and Form (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1953), p. 117.
9. Ficino, Opera, p. 651; quoted in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 308.
10. This idea was suggested in conversation by Dr. Robert Sardello.
11. Ficino, Opera, p. 639.
12. Ibid., p. 977, ch. 5.
13. Ibid., p. 978, ch. 7.
14. Hillman, "Plotino, Ficino, and Vico," Loose Ends, p. 155. "His position that mind has
its home in the soul, is like Jung’s—an esse in anima."
15. Ficino, Opera, p. 983.
16. Ibid., p. 984.

                         Chapter 5: Necessary Madness
1. Sears Jayne, "Marsilio Ficino's Commentary on Plato's Symposium," University of
Missouri Studies 19, no. 1 (Columbia, Mo.: University of Missouri Press, 1944), p. 231. (A
commentary and translation.)
212                             The Planets Within

2. See Hillman, "Pothos: The Nostalgia of the Puer Aeternus," Loose Ends, pp. 49-62.
3. See below, chapter 11, "Saturn."
4. Charles Edward Trinkaus, In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and Divinity in Italian
Humanist Thought, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970), p. 480.
5. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 231.
6. E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California
Press, 1951), p. 82,
7. On the general issue of personifying our complexes, see Hillman, Re-Visioning
Psychology, chap. 1, "Personifying or Imagining Things." "Rather than a field of forces, we
are each a field of internal personal relationships, an interior commune, a body politic" (p.
22).
8. Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, trans. James Strachey (New York: Avon
Books, 1965), p. 530.
9. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 231.
10. Ficino, Opera, p. 634.
11. Norman O. Brown, Love's Body (New York: Vintage Books, 1966), p. 259.
12. John G. Neihardt, Black Elk Speaks (Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press,
1961).
13. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 232.
14. C. G. Jung, Psychology and Religion: West and East; CW, vol. 11, 2nd ed. (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1969), p. 8.
15. Ficino, Opera, p. 319; in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 318.
16. Andre Chastel gives the following table indicating various names Ficino gave to the four
furors—Marsile Ficin et Fart (Geneva: Droz, 1954), p. 130.
De divino furore (1457)                  Convivium (1475)
vaticinium/conjectio           Venus: furor amatorius-mens angelica
mysteria/superstitio           Apollo: vaticinium-ratio animae
poesis/levior musica           Bacchus: sacerdotium-opinio
amor/amor vulgaris             Musae: furor poeticus-natura

Ep. a Pietro Divitio (1491)         Commen. in Phaedrum (1492)
mysterium: Bacchus                          vaticinium
vaticinium: Apollo                         sacerdotium
poesis: Musae                            furor poeticus
amor: Venus                               furor eroticus
17. Ficino, Opera, p. 927.
18. Edgar Wind, Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance, rev. and enl. ed. (New York: W. W.
Norton and Co., 1968), p. 17.
19. Ficino, Opera, p. 562.
20. Carl Kerenyi, "The Mysteries of the Kabeiroi,” in Joseph Campbell, ed.. The Mysteries,
Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks, II (New York: Pantheon Books, 1955), p. 37. Not only
nature, but the images of psyche themselves contain such "sacred open secrets."
21. Ibid.
22. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 232.
23. Ficino, Opera, p. 625.
24. See Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 309, for these examples and documentation.
25. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 231.
26. Ficino, Opera, p. 288, and Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 312.
26. For a critique of the fantasy of "growth," see James Hillman, "Abandoning the Child,"
Loose Ends, pp. 5~48. The widely used phrase "personal growth" may make sense with
regard to certain ego achievements, but even then more precise words would be
appropriate, perhaps "maturing" or "ripening."
28. Martin Heidegger, "The Ode on Man in Sophocles' Antigone," in Sophocles: A
Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Thomas M. Woodard (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-
Hall, 1966), p. 93.
29. Quoted in Kristeller,Philosophy, p. 313.
30. Wind, Pagan Mysteries, pp. 63-64.
                                         Notes                                         213

31. Jayne, 'Ticino's Commentary," p. 232.
32. Ficino, Opera, p. 1323; in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 264.
33. Ibid., p. 306; in Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 267.
34. James Hillman, "Anima," Spring 1973', pp. 106 9.
35. Plato, Symposium, 193.
36. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 140.
37. We find this in Ficino’s essays on love and also in courtly love poets, for example.
38. Emma Jung, for example, speaks of the integration of the anima as part of the
individuation process in Animus and Anima (Zurich: Spring Publications, 1974), p. 86; and
June Singer argues with the fantasy of "serial monogamy" in Boundaries of the. Soul (New
York: Doubleday, 1973), p. 253. To be vigilant in maintaining the psychological
perspective is one thing, to support a social norm and pattern with pychology is another —
moralism in disguise.


                       Chapter 6: Zodiacal Reflections
1. James Hillman, "Peaks and Vales," in On the Way to Self-Knowledge, ed. Jacob
Needleman and Dennis Lewis (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976), p. 121. Hillman points
out the tendency toward literalism in matters of the spirit.
2. See Kristeller, Philosophy, pp. 310 ff.
3. Ficino, Opera, p. 771.
4. David Miller points out this tendency in the study of religion in a review — the tendency
toward "pre-Barthian romanticism, a mythologized and psychologized 'faith' whose
idolatry is located interiorly." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 46, no. 1
(March 1978): 94.
5. See, for example, Singer, Boundaries, chap. 10. "The primary, all-encompassing
archetype is the archetype of the self" (p. 276).
6. Ficino, Opera, p. 533.
7. Ficino, Opera, p. 553.
8. Quoted in Lemmi, Classical Deities, p. 77.
9. In Ibid., p. 75.
10. See Berry, "Demeter/Persephone."


                                   Chapter 7: Sol
1. Ficino, Opera, p. 534.
2. Quoted in Georges Poulet, The Metamorphoses of the Circle, trans. Carley Dawson and
Elliott Coleman (Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1966), p. 5.
3. Jung, Mysterium, p. 106.
4. Ibid., p. 96.
5. Ficino, Opera, p. 533.
6. Roberto Assagioli, Psychosynthesis (New York: Viking Press, 1965), p. 17.
7. Johanm Jakob Bachofen, Myth, Religion, and Mother Right (Selected Writings), trans.
Ralph Manheim (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1967), pp. 144 45.
8. Ficino, Opera, p. 574.
9. Ibid., p. 530.
10. Ibid., p. 532.
11. Ibid., p. 536.
12. Joan Evans and Mary S. Serjeantson, English Medieval Lapidaries (London: Oxford
University Press, 1933), p. 124.
13. L. Oscar Kuhns, ed., "Bestiaries and Lapidaries," Medieval Song and Story, Columbia
University Course in Literature, IV (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1928-29),
pp. 515-16.
14. Ficino, Opera, p. 968.
15. Kuhns, Bestiaries and Lapidaries, p. 512.
16. Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis, p. 100.
214                             The Planets Within

                                  Chapter 8: Venus
1. Yates, Bruno, pp. 76-77.
2. See Seznec,Survival, pp. 76-77.
3. Yates, Bruno, p. 77.
4. Wind, Pagan Mysteries, chap. 7. Disputes over whether this painting is a calendar image,
specifically an astrological allegory, or a Neoplatonic metaphor miss the point that all three
intentions may be affirmed at once. Here we are following Yates by adding the function of
"natural magic" to the painting, as well as the psychological interpretation.
5. Yates, Giordano Bruno, p. 77.
6. Jayne, "Ficino's Commentary," p. 133.
7. Erwin Panofsky, Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art, 2nd ed. (Stockholm:
Almqvist and Wiksell, 1965), p. 200.
8. Friedlander, Plato, p. 56.
9. Wind, Pagan Mysteries, p. 36.
10. Ficino, Opera, p. 546.
11. Ibid., p. 536.
12. Sandor Ferenczi, Thalassa: A Theory of Genitality, trans. Henry Alden Bunker (New
York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1968), p. 49.
13. Ficino, Opera, p. 837.
14. An idea suggested by Hillman in "Anima," p. 108. An archetypal study of the
humanistic movement in psychology, viewed through the prism of Venus, might help us to
better discriminate the spirits in this movement.


                                Chapter 9: Mercury
1. Andre Chastel, The Myth of the Renaissance, trans. Stuart Gilbert (Geneva: Albert
Skira, 1969), p. 179.
2. Ficino, Opera, p. 542.
3. Chastel, Myth, p. 108; see also Seznec, Survival, pp. 159 and 165.
4. Ficino, Opera, p. 912.
5. Ibid., p. 875.
6. We may also see a regressive movement in Daphne's swift movement and her
transformation into a tree — a flight of the nymph from Apollo's heat and light. The
demands of Apollonian intensity seem to chase the soul toward vegetative concerns.
7. Norman O. Brown, "Daphne or Metamorphosis," in Myths, Dreams, and Religion, ed.
Joseph Campbell (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1970), p. 106.
8. Ficino, Opera, p. 546.
9. Ibid., p, 557.
10. See Berry, "Dream."
11. Brown, "Daphne," p. 108.
12. Chastel, Marsile Ficin et Tart, p. 141. Surprise is another important emotion, often
taken for granted, but, like longing and nostalgia, significant in establishing and
maintaining a psychological vulnerability.
13. The significance of this phrase from Stevens for the development of an imaginative
hermeneutic comes out of the lectures of Stanley R. Hopper.
14. Paul Radin, The Trickster: A study in American Indian Mythology, with commentaries
by Karl Kerenyi and C. G. Jung (New York: Philosophical Library, 1956), pp. 174 and 190.
15. Rafael Lopez-Pedraza, Hermes and His Children (Zurich: Spring Publications, 1977), p.
32.


                                  Chapter 10: Luna
1. Ficino, Opera, p. 546.
2. Ibid., p. 537.
3. Kristeller, Philosophy, pp. 136-37.
                                        Notes                                       215

4. Ficino, Opera, p. 917.
5. Bachofen, Mother Right, p. 115.
6. Ficino, Opera, p. 805.
7. Ibid., p. 538.
8. Ibid., p. 537.
9. Ibid., p. 540.
10. Ibid., p. 557.
11. Ibid., p. 537.
12. De Jong, Atalanta, p. 381.
13. See Hillman, "Abandoning."
14. Michael R. Best and Frank H. Brightman, eds., The Book of Secrets of Albertus Magus
(Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1973), p. 72.


                               Chapter 11: Saturn
1. Raymond Klibansky, Erwin Panofsky, and Fritz Saxl, Saturn and Melancholy (New
York: Basic Books, 1964).
2. James Hillman, "Senex and Puer-. An Aspect of the Historical and Psychological
Present," in Eranos Jahrbuch 36 (Zurich: Rhein, 1969); "On Senex Consciousness," Spring
1970 (New York: Spring Publications, 1970); and "Senex Destruction and a Renaissance
Solution," Spring 1975 (New York: Spring Publications, 1975), pp. 77-109. We may
consider Saturn as one specific mythological figure representing aspects of the senex.
3. See A. Vitale, "The Archetype of Saturn or Transformation of the Father," in Fathers
and Mothers, ed. Patricia Berry (New York: Spring Pubications, 1973), pp. 5~39.
4. Ficino, Opera, p. 533.
5. Sigmund Freud, "Mourning and Melancholia," trans. under supervision of Joan Riviere,
Collected Papers, vol. 4 (New York: Basic Books, 1959), pp. 152-170. Contained within
Freud's personalistic analysis are archetypal images of death, loss, grief, and absence.
Losses of many kinds generate the feelings and fantasies of melancholy, even so subtle a
loss as a change in perspective or attitude.
6. Ficino, Opera, p. 496.
7. See Murray Stein, "The Devouring Father," in Fathers and Mothers, pp. 64-74.
8. See note 5 above.
9. Ficino, Opera, p. 536.
10. Onians, Origins, p. 133, n. 1.
11. Ficino, Opera, p. 565.
12. Ibid.
13. Hillman, "Senex Destruction and a Renaissance Solution." Kristeller supports Hillman's
point, referring to Ficino's comments in the first book of De Vita {Opera, p. 294): "The
melancholic temperament facilitates a liberation of the soul from external events and so
constitutes one of the favorable conditons for prophecy" (p. 212).
14. Klibansky et al., Saturn and Melancholy, p. 273.
15. Ibid., p. 271.
16. Ficino, Opera, p. 496.
17. Ibid., p. 565.
18. Ibid., p. 522.
19. Ibid., p. 534.
20. See, for example, Jung's "Psychotherapists or the Clergy," Psychology and Religion,
CW, vol. 11, pp. 327-47.


                                Chapter 12: Jupiter
1. Ficino, Opera, p. 935.
2. Ibid., p. 531; see also Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 386; and Wayne Shumaker, The Occult
Sciences in the Renaissance (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1972), pp.
122-27.
216                            The Planets Within

3. Ficino, Opera, p. 935.
4. Ibid., p. 944.
5. Ibid., p. 846.
6. Ibid., p. 536.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid., p. 538.
9. Ibid., p. 537.
10. My occasional references to architecture are quite Ficinian. He considered architecture
second only to mathematics among the arts, and he called it a "Mercurial" art. See Opera.
p. 1267; and G.L. Hersey, Pythagorean Palaces: Magic and Architecture in the Italian
Renaissance (Ithaca, N.Y., and London; Cornell University Press, 1976), pp. 34 37.
11. Ficino, Opera, p. 56...
12. See Seznec, Survival, pp. 137-43. For the image, see p. 138.


                                 Chapter 13: Mars
1. Yates, Giordano Bruno, p. 63.
2. Ficino, Opera, p. 843.
3. Jung, Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, CW, vol. 9, pt. 1, 2nd ed. (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968), pp. 286 and 288: The archetypal personalities
"form a species of singular beings whom one would like to endow with ego-consciousness;
indeed, they almost seem capable of it. . . . Conscious and unconscious do not make a
whole when one of them is suppressed and injured by the other. If they must contend, let it
at least be a fair fight with equal rights on both sides. Both are aspects of life."
4. See Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology, chap. 1, "Personifying."
5. Ficino, Opera, p. 545.
6. Ibid., p. 539.
7. Ibid., p. 534.
8. Ibid., p. 557.
9. Ibid., p. 542.
10. Ibid., p. 819.
11. Ibid., p. 1348.
12. Wind, Pagan Mysteries, p. 90.
13. Ficino, Opera, p. 1339.
14. Michael J. B. Allen, Marsilio Ficino, The Philebus Commentary: A Critical Edition and
Translation (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 1975), p. 244.


                   Chapter 14: The Well-Tempered Life
1. Aristotle, Politics 8.6., trans. H. Rackham, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1959), p. 657.
2. Institutiones 5.2. ed. by R. A. B. Mynors (Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 1937), p. 143.
3. For a thorough study of this relationship, without, however, a psychological analysis,
see D. P. Walker, "Ficino's Spiritus."
4. See also Tom Moore, "Musical Therapy," Spring 1978 (New York: Spring Publications,
1978).
5. Ficino, Opera, p. 546.
6. Curt Sachs, The Commonwealth of Art (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1946), p.
105.
7. Paul Henry Lang, Music in Western Civilization (New York: W. W. Norton and Co.,
1941), p. 193.
8. The famous "serial" composer Anton Webern made some interesting and relevant
observations on these matters. He defined music as "natural law as related to the sense of
hearing." He also noted that "the diatonic scale was not invented, it was discovered." The
Path to the New Music (Bryn Mawr, Penna.: Theodore Presser Co., 1963), pp. 11 and 14.
                                        Notes                                       217

9. See Leo Spitzer, "Classical and Christian Ideas of World Harmony," Traditio 2 (1944):
414.
10. On the first two applications mentioned, see Hersey, Palaces, and for a modern theory
of Pythagorean proportion, see Hans Kayser, Akroasis: The Theory of World Harmonics
(Boston: Plowshare Press, 1970). For a technical analysis of Pythagorean proportions, see
Richard L. Crocker, "Pythagorean Mathematics and Music," Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 22, no. 2 (1963): 189-98; 22, no. 3 (1964): 325-36.
11. Albert Seay, Music in the Medieval World (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1965), p. 20.
12. On Fludd's musical philosophy, see: Frances Yates, Theatre of the World (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1969); John Hollander, The Untuning of the Sky (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961); and Peter J. Amman, "The Musical Theory and
Philosophy of Robert Fludd," Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 30 (1967):
198-227.
13. Ficino, Opera, p. 651.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., p. 566.
16. Ibid., pp. 537 and 562.
17. Ibid., pp. 559-60.
18. See Hillman, "Polytheistic?"
19. See Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology, chap. 2, "Pathologizing or Falling Apart."
20. Quoted in Klibansky, "Saturn," p. 5. Diels frag. Alcmaeon, B4.
21. A young American composer, Charles Wuorinen, makes the point from a musician's
point of view: "the whole point of functional harmony and modes of musical thought
derived from it is that it gets somewhere (usually to a 'home' key) in a certain specified
period of time. Now this, it seems to me, is absolutely contrary to the marvelously
improvisatory spirit of real 'spontaneously' created music." Elliott Schwarz and Barney
Childs, eds., Comtemporary Composers on Contemporary Music (New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1967), p. 374.
22. Ficino, Opera, p. 560.
23. Hillman, "Psychology: Monotheistic or Polytheistic?" p. 198. The italics are mine.
Notice the use of the image "circulate," particularly relevant to a zodiac of Gods.
24. See, for example, June Singer, Androgyny: Toward a New Theory of Sexuality (New
York: Doubleday, 1976), pp. 86~89. Singer inexplicably identifies polytheistic
consciousness with "desacralization" and suggests "androgynous monotheism" as an
alternative.
25. See Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology, p. 36 and passim; and Henry Corbin, "Mundus
Imaginalis, or the Imaginary and the Imaginal," Spring 1972 (New York: Spring
Publications, 1972), pp. 1~19.
26. Ficino, Opera, p. 920; see Kristeller, Philosophy, p. 358.
27. See D. P. Walker, "Ficino's Spiritus," pp. 143-44.
28. Ficino, Opera, p. 563.
29. See Amman, "Musical Theory."
30. C. G. Jung, The Psychology of the Transference, in The Practice of Psychotherapy,
 CW, vol. 16, 2nd ed. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1966), p. 271.
31. Angelo de Gubernatis, Zoological Mythology: or, The Legends of Animals, 2 vols.
(London: Truebner and Co., 1872), 1:323. See also Jung, Mysterium p. 291.
                       Bibliography


Allen, Michael J. B. Marsilio Ficino, The Philebus Commentary: A
   Critical Edition and Translation. Berkeley, Calif.: University of
   California Press, 1975.
Amman, Peter J. "The Musical Theory and Philosophy of Robert Fludd."
   Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 30 (1967): 198-227.
Bachofen, Johann Jakob. Myth, Religion, and Mother Right (Selected
   Writings). Translated by Ralph Manheim. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
   University Press, 1967.
Berry, Patricia. "An Approach to the Dream." In Spring 1974. New
   York: Spring Publications, 1974.
_____ . "The Rape of Demeter/Persephone and Neurosis." In Spring
   1975. New York: Spring Publications, 1975.
Best, Michael, and Brightman, Frank H., eds. The Book of Secrets of
   Albertus Magnus. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
Brion, Marcel. The Medici: A Great Florentine Family. Translated by
   Gilles and Heather Cremonegi. London: Elek Books, 1969.
Brown, Norman O. "Daphne or Metamorphosis." In Myths, Dreams,
   and Religion. Edited by Joseph Campbell. New York: E. P. Dutton,
   1970.
______ Life against Death. New York: Vintage Books, 1959.
_____ . Love's Body. New York: Vintage Books, 1966.
Cassirer, Ernst. The Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance
   Philosophy. Translated by Mario Domandi. Philadelphia: University
   of Pennsylvania Press, 1963.
Chastel, Andre. Marsile Ficin et lart. Geneva: Droz, 1954.
_____ . The Myth of the Renaissance. Translated by Stuart Gilbert.
   Geneva: Albert Skira, 1969.
Cirlot, Juan Eduardo. A Dictionary of Symbols. Translated by Jack
   Sage. New York: Philosophical Library, 1962.
Corbin, Henry. "Mundus Imaginalis." In Spring 1972. New York: Spring
   Publications, 1972.
Crocker, Richard L. "Pythagorean Mathematics and Music." Journal of
  Aesthetics and Art Criticism 22 (1963): 189-98; 22 (1964):325-36.

                                 218
                            Bibliography                           219

 Dodds, E. R. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley, Calif.: University
    of California Press, 1951.
 Evans, Joan, and Serjeantson, Mary S. English Medieval Lapidaries.
    London: Oxford University Press, 1933.
Ferenczi, Sandor. Thalassa: A Theory of Genitality. Translated by
    Henry Alden Bunker. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1968.
Ficino, Marsilio. Opera Omnia. 2 vols. Basel, 1576; reprint edition,
    Torino: Bottega d'Erasmo, 1959.
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. Translated by James
    Strachey. New York: Avon Books, 1965.
_____ . "Mourning and Melancholia." Translated under the supervision
    of Joan Riviere. Collected Papers, vol. 4. New York: Basic Books,
    1959.
 Friedlander, Paul. Plato: An Introduction. Translated by Hans
    Meyerhoff. Bollingen Series 59. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
    Press, 1973.
Golden, Leon. "Katharsis as Clarification: An Objection Answered.''
     Classical Quarterly 23 (May 1973):45-46.
--------- "Mimesis and Catharsis." Classical Philology 64 (1969):145-53.
Gubernatis, Angelo de. Zoological Mythology; or, The Legends of
    Animals. 2 vols. London: Treubner and Co., 1872.
Heidegger, Martin. "The Ode on Man in Sophocles' Antigone.” In
    Sophocles: A Collection of Critical Essays. Edited by Thomas M.
    Woodard. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1966.
Hersey, G. L. Pythagorean Palaces: Magic and Architecture in the Italian
    Renaissance. Ithaca, N.Y., and London: Cornell University Press,
    1976.
Hibbert, Christopher. The House of Medici: Its Rise and Fall. New York:
    William Morrow, 1975.
Hillman, James. "Abandoning the Child." In Loose Ends: Primary
    Papers in Archetypal Psychology. Zurich: Spring Publications, 1975.
--------- "Anima." In Spring 1973. New York: Spring Publications, 1973.
--------- "Dionysos in Jung's Writings." In Spring 1972. New York:
    Spring Publications, 1972.
-------- . The Dream and the Underworld. New York: Harper and Row,
    1979.
--------- The Myth of Analysis. New York: Harper Colophon Books,
    1978.
--------- "On Senex Consciousness." In Spring 1970. New York: Spring
    Publications, 1970.
--------- "Peaks and Vales." In On the Way to Self-Knowledge. Edited by
    Jacob Needleman and Dennis Lewis. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
    1976.
--------- "Plotino, Ficino, and Vico as Precursors of Archetypal
    Psychology." In Loose Ends: Primary Papers in Archetypal
    Psychology. Zurich: Spring Publications, 1975.
220                     The Planets Within

______ "Pothos: The Nostalgia of the Puer Aeternus." In Loose Ends:
   Primary Papers in Archetypal Psychology. Zurich: Spring
   Publications, 1975.
______ “Psychology: Monotheistic or Polytheistic?" In Spring 1971.
   New York: Spring Publications, 1971.
______Re-Visioning Psychology. New York: Harper and Row, 1975.
______"Senex and Puer: An Aspect of the Historical and Psychological
   Present." In Eranos Jahrbuch, vol. 36. Zurich: Rhein, 1969.
______ "Senex Destruction and a Renaissance Solution." In Spring 1975.
   New York: Spring Publications, 1975.
Hollander, John. The Untuning of the Sky. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
   University Press, 1961.
Jayne, Sears. "Marsilio Ficino's Commentary on Plato's Symposium."
   University of Missouri Studies 19 (1944).
Jong, Helena M. E. De. Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens: Sources of an
   Alchemical Book of Emblems. Leiden: Brill, 1969.
Jung, C. G. The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. CW, vol. 9,
   Translated by R. F. C. Hull. 2nd ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
   University Press, 1968.
_____ . Civilization in Transition. C.W, vol. 10. Translated by R. F. C.
   Hull. 2nd ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1970.
______ Man and His Symbols. New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1968.
_____ . Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Edited by Aniela Jaffe.
   Translated by Richard Winston and Clara Winston. New York:
   Vintage Books, 1963.
_____ . Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW, vol. 14. Translated by R. F. C.
   Hull. 2nd ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1970.
______ The Practice of Psychotherapy. CW, vol. 16. Translated by R.
   F. C. Hull. 2nd rev. ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
   1966.
_____ . Psychology and Alchemy. CW, vol. 12. Translated by R. F. C.
   Hull. 2nd rev. ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968.
______ Psychology and Religion: West and East. CW, vol. 11.
   Translated by R. F. C. Hull. 2nd ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
   University Press, 1969.
Jung, C. G., and Kerenyi, C. Essays on a Science of Mythology.
   Translated by R. F. C. Hull. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
   Press, 1969.
Jung, Emma. Animus and Anima. Zurich: Spring Publications, 1974.
Kayser, Hans. Akroasis: The Theory of World Harmonics. Boston:
   Plowshare Press, 1970.
Kerenyi, C. Dionysos: Archetypal Image of Indestructible Life.
   Translated by Ralph Manheim. Bollingen Series 65. Princeton, N.J.:
   Princeton University Press, 1976.
_____ . "The Mysteries of the Kabeiroi." In The Mysteries: Papers from
                            Bibliography                           221

   the Eranos Yearbooks. Edited by Joseph Campbell. New York:
   Pantheon Books, 1955.
Klibansky, Raymond; Panofsky, Erwin; and Saxl, Fritz. Saturn and
   Melancholy. New York: Basic Books, 1964.
Kristeller, Paul Oskar. The Philosophy of Marsilio Ficino. Translated by
   Virginia Conant. Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1964.
Kuhns, L. Oscar., ed. "Bestiaries and Lapidaries." In Medieval Song and
   Story. Columbia University Course in Literature 4. Freeport, N.Y.:
   Books for Libraries Press, 1928-29.
Langer, Susanne K. Feeling and Form. New York: Charles Scribner's
   Sons, 1953.
Lemmi, Charles. The Classical Deities in Bacon: A Study in
Mythological Symbolism. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press, 1933.
Lopez-Pedraza, Rafael. Hermes and His Children. Zurich: Spring
   Publications, 1977.
May, Rollo. Love and Will. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1969.
Miller, David L. "Orestes: Myth and Dream as Catharsis." In Myth,
   Dreams, and Religion. Edited by Joseph Campbell. New York: E. P.
   Dutton, 1970.
Moore, Tom. "Musical Therapy." In Spring 1978. New York: Spring
   Publications, 1978.
Onians, Richard Broxton. The Origins of European Thought.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951.
Otto, Walter. Dionysus: Myth and Cult. Translated by Tobert B.
   Palmer. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1965.
Panofsky, Erwin. The Life and Art of Albrecht Diirer. Rev. 4th ed.
   Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1955.
Panofsky, Erwin. Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art. 2nd ed.
   Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1965.
Radin, Paul. The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology.
   New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
Seznec, Jean. The Survivial of the Pagan Gods. Translated by Barbara F.
   Sessions. Bollingen Series 38. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
   Press, 1972.
Shumaker, Wayne. The Occult Sciences in the Renaissance. Berkeley,
   Calif.: University of California Press, 1972.
Spitzer, Leo. "Classical and Christian Ideas of World Harmony."
   Traditio 2 (1944):409-64; 3 (1945):307-64.
Stein, Murray. "The Devouring Father." In Fathers and Mothers. Edited
   by Patricia Berry. New York: Spring Publications, 1973.
Trinkaus, Charles Edward. In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and
   Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought. 2 vols. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press, 1970.
Vitale, A. "The Archetype of Saturn or Transformation of the Father." in
   Fathers and Mothers. Edited by Patricia Berry. New York: Spring
   Publications, 1973.
222                     The Planets Within

Walker, D. P. The Ancient Theology. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
  Press, 1972.
______ "Ficino's Spiritus and Music.” Annales Musicologiques 1 (1953):
  131-50.
Webern, Anton. The Path to the New Music. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Theodore
  Presser Co., 1963.
Wind, Edgar. Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance. Rev. and enl. ed. New
  York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1968.
Yates, Frances. Art of Memory. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  1966.
______ Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. New York:
  Vintage Books, 1969.
______ Theatre of the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
  1969.
                                   Index


Accommodation, 123-5, 78                    103; and the sun, 136; and wine,
Affection of soul, 65                       80-81
Agriculture, 157                          Bachofen, Johann Jakob, 130; on
Albertus Magnus, Book of Secrets, 164       Luna, 157
Alcmaeon of Croton, 200-1                 Bacon, Roger, 124
Angel, 55-56                              Beauty, 114
Anima: and love, 112; Luna, 157           Beckett, Samuel: Endgame, 70, 169
Anima Mundi (World Soul), 44, 127;        Bembo, Pietro, 122
  and culture, 180; and elixir, 73, 76;   Bestiaries, 21
  produced by Jupiter, 176                Bisticci, Vespasiando da, 30
Animus: as light, 93; Mercurial, 149      Blake, William 17
Apollo: associated with elements, 77,     Black bile, 167. See also Melancholy
  80; in Bachofen, 131; and Daphne,       Body: and psychic imagery, 81; soul
  150; as light, 94; and Mercury, 148;      and, 37; without soul, 45-47
  and music, 88-89                        Boethius, 194
Apuleius: Eros and Psyche, 114            Boderie, Guy le Febvre de la, 128
Aquinas, Thomas, 35                       Botticelli,   Sandro:    and   Lorenzo
Architecture: and cultivation, 59; a        di'Medici, 32; neoplatonism, 22;
  Ficinian art, 216 n. 10; and Jupiter,     Birth of Venus, 141; Primavera,
  180                                       137-42, 148, 150-51
Aristotle: on catharsis, 69; on music,    Brown, Norman O.: on Daphne, 150;
  194; sertsus communis in, 51; on          description of Dionysus, 81; on
  soul, 40                                  shifting images, 152; claim for
Aroma of love, 112                          universal poetics, 43, 100
Arrangement: musical term used of         Bruno, Giordano, 23
  soul, 23, 125                           Bull, 161
Arret on, 105
Art: influence of Ficino on, 54           Cancer and Capricorn: gates of,
Assagioli, Roberto, 129                     157-59
Astrology: ancient, 16; Ficinian, 50:     Careggi, 31. 82
  influence of planets in, 37; modern     Carpenters, 168
  practice of, 120; Renaissance, 30       Cassiodorus, 194
Astronomy, 193                            Cassirer, Ernst: and the cultivation of
Athena, 148                                 spirit, 60-61; on symbol, 43
                                          Catharsis: of Aristotle, 69; in music, 88
Bacchus (Dionysus): in Bachofen, 131;     Celestial temperament, 58, 69, 197-98
  brother of Apollo, 94; associated       Cemeteries, 169
  with elements, 77; Ficino's "father,"   Chastity, 139, 141-42, 144
  30; priest image, 101; and religion,    Chloris, 139, 141


                                      223
224                                  Index

Chrysolite, 133                           Eidos, 51
Circle: God as, 128; of love, 139,        Elixir, 73
  141-42; form of soul, 52; of spirit,    Enlightenment, 91
  60                                      Eros, 36, 113
City planning, 59                         Exorcism, 33, 209 n. 6
Clothes, 59                               Euripides: Bacchae, 57
Clouds, 151                               Ethereal body, 52
Cold, 169
Collectors, 168                           Fantasy: defined, 210 n. 7; Hillman on,
Colors: Graces, 137; light, 93-94;           43; as soul function, 51
  Mars, 186; Mercury's motley, 153;       Feelings: without soul, 46-47
  peacock, 207                            Ferenczi, Sandor: Thalassa, 144
Comet: soul as, 53, 210 n. 12             Ficino, Marsilio: attitude toward
Compensation, 58                             astrology, 122; centrality of soul in,
Constellation, 57-58                         34; horoscope of, 57, 210 n. 20;
Corneolus, 146                               influence on art, 19; his mother and
Corpus Hermeticurn, 34—38; Asclepius,        prophecy, 107; occult interests,
  38; history of, 32; Mind to Hermes,        29-30, 34. Works: Commentary on
  37; Picatrix, 36; Pimander, 36;            Plato's Symposium, 71, 92, 97, 99,
  secret, 104                                107, 140; De Amore, 187; De
Council of Ferrara, 31                       Lumine, 90, 92, 94; De Sole, 127;
Crocodile, 134                               Libri de Vita Tres, 23; Theologia
Cultivation, 58-62                           Platonica, 32-33, 111. See also
Cupid, 139-40                                Medici
Cusa, Nicholas of: influence on Ficino,   Fish: belly of, 41
  35; secret theology, 104; Tarot, 181    Flora, 139
                                          Florence: description of, 33; music in,
Daimon, 55-57, 121; image of, 210            196. See also Medici
  n. 17                                   Florentine Academy, 31; enactment of
Daphne, 214 n. 6                             Plato's     Symposium       at,    31;
Death, 33, 169-70                            importance of pleasure in, 82; and
Demeter, 41                                  psychology, 19. See also Careggi
Demons, 204                               Fludd, Robert: influenced by Ficino,
Depression: Saturnian, 167, 171              23; image of overtones, 205-206; on
Developmental psychology and Luna,           ratios, 197
  163                                     Four Platonic Furors: Ficino's names
Dionysus. See Bacchus                        for, 212 n. 16
Dionysius the Areopagite, 104             Freud, Sigmund: ego as body, 67;
Divitio, Piero, 103                          Interpretation of Dreams, 99; on
Dodds, E.R., 98                              melancholy, 97, 168-69; on myth,
Dorn, Gerard, 65                             100
Dreams: Lunar, 159; Mercurial, 154;       Friedlander, Paul, 141
  moist, 145; and mystery, 105;
  prophetic, 109-10; and religion,        Galen: Ficino's "father," 30
  103; and tempering, 199                 Genius, 55. See also Daimon
Dryness: Saturnian, 168; of spirit, 144   Gnosticism: soul in, 96
                                          Gods: Renaissance interpretation of,
Eagle, 181                                  20
Ecology of soul, 59                       Goethe: and daimon, 55
Ego: and deeds, 53; Freudian, 78-79;      Grace, 119-20
  imaginal or aesthetic, 203; not same    Graces, Three: planets, 177-78; in
  as soul, 98; resistance, 78               Primavera, 139-41, 145
                                     Index                                     225
Gubernatis, Angelo de, 207                 Jesus in hell, 135
                                           Jung, C. G.: alchemy, 63; archetypes,
Harmonia (child of Mars and Venus),          196; complexes, 184; fermenting
  187-88                                     sun, 136; literature and anima, 21;
Harmony (music): Ficinian,         195;      mess, 72; religion, 102, 174; ritual,
  functional, 201                            106; shadow, 68, 186; spirit, 49; sun
Health: Ficinian remedies, 128; as           and moon, 128. Works: Modern
  wealth, 62                                 Man in Search of a Soul, 65;
Heat: alchemical, 71; and Mars, 187          Mysterium        Coniunctionis,    63;
Heidegger, Martin: on time, 109              Psychology and Alchemy,            63;
Hekate, 163                                  Psychology of the Transference, 63
Heraclitus: on daimon, 55; moisture,       Jupiter: compared to Sol, 178; and
  71, 143; soul in world, 37; sun, 136       culture, 176—77; moisture in, 143;
Hermes (God in myth), 149; music, 88,        peppermint, 20; personal tempering,
  150; in Odyssey, 154                       200; in Renaissance, 177; versus
Hermes Trismegistus: and Corpus              Saturn, 170; with Venus, 145; with
  Hermeticum, 35; theologian of              Venus and Sol, 178
  antiquity, 42. See also Corpus
  Hermeticum                               Kenosis, lunar, 162
Heroism, 181, 184                          Kerenyi, Carl: on Dionysus, 81;
Hillman, James, 21-22; deepening,            hermetic life, 153-54; mystery,
  111; depression, 171; Dionysus, 81;        104-105
  fantasy, 43; love and anima, 112;        Kristeller, Paul O.: on Ficino's
  polytheism, 202; Saturn, 165, 170,         astrology, 172; generation, 157;
  172; seeing through, 76; Venus, 146        prophecy, 106
Holy Ghost, 133                            Kronos, 166
"Hook" image, 111-12
                                           Langer, Susanne, 88
Horoscope: image in house, 60. See
                                           Lead, Saturnian, 167
  also Ficino
                                           Le Clerc, Guillaume: on Sol, 134-35
Human life stages: as lunar, 160
                                           Leonardo da Vinci, 33
Humanistic psychology, 81, 214 n. 14;
                                           Light: element of, 77
  solar, 130
                                           Lion, 135
Hyvano, Antonio (letter to on elixir),
                                           Lopez-Pedraza, Rafael, 154
  74
                                           Love: and Mars, 188; tonics, 114
                                           Luna: and growth, 157; moisture of,
Idolum, 51-52
                                             143; and Sol, 161; movement, 158
Image: and art, 20; culture as, 180;
  defined, 210 n. 7; Mercurial, 152;       Magic decoys, 181; and ratio, 176
  multidimensional,     87;    nourishes   Mandorla, 180, 182
  soul, 60; and poet fantasy, 99;          Mars, 57, with Venus, 187
  synaesthetic, 81; of universe, 137;      Maslow, Abraham, 96; and solar
  and tempering, 199                        psychology, 130
Image-makers, 60                           Massa confusa (alchemical), 72
Imaginatio: faculty of soul, 51            Medici, Cosimo de', 30; imprisoned,
Imagination, 20, 50; and psycho­            184; influence, 31; and lyre, 31;
  poetics, 39                               translations encouraged, 32
Imitation, 198                             Medici, Lorenzo de', 30, 157, 177; in
Intelligence: Mercurial, 153                history, 32; and music,             196;
Interpretation: Mercurial, 149              Judgment of Paris letter, 204
Intestines: effect of Mars on, 185         Medici, Piero de', 32; and Botticelli, 30
                                           Meier, Michael: lunar kenosis, 162; on
Janus, 126; image of soul, 44-45            soul, 64
226                                  Index

Melancholy, 145. See also Saturn          Pico della Mirandola, 38; on sense of
Memory: aroma of wine, 84; art of,          self, 110; interpretation of Venus,
 53;     Dionysian,    84-85;      and      142
 imagination, 52-54; prophetic, 108       Pierfrancesco, Lorenzo di, 138
Mens, 129; Jupiter, 175; Saturn, 172;     Planets: human, 177-78; mechanical
 soul function, 51                          image of, 38; more than human, 21
Michelangelo, 33                          Plato, 29; eidos, 91; four frenzies, 97.
Mercury: in Primavera, 139-45               Works: Republic, 194; Symposium,
Microcosm, 17                               112
Moisture: Lunar, 156; Mercurial, 143;     Platonic love. 111
 of psyche, 144-45                        Pleasure, 82
Monarchia, 201                            Pethon, Giorgius Gemistus, 31
Monotheism, 57                            Pluralism, 188-89
Musano, Francisco, 89-90                  Plutarch, 55
Music: element of, 77; Ficinian, 88; as   Poetic theology, 38
 image, 86-87; planetary, 205; as         Poison, 185
 ratio,    197;    and    spirit,   66;   Polytonality, psychological, 201
 sympathetic vibration, 90; and time,     Prima materia: alchemy, 72
  88                                      Prophecy, 106-110; and melancholy,
Musica hutnana, mundana, instru-            215 n. 13
 mentalis, 86, 194                        Proserpine, 124
Musical terms as psychological, 88        Psychological attitude, 19
Music therapy: Ficinian, 31; planetary,   Psychology: critique of modern,
 205-206                                    16-18; defined, 44
Mysterium, 103                            Psychotherapist: as musician, 205
                                          Psychotherapy:      Ficinian,   49-50;
Narcissism, 79-80                           Lunar,     163;     in    Renaissance
Natural Magic: and cultivation, 59;         imagination, 19; as tempering, 203;
  imagination, 53; paintings as, 137;       without soul, 66
  and Primavera, 214 n. 4; solar, 133     Putrefactio: alchemy, 72
Nebo, 149                                 Puer, 166
Neoplatonism, 29, 96; in Primavera,       Puffers, 115
  139                                     Pythagoras: harmony, 195; musical
North Midland Lapidary, 133                 scale, 196
Nutmeg, 132                               Pythagoreans: on light, 94; against
Nutritive power of soul, 51                 Saturn, 58; wear white against
                                            Saturn, 170
Octaves of psyche, 206
Odyssey, 195                              Rage against self, 184, 186
Onians, Richard B., 83, 169               Ratio: and Jupiter, 175-76; soul
Ornamentation, 60                           function, 51
Orpheus, 41                               Rays: of planets, 50, 123; polytonal,
Osiris, 80                                   201-202
Otto, Walter, 81                          Reason of light (ratio lucis), 90-92
                                          Reflection, 68
Pan, 89                                   Religion: as attention, 42; natural, 103;
Panofsky, Erwin, 140                        and planets, 198; and priestly
Paris, Judgment of, 204                     madness, 102-106
Peacock, 207                              Renaissance: meaning of, 29
Peppermint, 132                           Renaissance man, 31
Peris, Fritz, 78                          Repression, 79
                                     Index                                 227

Rigor, 80                                 Sympathetic vibration, 205
Rilke, Rainer Maria: on daimon, 55;
  on harmony, 188                         Tarocchi, 181
                                          Temperament, 99
Sacerdotium, 103                          Tempering, 195; and Jupiter, 178; of
Saturn:     contemplation,      172-73;     psyche, 198, 200, 202-204
  depression, 57-58; against Luna,        Thales: on Gods, 62; soul in world, 37
  162; with Mars, 183; as Mens, 51;       Thoth, 149
  quiet, 104; in the university, 61       Three (number), 139
Saturn and Melancholy, 165, 170, 172      Time: Lunar, 158-60; prophetic, 107,
Schizophrenia, 46                           109
Schoenberg, Arnold, 201                   Triangulating, 64; Mercurial, 150
Scholars, 171                             Turtle, 146
Secret, sacred, 104                       Turtledove, 146
Senex: ego, 79-80, 200; Hillman on,
  171; and Saturn, 166; society,          Underworld, 41
  202-203, 207
Sense perception, 51                      Vacatio, 65
Seznec, jean: on astrology, 137; on       Valentine, Basil, 124
  Jupiter, 181                            Vaticinium: Mercurial, 149; prophetic,
Shadow, 198                                 106
Shaffer, Peter: Equus, 57                 Venus: earthly, 140-41; growth, 157;
Sloane Lapidary, 134                        heavenly, 110, 112, 140-41; moist
Snake: as lunar, 161                        spirit,    142 44;  in   Prirnavera,
Social psychology, Ficinian, 181            139-41; and sex, 57; in the
Socrates, 55                                university, 61, 146
Sol (sun): dry, 144; with Venus, 145      Vestal fire, 94
Sol Niger, 129, 166-67                    Villa Nova, Arnold de, 66-67, 83
Solar: animals, 134; night, 134-35;       Violence, 184
  psychology, 127, 129                    Virtu, 32
Solutio: alchemical, 67-69; poetic, 100
Solve et coagula, 66, 70,                 Wakening: Mercurial, 151
Soul: as depth, 41; loss of, 65, 97;      Walker, D.P., 48-49
  metaphysical, 40; between mind and      Webern, Anton, 216 n. 8
  body, 44; seeing with, 54; in world,    Wind, Edgar: on Mars and Venus, 187;
  40, 58                                   on mystery, 104; Prirnavera, 138;
Spirit: cultivation, 59-62; drying         sense of self, 110
  tendency, 134; and music, 195;          Wine: daily dosage, 83; elemental, 77
  practices, 74; as sexual, 132; and      Wuorinen, Charles, 217 n. 21
  soul, 48-50                             World Soul. See Anima mundi
Spiritus Mundi, 139
Stevens, Wallace, 153                     Yates, Frances: art of memory, 54; on
Strife, 185                                 Ficinian therapy, 137, 183; on
Sublimation, 70 72                          Pimander, 36; on Prirnavera, 139
Super-ego, 184                            Yeats, W.B.: aroma of wine, 85; on
Superstition, 42                            daimon, 55
Surprise, Mercurial, 152
Swan, 134-35                              Zephyr, 139, 146
Psychology/Astrology
                                                                    $16.95


          The Planets Within
                    Introduction by Noel Cobb
The Planets Within asks us to return to antiquity with new eyes. It centers
on one of the most psychological moments of the pre-scientific age—
Renaissance Italy, where a group of varied and talented individuals
clustered in the fifteenth century. These inner Columbuses charted new
territories which still give us today a much needed sense of who we are
and where we have come from, and the right routes to take towards
fertile and unexplored places.
  Chief among these masters of the interior life was Marsilio Ficino,
presiding genius of the Florentine Academy. Ficino taught that all things
exist in soul and must be lived in its light. Therefore this study broadens
and deepens our understanding of psyche, for Ficino was a doctor of
soul and his insights teach us the care and nurture of soul.
  Moore takes as his guide Ficino's own fundamental tool—
imagination. Respecting the integrity and autonomy of images. The
Planets Within unfolds a poetics of soul in a kind of dialogue between
the laconic remarks of Ficino and the need to give these remarks a life
and context for our day.
   "The reader turning to this book for knowledge and self-knowledge
will be delighted to find it so instructive, enjoyable and 'user-friendly.'
With Tom Moore as guide you will feel at home in the marvelous world
of Renaissance Hermetism, its psychological and astrological insights,
its music, its madness. How much Moore knows and how generous
he is in giving it to the reader."                           _
         °                                                   James Hillman
   "In his presentation of psychological insight and understanding in­
formed by Renaissance astrology and musicology, Dr. Moore's clarity
with complex matters is topped only by his wisdom. To tune the fantasy
of a 'well-tempered life' with the disharmonic of 'necessary madness'
is precisely the soulful genius that Dr. Moore's master, Ficino, would
have loved."                                                   ^
                                                               David Miller

  Thomas Moore is a psychotherapist in private practice, a writer,
teacher, and the founder of the Institute for the Study of Imagination.
He is the author of many articles, and of Rituals of the Imagination (Dallas
Institute) and Dark Eros: The Sadean Imagination (Spring, forthcoming).
Dr. Moore is also the editor of A Blue Fire, Selected Writings of James
Hillman (Harper and Row, 1989).
Cover art: Salomon Trismosin, Splendor Solis, MS Harley 3469, courtesy
of the British Library.
                                                         ISBN 0-940262-28-2


         Lindisfame Books
Cover design by Norman Kanter
                                                         9 780940 262287
