
THE 
+-low  the Male and  Female 
in  Each of lAs  Affects 
      Relationships 
JOHN  A.          
Pel'sonal  C\l'owth  &  Ch,.istian  Life 
THE 
s 
PAitT 
E 
E 
s 
This  book  concev-ns  t ~ e   masctAi ine  and  temi nine 
dimensions  of  the  sotAI -tev-med  the  ani ma/  ani mtAS  by 
c . a . 3tAng.  Jt a l so  demonstv-ates  how t he  femini ne  paV't 
of  a  man  and  the  masctAi ine  paV't  of  a  woman  av-e  the 
invisi b l e  pav-tnev-s  in  any  male-female  v-el ationship.  The 
atAthov- pv-ovides  d i v-ection  i n  tAndev-standing  and  deal ing 
with  .pv-ojections  that  can  damage  and  even  pv-event  a 
v-eal  v-elationshi p  between  a  man  and  a  woman. Thi s  is 
a  book  wv-itten  fov- peopl e  evev-ywhev-e  who  want  to 
tAndev-stanc::l  themselves  and  thei v- v-el a t ionshi ps  bettev-. 
JOHN A.  SANFOR.D,  a  3tAngian analyst and Epi scopali an 
pv-iest
1 
is  CtAV'V'ently  a  ftAII -tlme  cotAnsel ov- and  atAthov- in 
addition to doing extensive l ecttAv-i ng. t-l is  pv-eviotAS  books 
incltAde  f-lea/i ns ancl Wh.oleness (PatAl ist Pv-ess  1977)  and 
DV'eams  ancl  f-lea/ins  (PatAl ist Pv-ess
1 
1978) . t-I e  CtAV'V'entl y 
l ives  with  h i s  w ife  and  two  chi l dv-en  in San D iego. 
PaVI Iist Pl'"ess 
www. paVI Iistpl'"ess.com 
$14.95 
ISBN  0 - 8091 - 2277 - 4 
5  1 4 9  5 
9  780809  122776 
Lroarn 
                              
How  the Male and Female 
in  Each  of Us 
Affects Our Relationships 
John  A.  Sanford 
PAULIST PRESS 
New  York/Mahwah 
Unless otherwise  indicated,  Biblical  quotations  are from  the Jerusalem  Bible. 
Copyright  @1980 by  John Sanford 
All  rights  reserved.  No  part of this  book  may  be  reproduced  or transmitted  in 
any  form  or  by  any  means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying, 
recording or by  an information storage and retrieval system without permission 
in  writing from  the publisher. 
Library  of Congress 
Catalog Card Number:  79-56604 
ISBN:  0-8091-2277-4 
Published  by  Paulist  Press 
997  Macarthur  Blvd. 
Mahwah,  NJ  07430 
Printed and bound in  the 
United States of America 
Introduction  1 
Chapter One  3 
Chapter Two  31 
Chapter Three  56 
Chapter Four  80 
Appendix:  Active Imagination  119 
Bibliography  129 
Index  133 
Acknowledgments 
I am indebted to my good friend, The Rev. 
Morton  T.  Kelsey  and  my  friend  and 
colleague  Gilda  Frantz  for  reading  the 
manuscript  and  giving  me  the  benefit  of 
their comments; and to my wife, Linny, for 
her many helpful suggestions, and to Helen 
Macey  for  her  invaluable  help  with  the 
preparation  of this  manuscript. 
The  subject  of men  and  women,  of the  nature  of the  masculine 
and  the  feminine,  always  arouses  our  interest,  especially  now, 
when  men and women  are  trying,  as  never before,  to understand 
themselves,  and when the roles of the sexes and their relationship 
to  each  other are being  reexamined.  It is  also  a  practical subject, 
promising to give  us  useful information that we  can apply direct-
ly  to ourselves  and to  our personal relationships. 
One  of the  most  important  contributions  of the  Swiss  psy-
chiatrist C.  G.  Jung lies in this area.  In his concepts of the anima 
and  animus  Jung  makes  a  unique  addition  to  our  understand-
ing  of ourselves  as  men  and  women.  In fact,  it  can  be  said  that 
among the psychologists of this century only Jung has differenti-
ated  the  psychology  of men  and women,  and has  shown  us  how 
they  interrelate.  It is  because  of the  great  interest  today  in  the 
psychology of the sexes,  and because there is  no readily  available 
volume  that  brings  together  Jung's  most  important  ideas  in  this 
regard,  that I  have written this book. 
It is  for  people  to  whom  Jung's ideas  on  the  masculine  and 
feminine  are  new,  as  well  as  to  those  who  already  have  expe-
rience in Jungian psychology and may be interested in the impor-
tant  discussions  that  have  taken  place  regarding  the  masculine 
and  feminine  where  the  issues  are  not  yet  decided.  Although  I 
have  tried  to  pull  together  the many  threads  of Jungian  thought 
on this subject,  the interested reader may wish to go  more deeply 
1 
2  The Invisible  Partners 
into  it,  so  there  is  a  selected  bibliography  at  the  back.  Let  this 
book stand as  an  introduction,  and a  survey  of a  rich  and  varied 
subject,  but not as  the final  work in a field  of knowledge that will 
call for  much more discussion  and further investigation.  In deal-
ing with the masculine and the feminine  we are,  in the final  anal-
ysis,  discussing  the  human  soul,  and  about  this  much  more  still 
remains  to be discovered. 
Men are used to thinking of themselves only as  men,  and women 
think  of themselves  as  women,  but  the  psychological  facts  indi-
cate that every human being is androgynous. 
1 
"Within every man 
there  is  the  Reflection  of a  Woman,  and  within  every  woman 
there  is  the  Reflection  of a  Man,"  writes  the  American  Indian 
Hyemeyohsts Storm, who is stating not his own personal opinion, 
but  an  ancient  American  Indian  belief. 
2 
The  ancient  alchemists 
agreed:  "Our Adamic hermaphrodite,  though he appears in mas-
culine form,  nevertheless carries about with him Eve,  or his femi-
nine part,  hidden in his body."
3 
Mythology, and ancient traditions,  which frequently  express 
psychological  truths  that  otherwise  would  elude  our  attention, 
1 
The word androgynous  comes  from  two  Greek  words,  andros and gynos, 
meaning  "man"  and  "woman"  respectively,  and  refers  to  a  person  who  com-
bines  within  his  or  her  personality  both  male  and  female  elements.  The  word 
hermaphrodite is  an analogous word.  It comes from  the Greek god Hermaphro-
ditus,  who  was  born  of the  union  of Aphrodite and  Hermes  and embodied  the 
sexual characteristics of both of them. 
2 
Hyemeyohsts  Storm,  Seven  Arrows  (New  York:  Harper and  Row,  1962), 
p.  14. 
3 
From  the  alchemical  treatise  Hermetis  Trismegisti  Tractatus  vere  Aur-
eus, 1610,  quoted  by  C.  G.  Jung  in  Letters,  Vol.  L  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton 
University  Press,  1973),  p.  443;  and cf.  Letters,  Vol.  IL  (Princeton,  N.J.: Prince-
ton  University  Press,  1975),  p.  321  n.  2. 
3 
4  The Invisible  Partners 
often  state  this  belief in  the  sexual  duality  of human  nature.  In 
the  Book  of Genesis,  for  instance,  we  read  that  God was  an  an-
drogynous  being,  and that  the  first  human beings,  being  created 
in  His
4 
image,  were  therefore  likewise  male  and  female:  "On the 
day  God created  Adam," begins  the fifth  chapter of Genesis, "he 
made  him  in  the  likeness  of God.  Male  and  female  he  created 
them.  He blessed  them  and  gave  them  the  name  Man."  We  are 
also told in the second chapter of Genesis that when God wished 
to  make  woman  He  put  Adam  into  a  deep  sleep,  removed  a  rib 
from his body, and made Eve from Adam's rib.  Clearly the origi-
nal man,  Adam,  was  thus both male  and female.  From this early 
division of the originally whole,  bisexual  human being  comes  the 
longing,  through sexuality,  for  the  reunion of the severed  halves. 
The second  chapter continues:  "This is  why  a  man  leaves  his  fa-
ther  and  mother  and joins  himself to  his  wife,  and  they  become 
one body."
5 
This  idea  that  the  original  human  being  was  male  and  fe-
male is found in numerous traditions.  For instance,  both the Per-
sian  and  Talmudic  mythologies  tell  how  God  first  made  a  two-
sexed being-a male and a female joined together-and then lat-
er divided  that being into two.  This first,  original  man was  often 
represented as having extraordinary qualities,  as  found  in the ex-
tremely widespread  image  of the Anthropos,  or Original  Man,  so 
often referred to in  the writing of C.  G ~   Jung and his colleagues. 
6 
It is  a  thought  expressed  most  succinctly,  perhaps,  in  Plato's 
Symposium.  Here  Plato's  character  Aristophanes  retells  an  an-
cient  Greek  myth  about  the  original  human  beings,  who  were 
perfectly  round,  had four  arms  and four  legs,  and one head  with 
two faces,  looking opposite ways.  These human spheres possessed 
such  marvelous  qualities  and great  intelligence  that  they  rivaled 
the gods who,  acting out of envy and fear,  cut the spheres in two 
in  order to reduce their power.  The original,  spherical beings fell 
'  Wherever possible  I  will  try to  avoid  using  the masculine to  refer  to God 
or mankind,  but common  usage  and  the  awkwardness  of our language  prevent 
my  being completely consistent. 
'Gen. 2:24. 
6 
For a summary of the idea of the Anthropos see Marie-Louise von  Franz, 
Individuation  in  Fairy  Tales  (Zurich:  Spring Publications,  1977),  pp.  90fT. 
Chapter One  5 
apart  into  two  halves,  one  feminine  and  one  masculine.  Ever 
since then,  so  the story goes,  the two severed parts of the original 
human  being  have  been  striving  to  reunite.  "And  when  one  of 
them meets his  other half," Aristophanes informs  us,  "the actual 
half of himself,  ... the pair are lost in  an amazement of love and 
friendship  and  intimacy,  and  one  will  not  be  out  of the  other's 
sight  ... even  for  a  moment:  these  are the people who  pass  their 
whole  lives  together;  yet  they could not explain what they  desire 
of one another."
7 
Storm's intuition  that each  man  contains  the  reflection  of a 
woman,  and  vice  versa,  is  also  reflected  in  shamanism.  The  sha-
man,  the  primitive  healer  or  '!medicine  man,"  often  has  a  tute-
lary spirit who assists him in the work of healing and teaches and 
instructs  him  in  the  healing  arts.  In the  case  of a  male  shaman, 
this  tutelary  spirit is  female  and acts  like  a  spirit  wife  to him.  In 
the case of a shamaness the tutelary spirit is male,  and is  her spir-
it husband,  whom she has in addition to her flesh-and-blood  hus-
band. The shaman is unique partly because he or she has cultivat-
ed  a  special  relationship  to  the  other  half  of  his  or  her 
personality,  which  has become a  living  entity,  a  real  presence.  A 
spirit  wife  says  to  her  shaman  husband,  "I love  you,  I  have  no 
husband now,  you  will  be my husband and I  shall be a wife  unto 
you.  I  shall  give  you  assistant  spirits.  You are  to  heal  with  their 
aid,  and  I  shall  teach  and  help  you  myself."  The  shaman  com-
ments,  "She  has  been  coming  to  me  ever  since,  and  I  sleep  with 
her as  with  my own wife."
8 
Poets  and philosophers,  who often  see  things  before the sci-
entists do,  also  have intuited that a human being is  androgynous. 
So  the  Russian  philosopher  Nicholas  Berdyaev  writes,  "Man  is 
not only  a  sexual  but a  bisexual  being,  combining  the  masculine 
and the feminine  principle in himself in different proportions and 
often  in  fierce  conflict.  A  man  in  whom  the  feminine  principle 
was  completely  absent  would  be  an  abstract  being,  completely 
severed from  the cosmic element.  A  woman in whom the mascu-
'  The  Philosophy  of Plato,  The Jowett  translation,  ed.  Irwin  Edman,  Sym-
posium  (New  York:  The Modem Library,  1928),  p.  356. 
'Mircea Eliade,  Shamanism  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press, 
(1964),  p.  72. 
6  The  Invisible  Partners 
line  principle  was  completely  absent  would  not be  a  personality . 
. . . It is  only the union of these two  principles that constitutes a 
complete human being.  Their union is  realized  in  every  man  and 
every  woman  within  their  bisexual,  androgynous  nature,  and  it 
also  takes  place  through  the  intercommunion  between  the  two 
natures,  the masculine and the feminine. "
9 
So  this idea of man's androgynous  nature is  an old  one  that 
has often been expressed in  mythology and by  the great intuitive 
spirits of times past.  In our century,  C.  G.  Jung is  the first  scien-
tist  to  observe  this  psychological  fact  of human  nature,  and  to 
take it into account in  describing  the whole  human being. 
Jung called the opposites in man and woman the anima and 
the animus.  By the anima he meant the feminine  component in a 
man's  personality,  and  by  the  animus  he  designated  the  mascu-
line  component  in  a  woman's  personality.  He  derived  these 
words from the Latin word animare,  which means to enliven, be-
cause he felt  that the  anima and the animus  were  like  enlivening 
souls or spirits to men and women. 
Jung  did  not  simply  dream  up  his  idea  of the  anima  and 
animus,  nor did  he allow  his  ideas  to  remain  on the  level  of cre-
ative  intuition,  as  did  the  Russian  philosopher  Berdyaev.  Jung 
was  a  scientist,  and  the  scope  of his  scientific  investigation  was 
the human psyche,  hence his ideas are grounded on psychological 
facts.  Empirical evidence for the reality of the anima and animus 
can be found  wherever the psyche spontaneously expresses itself. 
The anima and animus  appear in  dreams,  fairy  tales,  myths,  the 
world's great literature, and, most important of all, in the varying 
phenomena  of human  behavior.  For  the  anima  and  animus  are 
the Invisible  Partners  in  every  human  relationship,  and in  every 
person's search for individual wholeness.  Jung called them arche-
types, because the anima and animus are essential building blocks 
in the psychic structure of every man and woman. If something is 
archetypal, it is typical.  Archetypes form the basis for  instinctive, 
unlearned  behavior  patterns  that  are  common  to  all  mankind, 
and represent themselves in human consciousness in certain typi-
'Nicholas Berdyaev,  The Destiny of Man  (New York:  Harper Torchbooks, 
1960),  pp.  61-62. 
Chapter One  7 
cal ways.  For Jung, the concepts of anima/animus explain a wide 
variety  of psychic  facts  and  form  a  hypothesis  that  is  confirmed 
over and over again by empirical  evidence. 
Naturally, in any such discussion as  this we  come up against 
the question of what is meant by  "masculine" and "feminine."  Is 
there  a  difference  between  the  masculine  and  feminine?  Are  the 
apparent differences between men and women due to archetypal, 
underlying  psychological  dissimilarities,  or are  they  entirely  the 
result  of socially  assigned  roles  and  conditioning?  In  support  of 
the  latter  idea  it  can  be  argued  that  the  roles  men  and  women 
play  sometimes  seem  to  be  designated  by  the  particular cultures 
in  which  they  exist.  It can  be· argued  that  men  and  women  do 
what  they  do  only  because  society  assigns  them  that  particular 
role or task.  According to this  point of view,  there is  no essential 
psychological  difference between men  and women,  and it is  only 
cultural  influence  that  produces  the  apparent  dissimilarities  be-
tween  the  male  and  the  female.  In  support  of this  contention  is 
the fact  that men can perform most of the functions  women  usu-
ally  perform,  except  the  biological  functions  associated  with 
childbearing,  of course,  and  women  can  also  perform  the  way 
men  do.  The  fact  that  women  do  not  usually  do  what  men  do, 
and  vice  versa,  is  laid  at the  door of social  expectation.  In addi-
tion,  there is  the admitted difficulty of defining what is  masculine 
and what is feminine,  for as soon as a definition is offered there is 
always  an  objection,  "But  women  (or  men)  sometimes  act  that 
way  too." 
The  fact  that  men  and  women  can  perform  many  of  the 
same functions in life supports the idea that each person is a com-
bination of male and female  polarities.  Because of their feminine 
side,  men  can  function  in  certain  circumstances  in  ways  tradi-
tionally  regarded  as  feminine,  and  vice  versa.  This  is  a  matter 
that will  be considered in more detail later on. 
On the other side  of the discussion,  the question  of whether 
or not  there  is  an  archetype  for  the  masculine  and  for  the  femi-
nine-that  is,  whether  essential  psychological  differences  exist 
between  the sexes  and between the psychological  polarities  with-
in  each  sex-is  a  matter  to  be  decided  by  empirical  evidence. 
Jung's view  is  that,  while undoubtedly the cultural and social ex-
pectations  and  roles  greatly  influence  the  ways  men  and women 
8  The  Invisible  Partners 
live  their  lives,  there  are  nevertheless  underlying  archetypal  psy-
chological patterns. The argument for this position will gradually 
unfold in the course of this book, and readers can decide the issue 
for  themselves in terms of their own life experiences. 
As  for  differentiating  between  what  is  the  masculine  and 
what is  the feminine,  it is  perhaps best to talk in  terms of images 
rather  than  in  terms  of psychological  functioning.  To  speak  of 
male  and  female  is  a  way  of saying  that  psychic  energy,  like  all 
forms of energy, flows  between two poles.  Just as electricity flows 
between  a  positive  and  a  negative  pole,  so  psychic  energy  flows 
between two poles that have been called masculine and feminine. 
They are not always called masculine and feminine,  however, and 
in  this  book  the  ancient  Chinese  terminology  of  Yang  and  Yin 
will sometimes be used instead.  These terms are often more satis-
factory  because  Yang  and  Yin  are not defined in terms of role,  or 
even  in terms of psychological qualities,  but by  means  of images. 
"Yang  means  'banners  waving  in  the  sun,'  that  is,  something 
'shone upon' or bright." Yang is designated by heaven, the sky, the 
bright,  the  creative,  the  south  side  of the  mountain  (where  the 
sun  shines)  and  the  north  side  of the  river  (which  also  receives 
the sunlight).  On the other hand,  "In its primary meaning Yin  is 
'the  cloudy,  the  overcast.'"  Yin  is  designated  by  the  earth,  the 
dark, the moist,  the receptive,  the north side of the mountain and 
the south  side of the  river. 
10 
Of course  the  Chinese also  speak  of 
Yang  as  the  masculine  and  Yin  as  the  feminine,  but  basically 
Yang  and  Yin  represent  the  two  spiritual  poles  along  which  all 
life  flows.  Yang  and  Yin  exist  in  men  and  women,  but  they  are 
also  cosmic  principles,  and their interaction and relationship  de-
termine  the  course  of events,  as  the  Chinese  wisdom  book,  the I 
Ching,  clearly shows. 
In a  similar vein,  the Chinese book of meditation,  the  T'ai I 
Chin  Hua  Tsung  Chih  [The  secret  of the  golden  flower],  tells  us 
of the two psychic poles in each man or woman.  One is called the 
p'o soul and is  represented  by  the  kidneys,  sexuality,  and the tri-
gram  K'an  (from  the  I  Ching),  and  expresses  itself as  eros.  The 
other,  the  hun  soul,  is  represented  by  the  heart,  consciousness, 
10 
The  I  Ching  or  Book  of Changes,  trans.  Richard  Wilhelm  and  Cary  F. 
Baynes.  (New  York:  Pantheon Books,  1950,  1966  ed.),  p.  xxxvi. 
Chapter One  9 
and  the  fire  trigram  Li,  and  expresses  itself as  logos.  These  two 
poles fall  away from  each other if their energies are directed only 
outward,  but  if their  energies  are  directed  inward,  through  cor-
rect meditation, the two unite to form  a higher and indestructible 
personality.  In the  translation  of this  Chinese  text by the sinolo-
gist  Richard  Wilhelm,  the  two  souls  are  also  called  anima  and 
animus.  Jung  notes  that  the  p'o soul  is  written  with  the  charac-
ters for  white and demon,  and therefore it means  "white ghost," 
and its  principle belongs  to  the lower,  earthbound nature so  it is 
Yin.  The hun soul is  made from  the characters for  cloud and de-
mon,  and  therefore  it  means  "cloud-demon,  a  higher  breath-
soul," and so  is  Yang. u 
We might wonder why,  if men and women have always had 
a  feminine  and  a  masculine  component,  this  fact  has  eluded  the 
awareness  of mankind  in  general  for  so  many  years.  Part of the 
answer  is  that  self-knowledge  has  never  been  one  of our  strong 
points.  To  the  contrary,  even  the  most  elemental  knowledge  of 
oneself is  something that most people resist  with the greatest de-
termination.  Usually  it  is  only  when  we  are  in  a  state  of great 
pain or confusion,  and only self-knowledge offers  a  way out,  that 
we are willing to risk our cherished ideas of what we  are like in a 
confrontation  with  the  truth,  and  even  then  many  people  prefer 
to live a  meaningless life  rather than to go  through the often dis-
agreeable  process  of  coming  to  know  themselves.  In  addition, 
there are some aspects of ourselves that are harder to know than 
others.  For instance,  the  shadow  personality  that  is  made  up  of 
unwanted and undeveloped characteristics,  which could have be-
come  part of consciousness  but were  rejected,  has  long  been rec-
ognized by  the church.  "The good that I  would  I  do not,  but the 
evil  which  I  would  not,  that I  do," cries out Saint Paul as  he an-
guishes over his shadowY It is not incredible to us that there is a 
darker side to our nature, because religion has so often pointed it 
out,  though  even  here  there  is  a  remarkable  conspiracy  within 
most of us to pay lip service to our darker nature but avoid seeing 
11 
See  The  Secret  of the  Golden  Flower,  trans.  Richard  Wilhelm,  with  a 
Foreword and Commentary by  C.  G. Jung,  trans.  from  the German by Cary F. 
Baynes (New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace and World,  1931,  rev.  ed.  1962),  p.  115. 
12 
Rom.  7:19  KJV. 
10  The Invisible  Partners 
it in the particular.  So  our shadow personality is often obvious to 
others,  but unknown to us.  Much greater is  our ignorance of the 
masculine  or feminine  components  within  us  that escape  our at-
tention because they are so entirely other than our consciousness. 
For this  reason  Jung  once  termed  the  integration  of the  shadow 
the "apprentice-piece" of becoming whole,  and the integration of 
the anima or animus the "master-piece."
13 
But there also is another factor that makes knowledge of the 
anima or animus  so  elusive:  These  psychic  factors  within  us  are 
usually  projected.  Projection is  a  psychic  mechanism that occurs 
whenever  a  vital  aspect  of our  personality  of which  we  are  un-
aware is  activated.  When something is  projected we  see it outside 
of us,  as though it belongs to someone else and has nothing to do 
with us.  Projection is  an unconscious  mechanism.  We  do not de-
cide to project something,  it happens  automatically.  If we  decid-
ed  to  project  something  it  would  be  conscious  to  us  and  then, 
precisely  because  it  is  conscious  to  us,  it  could  not be  projected. 
Only unconscious contents are projected;  once something has be-
come conscious projection ceases. 
So the anima and animus have, for the millennia of mankind's 
history,  been  projected  onto  mythological  figures,  onto  the  gods 
and  goddesses  who  have  peopled  our  spiritual  world,  and,  per-
haps  most  important  of all,  onto  living  men  and  women.  The 
gods  and  goddesses  of Greek  mythology  can  be  understood  as 
personifications of different aspects of the masculine or the femi-
nine  archetype.  Mythology  has  long  been  the  way  in  which  the 
human psyche personified itself,  and as long as people believed in 
the living reality of their gods and goddesses they could,  through 
appropriate ritual and worship, effect some sort of relationship to 
their psychic world. 
When the anima and animus are projected onto other people 
our perception of them is  remarkably altered.  For the most  part, 
man has  projected  the  anima  onto woman,  and woman  has  pro-
jected the animus onto man.  Woman has carried for  man the liv-
ing image of his  own feminine  soul  or counterpart,  and  man  has 
carried for woman the living image of her own spirit. This has led 
13 
C.  G.  Jung,  Collected  Works  [hereafter cited as  CW]  9,  1,  The Archetypes 
and the  Collective  Unconscious  (New  York:  Pantheon Books,  1959),  p.29. 
Chapter One  11 
to many unusual and often unfortunate consequences,  since these 
living  realities  within  ourselves  often  have  a  peculiarly  powerful 
or irritating effect.  So  Jung said,  in explaining  part of the  reason 
why the anima and animus have not been generally recognized as 
parts  of the  human  personality,  "In  the  Middle  Ages,  when  a 
man  discovered  an  anima,  he  got  the  thing  arrested,  and  the 
judge had her burned as a witch.  Or perhaps a woman discovered 
an animus, and that man was doomed to become a saint, or a sav-
ior,  or a great medicine man  .... Only now,  through the analytic 
process,  do the anima and animus,  which were always outside be-
fore,  begin to appear transformed into psychological functions."
14 
Because the anima and animus are projected, we do not usu-
ally  recognize  that  they  belong  to  us,  for  they  appear  to be  out-
side of us.  On the other hand, once the phenomenon of projection 
is  recognized,  these  projected  images  can,  to  a  certain  extent,  be 
taken  back  into  ourselves,  for  we  can  use  projections  as  mirrors 
in which  we  see  the reflection  of our own psychic contents.  If we 
discover  the  anima  or  animus  image  has  been  projected  onto  a 
man or a  woman,  that makes it possible for us to see in reflection 
contents  of our own  psyche  that otherwise  might escape  us.  The 
capacity  to  recognize  and utilize  projections  is  especially  impor-
tant  for  self-knowledge  when  it  comes  to  the  anima  or  animus, 
since  these  psychic  factors  can  never  become  so  conscious  to  us 
that  they  do  not  project  themselves.  The  contrasexual  element 
within  us  is  so  psychologically  elusive  that  it  escapes  our  com-
plete  awareness,  therefore  it always  is  projected,  at  least  in  part. 
It cannot be a  matter of knowing  these  realities so  well  that pro-
jection no longer occurs. This is an impossible goal, for the anima 
and animus do not partake of ego  reality,  but carry for  us  quite a 
different mode of psychological functioning.  As far as self-knowl-
edge  is  concerned,  it  is  a  matter  of utilizing  projections  as  mir-
rors,  a  task  that  is  possible  with  the  use  of Jung's  psychological 
concepts. 
There is  no one single place in which Jung wrote a definitive 
statement  about  the  anima  or  animus.  If you  wish  to  find  out 
what Jung had to say  on the subject it is  necessary  to  read many 
different  passages  in  many  different  major  works.  Nor did  Jung 
14 
C.  G.  Jung,  "The Interpretation  of Visions," Spring,  1965,  p.  110. 
12  The Invisible Partners 
content himself with one single definition,  but from  time  to  time 
offered  different  ones.  In  doing  so,  however,  he  did  not  contra-
dict  himself,  for  each  definition  brings  out  a  different  aspect  of 
these realities. 
The simplest and earliest definition Jung offered is  that the  an-
ima personifies  the  feminine  element in  a man,  and the  animus  per-
sonifies  the  masculine  element  in  a  woman.  He  writes,  "I  have 
called  this  masculine  element  in  woman  the  animus  and  the  corre-
sponding feminine element in  man the anima.'' 
15 
Marie-Louise Von 
Franz referred to Jung's definition of the anima in her chapter in Man 
and His Symbols where she wrote that' 'the anima is a personification 
of all  feminine  psychological tendencies  in  a man's psyche,  such  as 
vague feelings and moods.'' 
16 
Jung also speculates that the anima and 
the  animus  personify  the  minority  of feminine  or  masculine  genes 
within us.  This thought occurs in several places in Jung's works.  For 
instance,  ''The anima is  an  archetypal form,  expressing the fact that 
a man has a minority of female genes, and that is something that does 
not disappear in  him. '' 
17 
Of course the  same thing could be  said for 
the  animus  as  a  personification  of the  minority  of masculine  genes 
in a woman.  That is,  on the biological  level,  a man derives  his  mas-
culine, physical qualities by virtue of having a slight plurality of mas-
culine over feminine  genes,  and vice  versa in  the  case of a woman. 
The  anima,  Jung  has  suggested,  personifies  on  the  psychological 
plane this  minority of feminine genes,  and,  in  the  case of a woman, 
the  animus  personifies the  minority of masculine genes. 
If this  is  so,  that  which  makes  men  and  women  different  is 
not that men are entirely Yang and women Yin, for each sex con-
tains the other within;  it is  the fact  that a  man ordinarily  identi-
fies  his  ego  with  his  masculinity  and  his  feminine  side  is  uncon-
"C. G. Jung,  CW7,  Two  Essays  in  ,lnalytical Psychology  (New  York:  Pan-
theon  Books,  1953),  p.  88n. 
"C.  G.  Jung,  Man  and His  Symbols  (Garden  City  N.Y.:  Doubleday  and 
Co.,  Inc.,  1964),  hardback ed.  p.  177. 
17 
C.  G.  Jung Speaking,  ed.  Wm.  McGuire  and  R.  F.  C.  Hull;  (Princeton, 
N.J.:  Princeton University Press,  1977),  p.  296.  Also cf.:  CW 11,  par.  48;  CW8, 
par.  782;  CW 9,  1,  p.  58  and p.  512. 
Chapter One  13 
scious  to  him,  while  a  woman  identifies  herself consciously  with 
her femininity,  and her masculine side is  unconscious  to her. 
The  ego  and  the  body  carry,  as  it  were,  the  same  sign.  A 
man's  body  is  masculine,  shaped  by  the  male  hormone  and  de-
signed  for  certain  functions;  a  woman's  body  is  feminine,  and  is 
designed  to  perform  certain  specifically  feminine  functions,  the 
most obvious being childbirth. The ego identifies with the mascu-
line or feminine quality of the body, and so the other side,  the an-
ima  or animus,  becomes  a  function  of the  unconscious.  This,  at 
least,  is  the usual psychological development in men and women, 
though in  some  cases  it may not be  adequately  achieved.  A  man 
may fail  to  develop  a  sufficiently  masculine  ego,  for  instance.  In 
such a case,  as  we  shall see,  there may result a homogenized ego, 
a  feminized  masculinity,  as  it  were,  that  may  lead  to  a  form  of 
homosexuality. 
All  of this  has  important  implications  for  the  relationship 
between  the  sexes.  As  stated  above,  men,  identified  with  their 
masculinity,  typically  project  their  feminine  side  onto  women, 
and  women,  identified  with  their feminine  nature,  typically  pro-
ject  their  masculine  side  onto  men.  These  projected  psychic  im-
ages  are the Invisible Partners in every man-woman relationship, 
and  greatly  influence  the  relationship,  for  wherever  projection 
occurs the person who carries the projected image is  either great-
ly  overvalued  or greatly  undervalued.  In either case,  the  human 
reality  of the  individual  who  carries  a  projection  for  us  is  ob-
scured  by  the  projected  image.  This  is  especially  the  case  with 
the  anima  and  animus  since  these  archetypes  are  so  numinous. 
This  means  that  they  are  charged  with  psychic  energy,  so  that 
they  tend  to  grip  us  emotionally.  Consequently  these  projected 
images have a magnetic effect on us,  and the person who carries a 
projection will tend to greatly attract or repel us, just as a magnet 
attracts or repels another metal. This leads to all kinds of compli-
cations  in  relationships,  some  of which  will  be  examined  in  the 
last chapter. 
Like  all  archetypes,  the  anima  and  animus  have  positive 
and negative aspects.  That is,  sometimes they appear to be highly 
desirable  and  attractive,  and sometimes  destructive  and infuriat-
ing.  In  this  they  resemble  the  gods  and  goddesses  who  could 
14  The Invisible Partners 
shower  mankind  with  gifts,  but  could  also  turn  on  mankind  de-
structively.  If the positive aspect of the anima image is  projected 
by  a  man  onto  a  woman,  she  then  becomes  highly  desirable  to 
him.  She  fascinates  him,  draws  him  to  her,  and seems  to  him  to 
be  the  source  of happiness  and  bliss.  A  woman  who  carries  this 
projection for  a man readily becomes  the object of his  erotic fan-
tasies  and  sexual  longings,  and  it  seems  to  the  man  that  if he 
could  only  be  with  her  and  make  love  to  her  he  would  be  ful-
filled.  Such a  state we  call falling  or being in love. 
Naturally, a woman who carries such a powerful anima pro-
jection is  pleased,  at least  at first.  She  feels  flattered  and  valued, 
and, though she may be only dimly aware of it,  enjoys a feeling  of 
considerable  power.  The  person  who  carries  a  projected  psychic 
image from another person does  have power over that person, for 
as  long  as  a  part of our psyche is  perceived  in  someone  else  that 
other person has  power over us. 
The  woman  usually  regrets  the  situation  in  time,  however, 
as she experiences the disagreeable side of being the carrier of an-
other person's soul.  She eventually will  discover that the man be-
gins  to suffocate her.  She may find  that he  resents  it  when  she is 
not  immediately  and  always  available  to  him,  and  this  gives  an 
oppressive  quality  to  their  relationship.  She  will  also  discover 
that the man resents any attempt on her part to develop her indi-
vidual  personality  in  such  a  way  that  it  goes  beyond  the  anima 
image he has placed on her,  for,  in fact,  he sees  her not as she ac-
tually is,  but as he  wants her to be.  He wants her to fulfil  and live 
out for  him his projected feminine  image,  and this  inevitably will 
collide with  her human reality as  a  person.  So  she  may find  her-
self living in his box,  fenced  in by his determination that she fulfil 
his projection for him,  and she may discover that the shadow side 
of his  seeming  love  for  her is  a  possessiveness  and restrictiveness 
on  his  part that thwarts  her own  natural  tendency  to become an 
individual.  When  she  insists  on  being  herself she  may  find  her 
man jealous,  resentful,  and pouting.  She may also  begin  to dread 
his  sexual  advances,  which,  she  begins  to  suspect,  are  not  func-
tions  of the  relationship  between  them,  but  have  a  compulsive, 
unrelated quality to them.  Indeed,  the two  easily wind  up at log-
gerheads regarding sex.  The man is compulsively drawn to sexual 
relationship  with  the  woman  who  carries  his  feminine  image  for 
Chapter One  15 
him,  and feels  the relationship is complete only after coitus, when 
he feels  a  sense  of momentary oneness  with  her.  The woman,  on 
the  other  hand,  wants  to  work  out  the  human  relationship  first 
and then give  herself sexually to the man,  and many devils  whirl 
around this difference between them. 
Moreover,  the  opposite  projection  can  replace  the  positive 
one suddenly and without warning.  The woman who at one  time 
carried the projection of the positive anima,  the soul image,  for  a 
man,  may suddenly  receive  the projection  of the negative  anima, 
the  image  of the  witch.  All  a  man  has  to  do  is  blame  her for  his 
own  bad  moods  and  suddenly  he  will  see  her  in  this  light,  and 
men,  unfortunately,  are  notorious  for  putting  the  responsibility 
for  their bad moods on women.  Moods in  a man,  as  will be seen, 
are  disagreeable  effects  that  descend  on  him  from  his  feminine 
side.  Being,  as  a rule,  unenlightened about their own  psychology, 
most men project the blame for these bad moods onto their wom-
en,  which  accounts  for  the  fact  that a  woman  whom  a  man  was 
once in love  with  and regarded  as  a  goddess  can just as  easily  be 
seen  by  him  as  a  witch.  She  is  then  undervalued  as  much  as  she 
was  once  overvalued. 
The  same  projections  are  made  by  women  onto  men,  of 
course.  If a  woman  projects  onto a  man her positive  animus  im-
age,  the  image  of the savior,  hero,  and  spiritual  guide,  she  over-
values that man. She is fascinated by him, drawn to him, sees him 
as  the  ultimate  man  and  ideal  lover.  She  feels  completed  only 
through  him,  as  though  it  were  through  him  that  she  found  her 
soul.  Such  projections  are  especially  likely  to be  made  onto  men 
who  have  the  power  of the  word.  A  man  who  uses  words  well, 
who has power with  ideas  and is  effective in getting them across, 
is an ideal figure to carry such animus projections from a woman. 
When  this  happens  he  then becomes  bigger-than-life  to her,  and 
she  is  quite  content  to  be  the  loving  moth  fluttering  around  his 
flame.  In  this  way  she  misses  the  creative  flame  within  herself, 
having  displaced  it onto the man. 
The  man  who  receives  such  projections  may  often  not  be 
worth them.  For instance,  Adolph  Hitler seems  to  have  received 
the animus projection from  the women of his  time.  He had an ar-
chetypal  quality  when  he  spoke,  and  a  fascinating  power  with 
words.  I  once  asked  a  Jewish  woman  friend  of mine,  who  had 
16  The Invisible Partners 
gotten  out  of Nazi  Germany  just  in  time,  how  it  was  that  the 
German women  were  so  ready  to send  their sons  to  Hitler to be 
destroyed  in  his  war  machine,  and  why  it  was  that they  did  not 
object.  She  answered  that  they  were  so  fascinated  by  his  words 
they would have done anything he asked. 
If a  man carries the positive animus projection for  a  woman 
he  may  feel  flattered;  it  can  be  an  inflating  experience  to  carry 
such projections.  We are all too willing to identify ourselves with 
the powerful images projected on us,  and in this way  escape from 
the  much  more  humble  task  of recognizing  the  genuine  bound-
aries  of our  personalities.  But  the  man,  too,  may  soon  become 
aware of the disagreeable aspect of carrying such projections.  He 
begins to feel  the sticky, clinging,  unreal quality that has attached 
itself to the relationship.  As Irene de Castilleja put it,  if a woman 
looks  to  a  man  to  be  the  keeper  of her soul  it  "only  makes  him 
impatiently declare that she is  reading more into the relationship 
than exists."
18 
Jung also  comments on what it is  like for  a  man to carry an 
animus  projection.  "When  somebody  has  an  animus  projection 
upon me," he comments,  "I feel  as  if I  were a tomb with a corpse 
inside, a  peculiar dead weight;  I  am like one of those tombs Jesus 
speaks of,  with all sorts of vermin inside.  And moreover decided-
ly  a corpse myself,  one doesn't feel  one's  own life.  A  real  animus 
projection  is  murderous,  because  one  becomes  the  place  where 
the  animus  is  buried;  and  he  is  buried  exactly  like  the  eggs  of a 
wasp in the body of a caterpillar, and when  the young hatch out, 
they  begin  to  eat  one  from  within,  which  is  very  obnoxious."
19 
Jung refers to the animus as being buried when it is  projected be-
cause  it is  dead  as  far  as  its  conscious  development  as  a  psycho-
logical function  is  concerned. 
As  mentioned,  the  negative  projections  are just  around  the 
corner. The same man who once seemed fascinating and magnifi-
cent  can  just  as  readily  be  seen  to  be  an  infuriating,  frustrating 
person.  The  positive  projection  falls  away  when  familiarity  ex-
18 
Irene de  Castilleja,  Knowing  Woman  (New  York:  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons, 
1973),p.l74. 
19 
C.  G.  Jung,  The  Visions  Seminars,  Part  Two  (Zurich:  Spring  Publica-
tions,  1976),  p.  493. 
Chapter One  17 
poses  the relationship  to  a  healthy  dose  of reality,  and  the nega-
tive  projection is  right there to take its place.  The man who once 
was  overvalued now is  undervalued.  Once seen as  a hero,  he now 
becomes  a  demon  who  seems  to  be  responsible  for  all  the  wom-
an's disappointments in  love  and feelings  of being belittled. 
If both  a  man  and  a  woman  project  their  positive  images 
onto each other at the same time,  we  have that seemingly perfect 
state of relationship known as being in love,  a state of mutual fas-
cination.  The  two  then  declare  that  they  are  "in  love  with  each 
other" and are firmly convinced that they have now found the ul-
timate relationship.  Such relationships can be diagrammed as fol-
lows: 
Man's  Woman's 
Ego  Ego 
D--A-o 
I  I 
~ c ~  
Anima  Animus 
In this diagram it will be seen that there is a certain relation-
ship  on  the  conscious  level  between  the  ego  personalities  of the 
man and the woman,  represented by line A.  But there is  also  the 
powerful attraction between  the two of them represented by lines 
B  and B
1
,  which  is  the result of the projected images of the posi-
tive anima and animus.  But the most powerful factor of all is  line 
C,  which  is  the  attraction  via  the  unconscious.  Here  it  is  as 
though the animus of the woman and the anima of the man have 
fallen  in love  with each  other,  and here is  the bind,  the powerful 
pull between  them,  the source  of the  magnetism  of the being-in-
love state. 
There  is  much  to be  said  for  falling  in  love.  Most  of us  can 
probably  remember  the  first  time  we  were  in  love,  and what  un-
18  The  Invisible Partners 
expected and powerful emotions were released.  To have the expe-
rience of falling  in  love is  to become open to matters of the heart 
in a wonderful way.  It can be the prelude to a valuable expansion 
of personality  and  emotional  life.  It is  also  an  important  experi-
ence  because  it  brings  the  sexes  together  and  initiates  relation-
ship.  Whether this  leads  to happy or unhappy  consequences,  life 
is  kept  moving  in  this  way.  Perhaps,  especially  with  young  peo-
ple,  falling  in love is a natural and beautiful experience,  and a life 
that has  not known  this experience is  no doubt impoverished. 
The fact  is,  however,  that  relationships  founded  exclusively 
on the being-in-love state can never last.  As will be seen  in  chap-
ter four,  being in  love is  a matter for  the gods,  not for  human be-
ings,  and when  human beings  try to claim the prerogative  of the 
gods  and  live  in  a  state  of "in-loveness"  (as  differentiated  from 
truly  loving  each  other),  there  is  a  movement  from  the  uncon-
scious  to break it up.  A  relationship  of being  in  love  simply does 
not last when  put to the test of the reality  of a  true,  human rela-
tionship;  it can endure only in a fantasy world where the relation-
ship  is  not  tested  in  the  everyday  stress  of real  life.  When  they 
live  together  in  everyday  human  conditions,  "John  and  Mary" 
soon  become  real  to  each  other  as  actual,  imperfect  human  be-
ings.  The more real they are to each other as  people,  the less  pos-
sible  it  is  for  the  magical,  fascinating  images  from  the  uncon-
scious  to  remain  projected  on  them.  Soon  the  state  of being  in 
love fades  away,  and,  worse yet,  the same anima and animus who 
once fell  in  love with each  other may now begin to quarrel. 
The inability of the state of being in love to endure the stress 
of everyday  human  life  is  recognized  by  all  great  poets.  This  is 
why the relationship of Romeo and Juliet had to end in  death.  It 
would  have been unthinkable  for  Shakespeare to have  concluded 
his  great  love  story by  sending  his  loving  couple to  Sears  to  buy 
pans  for  their  kitchen.  They  would  have  quarreled  in  an  instant 
over  what  frying  pan  to  choose  and  how  much  it  was  going  to 
cost,  and  the whole  beautiful  love  story  would  have  evaporated. 
Great  poets  leave  such  love  stories  where  they  belong:  in  the 
hands of the gods.  Or,  if the human  pair insists on living  out the 
love fantasy,  they may bring everything down around their heads 
in  ruin.  This  is  what  Lancelot  and  Guinevere  did  in  Camelot. 
Having  fallen  in  love,  they  insisted  on  trying  to  make  their  love 
Chapter One  19 
relationship a personal matter,  to try to found  their lives  on it  no 
matter what.  As they tried to identify  with and possess  each oth-
er,  and  fulfil  their  love  fantasies  in  a  human  sexual  relationship, 
they  brought down  around  them  the  ruin  of Camelot.  The  great 
round table,  depicting  wholeness,  was  shattered,  and the story of 
their love became the tragic story of the destruction of the beauti-
ful  castle and the downfall,  not only of themselves,  but of the no-
ble  King  Arthur and many brave knights as  well. 
The  fact  that  the  state  of being  in  love  cannot  endure  the 
stress of everyday life is  not what we  want to hear,  at least not in 
present-day  America,  which  depicts  the state of being  in  love  as 
the  goal  of  the  relationship  between  the  sexes,  and  constantly 
dangles  it  in  front  of our eyes  with  advertisements  on television. 
Human beings are not very keen on substituting reality for the al-
lurement of fantasies.  We  prefer  to  go  on  looking  for  the  perfect 
man  or woman,  that is  the man or woman  who  will  fit  our ideal 
image and guarantee that we  are happy and fulfilled,  even though 
it  leads  to  disappointment  after  disappointment,  and  adds  more 
and more bitterness to our cup of life. 
It should now  be  clear that to the  extent  that a  relationship 
is  founded  on  projection,  the  element  of human  love  is  lacking. 
To be  in  love  with someone we  do not know as  a  person,  but are 
attracted to because they  reflect  back  to  us  the image  of the  god 
or goddess  in  our souls,  is,  in  a  sense,  to be  in  love  with  oneself, 
not  with  the  other  person.  In  spite  of the  seeming  beauty  of the 
love fantasies  we may have in this state of being in love we can, in 
fact,  be  in  a  thoroughly  selfish  state  of mind.  Real  love  begins 
only  when  one  person comes  to  know  another for  who he or she 
really  is  as  a  human  being,  and  begins  to  like  and  care  for  that 
human being. 
No  human  being  can  match  the  gods  and  goddesses  in  all 
their shimmer and glory and,  at first,  seeing the person whom we 
love for who she or he is,  rather than in terms of projections,  may 
seem  uninteresting  and  disappointing,  for  human  beings  are,  on 
the  whole,  rather  an  ordinary  lot.  Because  of this  many  people 
prefer  to  go  from  one  person  to  another,  always  looking  for  the 
ultimate  relationship,  always  leaving  the  relationship  when  the 
projections  wear  off and  the  in-loveness  ends.  It is  obvious  that 
with such shallow  roots  no real,  permanent love can develop.  To 
20  The Invisible Partners 
be capable of real  love means becoming mature,  with realistic ex-
pectations  of the  other person.  It means  accepting  responsibility 
for  our own happiness or unhappiness,  and neither expecting  the 
other person  to  make  us  happy  nor blaming  that person  for  our 
bad  moods  and  frustrations.  Naturally  this  makes  real  relation-
ship a  difficult  matter,  at  which  one  must  work,  but  fortunately 
the rewards  are there too,  for  only  in  this  way  does  our capacity 
for  love  mature. 
This is  not to say that projection is  a bad thing.  In itself,  the 
projection  of  the  anima  and  the  animus  is  a  perfectly  natural 
event that will always occur. The anima and the animus are vital-
ly alive in our psyches;  as we  have seen,  they will never be so well 
known to us that they do not project themselves onto members of 
the opposite sex.  In this way,  via the projection, they become visi-
ble to us.  Each time projection occurs there is another opportuni-
ty for  us  to know  our inner,  Invisible  Partners,  and that is  a  way 
of knowing  our own  souls.  There is  also  the  fact  that,  as  has  al-
ready  been  noted,  projection  is  often  the  factor  that  first  draws 
the  sexes  together.  Man  and  woman  are  so  unlike  that  it  takes 
quite  a  power  of attraction  to  bring  them  together  in  the  first 
place;  projection  provides  this  influence  because  of the  fascina-
tion  with  which  it endows  the member of the other sex.  For this 
reason  most  love  relationships  begin  with  projection,  and  this 
serves  life  for  then  life  moves.  The  question  is,  what  happens 
then?  Does  that  relationship  become  a  vehicle  for  the  develop-
ment  of consciousness,  or  do  we  give  in  to  our  infantile  nature 
and  go  on  and  on  through  life  insisting  that  somewhere  there 
must be  a  relationship that offers  us perfect bliss and fulfillment? 
Projection in itself is  neither good  nor bad;  it is  what we  do  with 
it that counts. 
Two  examples  from  history  help  us  here.  Dante  and  Mark 
Antony are both classic  examples  of men  whose  anima  was  pro-
jected onto women,  but they  dealt  with  their  projections  in  very 
different  ways.  When  he  was  only  nine  years  old,  according  to 
Boccaccio,  Dante met Beatrice (who was  also nine).  Instantly he 
fell  in love  with her.  When we fall  in love with someone instantly 
we  can  be  sure  a  projection  is  involved,  for  how  could  we  love 
someone whom we  do not yet  know?  The following  idealized de-
Chapter One  21 
scription  of her,  which  Dante  wrote  some  years  later,  shows  the 
powerful influence on  Dante of the projected anima image: 
Her dress  on  that day  was  of a  most  noble  color,  a  subdued  and 
goodly  crimson,  girdled  and  adorned  in  such  sort  as  suited  with 
her very tender age.  At that moment I say most truly that the spir-
it  of life,  which  hath  its  dwelling  in  the  secretest  chamber  of the 
heart,  began  to  tremble  so  violently  that  the  least  pulses  of my 
body  shook  therewith;  and  in  trembling  it said  these  words:  Ecce 
deus  fortior  me,  qui  veniens  dominabitur  mibi  (Behold  a  deity 
stronger  than  I,  who,  coming,  will  rule  me)  ... From  that  time 
forward  Love quite governed my soul. 
20 
It was  not  until  Dante  was  eighteen  that  he  again  saw  Be-
atrice.  After the second meeting he wrote of her: 
... it  happened  that  the  same  wonderful  lady  appeared  to  me 
dressed all  in pure white.  And passing through a street, she turned 
her eyes thither where I stood sorely abashed;  and by her unspeak-
able  courtesy  ... she saluted me  with so  virtuous a  bearing that  I 
seemed then and there to behold the very limits of blessedness .... 
I  parted thence as  one intoxicated. 
Then Dante adds significantly: 
Then, for that I had myself in some sort the art of discoursing with 
rhyme,  I  resolved  on  making a  sonnet. 
21 
This  practically  ended  the  relationship  between  Dante  and 
Beatrice,  if we  can  call  such  a  cursory  encounter  a  relationship, 
but it began Dante's relationship with his soul,  and launched him 
on  his  astounding  and  vigorous  career  as  a  poet.  Dante  wrote 
many  of his  beautiful  sonnets  to  Beatrice,  and  in  his  crowning 
work,  The  Divine  Comedy,  Beatrice  reappears  as  his  guide 
through heaven.  The fact  that at the age of twenty-three Beatrice 
20 
Dante,  La  vita  nuova  [The  new  life],  as  quoted  in  The  Age  of Faith  by 
Will  Durant (New  York:  Simon and  Schuster,  1950),  p.  1059. 
"Ibid. 
22  The  Invisible  Partners 
married  someone  else  and  a  year  later  died  did  not  discourage 
him in the slightest.  Dante had turned his encounter with the an-
ima,  which  had  fallen  on  Beatrice,  into  hard  and  creative  work 
and it kept him  going  for  a lifetime. 
The  experience  of  the  Roman  general  Mark  Antony  was 
quite different.  After the assassination of Julius Caesar in 44 B.C., 
Caesar's adopted son,  Octavian, became emperor in the West and 
Antony  in  the  East.  Antony  went  to  his  new  domain  to  receive 
the  homage  of the  various  kings  and  queens  who  were  now  sub-
ject to his  rule,  among whom was Cleopatra, the Queen of Egypt. 
Will Durant says of her,  "Cleopatra was  a Macedonian Greek by 
origin, and more probably blonde than brunette. She was  not par-
ticularly beautiful; but the grace of her carriage, the vivacity of her 
body and her mind,  the variety of her accomplishments,  the sua-
vity of her manners, the very melody of her voice,  combined with 
her  royal  position  to  make  her  a  heady  wine  even  for  a  Roman 
general.  She  was  acquainted  with  Greek  history,  literature,  and 
philosophy;  she  spoke  Greek,  Egyptian,  Syrian,  and  allegedly 
other languages,  well;  she added the intellectual fascination  of an 
Aspasia  to  the  seductive  abandon  of  a  completely  uninhibited 
woman."
22 
Cleopatra,  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  conquered 
one,  became  the  conqueror,  as  she sailed  up  the  river  Cydnus  to 
meet  Antony  "in a  barge  with  purple sails,  gilded  stern,  and  sil-
ver oars that beat time to the music of flutes  and fifes  and harps. 
Her  maids,  dressed  as  sea  nymphs  and  graces,  were  the  crew, 
while  she  herself,  dressed  as  Venus,  lay  under  a  canopy  of cloth 
of gold."
23 
When  Antony  met this  "seductive apparition"  he  fell 
in love with her at once,  and thus began one of the most famous, 
and tragic,  love affairs  of history. 
Cleopatra  became  as  his  soul  to  Antony,  and  as  a  conse-
quence  enjoyed  enormous  power  over  him.  Antony  was  disas-
trously weakened  because  he  could experience  his  soul  only  as  it 
was  projected onto Cleopatra,  and from  this time  his  qualities of 
generalship  and leadership  deteriorated.  Until  now,  Antony  had 
been a renowned military leader whose courage and dedication to 
22 
Will  Durant,  Caesar and Christ  (New York:  Simon and Schuster,  1944), 
p.  187. 
23 
Ibid.,  p.  204. 
Chapter One  23 
his  army  had  won  the  fierce  loyalty  of his  troops.  However  la-
mentable might have been Antony's wanton and pleasure-seeking 
ways  in  times  of peace,  in  war  the best  in  him  came  out  and  he 
proved  himself a  man  of courage  and  an excellent  general.  Now 
Antony  lost  that  quality  of decisiveness  which  must  mark  the 
successful military man.  For instance,  when he had the Parthians 
at a  marked  disadvantage,  and  might  have  defeated  them  with  a 
decisive  campaign,  he chose instead to postpone the struggle  un-
til  his  enemies  had  a  chance  to  regroup  their  forces  and  resolve 
their  internal  disputes.  He  acted,  according  to  Plutarch,  "as  a 
man  who  had  no  proper  control  over  his  faculties,  who,  under 
the  effects  of some  drug  or  magic,  was  still  looking  back  else-
where."24 
It was  not  long  before  Octavian  and  Antony  had  a  falling 
out,  and  each  marshaled  his  forces  for  a  decisive  battle.  Antony 
had  the  superior  army  and  was  the  more  experienced  general, 
while  Octavian  had  built  a  new  naval  force  and had  won  recent 
naval  victories  in  the Western  Mediterranean.  Yet Antony chose 
to meet Octavian at sea because Cleopatra,  who had a fleet  of her 
own,  wished it so.  "So wholly was  he now the mere appendage to 
the person of Cleopatra," writes Plutarch,  "that, although he was 
much  superior  to  the  enemy  in  land-forces,  yet,  out  of complai-
sance to his mistress,  he wished the victory to be gained by sea. "
25 
The two  naval forces  met at the famous  battle of Actium in 
31  B.c.  Antony  had  parceled  out  his  powerful  army  of  over 
100,000 men  and placed them on board the great,  unwieldly Ori-
ental  galleys  that  made  up  his  fleet.  Octavian  met  him  with  his 
fleet  of smaller  but  much  more  maneuverable  ships.  Moreover, 
Antony's  ships  were  manned  by  conscripts  and  inexperienced 
seamen,  while  Octavian's were  manned by experienced  and  loyal 
Romans.  Nevertheless,  the  battle  might  have  been  won  by  An-
tony  had  it  not  been  for  his  excessive  attachment  to  Cleopatra. 
Writes Plutarch,  "But the fortune  of the day was  still undecided, 
and  the  battle  equal,  when  on  a  sudden  Cleopatra's  sixty  ships 
24 
Plutarch's Lives,  chapter on Mark Antony; The Harvard Classics edition, 
translated by Dryden, corrected and revised by Clough (New York: P.F. Collier 
&  Son  Company,  1909),  p.  363. 
"  Ibid.,  p.  383. 
24  The  Invisible Partners 
were  seen  hoisting  sail  and making  out to  sea in full  flight,  right 
through  the  ships  that  were  engaged .... The  enemy  was  aston-
ished  to  see  them sailing  off with  a  fair  wind  toward  Peloponne-
sus.  Here it was that Antony showed to all the world that he was 
no longer actuated by  the thoughts and motives  of a commander 
or  a  man,  or  indeed  by  his  own judgment  at  all,  and  what  was 
once  said  as  a jest,  that the  soul of a  lover  lives  in  someone  else's 
body,  he proved to be a serious truth.  For,  as  if he had been born 
part  of her,  and  must  move  with  her  wheresoever  she  went,  as 
soon as  he saw  her ship sailing away,  he abandoned all that were 
fighting  and spending their lives  for  him,  and put himself aboard 
a  galley  of five  ranks  of oars,  . . .  to  follow  her  that  had  so  well 
begun his  ruin and would  hereafter accomplish it."
26 
Antony's  forces,  disheartened  by  the  flight  of their  leader, 
lost  the  battle.  For  a  time  his  remaining  troops  reassembled  on 
land  and  held  fast,  waiting  for  their  leader  to  return.  But  when 
Antony failed  to come back to lead them, even his most loyal sol-
diers joined  the  side  of the  victorious  Octavian.  Meanwhile  An-
tony,  sunk  in  depression,  had  returned  to  Egypt,  there  to  await 
his doom.  Within a few  months both Antony and Cleopatra were 
dead by  their own hands. 
The  difference  in  outcome  between  the  lives  of Dante  and 
Antony can be attributed to the ways in which they responded to 
the  projection  of the  anima.  Both men  experienced  the  power  of 
the  anima  as  she projected  herself onto a  mortal woman.  Dante, 
however,  turned  the  experience  into  creative  work,  and  realized 
his Beatrice as a figure of his own soul.  Antony was unable to ex-
perience his soul except through projection,  which led him into a 
life  of pleasure  and  idleness,  and  so  unmanned  him  that  he  lost 
the integrity of his personality. 
These  two  examples  are  drawn  from  the  annals  of history, 
but the projection of the anima and the animus,  and the resulting 
complications  in  the  relationships  of men  and  women,  are  also 
the daily  fare  of the psychotherapist.  Eleanor (I shall call  her),  a 
woman  in  her  mid-twenties,  came  for  counseling  because  her 
husband  had  left  her for  another  woman.  A  large  but  attractive 
woman,  she  had  been  married  for  about  seven  years.  Her  hus-
26 
Ibid.,  p.  387.  Italics  mine. 
Chapter One  25 
band had been  away  on a  cruise with the navy when he  wrote to 
her and said he  was  not coming back, but was  going to the wom-
an  in  another  part of the country whom he  "had always  loved." 
For seven  years,  he  now  told  his  wife,  he  had  done  nothing  but 
think of this other woman and now he was going to find  her even 
though  it  meant  giving  up  his  relationship  with  his  wife.  He ex-
plained  to  Eleanor  that  though  he  liked  her  he  did  not  "love" 
her,  but was  "in love"  with  the  other woman.  It made  little  dif-
ference  to  him  that  this  other  woman  was  already  married  and 
had several children. 
He  succeeded  in  finding  his  long-dreamt-of love  and  man-
aged to persuade her to leave her husband and live with him.  Per-
haps she  and her husband had a  poor relationship,  or maybe she 
was  flattered  to think that a  man would love  her for  seven  years 
and come gallantly across  the country to marry her.  Meanwhile, 
Eleanor had  had enough.  Although she deeply  felt  the rejection, 
she  gained  sufficient  strength  and  self-confidence  to  decide  that 
she  could  get  along  without  her  husband,  especially  if his  rela-
tionship  to  her  had  such  shallow  roots.  There  were  no  children 
involved  in  her  marriage,  and  she  filed  for  a  divorce.  The  rela-
tionship  between  Eleanor's  husband  and  the  woman  he  had 
"loved"  for  so  long  lasted  all  of eleven  weeks.  Then it  was  over, 
and  he  was  writing  Eleanor  again  explaining  that  he  had  been 
"disillusioned." Eleanor decided  not to take him back. 
Although  I  did  not  meet the husband,  the story  had all  the 
hallmarks  of a  classic  case  of anima  projection.  The  woman  of 
whom  the  young  man  dreamt for  seven  years  was  not the  actual 
flesh-and-blood  woman  he  lived  with  for  eleven  weeks,  but  the 
elusive anima image in his mind.  Unfortunately,  he could experi-
ence  his  soul  only  through  projection  and,  evidently,  lacked  the 
psychological depth and moral maturity to place real relationship 
above his fantasies  and the longings inspired in him by his awak-
ened  anima.  Had he  been  able  to  see  his  situation differently,  he 
might have recognized that the anima,  the image of his soul,  was 
trying  to  reach  him  via  his  love  fantasies  for  the distant  woman, 
for  it is  through just such  fantasies  that the  anima first  seeks  to 
become conscious  to a man. 
Another  young  woman  came for  counseling  because  of cer-
tain somatic complaints that were psychogenic in nature. Jane,  as 
26  The Invisible Partners 
I  shall  call her,  had been  divorced  for  about a  year;  she  had  one 
child.  It seems that she had liked her husband perfectly  well,  but 
had  fallen  in  love  with  another  man.  Apparently  he  also  loved 
her and the two planned to divorce their spouses and marry each 
other. Jane divorced first and waited for  her lover to join her,  but 
time went by and he stalled.  Finally he told her that while he did 
"love"  her,  he  did not love  her enough  to  come home  to her ev-
ery  night.  He eventually  divorced  his  wife,  but  married  another 
woman  instead  of  Jane.  This  left  Jane  all  alone  and  very  de-
pressed.  Without a husband to support her,  she had to take a job 
as  a  secretary,  a job she disliked  greatly.  When  I  asked her what 
she  would  like  to  do  instead  she  replied,  almost  guiltily,  "You 
know,  I  really just want to be  a wife  and mother." This was  sad, 
for  that is  exactly what she  was  not able to be now,  for  although 
she had one child she had no husband,  and had to spend most of 
her days  at work rather than making a home. 
Jane  reported several  dreams  in  which  the  man  with  whom 
she  had  fallen  in  love  came  to  her  as  a  lover.  She  took  these 
dreams  literally,  as  personifications  of the  love  relationship  be-
tween the two of them.  In doing this, she missed their inner,  psy-
chological meaning,  for  the man in the dream can be understood 
as her creative animus, a personification of her own creative pow-
ers  that now  want  union  with  her.  (In dreams,  sexual  union  fre-
quently  represents the tendency  of some  part of us  to unite itself 
to  our  conscious  personality.)  If  Jane  had  understood  these 
dreams  properly  she  would  have  realized  that  had  her  creative 
powers  been  awakened,  the  projection  of these  creative  powers 
onto the outer man could have been resolved,  and her life  would 
have  taken  a  different  direction.  By  choosing  instead  to  live  out 
her longings concretely, through the man who carried for  her the 
projected image of the creative animus, she chose an unconscious 
path instead of a conscious one,  and this almost always results in 
a  disaster  or,  at  least,  in  some  kind  of  mischief.  Because  she 
missed the real  point of her experience she failed  to realize a cer-
tain potential in herself that was seeking actualization in  her life. 
Fortunately she is young,  and hopefully life will send along other 
opportunities. 
What  Jane  experienced  is  very  common.  As  Marie-Louise 
Chapter One  27 
von  Franz points out, 
27 
when there is  a  certain creative energy in 
us  that  is  spilling  out  over  the  edges  or  boundaries  of the  mar-
riage and family  life,  it typically becomes projected onto a person 
of the  opposite  sex.  This  leads  to  the  attraction  to,  and  fascina-
tion  with,  that person,  as  has  been  discussed.  When  this  occurs, 
one needs to examine closely what is  happening.  Am I married to 
the  wrong  person?  Do  I  want  to  get  away  from  my  husband  or 
wife and live permanently with the other person? Or,  is  the other 
person  a  hook  onto  whom  my  creative  powers,  which  are  not 
completely satisifed in the marriage,  are projected?  If the answer 
to the first  two questions is  affirmative,  perhaps realistic changes 
need to be made in one's life.  If the last question applies,  the pro-
jection of the creative energies needs to be withdrawn so they can 
be  fruitfully  realized  as  a  potential within oneself. 
What happened  to  Jane  can  also  be  understood  in  terms  of 
the  disparity  that  almost  always  occurs  in  a  relationship  such  as 
marriage.  One  person  is  more  contained  in  such  a  relationship 
than  the  other,  as  C.  G.  Jung brought out in  his  article  on mar-
riage. 
28 
For the person who  is  contained in the relationship,  emo-
tional and physical needs  are satisfied;  there is  no  need  to  go  be-
yond  the  relationship,  for  that person  feels  comfortably  fulfilled. 
For the container,  however,  there is  a  tendency for  libido  to spill 
out  over  the  boundaries  of the  relationship  and  seek  an  outlet 
elsewhere.  This psychic energy  that spills out is  a creative energy 
that,  as  just  noted,  readily  becomes  projected  onto  another  per- . 
son  unless  it finds  a  suitable outlet.  It is  important that the con-
tainer in such a relationship realize that the deepest longing is for 
unity  of the personality,  a  unity  that,  as  Jung  has  pointed out in 
his  article,  is  available  to  the  contained  person  via  the  relation-
ship,  but that the container must seek in another way. 
Often  the  personality  of the  container is  more  complex  and 
developed  than  that  of  the  contained  person.  However,  some-
"  Marie-Louise  von  Franz,  The  Feminine  in  Fairy  Tales  (Zurich:  Spring 
Publications,  1972),  pp.  13fT. 
28 
C.  G.  Jung,  "Marriage  as  a  Psychological  Relationship,"  CW  17,  The 
Development  of Personality  (New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1954),  p.  189  of the 
1964 edition. 
28  The Invisible Partners 
times  roles  switch,  and there  are relationships  in which  now  one 
person,  now  the  other,  is  the  container;  or  perhaps  the  wife  is 
contained  spiritually  in  the  husband  and  the  husband  contained 
emotionally in the wife,  or vice versa.  Each person has a struggle. 
For the one who is contained there is anxiety and distress because 
that person senses, consciously or unconsciously, that the partner 
is  not in the relationship as much as  he is.  For the  person who is 
the container there  is  a  sense  of frustration,  and sometimes  feel-
ings of guilt or disloyalty  because of an awareness  that he or she 
is  not responding to the partner as  the partner would like.  Either 
the man or the woman may be the container for the other. It does 
not  seem  to  be  a  matter  of sex  that  determines  which  person 
plays  which  role,  but  rather  a  matter  of which  person  has  the 
more differentiated  personality. 
Naturally,  if one  person  is  the  container,  and  the  other  the 
contained,  this  places  a  certain  stress  on  the  relationship  and  is 
part of a  force  that  tends  to  draw  people  away  from  each  other, 
rather  than  toward  each  other.  In  every  relationship  there  are 
certain factors  tending to promote the togetherness of the people, 
their oneness and desire to be together,  and other factors  tending 
to pull them apart.  It is  helpful to look at the latter factors  as  be-
longing to the principle of individuality, not as being entirely neg-
ative.  A  relationship is  the joining together of two  people.  This is 
one side of life,  but the other side of life calls for the accentuation 
of an individual personality,  and for this to develop there must be 
the assertion  and recognition of individual differences. 
One  rather  frequent  fantasy  that  married  people  find  going 
through  their  minds  is  the  fantasy  that  their  partners  are  dead. 
The fantasy  may consist in the simple thought,  "What if my hus-
band/wife should die?"  Or it  may  develop  into  a  fantasied  scene 
of death, or even a wish that the other person would die.  Natural-
ly  such  fantasies  shock  us,  and we  tend  to  repress  them  quickly, 
horrified  that we  should  have  such  a  thought.  But in  most  cases 
such  fantasies  are  simply  a  compensation  for  a  relationship  in 
which the lives of the two people are too intertwined, and there is 
a  need  for  more individual  development.  This same  thought  was 
expressed by  Jesus  in  a  statement that would  be shocking  unless 
we  took  it  as  a  way  of stating  the importance  of individual  psy-
chological development:  "If any man comes to me without hating 
Chapter One  29 
his  father,  mother,  wife,  children,  brothers,  sisters,  yes  and  his 
own life  too,  he cannot be  my disciple."
29 
The need  for  individual development  does  not invalidate re-
lationship.  Only separated beings can relate.  Unless there is  indi-
vidual  development  on  the  part of two  people,  true  relationship 
cannot  occur.  Instead,  a  state  of mutual  identification  develops 
that blunts the psychological development of both partners.  Nev-
ertheless,  when  the principle of individuality asserts itself in a re-
lationship it is  important that the two people involved are able to 
discuss their differences  and accept them.  It also  helps if the two 
people have  certain things in  common.  A  marriage,  for  instance, 
tends  to  hold  together  more  often  if the  man  and  the  woman 
share  a  common  racial,  religious,  and  educational  background. 
Common goals also help, such as the goal of raising children, or a 
commonly  shared  financial  goal.  Having  friends  in  common  is 
also  helpful. 
Every  relationship  is  a  mixture  of areas  where  people  meet 
and areas where they do not meet because the two people are dif-
ferent.  Verda Heisler,  author of the helpful article "Individuation 
through  Marriage,"
30 
diagrams the situation in this way: 
A  B 
cu 
In  this  diagram,  the  areas  that  are  shaded  represent  areas  in 
which  the  man  and  woman  share  interests,  goals,  or aspirations 
in  common.  The  white  sections  represent  areas  where  there  are 
individual  differences.  The amount of overlap  may  be  greater or 
less.  So  diagram  A  shows  a  relationship  in  which  there  is  more 
psychological life  shared in common than in diagram B. 
Clearly these  Invisible  Partners have  a fateful  effect  on rela-
tionships.  As  we  have  seen,  when  they  are  projected  the  anima 
2
'  Lk.  14:26. 
30 
Verda  Heisler,  "Individuation  through  Marriage,"  Psychological  Per-
spectives,  Fall  1970,  Vol.  1,  No.  2. 
30  The Invisible Partners 
and  animus  can  produce  extraordinary  attractions  and  repul-
sions  between men and women,  and invariably mislead a  man or 
woman into thinking too much or too little of his or her partner. 
But  the  anima  and  animus  also  produce  their  marked  effects 
on the consciousness of men and women quite apart from  projec-
tion, and here too they have disturbing effects on relationships.  It 
is  to this that I  now tum. 
Myths  and fairy  tales,  being  spontaneous  representations  of psy-
chological  reality,  often  represent  the  anima  and  animus,  and 
through  their  vivid  story  imagery  show  us  how  they  can  affect 
human life.  Take, for  instance, the Greek myth of Circe,  who was 
a  deadly  female  being,  known  for  her  enchantments  and  evil 
spells.  She had poisoned her husband and gone to live in a beauti-
ful  castle  on  the  isle  of Aeaea.  By  means  of magic,  she  had  the 
power to enchant any man who wandered onto the shores of her 
island,  and she could  turn him into an animal.  The most  famous 
story  about  Circe  is  found  in  the  Odyssey.  Odysseus's  men  have 
ventured onto the isle and have been welcomed by Circe,  who en-
tertains  them  and  gives  them  a  glorious  banquet  in  her  palace, 
but just at the height of their pleasure and enjoyment Circe casts 
her  evil  spell  on  the  men  and  they  are  turned  into  swine.  Odys-
seus  himself,  fortunately,  had  been  forewarned  by  the  god  Her-
mes,  who  provided him with an herb that was  an antidote to the 
spells of Circe.  Thus prepared,  Odysseus is  finally  able to get the 
better  of Circe  and  compels  her  to  free  his  men  from  her  evil 
spell.  But even  then her fascination  is  so  great that Odysseus dal-
lies  with  her  on  the  island  for  a  year,  forgetting  about  his  wife, 
Penelope,  and the urgency of his  voyage back to his  homeland. 
The Sirens,  whom we  also  meet in the Odyssey,  were as  dan-
gerous  as  Circe.  The  Sirens  were  fearsome  female  creatures  with 
bodies of birds and heads of women.  They could make exceeding-
31 
32  The Invisible Partners 
ly  melodious  music,  which  was  so  enticing  that  no  man  who 
heard their music could resist going to them.  But once a man ap-
proached them the Sirens set upon him  and tore him apart,  add-
ing  his  bones  to  the  heap  of skeletons  that  were  scattered  over 
their  terrible  island.  Odysseus  himself would  have  fallen  prey  to 
the  Sirens  had  he  not  been  forewarned  by  Circe.  When  his  ship 
passed  the island  where  the  Sirens  lived  he  had  his  men  stop  up 
their ears so  they could not hear the deadly music,  while he him-
self was lashed securely to the mast.  In this way,  though he heard 
the music,  he was  able to pass safely by. 
In  both  of these  tales  we  have  female  beings  who  are  ex-
tremely dangerous to men.  They have great seductive power,  and 
can lure men with their offerings of pleasure or music into a state 
of unconsciousness.  Then,  once the men are seduced  and power-
less,  they  destroy  them.  The  transformation  of Odysseus's  men 
into swine represents the reduction of masculine consciousness to 
its  lowest,  most  swinelike  nature,  and  a  psychological  state  in 
which  a  man  has  become  identical  with  his  appetite  for  sex  and 
pleasure.  The rending  apart of men by  the  Sirens  personifies  the 
way  the  deadly  anima  power  can  tear  masculine  consciousness 
into shreds by luring men into a state of unconsciousness with of-
ferings  of bliss  and  pleasure.  In this  way  Greek  mythology  per-
sonified  the  deadly,  dangerous  side  of the  anima  that  can  lure  a 
man to  his destruction.  We could say  that Mark Antony fell  prey 
to  the  evil  effects  of the  anima in her Circe and Siren  aspect,  for 
he became identical with his appetites for pleasure,  and was lured 
to his destruction by the sirenlike quality of the anima he project-
ed onto Cleopatra. 
Odysseus is  able  to  escape  this evil  fate  because  he  has been 
forewarned,  that  is,  he  has  become  conscious  of the  meaning  of 
the situation.  Equipped  with  his  knowledge  of the deadly  nature 
of Circe,  the hero is  able to overcome her dangerous side and ex-
perience her helpful side,  since it is  she who warns him about the 
Sirens  and  tells  him  how  to  find  safe  passage.  Odysseus's  men, 
who  represent  ordinary  consciousness,  do  not  hear  the  Sirens' 
music,  but Odysseus  does.  The  hero  is  the  man  who  is  fully  ex-
posed to the anima and her effects, but is  psychologically enlight-
ened and so does  not fall  prey to her negative side. 
A  striking example of the dangerous side of the animus is  in 
Chapter  Two  33 
the  story  of Tobit,  which  is  found  in  the  Apocrypha.  The  story 
tells us of the beautiful young woman, Sarah, who is possessed by 
a  demon,  Asmodeus.  Seven  times  Sarah  had  been  married,  but 
each  time the demon  Asmodeus had come on her wedding  night 
and  strangled  her  husband.  Sarah  prays  to  God,  who  hears  her 
prayer and  resolves  to  help  her.  He also  hears  the  prayer  of the 
righteous,  blind  old  man,  Tobit,  and  his  son,  Tobias,  and  sends 
the angel Raphael to help the old man and his son, and the young 
woman Sarah. 
Raphael  takes  Tobias  on  a  journey  and  on  the  way  they 
come to a river.  Tobias goes down to the river to wash and as he 
does  so  a  fish  leaps  up  and  would  have  swallowed  him  had  not 
Raphael cried out,  "Catch the fish."'  Tobias catches the fish  and 
throws it onto the land and,  acting on the instructions of the an-
gel,  cuts  out the  heart,  liver,  and  gall,  and takes  them  with  him. 
Eventually  they  arrive  at  Sarah's  home  where  Tobias  is  told  by 
Raphael  that  he  is  to  marry  the  young  woman.  At  first  Tobias 
objects.  "I have heard," he complains, "that the girl has been giv-
en  to  seven  husbands  and  that  each  died  in  the  bridal  cham-
ber .... I  am  afraid  that  if I  go  in  I  will  die  as  those  before  me 
did,  for  a demon is in love  with her,  and he harms no one except 
those who approach her."
2 
But the angel instructs him to take the 
heart  and  liver  of the  fish  and  make  a  smoke  of them,  and  tells 
him that when the demon smells the smoke he  will flee  to the re-
motest  parts  of the  earth.  Tobias  does  as  he  is  told.  He  falls  in 
love  with Sarah,  marries her,  and that evening  makes a  smoke of 
the heart and liver of the fish,  and Asmodeus,  smelling it,  is  ban-
ished.3 
Asmodeus  personifies  the  animus,  who,  when  he  is  in  pos-
session  of a  woman,  acts  like  a  demon.  We  are  likely  to  be  pos-
sessed by an unconscious content when we  are ignorant of it and 
have  no relationship  to it,  but it  helps  us  when  we  are  related  to 
it.  Becoming  conscious  or  aware  of the  contents  of the  uncon-
scious  is  the  surest  way  to  establish  a  relationship.  It has  been 
1 
Tobit 6:3,  RSV. 
'Ibid., 6:13-14. 
3 
The gall of the fish  is used later in the story to cure the old man,  Tobit,  of 
blindness. 
34  The Invisible Partners 
said  of the  complexes  that  make  up  the  unconscious  that  most 
people  wonder  if  they  have  any  complexes;  what  they  do  not 
know is that their complexes have them.  So  Asmodeus has Sarah 
and it is because he possesses her that he is  a demon.  He destroys 
her  seven  husbands  because  the  animus,  when  he  possesses  a 
woman,  is  destructive to human relationships and to eros values. 
The angel  and the  fish  symbolize  the  healing  powers  of the 
unconscious,  and,  more specifically,  the power of a  spiritual  life. 
As Jung once pointed out,  one antidote to possession by evil is to 
have  one's  soul  filled  with  a  spirit  more  powerful  than  that  of 
evil.  When Tobias heats the gall and liver of the fish  and sends up 
a  smoke,  it  is  as  though a  new  spiritual force  enters  into Sarah's 
soul,  and there is  now no room for  the evil,  demonic force.  Tobi-
as,  of course,  also  arouses Sarah's eros,  and brings up  her feeling 
for a man and for  relationship. This human warmth and eros also 
have the capacity to banish the evil  power.  So the story gives us a 
clue  about  how  a  woman  can  destroy  the  deadly  effects  of the 
animus:  Her soul must be  filled  with a more powerful spirit than 
that of the destructive animus, and her capacity for eros and rela-
tionship must live. 
The  demon  Asmodeus,  the  sorceress  Circe,  and  the  seduc-
tive  Sirens  symbolize  the  destructive  effects  of the  animus  and 
anima.  It is  usually  these negative effects  that we  first  experience 
and that must be overcome if the positive aspects  of the Invisible 
Partners are to be  realized.  The negative,  destructive effects  con-
stitute  the  "bad  news"  about  the  animus  and  anima,  so  they 
will be considered first and the "good news,"  the helpful,  positive 
side of the anima and animus,  reserved for  the next chapter. 
The negative effects of the anima and animus are directly re-
lated  to  a  man's  unawareness  and  devaluation  of his  feminine 
side,  and  a  woman's  unawareness  of her  masculine  side.  With 
men,  the  anima  tends  to  take  them  over  in  proportion  to  their 
failure to properly recognize and respect feminine values in them-
selves,  in  life,  and  in  women.  For this  reason,  men  need  to learn 
to talk with women  and to listen to them,  for  a woman  can  then 
instruct  a  man  in  what  is  important  to  her;  in  this  way  he  be-
comes  more  related  to  eros  and  its  values.  This  facilitates  his 
Chapter  Two  35 
proper  relationship  to  the  anima,  an  important  matter,  for  in 
dealing  with  archetypal  figures  of the  unconscious  the  key  is  re-
latedness.  For,  as  we  have seen,  when such figures  are related to 
consciousness  their  positive  side  tends  to  be  manifested,  other-
wise  their demonic side  tends  to appear. 
In  the  case  of the  anima,  it  is  she  who  lies  behind  a  man's 
moods.  When a man is  possessed by the anima he is drawn into a 
dark  mood,  and  tends  to  become  sulky,  overly  sensitive,  and 
withdrawn.  A  poisonous  atmosphere surrounds  him,  and  it  is  as 
though  he is  immersed in  a  kind  of psychological  fog.  He ceases 
to  be  objective  or related,  and  his  masculine  stance  is  eroded  by 
peevishness.  If a man argues or writes in this frame  of mind,  this 
peevishness  and  poison  will  certainly  emerge.  In writing,  the  in-
fluence  of the  anima  can  be  seen  in  sarcasms,  innuendos,  irrele-
vancies,  and poisonous jabs that reveal  a subjective,  personalistic 
bias and detract from the objective quality of the work.  A  man in 
the grip of the anima acts for all the world like an inferior kind of 
woman who is  upset about something and that,  in fact,  is  exactly 
what he  has within  himself. 
Such  a  mood  may  fall  on  a  man in  an instant.  A  seemingly 
chance  remark from  someone,  a  slight,  an almost  unnoticed  dis-
appointment,  and suddenly  a  man may be in  a  mood.  Astonish-
ingly  enough,  men  almost  invariably  fail  to  note  that something 
from  within  themselves  has  suddenly  possessed  them,  that  a 
mood  has  fallen  on  them  and  gripped  them,  and  that  the  event 
has  been  quite  autonomous.  Such  moods  may  simply  make  the 
man a bit grouchy or out of sorts for a while,  or they may become 
dangerously dark.  If the moods are chronic they may  lead a man 
into  alcoholism  or  severe  depression.  Under  certain  circum-
stances,  an  intense  anima  mood  may  plunge  a  man  into  such  a 
feeling  of hopelessness that he commits suicide. It is no doubt the 
presence of the anima within a man that explains why fewer  men 
than women attempt suicide,  but more men than women actually 
succeed in killing  themselves.  It is  as  though  the anima says,  "It 
is  all futile!"  and the man falls  into utter despair. 
The woman  in  a  man's  life  could  tell  him  a  lot  about  these 
anima  moods.  She  knows  almost  right  away  when  a  mood  has 
her  man  because  then  he  is  not  available  for  relationship.  One 
36  The  Invisible  Partners 
cannot get  through the  mood to find  the man.  It is  as  though he 
has  disappeared,  and  someone  else  has  taken  his  place.  This 
moodiness  of the  man  has,  as  a  result,  a  disturbing  effect  on  a 
woman,  who  finds  it diffucult  to be  with  a man who  is  in  such a 
state. 
If you  can  get  to  the bottom  of a  man's  mood  you  will  find 
that something  has  gone  wrong,  but the man  may  hardly  realize 
what it is.  It may be that his inner woman does  not like what the 
man  is  doing.  For instance she  may  not  like  his  work  because  it 
drains her of life  and energy,  or it may keep  her from  her fulfill-
ment  in  life.  It is  as  though  the  man's  inner  woman,  and  the 
woman's  inner man,  also  need  to be  fulfilled  in life,  but the only 
way  they  can  be  fulfilled  is  through  the  kind  of life  their  outer 
man or outer woman  leads.  Imagine a  woman who  is  denied  her 
proper  scope  in  life,  who  is  forced  to  endure  a  way  of life  that 
leaves  her no room for  her emotions or her own creative  powers. 
Such a woman would,  naturally, become dissatisfied and her dis-
pleasure would be felt  in the bad atmosphere she would create.  It 
is  exactly  this  way  with  the  anima  if she  does  not  have  enough 
share in  the man's life. 
But the negative anima mood may also be a function of a re-
lationship.  For  example,  a  man  may  get  thrown  into  this  mood 
when  his  feelings  have been  hurt.  Someone has  ignored him,  giv-
en him a nasty verbal thrust,  or rejected him in some way,  and he 
is hurt and angry.  When the man is  hurt, if he were to express his 
feelings  directly  he  would  be  all  right-he  would  not  go  into  a 
mood.  If it is  his  wife  who  has hurt his feelings,  for instance,  and 
if he  were  to  say  to  her,  "That really  made  me  angry  when  you 
said that,"  he would be  himself and would not become  possessed 
by  the  anima;  he  would  not fall  into a  mood  about  it.  But if the 
man does  not express  his  feelings,  they fall  into the  unconscious, 
and the anima gets them.  The anger that the man did not express 
directly is  taken over by the anima,  who turns it into resentment; 
in  fact,  resentment  in  a  man  is  always  a  sign  of the  anima  at 
work.  In the hands of the anima this unexpressed and unresolved 
anger smolders, burns,  and eats away at him,  and is  expressed in-
directly by  "passive-aggressive"  moods and behavior. It is  always 
ready to erupt into flames;  then the man does  not have his anger, 
Chapter  Two  37 
it  has  him.  He is  possessed  by  rage,  and his  anger is  in  constant 
danger of becoming a terrible affect,  for  it is as  though the anima 
stands  poised  to  drop  her flaming  match  into  the waiting  can  of 
gasoline,  and the man will erupt in an engulfing and uncontrolled 
emotion. 
Jung noted that the anima can be seen to be at work wherev-
er emotions and affects  are at work in a man.  He wrote,  "She in-
tensifies, exaggerates, falsifies,  and mythologizes all emotional re-
lationships  with  his  work  and  with  other people  of both  sexes."
4 
The  antidote  for  this,  as  has  been  mentioned,  is  for  the  man  to 
know what he is  feeling  and become capable of expressing this in 
relationship.  This keeps his emotion out of the clutches of the an-
ima,  and,  moreover,  satisfies  her  that  the  correct  thing  is  being 
done  with  whatever  it  is  that has  wounded  or aroused  him.  The 
anima does not necessarily want to carry the man's emotional life 
for  him;  she  gets  it  by  default.  It is  as  though  she  says,  "Why 
don't you say something about that irritating thing that so-and-so 
has just done  to you!  If you  don't do something about it, I  will." 
We  can say  that if something  has  gone  wrong  in  an emotionally 
significant  relationship  the  anima  will  grouse  about  it  until  the 
man  straightens  it  out,  or  comes  to  terms  with  his  emotions  in 
some proper way. 
Unfortunately,  many  men  have  difficulty  expressing  their 
feelings.  Men  tend to  like  their relationships  to be smooth,  easy, 
and  comfortable.  They  are  reluctant  to  get  into  emotionally 
toned discussions or difficult issues.  They want "peace and quiet" 
and  want  their  women  to  maintain  a  pleasant  atmosphere  and 
not bring up distressing matters. But, as we have just seen, if mat-
ters of relationship  are ignored  they  simply  get  worse,  and  when 
a man consistently denies  his  feelings,  and fails  to relate  them to 
the people in his  life,  he becomes a chronically moody,  resentful, 
anima-ridden  man.  Then it is  as  though  a  witch  has  gotten  him, 
for  he has become identical with his  moods. 
If a man becomes capable of expressing his feelings,  not only 
does  he keep emotional  matters out of the clutches of the anima, 
he  also  becomes a  much more developed  person.  A  man who al-
• Jung,  CW9,  1,  p.  70. 
38  The Invisible Partners 
ways  avoids  emotionally  toned  encounters  with  other  people  is 
contained  within  the  Mother.  One  way  for  him  to  get  out of his 
Mother complex is to express himself in relationship. If he fails  to 
do so he remains emotionally a little boy who is afraid of women, 
who resents them if they don't keep him happy,  and who is  out of 
touch with his own masculine strength. 
Men  are  often  reluctant  to  bring  up  unpleasant  things  that 
have  happened  in  a  relationship  with  a  woman  because  they  are 
afraid  of her  anger,  or their  own  anger,  or  they  are  afraid  they 
will be  rejected,  or they are afraid of pain. 
Working things out in relationship requires that a man must 
come  to  terms  with  his  anger.  He  must  become  comfortable 
enough  with  anger so  that  he  can  express  it  without being  over-
come by it;  he must be able to allow himself to have his own  cre-
ative dark side.  One man  I  know  said  that  whenever a  difficulty 
arose  with  his  wife  he  positioned  himself near  the  door  so  that 
when he became angry he could simply leave.  He was  that afraid 
of his  own  anger.  Of course,  until  he  could  work  this  through 
with himself he would not be capable of working out his  relation-
ship with his  wife. 
If a  man is  afraid of his  woman's anger it often goes back to 
the  little  boy  in  him.  Watch  a  small  boy  when  mother  becomes 
angry at him!  See how unpleasant it is for him,  and how many lit-
tle boys will be terribly hurt, and want to do whatever they can to 
appease mother so  things will be good again,  or,  if they are more 
robust,  will  spew  out  boyish  defiance  so  as  not  to  be  over-
whelmed  by  their own  hurt feelings.  A  woman's  acid  anger  and 
power of rejection have enormous influence on other people,  men 
and  boys  especially,  and  if a  man  is  to  become  capable  of rela-
tionship  with  a  woman  he  must  overcome  his  fear  of her  anger 
and his anxiety about being  rejected.  This may mean that he will 
have to find  and help the little boy  in himself.  By recognizing his 
hurt-little-boy side he is much less likely to become identical with 
it,  and can remain more the man in relationship  with the woman 
in his  life. 
He will also have to deal with the angry,  rejecting side of his 
woman.  Why does  she  have  to be that way?  he may ask himself. 
But just as the anima has a negative side that must be overcome if 
the  positive  side  is  to  be  realized,  so  every  man  must be  capable 
Chapter  Two  39 
of enduring the dark side of the woman in his life if he is  going to 
find  her tender and life-giving  side. 
5 
A man's fear  that he  will be rejected if he brings up difficult 
matters  in  the  relationship  is  usually  unfounded.  A  woman  who 
cares about a man,  or is  at all  connected to her own instincts for 
relatedness,  has  a  great  capacity  for  confrontation  and  working 
things  out.  A  young  man  who  was  working  in  a  restaurant once 
had  an  angry  encounter  with  one  of the  waitresses  in  which  he 
told her just what he  thought of her and some things she was do-
ing.  Afterwards  he  came  to  me  in  amazement  and  said,  "You 
know,  you can tell a woman anything you want as long as it is  re-
lated."  He was  astonished  that this  girl  had  listened  to  what  he 
had said,  had  responded  to  it,  and had not just become  angry  at 
him  or walked  out on him. 
Related anger means  that the issues  that are brought up  are 
concerned  with  what  is  going  on  between  two  people.  It is  an 
honest expression  of genuine feeling.  If a  man expresses anger in 
an unrelated way  to a woman,  he will do it indirectly by creating 
a  bad  atmosphere  or indulging  in  a  personalistic  attitude.  If he 
expresses  anger  in  a  related  way,  he  will  tell  her just  what  it  is 
that is  upsetting  him.  If a  woman cares about a man she  will  not 
reject him if he expresses  his anger at her in this way;  to the con-
trary,  she  will  welcome  it,  for  it  shows  that  their  relationship  is 
meaningful  to  him.  From a  woman's  point  of view,  if a  man  ig-
nores  matters  of relationship  it  is  the same  as  ignoring  her,  and 
that means to her that she and the relationship are not important 
to him. 
Many times women will also welcome a man's anger because 
it  tells  them  when  they  have  gone  too  far.  Where  there  is  emo-
tion,  something  is  happening,  and  it  means  the  other  person  is 
taking  part  in  the  relationship.  When  a  man  never  shows  any 
emotion he leaves a vacuum in the relationship,  and,  especially if 
'By the way,  every  woman who is  angry is  not "in the animus" or animus-
possessed.  There is  a tendency among m e n ~   to suppose that all anger in a woman 
comes from  the animus. This can operate as a subtle way to keep a woman from 
expressing  those angry feelings  that men dislike  to face.  As we  will  see,  the ani-
mus may  very well  take up the cause of a  woman's anger and express it for  her, 
but the feminine  is  quite capable of being  angry on its  own. 
40  The  Invisible Partners 
he  becomes  passive,  there  is  something  in  most  women  that will 
dominate such a man if he allows it.  It is  man's passivity in rela-
tionship  that  draws  out  a  woman's  animus.  A  man's  anger  may 
be his healthy reaction against domination, and this kind of anger 
a  woman  will  be  glad  to  receive,  for  in  it she  will  recognize  and 
respect  her  man's  strength,  and  be  liberated  from  her  own  in-
stinctive tendency to dominate him.  It is  as  though she says,  "So 
that's the way it is.  Now I can stop dominating him for he has be-
come himself." 
I  have  stressed  here  the  way  a  woman  appreciates  a  man's 
emotional  reactions,  but  it  can  be  the  other  way  around,  of 
course; it can be the man who  yearns for a genuine emotional re-
sponse from  his  woman.  More often  than not,  it  is  the man  who 
retreats emotionally from relationship, but this is a generalization 
with many exceptions. 
On the  other  hand,  if the  anima  gets  hold  of a  man's  emo-
tions,  as  Jung  said,  she  intensifies,  falsifies,  and  exaggerates  the 
whole  matter.  These  distortions  the  anima  creates  in  a  man's 
mind  have  led  James  Hillman  to  challenge  an  oft-stated  thesis 
among Jungian psychologists that men relate through the anima, 
that a man who has a "well-developed anima" will,  as it were,  re-
late  through  her  to  other  people.  Hillman  contends  that  if we 
want relationship  the anima should not be  a  part of it.  "It seems 
odd,"  he  writes,  "that anima could  ever  have  been  considered as 
a  help  in human relationship.  In each  of her classical  shapes  she 
is  a  non-human  or  half-human  creature  and  her  effects  lead  us 
away  from  the individually  human  situation.  She  makes  moods, 
distortions,  illusions,  which  serve  human relatedness  only  where 
the  persons  concerned  shared  the  same  mood  or  fantasy.  If we 
want  'to  relate,'  then anima begone!"
6 
It is  the man  himself who 
relates,  and if the  relationship  is  determined by  the  anima,  it  be-
comes  a  matter  of archetypal  fantasy  playing  itself out  through 
human  actors,  or of the  exaggerations  and  falsifications  of emo-
tions  and emotionally  toned issues  that Jung has  described. 
The  important  thing  to  remember,  as  will  be  seen  more 
clearly  later  on,  is  that  the  correct  position  of the  anima  is  in-
'James Hillman,  "Anima," Spring,  1973,  p.  111. 
Chapter  Two  41 
ward,  not  outward.  She belongs  as  a  function  of relationship  be-
tween a  man's consciousness and the unconscious,  not as  a  func-
tion  of relationship  between  a  man  and  other people.  When  she 
intrudes  into  this  outer  sphere,  there  are  difficulties.  Men  are 
quite  capable  of doing  their  own  relating  and  having  their  own 
feelings,  and do not need the anima to provide this for  them. 
The anima not only  interferes  with  a  man's emotional  reac-
tions,  she  can  interfere  with  his  thinking  as  well.  For  instance, 
when  a  man is  anima-possessed  he may begin  to give  forth  opin-
ions instead of genuine thinking.  It is  as  though the anima begins 
to talk right through him, and she expresses herself as though she 
had an animus,  which means that she expresses opinions without 
regard to facts,  relationship,  or logic.  When a man is  in this state 
of mind  he  begins  to  argue  in  a  peevish  way,  and  his  masculine 
objectivity is  quite lost in a sea of emotionally toned and irration-
al  opinions  that  prove  resistant  to  reasonable  discussion.  Jung 
pointed  out  that  "men  can  argue  in  a  very  womanish  way  ... 
when  they  are  anima-possessed  and  have  thus been  transformed 
into the animus of their own anima. "
7 
She  may  also  disturb  his  thinking by  infiltrating  it  with  her 
own  notions  of what  is  desirable.  The  result  is  a  kind  of anima-
thinking  in  which  a  man's  capacity  for  clear  distinctions  is 
blurred,  and his  logos  is  distorted.  It is  as  though  the  anima,  in 
an  effort  to promote a  kind of "togetherness,"  blurs over all  dis-
tinctions and ignores all genuine differences.  Then the man is  not 
so  much  the  victim  of a  mood  as  he  is  the  victim  of a  powerful 
figure  within  himself that  seeks  to  mould  his  conscious  thinking 
and produces fuzziness  instead of clarity,  fog  instead of vision. 
Among  the  negative  attributes  of the  anima  is  her  capacity 
to poison a man's creative urges.  When a man gets a creative idea 
or  impulse  that  would  lead  him  beyond  the  ordinary,  a  subtle 
voice  seems  to whisper in  his  ear a  destructive thought that may 
well  stop him in  his  tracks.  Let us  say  that the man conceives an 
idea  to  write,  and  sees  himself compiling  a  book  or article.  The 
anima  is  almost  certain  to  whisper,  "Who are  you  to  think  you 
can  write?"  Or,  "But  it  has  already  been  written."  Or,  "But  no 
'C. G.  Jung,  CW9, 2,  Aion  (New York:  Pantheon Books,  1959),  p.  15. 
42  The Invisible Partners 
one  would  ever  publish  it."  The  creative  energy  of many  men  is 
stolen  from  them  by  this  subtle  voice  that  seemingly  wants  to 
nullify a man's attempts to make something of himself. 
Jung  relates  in  his  autobiography,  Memories,  Dreams,  Re-
flections,  that  he  heard  such  a  poisonous  voice  speak  to  him 
when  he  was  first  beginning  to work  out  a  relationship  with  his 
unconscious  personality  through  the  use  of the  technique  of ac-
tive imagination. 
8 
When  I  was  writing  down  these  fantasies,  I  once  asked  myself, 
"What  am  I  really  doing?  Certainly  this  has  nothing  to  do  with 
science.  But  then what is  it?"  Whereupon a  voice  within  me  said, 
"It is  art."  I  was  astonished.  It had  never  entered  my  head  that 
what  I  was  writing  had any connection with art .... I  knew  for  a 
certainty that the voice had come from a woman.  I recognized it as 
the  voice  of a  patient,  a  talented  psychopath  who  had  a  strong 
transference to me.  She had become a  living figure  in my  mind. 
Obviously what  I  was  doing  wasn't science.  What then could it 
be but art? It was as though these were the only alternatives in the 
world.  That is  the way  a  woman's mind  works. 
I  said  very  emphatically  to  this  voice  that  my  fantasies  had 
nothing to do with art, and I  felt  a great inner resistance.  No voice 
came  through,  however,  and  I  kept  on  writing.  Then  came  the 
next assault, and again the same assertion: "That is art." This time 
I  caught her and said,  "No, it is  not art!  On the contrary,  it is  na-
ture,"  and prepared myself for  an  argument.  ... 
I  was  greatly  intrigued  by  the  fact  that  a  woman  should  inter-
fere  with  me from  within .... Why  was  it  thought of as  feminine? 
Later I  came to see  that this  inner feminine  figure  plays  a  typical, 
or archetypal,  role  in  the  unconscious  of a  man,  and  I  called  her 
the "anima." ... 
At  first  it  was  the  negative  aspect  of the  anima  that  most  im-
pressed me.  I  felt  a  little awed by  her.  It was  like the feeling  of an 
invisible presence in the room .... What the anima said seemed to 
me full  of a deep  cunning.  If I  had taken  these fantasies of the un-
conscious as art,  they would have carried no more conviction than 
visual perceptions, as if I were watching a movie.  I would have felt 
no moral obligation toward them.  The anima might then have eas-
'  See  the  Appendix  at  the  back  of  this  book  for  a  description  of active 
imagination. 
Chapter  Two 
ily  seduced  me  into  believing  that  I  was  a  misunderstood  artist, 
and  that  my  so-called  artistic  nature  gave  me  the  right  to  neglect 
reality.  If I  had  followed  her  voice,  she  would  in  all  probability 
have said to me  one day,  "Do you imagine the nonsense you're en-
gaged  in  is  really  art?  Not a bit."  Thus  the  insinuations  of the  an-
ima,  the  mouthpiece  of  the  unconscious,  can  utterly  destroy  a 
man.' 
43 
This  engaging  story  from  Jung  not  only  illustrates  how  the 
anima can  poison  a  man's consciousness  and  rob  him of himself 
should  he  fall  for  her  insinuations,  it  also  gives  us  a  hint  about 
how  a  man can  prevent  the  negative  anima from  having  this  de-
structive  influence  on  him:  by  making  her  conscious.  Later  we 
will look more closely at what this means,  and how a man can re-
late  positively  to  the anima,  and a  woman to  the  animus.  Mean-
while  it can  be  seen  that  the  negative  anima  is  very  much  like  a 
witch  who  can seduce a  man into unconsciousness,  and can turn 
him into stone by  paralyzing his  creative efforts. 
If the anima is  the master of moods in a  man,  the animus  is 
the  master  of opinions  in  a  woman.  He typically  expresses  him-
self in judgments, generalizations, critical statements, and apodic-
tic  assertions  that  do  not  come  from  a  woman's  own  process  of 
thinking  and  feeling,  but  have  been  picked  up  from  various  au-
thoritative sources,  mother or father,  books or articles, church or 
some other collective organization. It is the animus who is behind 
the  autonomous,  critical,  and  opinionated  thoughts  that  intrude 
into a woman's consciousness.  He thus represents inferior mascu-
line logic, just as the anima represents inferior feminine  emotion-
ality. 
In dreams  the  negative  animus  often  appears  as  a  group  of 
men  rather than as  a  single  individual.  Imagine a  number of un-
educated  and  uninformed  men  sitting  around  the  cracker  barrel 
expressing  their  opinions  on  politics  or  religion!  This  is  the  way 
the animus  can sound.  If a  woman  becomes  identified  with  such 
opinions in herself,  which happens when the animus is  not differ-
entiated  from  her own  ego  psychology,  we  speak  of animus  pos-
session. 
'C. G.  Jung,  Memories,  Dreams,  Reflections (New York:  Pantheon Books, 
1961),  pp.  185-187. 
44  The  Invisible Partners 
The opinions of the animus have an unpleasant and even  de-
structive quality,  and  may be  projected  onto other people,  or di-
rected  inwardly  on the woman  herself.  In the former  case,  other 
people  cannot stand the woman because of the blunt and critical 
judgments she passes on them.  In the latter case,  the woman can-
not stand herself,  for  the effect of the judgments of the animus on 
her is  to destroy  her sense of her own value and worth. 
The  animus  is  thus  able  to  rob  a  woman  of her  creativity, 
even as  the anima,  as  we  have seen,  can rob a  man of his.  At the 
moment when a  woman gets  a creative idea,  or her eros and ten-
derness begin to stir in her in a new way,  the animus may intrude 
into her consciousness with thoughts that could prevent her from 
fulfilling  herself.  He  may  say,  "You  can't  do  that."  Or,  "Other 
people  can  do  these  things  much  better  than  you."  Or,  "You 
have nothing of value to offer."  If the woman identifies with such 
thoughts, that is,  mistakes them for her own thoughts and for the 
truth,  the new  creative possibility is  taken away from  her. 
It can be  seen  that  the  negative  anima  and  animus  seem  to 
personify  a  destructive,  negating  force.  Mythology  has  long  pic-
tured just such a psychological situation.  For instance,  in ancient 
Babylonia  it  was  believed  that  when  a  soul  was  born  into  the 
world the gods appointed two gods  and two goddesses  to accom-
pany that soul through life.  The task of one god and goddess was 
to  help  and  guide  the  soul.  The  task  of the  others  was  to  try  to 
negate and destroy the soul.  In Judaeo-Christian  lore  this  adver-
sary or accuser who tries to destroy us is  personified as Satan.  In 
fact,  the Greek word for the devil means "an accuser," or an "ad-
versary."  This  is  an  accurate  psychological  portrayal  of the  way 
things are.  There seems  to be  a  power of evil  within  us  that tries 
to negate and destroy us,  and the negative anima and animus,  the 
witch or sorcerer within  us,  seem  to be a  part of that force. 
The opinions of the animus have a peculiarly irritating effect 
on  other people  because,  in  spite  of their  seeming  logic,  they  do 
not fit  the actual situation.  Yet neither can they be  reasoned with, 
for the animus has an absolutist attitude, and his opinions are not 
amenable  to  discussion  or  qualification.  Whenever  the  animus 
takes  over,  a  woman  is  taken  away  from  her  own  thinking  and 
feeling,  and she  becomes  identical  with  banal  statements,  sweep-
ing  judgments,  or  generalizations.  Small  wonder,  when  these 
Chapter  Two  45 
judgmental  optmons  are  directed  from  within  against  herself, 
that  a  woman  tends  to  become  depressed  and  is  robbed  of the 
colorfulness of life. 
A  conversation  in  which  the  animus  is  involved  might  go 
like  this:  A  man  who  is  discouraged  over  some  difficulty  might 
express his sense of defeat and despair,  and the woman might re-
spond  with,  "Everyone tends to  get  discouraged  now  and then." 
This  seemingly  harmless  statement,  true  enough  in  itself,  will 
have the tendency to stop the man dead in his tracks.  He will feel 
put  off and  not  able  to  go  on  to  express  himself,  and  may  feel 
vaguely angry,  though he may not know why.  The woman herself 
is,  in her own mind,  trying to be helpful,  but the animus has tak-
en over and instead of a  statement related to this individual man 
and his  need,  the animus  has answered with a generalization. 
If a  man  said  such  a  thing  to  a  woman,  it  would  no  doubt 
come  across  to  a  woman  in  a  preachy,  superior  masculine  way. 
She  would  probably  feel  rejected  and  put  down  by  the  man's 
sweeping  generalization  that seems  to  leave  her and her feelings 
out  of the  picture.  Men  are  prone  to  just  such  sweeping  state-
ments,  and the animus  acts the same way.  A  man who wishes  to 
relate  must  learn  to  temper  his  masculine judgments  with  eros, 
which  always  makes  things  personal  and  individual,  just  as  a 
woman  who  remains  true  to  her  eros  principle  will  not  want  to 
allow  the animus and his  sweeping statements to take over. 
The animus often keeps  other people from  reaching and ex-
periencing  the  warm,  feeling  side  of a  woman  because  they  can-
not get through the animus and his opinions.  Children with such 
a  woman  for  a  mother  feel  deprived  of their  mother's  affection 
because  they  keep  coming  up  against  the  animus.  She  comes 
across to them as a hard disciplinarian, and the critical, judgmen-
tal attitudes of the animus effectively shut them out from  her ten-
derness  and affection.  (The situation is  exacerbated  when the  fa-
ther  has  relinquished  the  masculine  role  of disciplinarian  and 
forced  the mother to assume this role in the family.) It is not that 
the mother does not have warm feelings for her children; they are 
there,  but  the  children  do  not  receive  them  because  the  animus 
blocks them.  Such women may appear hard and steely, and other 
people may be leery of them, for their animus can wound;  howev-
er,  strangely  enough,  they  themselves  easily  get  their  feelings 
46  The Invisible Partners 
hurt,  and when  this  happens  they  are  terribly  injured and bewil-
dered and do not understand why other people do not love them. 
The animus-ridden  woman  and the martyred  woman are not far 
from  each other. 
Emily  Bronte's  profound  novel  Wuthering  Heights  is  filled 
with  illustrations  of the  psychology  of the  animus,  as  Barbara 
Hannah has shown in her brilliant book Striving  Towards  Whole-
ness. 
10 
Hannah points  out a  scene  in the opening  part of the nov-
el,  in  which  Mr.  Lockwood  has  a  vivid  nightmare  of the  Rever-
end Jabes  Branderham,  as  a  good  portrayal  of what  C.  G.  Jung 
once  called  "the ravings  of the  animus."  Mr.  Lockwood,  an  un-
welcome  visitor to the  austere  home of the somber Heathcliff,  is 
forced  to spend the night in Wuthering Heights because of a vio-
lent snowstorm.  He is ushered by the servant into the forbidding, 
gloomy room that once was used by the now-deceased Cathy, but 
has remained unused for  many years.  Here he finally  manages to 
fall  asleep  in  spite  of the grim  surroundings,  but is  awakened  in 
the  middle  of the  night  by  a  terrible  nightmare.  In his  dream  a 
character  appears  called  the  Reverend  Jabes  Branderham,  a 
name  Lockwood  had  chanced  upon  in  some  reading  shortly  be-
fore  going  to  sleep.  In his  dream  Mr.  Lockwood  sits  imprisoned 
in  the midst  of a  somber  congregation  listening  to  the  Reverend 
Jabes  Branderham preach  an  interminable sermon  on  the seven-
ty-times-seven  sins.  One  by  one  the  preacher  wearisomely  goes 
through  each  of the  490  sins.  Every  one  of these  discourses  is 
equal  to  an  ordinary  sermon,  and  the  sins  were  "of a  curious 
sort,"  "odd  transgressions,"  Lockwood  notes,  "that  I  never 
imagined previously." 
"Oh,  how  weary  I  grew.  How  I  writhed,  and  yawned,  and 
nodded,  and  revived!  How  I  pinched  and  pricked  myself,  and 
rubbed  my  eyes,  and stood  up,  and  sat down."  Finally  Brander-
ham  finishes  with  the  four  hundred  and  ninetieth  sin,  but  then 
begins the four hundred and ninety-first sin!  That is  too much for 
Mr.  Lockwood.  He  leaps  to  his  feet  in  the  dream  and  objects: 
"Sir, ... I have endured and forgiven  the four hundred and nine-
ty heads of your discourse .... The four  hundred and ninety first 
10
Barbara  Hannah,  Striving  Towards  Wholeness  (New  York:  G.  P.  Put-
nam's Sons,  1971),  chap.  10. 
Chapter  Two  47 
is  too much!"  The interminable preacher is  not dissuaded.  Point-
ing  his  finger  at Lockwood  he calls on the congregation  to  "exe-
cute upon him the judgment." The result is  pandemonium as the 
people  rush  upon  Lockwood,  he  defends  himself,  and  finally 
wakens  with everyone fighting  furiously  with everyone else. 
11 
As Barbara Hannah notes,  the Reverend Jabes  Branderham 
is  an  apt  personification  of the  capacity  of the  animus  to  go  on 
and on reciting the list of "sins" that he claims people have com-
mitted.  The negative  animus can dredge  up  the most remarkable 
incidents  to  add  to  his  unending  list  of sins  and  failures,  and  in 
addition  to  acting  as  prosecutor,  appoints  himself judge as  well. 
He has  no  mercy  in  his  pronouncements,  and  there  is  no  end  to 
the  list  of faults  he  can  find.  Small  wonder  he  can  impart  such 
feelings  of guilt,  defeat,  and inferiority in  people! 
It is  helpful to have Emily Bronte personify for  us  the work-
ings  of the  animus  in  her image  of the Reverend  Jabes  Brander-
ham,  for  the term animus  is  a  stiff term that,  while  scientifically 
useful,  does  not fit  very  well  with  the  way  he  is  actually  experi-
enced.  When  he  is  seen  working  within  a  woman's  psyche,  it  is 
often better to speak of him as the Great Prosecutor, the Top Ser-
geant,  the Great Scorekeeper,  the Inner Judge,  or,  as  one woman 
once put it,  the "Duty Demon." 
There are  certain  words  ofwhich the  animus  is  particularly 
fond-"should"  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  these-and 
there  are  certain  statements  he  makes  more  often  than  others. 
For instance,  "You are no good  ... You  can't do  anything right 
... Other people are  better than you  ... You are a  failure."  The 
differentiation of the animus is  helped  when  a woman can recog-
nize  these  autonomous  thoughts  that  suddenly  appear  in  her 
mind,  sense  that  they  are  presented  to  her  from  a  force  within 
herself,  and stop to question them.  In many cases it helps to write 
them  down  so  they  can  be  looked  at  more  objectively  and  seen 
for  what  they  are.  She  can  even  put  quotation  marks  around 
them because they  are  thoughts  that act as  though  someone  else 
within her mind has spoken them. 
The animus can also fill  a woman's mind with a strange kind 
11 
Emily  Bronte,  Wuthering  Heights  (New  York:  Random  House  edition, 
1943),  p.  14. 
48  The  Invisible Partners 
of logic.  A  young  woman who  had a  loving  relationship  with  an 
airplane pilot  was  troubled one night by a  dark fantasy  in  which 
her only brother was committing suicide.  A train of thought then 
began to run through her mind that went like this:  "You see how 
much you love  your brother,  yet he might die.  Now if you  really 
love your brother, your father,  and your mother, you will want to 
go  and  be  with  them  as  much  as  possible  because  they  may  all 
die.  And if you really love your man you will want to be with him 
too  as  much  as  possible.  So  you  should  give  up  your job,  and 
travel wherever  he goes  and be  with  him on  as  many flights  and 
overnight stops  as  possible because that is  what you should do if 
you  love  someone."  Fortunately,  this  "logic"  was  so  outrageous 
the woman knew something was wrong  with it.  As she expressed 
it,  "But  I  would  not  be  myself if I  were  doing  that."  This  illus-
trates  the  way  the  animus  manifests  himself in  an  autonomous 
train of thought,  and a  woman  needs  to be  careful  and not let  it 
run her life. 
This quasi-logical aspect  of the animus is  one reason it is  so 
irritating  to  other people.  His judgments,  conclusions,  and criti-
cisms  have  a  peculiarly  blunt,  stinging  quality  because  they  are 
not  related  to the emotional  reality  of the situation.  The animus 
has a  way of using  a  sword when a  lamp would be better. 
When the animus  utters  an opinion,  it is  said with  an  air of 
great authority.  It is  like a pronouncement, and pronouncements, 
of course,  are  indisputable.  This  air  of  authority,  Emma  Jung 
suggests in  her monograph Animus and Anima, 
12 
is  enhanced by 
our present culture,  which  tends to  overvalue  everything mascu-
line and undervalue the feminine.  Masculine achievement, power, 
control,  success,  and  logic  are  rewarded  in  our  society  by  pres-
tige,  good  grades  in  school,  and  generous  paychecks.  The  femi-
nine  principle,  which  tends  to  unite  and  synthesize,  is  underval-
ued  culturally  both  in  men  and  in  women.  It is  as  though  the 
animus were aware of this,  and so  his utterances are all the more 
authoritative,  while,  conversely,  a  woman  is  led  to  distrust  her 
seemingly  inferior  and  more  vague  feminine  intuitions  and  feel-
ings,  even  though  it  is  these  that  have  the  truth  of the  matter. 
This  is  a  deplorable  situation,  for  not  only  does  our world  need 
12
Emma Jung, Animus and Anima (Zurich:  Spring Publications,  1974). 
Chapter  Two  49 
more  of the  healing  influence  and  wisdom  of the  feminine,  but 
the  woman  herself  is  all  the  more  victimized  by  animus  judg-
ments  that,  if left  unchallenged,  nullify  her own  deepest  psycho-
logical  truth. 
Since  the  anima  and  animus  have  these  peculiarly  irritat-
ing  effects,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  are  inclined  to  quarrel 
with  each  other.  A  typical  anima/animus  quarrel  can  start  in 
many different ways.  A man may come home in a dark mood.  He 
is  possessed  by  this  mood,  that  is,  by  the  anima,  and  exudes  an 
air of poison and gloom.  Now  if the man were  to tell  his  woman 
what the problem is,  things could take a more  positive direction, 
but  the  chances  are  that  he  will  say  nothing  about  his  frame  of 
mind, but will just inflict his mood on her.  Being in this mood,  of 
course he is  not  related,  and his  woman  senses  this  immediately, 
and  cannot  stand  the  lack  of relationship.  She  finds  the  psycho-
logical  atmosphere,  and the sense of isolation,  increasingly  intol-
erable,  and  also  wonders  if  somehow  she  is  being  blamed  for 
something,  for a man in the grip of the anima has a way  of being 
vaguely reproachful of others.  At this  point,  unless the woman is 
very careful,  her animus may intrude.  It is  as though he does  not 
like  that  man's  moody  anima  either,  and  so  he  will  pick  up  his 
sword or club and take  matters into his  own hands.  This may  be 
done  with  some  kind  of stinging  remark,  or  a  direct  frontal  as-
sault on the man's objectionable moodiness. 
Stung by the attack, the anima of the man may retaliate.  Un-
less  the  man  is  quick  to  realize  what is  going  on,  and to  make  a 
conscious response to this situation, the anima will probably drop 
her match into the gasoline,  and the result will  be  an eruption of 
affect.  The  man  will  then  become  irrational  and  fight  back  in  a 
sarcastic, affect-laden way,  perhaps with a personalistic attack on 
his  wife's  character,  that  of her  mother,  and  anything  else  that 
can be thought of to get revenge for  the wound that has just been 
inflicted  on  him.  The  animus  then  comes  back  in  kind,  and  the 
result is  an angry  quarrel.  It never occurs  to the man,  of course, 
that  he  has  become  possessed  by  a  witch  inside  himself;  to  the 
contrary,  he is  quite convinced that his  wife  is  to blame for  all  of 
this. 
Or  perhaps  it  is  the  woman's  animus  that  first  delivers  a 
stinging remark or irritating opinion.  The man is  immediately af-
50  The  Invisible Partners 
fected  by this,  but unless he is quick to realize what is  happening, 
it is  his  anima who  reacts.  As Jung once wrote,  " ... no man can 
converse  with  an  animus  for  five  minutes  without  becoming  the 
victim of his own anima ... the animus draws his sword of power 
and the anima ejects  her poison of illusion and seduction."
13 
At this  point  projections  occur again,  but it is  not  the  posi-
tive  animus  and  anima  who  are  projected  onto  the  human  part-
ners,  creating  an  air  of fascination  and  magical  attraction;  it  is 
the negative images,  which have the effect of driving the man and 
the woman  apart.  The man's  wife  now  receives  the  projection  of 
his  inner witch,  and is,  accordingly,  held  responsible  for  his  bad 
mood,  while the woman projects onto her man all the infuriating 
qualities  that,  in fact,  belong  to the man inside of herself. 
Clearly  such  anima/animus  fights  can  be  destructive.  The 
tragedy  is  that  while  the  man  and  woman  have  their  unproduc-
tive quarrel, and the atmosphere becomes darker and darker, nei-
ther  realizes  that  the  scene  is  being  dominated  by  the  Invisible 
Partners.  It is  not John  and  Mary who  are  quarreling,  but these 
archetypal  figures  within  them.  For just  as  the  anima  and  ani-
mus can fall in love, so they can quarrel, and the intensity of their 
attraction  to  each other is  matched only by  the intensity  of their 
dislike. 
This  destructive  anima/animus  fight  is  not  to  be  confused 
with  a  genuine  encounter  between  the  actual  man  and  woman. 
When John and Mary confront each other to express their anger 
and  work  out  their  differences,  something  positive  can  emerge. 
Such  encounters  between  a  man  and  a  woman  can  have  great 
psychological  value  and must  not be  avoided just because  a  per-
son  is  too  squeamish  to  get  into  emotionally  difficult  situations. 
But  when  John  and  Mary  are  eclipsed  by  their  anima  and  ani-
mus,  and  these  two  begin  to  quarrel,  the  result  is  most  unfortu-
nate. 
The  strange  thing  is,  as  suggested  earlier,  that  the  quarrel 
could  be  avoided  if the  man  would just say  what  it is  that  he  is 
feeling,  and the woman would say what it is  that is  troubling her. 
If the man directly  expresses  his  hurt,  anger,  or bewilderment,  it 
is he who  is  talking.  If he does  not,  however,  the anima gets  hold 
13 
Jung,  CW9, 2,  p.  15. 
Chapter  Two  51 
of it and expresses  his emotional reaction for  him in the devious, 
destructive  ways  described.  She  exaggerates,  as Jung said.  In her 
grasp,  a  relatively  minor  personal  injury becomes  magnified  and 
a mountain is  made of a molehill.  She falsifies.  Once the personal 
slight  or  hurt  is  in  her  grasp,  the  facts  of the  situation  become 
distorted.  In  the  ensuing  argument,  what  really  happened  be-
comes obscured by  the emotionality of the anima.  She intensifies, 
so that the original emotion the man felt  now becomes a powerful 
affect,  and  the  small  fire  a  large  one.  And  she  mythologizes. 
When things are left in her hands, an ordinary human woman be-
comes  a  goddess  or  a  witch  and  an  ordinary  human  situation 
takes  on a highly  dramatic character. 
Similarly, when a woman who is  troubled by something in a 
personal  relationship  says  what  she  feels,  it  is  she  who  is  speak-
ing,  and the matter can be  worked  out.  But if she  hides  her true 
feelings,  it is  the animus who seizes his club or sword and tries to 
set matters straight.  The result is disastrous as far as the relation-
ship is concerned, and is a defeat for the woman's ego, for the ego 
always  experiences  defeat  when  it  becomes  possessed  by  the  an-
ima  or  animus.  Club  in  hand,  the  animus  will  let  the  offending 
man  have  it  by  some  form  of direct  attack  that  may  have  little 
perceivable relationship to the actual offense.  Taking his sword of 
seeming  logic,  the  animus  will  bring up some  argument  that has 
little  or nothing  to  do  with  the  real  emotional  issue.  Irritated  at 
such  an  irrational  assault,  and  frustrated  by  its  seeming  unfair-
ness,  a  man  is  all  too  likely  to fall  into  the clutches  of his  anima 
at this point and then dark things  happen. 
A  woman  can  avoid  this  by  saying  something  like,  "You 
seem to be upset about something. Are you angry at me?" If he is 
angry  at  her,  he  can  say  so  and  perhaps  the  matter  can  be  re-
solved.  If not, the woman need not feel  guilty or anxious,  and can 
afford to let her man remain with his mood and work it out him-
self while she goes  about her business.  For it is  not her job to get 
him out of his  mood;  that is  a  task that every  man must take on 
himself.  Of course  the  man  may  be  dishonest.  He  may  snarl, 
"No!" when he really means yes.  It is probably best,  however,  for 
the woman to take his words at face  value and let him stew in his 
own juice,  and say  to  herself,  "Okay,  he said  I  was  not to blame 
for his bad mood so  I accept no guilt or responsibility for what he 
52  The Invisible  Partners 
is feeling."  It goes without saying,  of course, that if people persist 
in  emotional  dishonesty  with  each  other,  relationship  is  exceed-
ingly difficult. 
A  man who is confronted by a woman's animus can help the 
situation by keeping his cool and responding out of his own mas-
culine strength.  If a man's masculinity is stronger than that of the 
animus,  he  can  usually  free  the woman  from  possession;  at least 
he  can  keep  himself from  falling  into  the  clutches  of his  inner 
woman.  It usually  helps  to  find  out  what  the  problem  really  is. 
"What is really bothering you?" a man might ask if he realizes he 
has just been  attacked by  a  woman's  animus.  He may  often find 
that what really is  bothering her has nothing to do  with the sub-
ject the animus has brought up.  (It isn't that she doesn't like  the 
suit he has put on, which she has chosen to violently criticize, but 
that she is  hurt because he ignored her at the party the night be-
fore.) 
In her  masterful  book  The  Feminine  in  Fairy  Tales,  Marie-
Louise  von  Franz stresses  the  role  of hurt feelings  in  animus  at-
tacks  by  women.  If one  is  upset  or  possessed  by  a  mood,  she 
points  out,  "It is  very  helpful  to  ask,  'Where  have  I  been  disap-
pointed  or hurt in  my  feelings  and  have  not  sufficiently  noticed 
it?' "  She  continues: 
Then you will frequently find  the cause.  If you can get back to the 
origin of the hurt and where you  have  not worked it out,  the ani-
mus  possession  will  walk  out;  for  that  is  where  it jumped in,  and 
that is  why  in  animus  possession  there  is  always  an  undertone  of 
the reproachful woman. 
Animus possession  in  a  woman  annoys  men  madly;  they  go  up 
in the air at once.  But what really gets the man's goat is the under-
tone  of lamenting  reproachful/ness.  Men  who  know  a  little  more 
about this  know  that eighty-five  percent of animus  possession  is  a 
disguised appeal for  love,  although unfortunately it has the wrong 
effect,  since  it  chases  away  the  thing  that  is  wanted.  Underneath 
the  animus  there  is  a  feeling  of reproach  and  at the  same  time  of 
wanting to get back at the one who has hurt you.  It is  a vicious cir-
cle and arguing develops into a typical animus scene. 
14 
14 
Von  Franz,  The  Feminine in  Fairy  Tales,  p.  27.  Italics mine. 
Chapter  Two  53 
It is  important  to  add,  however,  that  much  the  same  thing 
can  be  said  of a  man.  If he  falls  into  a  mood,  he  can  often  free 
himself by  asking,  "Where did  something  go  wrong?  What  does 
my  inner  woman  not like?  Did something  that  was  done  or said 
hurt my  feelings?"  If we  can get  to the origin of the hurt and do 
something  about  it,  the  anima  possession  will  disappear.  Men in 
such a mood also  exude  the atmosphere of the "reproachful hurt 
woman," for that is what the anima can be like,  and that is why it 
is  so  essential  for  a  man  to  become  conscious  of his  feelings  and 
to act on them. 
A man must overcome his fears  of rejection for,  as  noted be-
fore,  many  men fear  a  woman's  anger because  they  are afraid  of 
her rejection.  In an effort to avoid the emotional trauma of rejec-
tion a man may do all the wrong things, such as trying to appease 
the woman's animus,  or giving in to a woman's more childish re-
actions,  or arguing  her  out  of her complaints.  If he  does  any  of 
these,  he never gets to the bottom of the matter;  by his weak and 
defensive  posture he does  his  woman  a  great  disservice,  for  what 
she  needs  from  him  is  his  strength  and  willingness  to  get  to  the 
root of the matter. 
As  we  have  seen,  beneath  such  emotional  insecurity  in  a 
man may be his inner little boy who fears  mother's rejection,  and 
who  cannot  stand  being  left  out  in  the cold.  There may  even  be 
deep-rooted memories of a mother who once tried to control him 
by  rejection,  saying,  in  effect,  "If you  do  not  do  what  I  want,  I 
will treat you coldly and shut you out, and you will not be able to 
stand  that."  He  may  also  recall  his  mother's  use  of guilt  as  a 
mechanism of control and punishment.  "You are a bad boy,  you 
have  made mother angry,  and I  will  shut you  up in your room." 
This  may  be  a  memory  silently  at  work  in  the  man's  fearful  re-
sponse to his wife,  for as far as men are concerned, women have a 
powerful  guilt-producing  mechanism,  which  is  both  feared  and 
hated.  Many  men,  out  of sheer inability  to  face  this  guilt,  either 
quit the field  in the face  of an angry woman,  or find  some way  to 
keep  her down  so  they  can remain  top dog.  So  in  learning  to  re-
late to  a  woman,  a  man also  has to  come to terms with  the little 
boy  in himself. 
It can  be  seen  that  in  working  out  a  relationship  a  person 
54  The  Invisible  Partners 
must  also  work  things  out  within  himself  or  herself;  also  one 
must learn that being a partner in a  relationship is  extremely im-
portant.  As  Jung  once  put it,  "One is  always  in  the  dark  about 
one's  own  personality.  One  needs  others  to  get  to  know  one-
self."15 
One word of caution:  In discussing  their relationship a  man 
and  woman  do  well  to  avoid  the  use  of the  terms  anima  and 
animus,  or any  psychological  terms  for  that  matter.  It is  best  to 
use  ordinary  language,  for  the  use  of psychological  language  is 
unnatural  in  relationships  and tends  to  depersonalize  them.  The 
value  of being  aware  of the  anima  and  animus  is  that  we  may 
know  what  is  going  on,  and  our heightened  consciousness  helps 
us  in  working  out  the  relationship,  but the  use  of psychological 
language  as  we  do  so  is  generally  destructive.  So  a  woman  who 
sees  her  man  in  a  mood,  instead  of saying,  "Looks  like  you  are 
gripped  by  your  anima,"  might  say,  "You  look  upset;  is  some-
thing  bothering  you?"  And  a  man,  suspecting  his  woman's  ani-
mus is  attacking him,  can say,  "I have a  feeling  that you  are an-
gry  at me  about something,"  instead  of saying,  "Your animus is 
showing again." 
A  final  comment  on  the  way  the  anima  and  animus  may 
negatively  affect  our  lives  concerns  the  influence. they  have  on 
our choice  of marriage  partners.  Because these  figures  so  readily 
project themselves onto members of the opposite sex,  and tend to 
possess  us  to  the  extent that we  are  unaware of them,  they  often 
have  a  determinative  influence  upon  the  kind  of man  or woman 
who  becomes  our  husband  or  wife.  An  anima-possessed  man, 
with a weak ego and a powerful witchlike anima figure,  will quite 
likely  unconsciously select a domineering animus-ridden woman. 
In  this  he  acts  out  his  inner  situation  in  his  outer  relationship. 
Conversely,  a  woman  who  is  dominated  from  within  by  a  nega-
tive,  defeating  animus  may  very  likely  wind  up  with  a  man  who 
portrays this negative animus for her by  putting her down, negat-
ing and criticizing her.  This explains  some of the unlikely  unions 
that are made between men and women,  and also shows that tru-
ly we  have no free  choice unless we  are psychologically conscious 
persons. 
"Jung Speaking,  p.  165. 
Chapter  Two  55 
In one of Jung's letters there is an interesting story that illus-
trates this.  A  man who had a gift for  writing,  but had done noth-
ing with  it,  had three marriages.  His first  wife  was a pianist,  who 
left  him  after  a  marriage  of seventeen  years;  the  second  was  an 
artist  whose  death  ended  twenty-two  years  of an  "idyllic"  mar-
riage;  the third was  an actress.  After the death of the second wife 
he  experienced  strange  psychological  phenomena,  such  as  hear-
ing  "raps and  taps"  in  the  bedroom,  about  two  or three  times  a 
week.  In his letter Jung tells the man that his choice of wives  was 
influenced by the anima.  The man had a creative gift,  but not the 
necessary  talent  to  express  it  adequately,  so  he  did  not  live  his 
own  creative  side;  he  projected  it  onto  the  creative  women  he 
married.  In this way he missed part of his own life,  and it was the 
unused creativity  in  himself that was  behind  the strange psycho-
logical  phenomena.  Jung commented,  "In practice it means that 
the  woman  of your choice represents  your own  task  you did not 
understand."
16 
The same  thing  could be  said  of the  choice  every 
man and woman makes of his or her partner in life;  in some  way 
the  partner  represents  something  we  need  to  understand  about 
ourselves. 
Of course this  is just one level  of relationship;  relationship has 
many meanings and many levels. The point I wish to make is that 
the Invisible Partners add an often overlooked level or dimension 
to our choice of partners in life. 
I  have  talked  of the negative side of the  anima and animus. 
It is  always  best  to  get  the  bad  news  first;  besides,  it  is  usually 
this  negative  side  that  we  experience  first.  But  the  anima 
and animus  also  have  a  positive aspect,  in fact,  when  they are in 
their correct place they  have  a  great blessing  to give  to us.  How-
ever, in order to realize this blessing we  must be able to overcome 
their  negative  effects.  In the  next  chapter  I  will  suggest  how  we 
can do this,  and then go on to discuss the positive nature of these 
figures. 
16 
C.  G.  Jung,  Letters  Vol.  2  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press, 
1975),  p.  321. 
In  Goethe's  great  drama  Faust,  when  Mephistopheles  is  asked 
who he is,  the devil  replies,  "A part of that power which  always 
wills the evil and always works the good."
1 
So it is  that the power 
of evil,  while  striving  to  bring  about  destruction,  can  in  fact  en-
gender the good. 
It has  been  demonstrated  that  the  anima  and  animus  have 
their  dark  side,  and  can  destroy  people  if  they  are  allowed 
to possess them with their dark rages  and negative thoughts.  But 
a potential for the light lies  hidden even  in this darkness. 
Robert Johnson  gives  us  a  good example  of this  in  his  mas-
terful book HE!, a psychological study of the meaning of the leg-
end of the Holy Grail.  It seems that Parsifal,  the hero of the tale, 
has  risen  to  the  top  of the  heap  in  his  knightly  world.  He  has 
slain  more  knights  than  anyone  else,  done  more  great  deeds, 
achieved  more fame.  So  a feast  is  given  in his  honor,  and he,  and 
all  the  other  knights  of  the  Round  Table,  are  congratulating 
themselves  on  what  splendid  fellows  they  are,  when  in  walks  a 
horrible  looking  woman,  so  ugly  that  she  is  called  the  "hideous 
damsel."  "Her  black  hair  was  tressed  in  two  braids,  iron  dark 
were  her hands and nails.  Her closed eyes  small like  a  rat's.  Her 
1 
Goethe's  Faust,  by  C.  F.  Macintyre  (Norfolk,  Conn.:  New  Directions, 
1941),  part  1,  p.  91. 
56 
Chapter  Three  57 
nose  like  an  ape  and  cat.  Her lips  like  an  ass  and  bull.  Bearded 
was  she,  humped breast and back,  her loins and shoulders  twist-
ed  like  roots  of a  tree.  Never  in  royal  court  was  such  a  damsel 
seen."
2 
So  the  legend  describes  this  terrifying  feminine  appari-
tion.  The mere sight of her casts a pall on the knightly company. 
The feasting  and self-congratulating stop,  a  hush  comes  over ev-
eryone,  and then the hideous damsel begins a recitation of Parsi-
fal's sins.  On she goes about the failures of his life,  the damsels he 
has  left  weeping,  the  children  who  have  been  orphaned  because 
of him,  and when she is  through she says,  "It is  all your fault."
3 
Of course the hideous  damsel  is  a  personification  of the  an-
ima.  Experientially  she  would  be  felt  as  a  terrible  mood,  a  fore-
boding  depression  and  great  malaise,  which  might  overcome  a 
man at just the point when  he is  at the apex  of his  masculine ca-
reer in the world.  As Johnson points out,  the hideous damsel is  a 
personification  of that  kind  of male  depression  which  typically 
comes in middle age at just the point when a man has reached his 
greatest strengths and successes.  She personifies  "the anima gone 
absolutely  sour  and  dark."  She  is  the  living  image  of the  man's 
failure  to  deal  with  the  other  side  of his  life--the feminine  side, 
the spiritual side,  the soul  side.  She  is  dark and monstrous in  di-
rect  proportion  to  the  man's  outer  success,  and  inner  denial  of 
the things of his soul. 
On the surface of it,  the hideous damsel looks as  though she 
came  straight  from  hell.  In  fact,  she  can  be  a  hellish  force  in  a 
man,  pulling him into depression,  drink,  illness,  and suicide.  But 
curiously enough in the legend of Parsifal she has a most salutary 
effect,  for,  because  of her,  Parsifal,  who  is  destined  to  find  the 
Holy  Grail,  symbol  of wholeness  and  completeness,  resumes  the 
spiritual journey that he  had abandoned  earlier  in  his  masculine 
urge for  adventure,  conquest,  and worldly success. 
As  Robert  Johnson  points  out,  when  the  hideous  damsel 
looms  up  in  a  man's  psychology,  it  is  essential  that  the  man  re-
spond to her correctly. If he does, she becomes the instrument for 
setting  him  on  his  right  path  again;  if he  makes  the  wrong  re-
2 
Robert Johnson, HE! (King of Prussia,  Pa.: Religious Publishing Compa-
ny,  1974),  p.  74. 
'  Ibid.,  p.  75. 
58  The  Invisible Partners 
sponse,  she  becomes  the  instrument  of  his  destruction.  The 
wrong response would be trying to avoid her,  that is,  avoiding the 
meaning  of his  depression by one  of a  thousand tricks:  still  more 
extraverted  activities  and  plans  for  outer  success,  drinking, 
drugs,  exchanging  one  woman  for  another.  These  are  all  typical 
ways  that men  have  of avoiding  the hideous damsel  and keeping 
their  life  energies  going  as  before.  In so  doing  they  simply  heap 
psychological  sin  on  psychological  sin  and  turn  the  anima  still 
more against them.  But if a man will  accept  his  dark moods as  a 
call to find  his  soul,  and complete his journey to become a whole 
person,  the anima changes and becomes  his  ally. 
Much  the  same  thing  sometimes  happens  to  women  when 
they  reach  those  mysterious  and difficult  middle years  of life.  At 
this  point in her life a  woman may have fulfilled  earlier feminine 
goals.  She  has her husband,  her home,  and her children,  who are 
now  grown  or  nearly  grown.  But  instead  of being  content  she 
may become depressed and feel  unfulfilled.  The problem lies with 
the animus,  who is  now  acting like a devil,  and is  telling her that 
everything  she  has  done  so  far  in  life  adds  up  to  nothing,  or, 
speaking through her mouth,  he bores other people to distraction 
with banal generalizations.  If she is  not to fall  under the domina-
tion  of this  devil,  she  must  undergo  a  journey  for  spiritual  life 
and  development.  There  are  no  choices:  Either  she  develops 
now  in  a  new  way,  and  expands  into  the  world  of logos,  spirit, 
and mind, or she falls  more and more under the domination of an 
animus figure  who has turned peevish  and cruel. 
So  while  there  is  a  dark  side  to  the  anima  and  animus  it 
would  seem  as  though  it  is  this  dark  side  that  can  set  us  on 
our  path  to  wholeness  again.  The  dark,  negative  side  of these 
inner  figures  becomes  greater  the  more  it  is  ignored.  We  help 
ourselves  best  when  we  turn  toward  the  anima  and  animus,  not 
away  from  them,  and undergo  a  new  psychological  development 
that will  take them into account.  For a man, this may mean a re-
newed respect for  the world of the heart,  for  relationships, for the 
soul,  and  for  the  search  for  meaning.  For  a  woman  this  may 
mean  a  renewed journey  into  the  world  of spirit,  of understand-
ing,  and  a  new  kind  of involvement  with  the  world  beyond  the 
family.  Thus even the dark sides of the Invisible Partners seem  to 
serve  the  purposes  of life.  Of course  the  stakes  are  high.  To  ig-
Chapter  Three  59 
nore  them,  or  to  fail  to  understand  what  is  required  of us,  will 
have  undesirable  results,  but,  conversely,  to recognize  the reality 
of these  inner  figures,  and  to  go  in  the  direction  in  which  they 
point,  is  to be on the path to a new  development. 
The first  step  in  freeing  oneself from  the  negative  effects  of 
the  anima  and  animus  is  to  recognize  the  problem.  For  a  man, 
this  means  recognizing  that  his  moods,  compulsive  sexual 
fantasies,  and insatiable  restlessness  have  this  dark  feminine  fig-
ure  as  their  source.  For a  woman  it  means  recognizing  that  the 
opinions  and  destructive  criticisms  that  suddenly  come  into  her 
consciousness  have  the  inner  figure  of the  animus  behind  them. 
For both  men  and  women,  of course,  it  means  withdrawing  the 
projections of these  figures  from  actual human beings. 
Projections  are  integrated  by  being  made  conscious.  As  we 
have  suggested  earlier,  we  cannot  keep  projections  from  occur-
ring;  they  happen quite spontaneously  and are not subject to  our 
conscious control. But we can learn to recognize that a projection 
has occurred;  whenever a man or woman fascinates  us we can be 
sure  that  a  projected  content  of the  unconscious  is  at  work.  In 
their all-too-human reality people are not fascinating;  it is  the ar-
chetypal  figures  of the  unconscious  that  are  fascinating.  Recog-
nizing  fascinating  projections  when  they  occur makes  it  possible 
for  us  to  become  aware  of the  anima/animus  figures  who  stand 
behind these projections. 
In fact,  this  may  be  what  the  anima  and animus  want.  It is 
as though they project themselves outside of us onto suitable peo-
ple because they  want to  be  recognized,  and that is  the only way 
they  can  reach  us.  As  already  noted,  the  most  common  way  for 
the  anima  to  claim  a  man's  attention  is  to  fill  his  mind  with  a 
powerful  sexual-erotic  fantasy,  and,  similarly,  it  is  the  animus 
who  lies  behind  many  a  woman's  sexual-erotic  fantasy  about  a 
man.  It is as though the inner figures are trying in this way to get 
our attention. 
Once  the  anima  and  animus  are  recognized,  a  great  work 
of psychological  differentiation  of the  personality  can begin.  For 
instance, a man can begin to separate his moods from his feelings. 
His  moods  are  from  the  anima;  the  feelings  are  his  own.  As  we 
have seen,  if a man expresses  his  feelings  in  relationship,  he does 
not  fall  into  moods.  So,  to  free  himself from  the  clutches  of his 
60  The Invisible Partners 
anima,  a  man must learn  to  relate  to  his  feelings,  and to express 
them  in  human  relationships  when  the  situation  calls  for  it.  In 
this  way  he comes  out of the  Mother and develops  his  eros  side. 
Again we see the odd fact:  The anima,  who can be so negative, fa-
cilitates  a  man's  psychological  development  when  he  takes  her 
into account;  because of her a man is forced  to become conscious 
of his affective  side. 
Similarly with the animus.  In order to fight against the nega-
tive judgments of the animus,  a  woman must come to know  and 
value what is  truly  important to her.  When the animus says  that 
this  or that  is  of no  value,  the  woman  needs  to  recognize  these 
thoughts and challenge  them.  She  needs  to find  her own  ground 
and stand firmly on it, to value her feminine feelings and eros and 
not  allow  the  animus,  with  his  sweeping  condemnations,  to  rob 
her  of her  self-value.  In  accomplishing  this  task,  a  woman  may, 
for  the first  time,  discover  what is  truly important to her. 
As we have seen,  the negative animus resembles  an inferior, 
ill-informed,  and  prejudiced  man;  his  sweeping  judgments  and 
banal opinions  come from  his  ignorance.  So  a  woman  may  need 
to sit  down  with  her animus  and  say,  "This is  the  way  it is,  and 
this is what is  important to me.  You are not to keep telling me to 
the contrary." Obviously,  in order to do  this she must first  know 
what  is  important  to  her.  In  this  way,  the  animus  can  have  the 
positive  effect  of helping  a  woman become  conscious  of her  true 
values. 
She  must also  find  out what he wants.  As we  noted,  the an-
ima  and  animus  live  through  us,  and  the  lives  we  lead  must 
have room  in  them for  these archetypal  figures  and  their life  en-
ergy.  For a  man  this  means  that his  life  must include  warm and 
meaningful  human  relationships,  and  the  area  of the  heart,  for 
the anima and the feminine  always  stand  on  the  side  of a  man's 
heart.  For a  woman  this  means  that her life  must  include  a  cer-
tain fulfillment  in  the area of goals,  aspirations,  spirit,  and mind. 
When  we  talk  with  the  anima  and  animus  we  must  regard 
them  as  the  autonomous  psychological  realities  that  they 
are.  Indeed,  working with them requires  us  to overcome what C. 
G. Jung once called the "monotheism of consciousness," and rec-
ognize  that our personalities  are  made  up not only  of conscious-
ness,  but of a  multitude of lesser  or partial  personalities  as  well. 
Chapter  Three  61 
A  great darkness exists  today in  this regard,  for  we  persist in  the 
belief that  only  the  ego  and  its  world  exist,  in  spite  of the  evi-
dence  all  around  us  that  human  beings  are  readily  possessed  by 
they-know-not-what  within  them.  Jung  wrote,  "we  lack  knowl-
edge of the unconscious psyche and pursue the cult of conscious-
ness to the exclusion of all else.  Our true religion is a monotheism 
of consciousness,  ... coupled  with  a  fanatical  denial  that  there 
are parts of the psyche which are autonomous."
4 
It is  because  the  psyche  is  made  up  of these  autonomous, 
partial  personalities  that  it  is  possible  to  talk  to  oneself.  This  is 
not an indication that one is  crazy;  it is just the opposite,  for  the 
more  one  comes  into  a  conscious  relationship  with  the  different 
parts of oneself the more there is promoted from within a synthe-
sis  and  harmonization  of the  personality.  A  man  who  wishes  to 
talk with his anima might begin by addressing  himself to a  mood 
that  has  engulfed  him  and  from  which  he  cannot  extricate  him-
self.  This  can be  done by  personifying  the  mood  in  his  imagina-
tion  and  talking  to  it.  This  is  not  difficult  because  most  psychic 
contents,  especially  the  anima  and  the  animus,  appear  in  a  per-
sonified  form  in  our dreams  and fantasies.  What would  you  like 
to  say  to  a  mood  that  has  engulfed  you  and  will  not  go  away? 
Whatever that might  be,  write  it down,  just as  though  you  were 
writing  to  an  actual  person.  Then imagine  what  that personified 
mood  would  say  in  response.  Whatever  comes  into  your  mind 
would be the reply.  Do not stop to question whether or not this is 
"legitimate,"  but  simply  write  down  what  the  personified  mood 
says.  This  may  call forth  another response  from  you,  with  a  sec-
ond reply  from  the  personified  mood,  and  so  a  dialogue  ensues. 
The value  of writing  down  the  dialogue is  that it gives  it  reality, 
makes  a  record  of the conversation  that can be  referred  to  later, 
and strengthens the hand of the ego in its dealings with the pow-
erful feminine  numen. 
5 
In actual practice,  an anima mood is  usually quite willing to 
4 
Secret of the  Golden  Flower,  p.  111. 
' This technique of dialoguing  with  the anima or animus is part of what C. 
G.  Jung called  "active imagination." Jung has described this method of relating 
to  the  unconscious  in various  places.  See  also  the  Appendix  on active  imagina-
tion at  the back  of this book. 
62  The  Invisible Partners 
talk. It resembles a woman who responds positively to a move to-
ward relationship  from  her man,  but becomes  dark  and  unpleas-
ant when  ignored.  It is  characteristic of the feminine  to  want at-
tention  and  to  resent  being  ignored.  Indeed,  one  begins  to  feel 
that  the  fantastic  and  dangerous  machinations  of the  anima  are 
designed  from  the  beginning  for  the  sole  purpose  of getting  the 
man's attention,  and compelling him  to relate  to her as  his  inner 
woman  or soul.  When  this  is  done,  as  we  shall  see,  the  negative 
effects of the anima begin to give way,  and the positive manifesta-
tions tend to appear. 
Dialoguing with the animus  is  as  natural as  with  the anima. 
The former  tends to be  more verbal,  and is  usually  recognized at 
first  as  autonomous  thoughts  appearing  in  a  woman's  mind. 
When  a  woman  begins  to  recognize  that  these  thoughts  come 
from  the  animus  and not  from  her  ego,  she  begins  to  make  the 
important distinction between herself and the male factor  within 
her.  Sometimes  it  helps  to  start by  carefully  noting  the  kinds  of 
things  the  animus  is  saying,  u ~ u a l l y   characterized,  as  we  have 
seen, by "shoulds" and "oughts" and judgments of one sort or an-
other.  As  suggested  in  chapter two,  it often  helps  to  write  these 
down  and  put  quotation  marks  around  them  to  emphasize  the 
fact  that these  do  not  represent  a  woman's  own  thinking but the 
opinions  of the animus.  Then it is  only a  simple step beyond  this 
for  a woman to reply  to the voice  of the animus.  In this  way  she 
can  challenge  his  opinions,  disagree  with  him,  and  educate  him 
about her true feelings  and the actual situation. Writing down the 
ensuing dialogue strengthens a woman's ego,  for taking up pen or 
pencil  to write is  the ego's work.  Once  such  a  dialogue  is  begun, 
the  animus  may  go  on  to  tell  a  woman  what  it  is  that  he  really 
wants out of life.  When this happens the chances for a positive re-
lationship  between  a  woman  and  her  animus  are  greatly  in-
creased. 
The  key  word  in  coming  to  terms  with  the  anima  and  the 
animus is  relationship.  Anima and animus are archetypal figures, 
which  means  they  do  not  simply  go  away  and  disappear  from 
one's  life,  but  act  like  permanent  partners  with  whom  we  must 
find  some  way  of relating  no  matter  how  difficult  they  may  be. 
But  relationship  makes  all  the  difference.  When  a  figure  of the 
unconscious  is  denied,  rejected,  or  ignored,  it  turns  against  us 
Chapter  Three  63 
and shows its negative side.  When it is accepted,  understood,  and 
related to,  its  positive side tends to appear. 
But at the same time that a  man learns to dialogue  with the 
anima, and a woman with the animus, men and women must also 
learn  to  dialogue  with  each  other.  It should  be  obvious  by  now 
that a  relationship  with  a  member of the opposite  sex  is  of great 
value  in  working  out  the  anima  and  animus  problem,  and,  con-
versely,  that  a  good  rapport  with  our  anima  and  animus  is  of 
great value in waking out our human relationships.  Just as a  dia-
logue  with  the anima or animus will  help  us  to distinguish  what 
belongs  to  the ego  and  what belongs  to  the  unconscious  figures, 
so  a  dialogue  with  the  man  or woman  in  our life  will  help  us  to 
understand  and  appreciate  our differences  and  each  other's  true 
personality.  Only  through dialogue  can two human beings  begin 
to  see  their  own,  and  the  other  person's,  reality.  Such  dialogue, 
which  consists  of stating  in  one  way  or  another  one's  own  feel-
ings  and thoughts,  and then  listening  carefully  to what the other 
person  is  saying,  is  greatly  facilitated  when  the  anima  and 
animus  are  out  of the  picture.  If these  Invisible  Partners  are  in-
truding  into  the  sphere  of the  relationship,  then  moods,  affects, 
opinions,  and  judgments  will  cloud  the  atmosphere,  leading  to 
distortions,  recriminations,  and  the kind  of anima/animus quar-
rel that has been described. 
So  if a  man  wishes  to  come  to  a  rapprochement  with  his 
feminine  side  he  also  needs  to  understand  the  personality  of the 
important woman in  his  life,  and a  woman,  conversely,  needs  to 
understand  her  man  and  his  thoughts  and  feelings.  Men  and 
women  think and feel  differently;  their  mental  processes  are  not 
alike and a relationship between the sexes requires that we under-
stand the differences that separate us.  When we do there are salu-
tary results,  one of which is a broadening of consciousness.  When 
a  man  understands  something  of a  woman,  his  masculine  con-
sciousness  is  expanded  and his  personality enriched.  This broad-
ening  of consciousness  defeats  the negative  aspects  of the anima 
and  animus  and  puts  these  inner  partners  in  their  psychologi-
cally  correct  place,  which  Jung  repeatedly  tells  us  is  within  and 
not without. 
This brings  us  to another of Jung's definitions  of the anima 
and  animus:  They  personify  the  collective  unconscious,  and 
64  The Invisible  Partners 
therefore  their  true  psychological  purpose  is  to  be  a  function  of 
relationship  between  the  ego  and  the  collective  unconscious,  to 
build a bridge, as it were, between the world of consciousness and 
the world of inner images. 
This  is  Jung's  most  common  definition  of the  anima  and 
animus.  He offers  it  to  us  in  one  of his  earliest  studies,  in  which 
he says  that the function  of the  animus  (and  the  same  would  be 
true  of the  anima)  "is  ... to  facilitate  relations  with  the  uncon-
scious. "
6 
And  in  his  commentary  on  the  ancient  Chinese  book 
The Secret of the  Golden  Flower  he said,  "I have  defined  the  an-
ima  in  man  as  a  personification  of the  unconscious  in  general, 
and have therefore taken it to be a bridge to the unconscious, that 
is,  to  be  a  function  of relationship  to  the  unconscious. "
7 
It also 
occurs  in  Man  and His  Symbols,  in  which  Jung's  colleague  and 
disciple Marie-Louise von Franz states,  "The anima is  a  personi-
fication  of  all  feminine  psychological  tendencies  in  a  man's 
psyche, such as vague feelings  and moods,  ... and ... his relation 
to  the  unconscious."
8 
Practically  speaking,  this  means  that  if a  man  will  look  at 
what  lies  behind  his  moods,  affects,  fantasies,  and  emotions, 
those spontaneous psychic events which form  the background to 
his consciousness and which the anima brings to him,  he will  ar-
rive  at  what  is  going  on  in  his  unconscious  personality.  It is  as 
though  the anima becomes  contaminated with  everything  within 
a  man  which  wants  to  reach  consciousness.  Consequently,  if a 
man can take the anima as  an inner figure,  he arrives at those ar-
chetypal images  which form  the foundation  of his  personality. 
This  is  difficult  for  modern  man  to  understand  because  we 
do not take  the reality  of the inner world seriously;  in fact,  most 
people  have  no  idea  that  there  is  an  inner  world.  Since  we  have 
no inkling of the inner world, the highly personified figures  of the 
anima and animus  appear to  us  on  the outside,  where  they com-
plicate relationships and create illusions,  in the projected manner 
discussed,  and begin  to malfunction by creating  moods  and  gen-
erating opinions. 
• Jung,  CW 7,  p.  207. 
7 
Jung,  The Secret of the  Golden  Flower,  p.  119. 
• Jung,  Man  and His Symbols,  p.  177.  Italics mine. 
Chapter  Three  65 
An  evil  condition  develops  when  any  part  of an  organism 
fails  to  perform  its  proper  role,  and  instead  usurps  a  role  that 
does  not  belong  to  it.  For instance,  the  intellect  becomes  evil  if, 
instead  of serving  the  whole  person  by  performing  its  particular 
function  of discrimination,  it usurps the wholeness of the person-
ality  by  dominating  and  excluding  other  aspects  of the  psyche. 
So  the  anima  and  animus  also  become  embroiled  with  evil  when 
they are not in the correct place.  Jung wrote,  "The reason for this 
perversion is clearly the failure to give adequate recognition to an 
inner  world  which  stands  autonomously  opposed  to  the  outer 
world,  and makes just as serious demands on our capacity for ad-
aptation. "
9 
To  perceive  the  reality  of the  anima  and  animus  thus  re-
quires  considerable  conscious  effort,  which  is  why  Jung  referred 
to the encounter with the anima or animus as  the "master piece" 
of individuation. 
10 
In the  first  place,  we  must  overcome  the  ten-
dency  to think of ourselves as  exclusively  masculine or feminine; 
for  many  people  this  in itself represents  a  revolution  in thinking. 
But  then  we  must  go  further  and  realize  that  our conscious  life 
rests on the vast sea of an inner world of which we  know very lit-
tle.  We  must realize  that this inner world is  as  real  and as  objec-
tive to our conscious standpoint as  is  the outer world of physical 
reality,  for  this dimension of the unconscious would exist wheth-
er we  existed  or not, just as  the outer world exists whether or not 
a  given  human  individual  exists.  It is  this  objectively  real  inner 
world  that  Jung  calls  the  collective  unconscious;  it  would  have 
been called the spiritual world by early Christians,  or personified 
as a mythological world of spirit beings by the American  Indians. 
It is  also  this  world  to  which  the  anima  and  animus  can  relate 
us  when  they have been  withdrawn from  projections in the outer 
world and taken  back into our inner world. 
When the anima functions in her correct place,  she serves to 
broaden  and  enlarge  a  man's  consciousness,  and  to  enrich  his 
personality  by  infusing  into  him,  through  dreams,  fantasies,  and 
inspired ideas,  an  awareness  of an inner world of psychic images 
and  life-giving  emotions.  A  man's  consciousness  tends  to  be  too 
'Jung, CW7,  p.  208. 
10 
Jung,  CW 9,  1,  p.  29. 
66  The  Invisible Partners 
focused and concentrated; it easily becomes rigid and constricted, 
and,  without  contact  with  the  unconscious,  becomes  dry  and 
sterile.  Jung wrote,  "If the products of the anima (dreams,  fanta-
sies,  visions,  symptoms,  chance  ideas,  etc.)  are  assimilated,  di-
gested,  and  integrated,  this  has  a  beneficial  effect  on  the  growth 
and development  ... of the psyche."
11 
Masculine  consciousness  has  been  likened  to  the  sun,  and 
feminine  consciousness  to  the moon.  At noon  everything  is  seen 
in  bright  outline and one  thing  is  clearly  differentiated  from  an-
other.  But  no  one  can  stand  too  much  of this  hot,  bright  sun. 
Without  the  cool,  the  moist,  the  dark,  the  landscape  soon  be-
comes unbearable, and the earth dries up and will not produce life. 
That is  the way a man's life becomes without the fertilizing influ-
ence  on  him  of the feminine.  Without a  relationship  to  his  inner 
world,  a  man  can  focus,  but  lacks  imagination;  he  can  pursue 
goals, but lacks emotion;  he can strive for  power, but is  unable to 
be  creative  because  he  cannot  produce  new  life  out  of himself. 
Only the fruitful joining of the  Yin  principle to the Yang  princi-
ple  can  stir  up  his  energies,  can  prevent  his  consciousness  from 
becoming sterile,  and his  masculine power from  drying  up. 
So  the  anima  mediates  to  a  man  invaluable  psychological 
qualities  that  make  him  alive.  For  this  reason,  at  various  times 
Jung  has  also  defined  the  anima  as  "the archetype  of life,"  and 
once  said  that  she  is  "an  allurement  to  the  intensification  of 
life."
12 
She is  like  soul  to  a  man,  that elusive but vital  ingredient 
that alone· makes  life  worth  living  and gives  to  a  man a  sense  of 
something  worth  striving  for.  It is  the  anima  who  gives  a  man 
heart,  enabling  him  to  be  strong  of heart  and  courageous  in  the 
face  of life's burdens and afflictions. 
As  the  archetype  of life,  the  anima  contains  the  element  of 
meaning.  It is  not that she has the answers;  rather,  she  embodies 
within  herself the  secret  of life,  and  helps  a  man  discover  it  by 
leading him to a knowledge of his own soul.  "Something strange-
ly  meaningful clings to her." Jung wrote,  "a secret knowledge  or 
hidden  wisdom,  which  contrasts  most  curiously  with  her  irra-
11 
C.  G.  Jung,  CW 14,  Mysterium  Coniunctionis;  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Prince-
ton University  Press,  1963;  2nd printing  1974),  p.  308. 
12 
Jung, Letters 2,  p.  423. 
Chapter  Three  67 
tional  elfin  nature."  And,  he  added,  when  a  man comes  to  grips 
with  the  anima  he  comes  to  realize  that  "behind  all  her  cruel 
sporting with  human fate  there lies  something like  a  hidden pur-
pose which seems to reflect a superior knowledge of life's laws .... 
And  the  more  this  meaning  is  recognized,  the  more  the  anima 
loses  her impetuous and compulsive character."
13 
As a  personifi-
cation  of life,  the  anima  personifies  for  a  man  "the  life  behind 
consciousness  that  cannot  be  completely  integrated  with  it,  but 
from  which  ... consciousness  arises,"  and  "it  is  always  the  a 
priori element in (a man's) moods,  reactions,  impulses, and what-
ever else  is  spontaneous in  psychic life."
14 
We  must not,  however,  think that the anima is  "good." The 
anima is  neither good  nor bad;  she just is.  She  wants  life,  and so 
she seems  to want  both good and bad,  or,  rather,  she is  not con-
cerned with these moral categories.  That is  why working with the 
anima is  always  a  delicate  matter.  One can  no more deliver  one-
self over to the anima lock stock and barrel than one can surren-
der the whole  of oneself to  any  particular psychological function 
or quality.  It is  also  the  anima who  seems  to  arouse  a  man's ca-
pacity  for  love.  When  we  first  fall  in  love  we  are  flooded  with 
powerful,  life-giving  emotions.  This is  why  the anima can best be 
described  poetically  and  not  scientifically,  dramatically  and  not 
concretely.  Yet,  as  we  have  seen,  a  man's  relationship  with  her 
must  develop  beyond  the  mere  sensation  of falling  or  being  in 
love,  as  he  must  come  to  perceive  that  the  life-giving  feminine 
soul is  within himself.  He cannot afford to let his  anima live only 
in  projection  onto  a  woman,  but must reach  beyond  this  projec-
tion to search for  the soul within himself.  Jung said,  in a letter to 
a woman who was carrying a man's projected soul image for him, 
"Since he is  unable to see you as  a real woman behind his projec-
tion,  you  seem  to  be  a  'sphinx.'  In reality  his  soul  is  his  sphinx, 
and he should try to solve  the riddle."
15 
It is  not,  however,  that the anima does the loving inside of a 
man.  She  is  not  identical  with  his  eros,  but arouses  his  eros.  She 
awakens in a man his capacity for love and personal relationship, 
13 
Jung,  CW 9,  1,  pp.  30 and  31. 
14 
Ibid.,  p.  27. 
1
'  Jung,  Letters 2,  p.  402. 
68  The Invisible Partners 
but she  is  not  that  love  and  personal  relationship.  It is  the  man 
who loves  and feels,  not his  anima,  though she may be  likened  to 
the spark that ignites  his  flame. 
This last point is one that James Hillman takes up in his two 
articles on the anima in  the  1973  and  1974 issues  of Spring.  Jung 
often  referred  to  the  anima  as  though  she  were  identical  with 
eros,  and  many  Jungian  analysts  speak  of the  anima  as  though 
she  were  identical  with  feeling,  as  if feeling  and eros  were  neces-
sarily  feminine  and  not  masculine.  Yet  the  Greek  god  Eros  is 
himself a masculine deity,  even though he is Aphrodite's son,  and 
there is  no good reason for  ascribing feeling  only to the feminine. 
It seems  more  accurate  to  say  that  the  anima  is  a  function  that 
arouses  and  constellates  eros  in  a  man,  but  that  there  is  such  a 
thing as  masculine eros as  well  as  feminine  eros.  That is  a way  of 
saying that it is  the man himself who loves,  even though the femi-
nine may arouse his  love.  In the same way,  there is  no  good  rea-
son  for  identifying  the  aQima  with  feeling,  or  the  animus  with 
thinking.  A  man can  feel,  and  a  woman  can  think,  although  the 
anima  and  the  animus  may  arouse,  aid,  and  direct  these  func-
tions. 
Another point of confusion  in  this  regard  is  whether  or not 
there  is  any  such  thing  as  "anima development."  Jungians  often 
speak  of  anima  development  in  a  man  as  though  it  were  the 
man's  task  to  "develop  his  anima"  so  he  could  relate,  feel,  and 
love  more  deeply.  Jung  himself speaks  of four  stages  of the  an-
ima:  as  Eve, as Helen of Troy, as the Virgin Mary, and as  Sophia. 
The  first,  Eve,  is  anima  on  the  lowest,  biological  level,  as  the 
source  of instinct  and  the  instigator  of  sexuality.  As  Helen  of 
Troy the anima personifies  beauty and the soul,  and is  no  longer 
completely  equated  with  instinctuality.  As  the  Virgin  Mary  she 
personifies the possibility of relationship with God, and as Sophia 
she  embodies  the  principle  of  relationship  to  the  highest  wis-
dom.16 
Undoubtedly the anima can appear on many different levels; 
the  question is  whether it is  the  anima who  develops  or the man 
who  develops.  The  Greeks  spoke  of Aphrodite  Pandemos  and 
16 
C.  G. Jung,  CW 16,  The Practice of Psychotherapy (New York:  Pantheon 
Books,  1954,  revised  and augmented  1966),  p.  174. 
Chapter  Three  69 
Aphrodite  Ouranos.  The  former  was  "Aphrodite  for  everyone" 
and the latter was  the "heavenly or spiritual Aphrodite."  Aphro-
dite Pandemos would be Aphrodite as experienced on the level of 
sexual,  instinctual  union.  Experienced  in  this  way,  Aphrodite 
would  personify  the anima  as  she  appears  in  sexual  erotic  fanta-
sies  and instinctual urges.  But the spiritual Aphrodite personifies 
the  anima  as  the  function  that  relates  a  man's  soul  to  God,  and 
helps  him  achieve  the  highest  possible  spiritual  union.  However, 
in  my  view  it  is  not  the  anima who  undergoes  a  "development," 
but  the  man  himself  who  must  undergo  a  development.  If  a 
man's character and understanding are at a low,  unconscious lev-
el,  he  will  experience  the  anima  on  her  lowest  level,  and  not  be 
able  to  understand  or appreciate  her  higher  qualities.  But  if the 
man  undergoes  development  and  acquires  "soul,"  the  anima  in 
her highest manifestations can become  meaningful  to him. 
Another point  at issue  with  regard  to  the  anima is  whether 
she  can  ever  be  "conquered"  and  depersonified,  or whether  she 
always retains her elusive personified nature. Jung often spoke of 
the anima as though she were a being who personified herself in a 
most  irritating  way  and  who  had  to  be  conquered  and  trans-
formed  into  an impersonal  psychological  function.  For instance, 
in  Two  Essays  on  Analytical Psychology  he  wrote,  "I  recognize 
that there is  some  psychic factor  (the  anima)  active  in me which 
eludes  my  conscious  will  in  the  most  incredible  manner.  It can 
put  extraordinary  ideas  into  my  head,  induce  in  me  unwanted 
and unwelcome  moods  and emotions,  lead me to astonishing ac-
tions for  which  I  can accept  no  responsibility,  upset my  relations 
with  other  people  in  a  very  irritating  way,  etc.  I  feel  powerless 
against  this fact  and,  what  is  worse,  I  am in  love  with  it,  so  that 
all  I  can do  is  marvel."
17 
It is  perfectly  true  that the  anima  can have  all  of these  dis-
turbing effects on a man, yet what a man must "conquer" is him-
self,  although this  will  also  mean that he  must not allow  this be-
guiling  and deceptive  feminine  creature  within  himself to  seduce 
him.  If he succeeds in "bottling up" the anima, that is,  not allow-
ing her to run his outer life,  dominate his moods,  and destroy his 
relationships,  then,  as  we  have seen,  the anima tends to take her 
17 
Jung,  CW7, pp.  225-226. 
70  The Invisible Partners 
proper place as  a function  within him,  leading  him into a  deeper 
experience of his own soul.  Yet the anima seems to stubbornly re-
sist being depersonified.  She  remains the personification,  as  Hill-
man puts it,  of a powerful feminine numen.  For this reason,  Hill-
man  sees  no  value  in  trying  to  break  up  the  personifications  of 
the anima.  In fact,  it is  precisely  because she does  personify  her-
self in our dreams and imagination that we  can achieve a  related-
ness to her. 
Moreover,  Hillman points out,  if we  persist in trying to con-
quer the anima,  and force  her to be what we  want her to be,  this 
puts the ego  in  a  "heroic stance,"  that is,  reinforces  a  masculine 
stance that  is  certain  to  result  in  a  continued  devaluation  of the 
feminine  and  exaggeration  of  the  ego.  Jung  himself,  in  other 
places,  seems  to  concede  that the anima is  irreducibly  a  personi-
fied  figure.  Of both  anima  and  animus  he  wrote,  "It is  not  we 
who  personify  them;  they  have  a  personal  nature  from  the  very 
beginning. "
18 
The anima as the bridge between a  man's consciousness and 
the world of the unconscious can be contrasted with the function 
of the persona in masculine psychology.  The word persona means 
mask. It denotes the front or face that the ego presents to the out-
er world.  The persona  is  thus  a  function  of relationship  between 
the ego and outer reality, just as the anima is  the function of rela-
tionship between the ego  and inner reality.  The persona is  a  use-
ful,  even  essential,  psychological  function.  Without  a  certain 
amount of persona we can scarcely carry on in life.  It is  not only 
a mask behind which we can hide, it is also a means of adaptation 
to outer reality.  Without any persona it would be very difficult to 
relate  to  the  demands  that  come  to  us  from  other  people,  our 
work,  and society in general.  The difficulty comes when someone 
identifies  with  the  persona.  Then  they  think  they  are  that  front 
they  present to the outer world,  and they lose awareness  of their 
true reality,  especially of the dark,  shadow side of their personal-
ity.  When  people  identify  with  the  persona,  they  are  not  real; 
they go  through life  with a face,  but no  inner depth. 
The anima stands in a compensatory relationship to this per-
18 
C.  G.  Jung,  CW 13, Alchemical Studies; (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton Uni-
versity  Press,  1967,  1970 edition),  par.  62. 
Chapter  Three  71 
sona.  If we  are  too  identified with it,  we  can expect the anima to 
react accordingly.  Only if we  have the correct relationship to the 
persona  can  we  have  the  correct  relationship  to  the  anima.  We 
can  think,  for  instance,  of a  powerful  tyrant-a Nero  or  a  Hit-
ler-whose  mere  word  affects  the  lives  of  many  people,  and 
whose  power  in  the  world  of outer  reality  leads  him  to  believe 
that  he  is  an  all-powerful  person.  But inwardly  such a  man  may 
be  beset  by  fearsome  and  dark  fantasies  over  which  he  has  no 
control.  His soul is  possessed by  frightening  fears;  he sees threats 
in  every  corner,  and  he  is  helpless  in  the  presence  of dark  and 
troubling  thoughts, just as  King  Saul  was  helpless  in  the  face  of 
his evil  moods.
19 
The  Roman  Emperor  Caligula  is  a  good  example.  Caligula 
was  so  ruthless  and  identified  with  his  power  that  he  is  said  to 
have  reminded guests at his banquets that he could have them all 
killed at any  time,  and is  reputed to have said  to his  wife  or mis-
tress  while  embracing  her,  "Off comes  this  beautiful  head  when-
ever I  give the word. "
20 
Yet it is  also said of him that "he hid un-
der the  bed  when  it  thundered,  and fled  in  terror from  the sight 
of Aetna's  flames.  He  found  it  hard  to  sleep  and  would  wander 
through his enormous palace at night crying for the dawn."
21 
It is 
the anima who sends these troubling, fear-laden fantasies into the 
moods of such a man,  who inspires the sleepless nights and vague 
feelings  of foreboding,  and he is  as helpless in the face  of them as 
he  is  all-powerful  in  his  dealings  with  the  outer  world.  In  this 
way  the anima compensates a  faulty  one-sidedness in his  charac-
ter. 
Or  perhaps  it  is  a  powerful  business  executive,  whose  deci-
sions  influence  many,  around  whom  obedient  secretaries  hover, 
and  who  is  played  up  to  by  insecure  subordinates.  He lives  in  a 
world of tall buildings with elaborate offices,  padded expense ac-
counts,  and important people on the board.  Yet inwardly he may 
be victimized by vague fears  and controlled by compulsive sexual 
fantasies,  which  may  compel him  to visit  the pornographic mov-
ies  on  his  way  home  or have  call  girls  visit  him  in  a  motel.  It is 
19 
Cf.  I Sam.  18:10-11. 
20 
Suetonius,  Gaius,  quoted in Will Durant's Caesar and Christ,  p.  226. 
21 
Ibid.,  p.  265. 
72  The  Invisible Partners 
the  anima  who  is  behind  these  fears  and fantasies,  and  she  rules 
him from within as completely as he,  on the outside,  rules others. 
It is,  once again,  the message of the hideous maiden,  as seen 
in  Robert  Johnson's  analysis  of the  Grail  Legend.  Parisfal,  the 
great outer hero and master of the world of knights,  is  helpless to 
oppose  the  hideous  maiden,  the  image  of his  anima,  who  has 
gone dark on him because,  in his concentration on outer success, 
he has neglected his inner journey. 
But if it appears at first  as though it is  the anima who is  the 
negative figure,  possessing a  man with uncontrollable and unwel-
come thoughts or fantasies,  this is  only the superficial manifesta-
tion  of a  much  deeper  problem.  She  really  has  a  positive,  not  a 
negative, function,  and serves to bring a man away from a path in 
life  that  is  false  to  himself  and  his  highest  values;  to  lead  him 
back  to  the  path  of wholeness  and spiritual development.  She  is 
serving  a  constructive  function,  not  a  destructive  one,  and  as 
soon as she is properly recognized and appreciated her positive as-
pect appears.  Even in her negative aspect she remains true to her-
self and her basic function:  the bridge to the unconscious,  and to 
the world of a  man's soul. 
In his  positive aspect the animus plays an indispensable role 
in  a  woman's individuation process.  His main function  is  to be  a 
psychopomp,  a  guide  who  leads  a  woman  through  her  inner 
world  to  her  soul.  In dreams,  the  animus,  as  guide  and  creative 
spirit,  typically appears as a  gifted man,  a  priest,  teacher,  doctor, 
god,  or a  man  with  unusual  powers.  Again  it  is  essential,  if the 
positive  aspect  of the  animus  is  to  emerge,  that  he  assume  his 
proper  function  as  a  bridge  between  a  woman's  consciousness 
and her unconscious inner world;  if he functions  only on the out-
side  he assumes  the  negative  forms  that have  been  discussed.  As 
Jung once said,  "In his  real form  he (the animus) is  a hero,  there 
is  something divine about him" but when not in  his  real form  he 
is  "an opinionating substitute. "
22 
The  creative  animus  blazes  a  trail  for  a  woman;  he  does 
things first that she must later undertake for herself.  He leads the 
way,  and opens up a  line of development.  This can sometimes be 
22 
C.  G.  Jung,  "The Interpretation of Visions,"  Spring,  1966,  p.  143. 
Chapter  Three  73 
seen  in  a  woman's dreams in  which a  man undertakes a journey, 
overcomes a danger,  or endures a difficulty-a task to which the 
woman herself will soon be  called.  Jung notes,  in commenting on 
a woman's vision in which the animus seemed to be performing a 
heroic function,  "It is  the motif we  have encountered many times 
before:  always when some new enterprise that she cannot face  be-
comes  necessary,  the animus  precedes her."
23 
Just as  the  anima  often  first  appears  to  a  man in  projection 
onto  an  outer  woman,  or  in  the  form  of powerful  sexual-erotic 
fantasies,  so  the  animus  also  typically  manifests  himself  to  a 
woman in powerful fantasies  or projections.  If this numinous im-
age is  not taken psychologically; and recognized as a figure of her 
inner world,  he  readily  becomes  what Esther Harding called  the 
"ghostly lover."
24 
As the ghostly lover the animus haunts a wom-
an's  mind,  seduces  her  into  unreal  romantic  fantasies,  and  ab-
sorbs  her  consciousness  more  and  more  into  unreality.  No  psy-
chological  development  can  then  take  place,  for  the  woman 
becomes lost in love fantasies that are not related to the reality of 
an  actual  man,  nor  to  the  reality  of her  inner  world.  It is  not, 
however,  the  animus  who  is  at fault.  He is  trying  his  best  to  at-
tract her attention by  means  of these  powerful fantasies;  it is  the 
woman herself whose  consciousness  must develop  and mature so 
she  is  capable  of understanding  her fantasies  in  the  correct way. 
The story of Jane in  the first  chapter is  a  good illustration of the 
way  in  which  the  animus  as  ghostly  lover  can  upset  a  woman's 
life  and lead her into unreality. 
In his  positive aspect,  the animus embodies the driving force 
for  individuation  in  a  woman's  psyche.  An excellent  illustration 
of this  is  in  Emily  Bronte's novel  Wuthering  Heights,  which  has 
already  been  mentioned.  The  most  striking  figure  in  this  tale  is 
Heathcliff,  who appears to be part man and part devil,  and whose 
one driving goal in life is to unite with his beloved Cathy. Howev-
er,  Cathy,  though  she  loves  him  deeply  in  her  soul,  resists  him 
and  betrays  her  truest  feelings  by  marrying  the  innocuous  and 
ineffective Edgar Linton. Heathcliff is not deterred,  however,  and 
23 
Ibid.,  p.  129. 
24 
Esther Harding,  The  Way  of  All Women  (New York:  David McKay Co., 
Inc.,  1933,  1961),  chap.  2. 
74  The Invisible Partners 
persists in his efforts to unite with Cathy, even though this results 
in a conflict in her so great that, unwilling to bear it,  she becomes 
ill and dies.  The story then continues with Cathy's daughter, also 
named  Cathy,  as  the  heroine.  The  younger  Cathy  is  persecuted 
relentlessly  by  the increasingly  morose  Heathcliff.  However,  un-
like others who are destroyed  under Heathclitrs persecution,  the 
younger  Cathy  grows  stronger.  Eventually  she  marries  Hareton, 
and  as  she  works  out  her  relationship  with  Hareton,  Heathcliff 
withdraws  more  and  more  from  the  story  until  finally  he  unites 
in  death  with  his  Cathy.  Thus  at  the  end  of the  story  there  is  a 
double  marriage:  the  earthly  pair,  Catherine  and  Hareton,  and 
the spirit couple,  Heathcliff and Cathy. 
In  her  brilliant  analysis  of  the  story,  Barbara  Hannah
25 
points out that Heathcliff is  a  personification  of the  animus,  and 
describes the way  he functions  in the psychology of a woman.  He 
is  a  seemingly  ruthless  figure  who  destroys  many  people  in  the 
story,  but  he  is  not  blind  evil,  for  in  the end  he  proves  to  be  the 
very  force  that  leads  to  psychological  development.  Because  of 
him  the  weak  are  destroyed  and  only  those  who  become  strong 
survive,  and it is  through his  persistent efforts that,  in the end of 
the story,  there is  the double marriage that is  a symbol of whole-
ness.  Thus in Heathcliff we can see how the animus can appear to 
be  demonic,  yet  in fact  he contains in himself the mainspring for 
individuation  and  proves  to be  a  relentless  force  that  compels  a 
woman  to  rid  herself of weak,  childish  feelings  and  develop  the 
true  strength  of her  character.  Heathclitrs  relentless  desire  for 
union with  Cathy is  analogous  to the relentless  urge from  within 
for  the  unification  of a  woman's  personality,  a  process  that  the 
animus makes possible and even seems  to insist on. 
Jung  first  equated  the  animus  with  a  woman's  soul,  just as 
he equated  the  anima  with  a  man's  soul.  In "The Psychology  of 
the Transference,"  he  wrote,  "It will  be  clear  ... that  the  'soul' 
... has a  feminine  character in the man and a masculine charac-
ter in the woman. "
26 
However,  this identification  of animus  with 
soul has been disputed by  many of Jung's women  colleagues and 
disciples.  For instance,  Emma Jung,  Barbara Hannah,  and  Irene 
"  Hannah, Striving  Towards  Wholeness,  chap.  10. 
26 
Jung,  CW 16,  p.  301. 
Chapter  Three  75 
de Castilleja all argue that the soul in woman is feminine just as it 
is  in  man,  and  that  animus  is  not  to be  identified  with  soul,  but 
with  spirit.  According  to  this  way  of thinking,  the  animus  is  not 
the soul,  but leads  a  woman  to  her soul.  It is  for  this  reason  that 
he  has  the value  of a  psychopomp,  a guide,  or one  who  points or 
leads  the way. 
27 
One helpful function the positive animus gives to a woman is 
the power of discrimination. Jung wrote that in feminine  psychol-
ogy  "we  are  not  dealing  with  a  function  of relationship  (as  with 
the  anima)  but,  on  the  contrary,  with  a  discriminative  function, 
namely  the  animus."
28 
Thus  he  virtually  identified  the  animus 
with  logos  and the  anima  with  eros,  with,  however,  the  mislead-
ing  intimation  that the  animus was  thereby  identical  with  think-
ing in a woman,  and the anima with feeling  in a man. We have al-
ready  seen  that  this  is  not  the  case-that  a  woman  thinks  for 
herself-it is  not the animus who thinks for  her-and that a man 
has  his  own  feelings  and his  own  capacity  for  love.  Yet,  in  fact, 
Jung  did  not  directly  connect  the  animus  with  logos  as  such, 
much less  with  thinking,  nor the anima with eros,  but used these 
categories  to  give  us  conceptual approximations  of the functions 
of these  two  realities.  "The  animus,"  he  wrote,  "corresponds  to 
the paternal Logos just as  the anima corresponds to the maternal 
Eros.  But I  do not wish or intend to give  these two intuitive con-
cepts  too  specific  a  definition.  I  use  Eros  and  Logos  merely  as 
conceptual  aids  to  describe  the  fact  that  woman's  consciousness 
is  characterized  more  by  the  connective  quality  of Eros  than by 
the  discrimination  and cognition  associated  with  Logos.  In men, 
Eros,  the  function  of relationship,  is  usually  less  developed  than 
Logos.  In  women,  on  the  other  hand,  Eros  is  an  expression  of 
their true nature. "
29 
The animus  can  act  like  a  guide  who  leads  a  woman  to  her 
soul because  he  uses  his  torch of discrimination and understand-
ing  to illuminate her inner world.  He also  acts  as  a bridge to  the 
impersonal  world  of intellect  and spirit,  and  gives  her otherwise 
27 
Cf.  E.  Jung,  Animus and Anima;  de  Castillejo,  Knowing  Woman;  Han-
nah,  Striving  Towards  Wholeness. 
28 
Jung,  CW 16,  p.  294. 
"Jung, CW9, 2,  p.  14. 
76  The Invisible Partners 
diffused consciousness a capacity for focused concentration. As is 
always  the  case  when  describing  the  anima  and  animus,  images 
are  more  helpful  than  concepts,  and  Irene  de  Castillejo  gives 
us  a helpful image of the positive animus when she describes him 
as  a  "torchbearer."  It is  the  animus,  she  says,  who  throws  light 
on  things,  who  enables  a  woman  to  focus  her  concentration, 
makes it possible for  her to be objective,  and opens  up to her the 
world of knowledge for  its own sake. 
To  see  clearly  enough  to  know  something  quite  definitely,  so 
solidly  that  one  can  express  it  and  say  "This  is  my  truth,  here  I 
take my  stand," one needs the help  of the animus  himself. 
I  personally  like to think of my  helpful  animus  as  a  torch-bear-
er;  the  figure  of a  man  holding  aloft  his  torch  to  light  my  way, 
throwing  its  beams  into  dark  corners  and  penetrating  the  mists 
which shield the world of half-hidden mystery where,  as  a woman, 
I  am so  very much at home. 
In a  woman's  world  of shadows  and  cosmic  truths  he  makes  a 
pool of light as  a focus  for  her eyes,  and as  she looks  she may say, 
"Ah yes,  that's  what  I  mean,"  or "Oh no,  that's  not  my  truth  at 
all."  It is  with  the  help  of this  torch  also  that  she  learns  to  give 
form  to  her ideas.  He  throws  light  on the jumble of words  hover-
ing  beneath  the  surface  of her  mind  so  that  she  can  choose  the 
ones she  wants,  separates light into  the colours of the  rainbow  for 
her  selection,  enables  her  to  see  the  part  of which  her  whole  is 
made,  to discriminate between this and that.  In a word,  he enables 
her to  focus. 
30 
As  a  woman  begins  to  relate. to  her inner self,  de  Castillejo 
continues,  she first  meets the animus,  who,  by throwing his torch 
into the interior and meanings  of things,  leads  her into  her inner 
recesses  where her soul is  to be found.  But, she stresses,  he is  not 
her soul,  for her soul is feminine like her ego.  "As it is he whom a 
woman  meets  first  he  may  appear  to  be  himself the  soul  image 
she is  seeking;  but if she  ventures with  him  further into the dark 
and  unknown  she  may  find  that  he  does  not  represent  her  soul 
but is  rather acting as  her guide toward it. "
31 
30 
De Castilleja, Knowing  Woman,  p.  76. 
"  Ibid.,  p.  166. 
Chapter  Three  77 
Thus  the  soul  in  a  woman  is  feminine  like  herself,  best  de-
scribed,  perhaps,  as  a  life force,  a  source of energy and love.  For 
a  man,  the  soul  is  something  other  than  himself,  an  elusive 
though essential feminine  reality that is  indispensable to the well-
being  of his  consciousness.  For  a  woman,  the  discovery  of the 
soul  is  the discovery of what is  most essentially her own deepest, 
truest  nature.  For a  man,  the  world  of objective  knowledge  and 
impersonal  goals  comes  naturally,  while  a  woman  needs,  as  it 
were,  to be initiated into a  world  to which she is  not subjectively 
related and which  may come as  a  startling discovery. 
So  the animus is  a thrower of light.  But,  de Castillejo warns 
us,  he  must throw  his  light  somewhere,  and this  means  that  the 
woman must use the animus function in herself correctly and cre-
atively.  "It is  the woman  who  is  not using  the  animus  creatively 
who is at his mercy for  he must throw his light somewhere.  So he 
attracts her attention by throwing his light on one formula or slo-
gan  after  another  quite  regardless  of their  exact  relevance.  She 
falls  into  the  trap  and  accepts  what  he  shows  her  as  gospel 
truth."
32 
As  with everything else in the psyche,  the key  word is  relat-
edness.  The animus is  positive in his function when the woman is 
correctly related to him,  and negative when the relationship is in-
correct.  The  proper  relationship  with  the  animus  is  helped  by 
recognition  of his  reality,  by  giving  him  scope  in  life  and  main-
taining a  dialogue with him just as  if he  were an inner husband. 
To recognize  the  reality  of the animus  is  to  perceive  there-
ality  and  autonomy  of the  unconscious.  This  always  requires,  as 
we  have seen,  the recognition of projections when they occur;  the 
animus  is  particularly  likely  to  project  himself onto  outer  men 
when  he  is  not  consciously  perceived  by  a  woman  as  a  part  of 
herself.  Such  a  projection  can  be  perceived  as  having  occurred 
when  a  man  is  overvalued  or undervalued,  and  especially  when 
he is  seen to be fascinating.  It can also be recognized by the reac-
tion of the man himself because,  unless he is so egocentric that he 
feeds  on  such  things,  the  man  will  react  to a  projection  with  in-
creasing discomfort,  in  the manner already described. 
To  give  the  animus  reality  and  his  proper  place  in  life,  a 
32 
Ibid.,  p.  80. 
78  The Invisible Partners 
woman must have a life  that includes him.  As we  have seen with 
the anima,  the  inner figures  of the  unconscious  all  want  to  live, 
and  they  can  do  this  only  through  our lives.  A  woman  who  ig-
nores the objective side of life,  and especially  the development of 
her intellectual and spiritual side,  can expect to have a frustrated 
animus who becomes troublesome and devilish as  a consequence. 
She  often  needs  to have something in  her life  outside  of the  per-
sonal realm of family,  husband,  or lover.  In this way she can sat-
isfy  the  animus.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  if a  woman 
goes  too  far  in  this  matter she  runs  the  danger  of becoming  too 
identified  with  the  animus.  She  may  pursue  masculine  goals  in 
the  world  and  develop  the  life  of her  intellect  in  academic  and 
professional  pursuits  only  if she  maintains  an  awareness  of her-
self as a person with a feminine  soul who also embodies a mascu-
line principle. 
Keeping  a  distinction  between  herself as  woman  and  soul, 
and the animus as masculine discriminatory power, is greatly aid-
ed  by  the  process  of dialogue,  a  process  already  mentioned  as  a 
way in which a  man can relate to his anima.  The animus is  often 
first  noticed  by  a  woman  as  a  "voice"  within  her,  that  is,  as  an 
autonomous  train  of thoughts  and  ideas  that  flow  into  her  con-
sciousness.  This autonomous stream of thoughts and ideas can be 
personified  as  her  inner  man  and  a  dialogue  can  be  cultivated 
with  him.  In this  dialogue  it is  very  helpful,  Irene  de  Castillejo 
points out, if a woman keeps the animus informed about how she 
feels  about things.  The animus will be quite ready to intrude with 
his opinions and ideas and plans,  and can be ruthless in trying to 
bring them about.  The woman must be firm  with him,  and care-
fully instruct him in how she feels  and what her needs and desires 
are.  In describing the case of one woman,  Irene de Castillejo not-
ed that the animus was  "positive and helpful so long as the wom-
an took the precaution of informing him how she,  as woman, felt 
about  the  matters  in  hand  and  only  became  negative  when  she 
failed  to  do  so.  For then,  being  deprived  of the essential  data  of 
her feeling he had no alternative but to voice the general truths of 
the day."
33 
Again  and  again  in  matters  of the  psyche  we  realize  that 
"  Ibid.,  p.  168. 
Chapter  Three  79 
when  we  are  correctly  and  consciously  related  to  our inner  fig-
ures  they  tend  to  assume  their  proper  role  and  function,  and 
when  we  are  unaware  of them,  and  do  not  have  a  correct  rela-
tionship,  they  tend  to  possess  us  and  disrupt  our  lives.  So  it  is 
with  the  animus,  who  "is  a  woman's  greatest  friend  when  he 
shines his light on what is  relevant,  and turns foe  the moment he 
lapses  into irrelevance."
34 
34 
Ibid.,  p.  80. 
That mysterious life force  which we call sexuality is  both compli-
cated  and  enriched  by  the  Invisible  Partners.  We  have  already 
seen  how  the  anima  and  animus  are  frequently  projected  onto 
members of the opposite sex,  and how,  when a  person carries for 
us  such a projected image,  sexual feelings  and fantasies  are likely 
to  be  aroused.  This  is  because  the  archetypes  of the  anima  and 
animus  are  so  numinous,  that  is,  so  charged  with  psychic  en-
ergy that they grip us  emotionally, and this energy usually affects 
us first  on the sexual level. 
The kind of magnetic sexual attraction we may feel  when the 
anima  or  animus  is  projected  in  this  manner  leads  to  powerful 
psychological  ties  with  the  person  who  is  carrying  that  projec-
tion,  in  the  manner  we  have  described,  and  this  phenomenon  is 
often  disturbing  to  a  long-term  relationship  such  as  marriage. 
The  projections  of the  anima  and  animus  seldom  remain  on  a 
person,  whose  ordinary  humanity  becomes  evident  under  the 
stress  and strain  of daily  life,  and for  this  reason  the  projections 
of the anima or animus will  usually fall  on persons outside of the 
marriage relationship,  which may prove to be a disturbing factor. 
Numinosity,  discovery,  adventure,  and  curiosity  usually  en-
liven  the  initial  relationship  with  members  of the  opposite  sex, 
but as they begin to wear off,  sexual life between a man and worn-
80 
Chapter Four  81 
an can become  routine, 
1 
and sexual desires  and fantasies  may  re-
volve around other people.  People who lack psychological under-
standing may  then suppose  that they  no  longer  love  their mates, 
since they are now "in love" with someone else.  Others,  especial-
ly  those  who  have  been  raised  in  a  strict  religious  tradition  that 
has educated them to treat their fantasies as though they were,  in 
themselves,  sins,  may be horrified at their fantasies  and try to re-
press  them  out of fear  and guilt.  Still  others,  who  lack  a  certain 
moral  stamina,  may  want  to  cast  aside  a  marriage  relationship 
that is  being threatened with boredom,  rather than to work on it, 
thinking  that  the  new  and  fascinating  relationship  is  now  "it," 
and that if only they can possess the object of their sexual desires 
they  will  be  happy. 
As Adolf Guggenbuhl-Craig has pointed out, 
2 
this is  partic-
ularly likely to occur in our culture,  where marriage is  perceived 
in  terms  of what  he  calls  "well-being"  rather  than  "salvation." 
To  view  marriage  in  terms  of well-being  means  that  we  marry 
with the thought  that this will  lead us  to  happiness,  satisfaction, 
and a  feeling  of peace  and  plenitude.  To view  marriage  in  terms 
of salvation  means  that  we  see  marriage  as  one  possible  path to 
self-knowledge  and individuation.  In marriage  two  people  bump 
up  against  each  other's  areas  of unconsciousness.  This  affords 
both people an opportunity to become aware of personal qualities 
or habits that they see  only when their partners in the experience 
of daily  living object  to them. 
Such a  relationship provides an excellent container in which 
individuation can occur,  for  people who  can work through areas 
'  Fortunately for sexual life in marriage, there are certain advantages to the 
married or permanent relationship when it comes to sexual fulfillment.  In a per-
manent  relationship,  for  instance,  a  couple  has  an  opportunity  to  learn  about 
each  other  as  sexual  partners,  to  discover  what  pleases  each  other,  and  to  be-
come adept  at being  a  lover  well-suited  for  his  or her partner.  It is  also  impor-
tant that in  a  long-term relationship the factor  of personal  love  and relatedness 
may  more than make up for  the fact  that the projected image of the anima and 
animus no longer surrounds one's partner.  If,  in addition,  a married couple can 
keep  their  fantasies  alive  in  their  sexual  life,  perhaps  sharing  them  with  each 
other and  expressing  them  in their love  life,  sexuality in marriage can remain  a 
vital  part of the relationship. 
2 
Adolf Guggenbuhl-Craig,  Marriage-Dead or Alive,  trans.  Murray  Stein 
(Zurich:  Spring  Publications,  1977),  pp.  36fT. 
82  The Invisible Partners 
of unconsciousness  in  their life  together  can  mature  in  their  ca-
pacity  to  love  and  relate  to  another  human  being.  If we  value 
marriage only when it offers  us  a sense of well-being,  we  will  not 
have the intestinal fortitude to work through these painful experi-
ences, but if we learn to value marriage because of the opportuni-
ties  it  offers  for  salvation-that is,  individuation-as well  as  for 
its  other blessings,  our marriage  relationship  is  on  a  more  solid 
footing. 
However,  the  question  will  remain:  How  are  we  to  regard 
fantasies  about another person  outside of our marriage  that may 
be  inspired by the projections  we  have  discussed?  It is  clear that 
it can be  destructive to be pulled into such fantasies  without any 
conscious  regard  for  their  underlying  meaning.  But  it  can  be 
equally  unfortunate  if an  overly  developed  conscience  causes  a 
person  to  reject  his  or  her  anima- or  animus-inspired  fantasies, 
for such fantasies  contain a great deal of important psychic ener-
gy.  For  this  reason  it  is  often  better  to  try  to  understand  the 
meaning of our fantasies  than to reject them out of hand because 
of their  supposed  devilishness,  for  there  is  nothing  wrong  with 
having  fantasies  as  such.  Fantasies  simply  come  uninvited  into 
our minds for reasons of their own; it is what we  do with our fan-
tasies  that is  a matter of morality. 
If our erotic  thoughts  have been  directed  to  another  person 
by  the  anima  or  animus,  there  may  be  many  messages  for  us. 
When  this  happens,  perhaps  the  first  thing  to  examine  is  the 
quality of our primary relationship.  For instance, many men have 
a passive eros,  that is,  they are not active in establishing close ties 
with women, they tend to look on women as mothers and provid-
ers and not as companions and lovers.  Consequently they remain 
undeveloped  on  the  side  of feeling  and  relationship.  When  this 
happens,  the  anima  may  attempt  to  stir them  up  by  creating  all 
kinds of fantasies  in their minds.  It is as though the anima recog-
nizes the inadequacy and sleepiness of the man in the area of per-
sonal relationships and love,  and decides to stir up the pot.  Or,  it 
may be  that a  man or a  woman  is  married  to  the  wrong  person, 
has been unwilling or unable to face  this fact,  but is  led to exam-
ine  his  or  her  primary  relationship  more  honestly  by  the  intru-
sion  into  consciousness  of  anima- or  animus-inspired  fantasies 
about other people. 
Chapter Four  83 
For instance,  a  man  came  to  therapy  because  he  had  been 
impotent  with his  wife  for  many  years.  He also  was  troubled be-
cause  of his  erotic  fantasies  for  another  woman.  After  he  had 
talked for  a  few  hours  it became clear to him that he simply  did 
not like  his  wife.  It was not a  matter of loving  or not loving  her, 
he did not like her, and really did not want to be with her. It was 
the  first  time  he  had  allowed  himself to  face  this  fact.  Once  he 
faced  this  honestly,  he sought out the other woman and immedi-
ately  his impotence  vanished.  It was  as  though  his  penis  did  not 
lie;  it  was  telling  him  all  along  that  he  simply  did  not  want  the 
woman  to  whom  he  was  married.  Of course  this  man  had  to  go 
through  all  kinds  of hell in  separating from  his  wife,  and he had 
to carry  a  certain  burden  of guilt,  for,  as  could  be  expected,  his 
wife felt  unwanted and rejected.  There are no simple solutions to 
love problems in life,  and every  love  relationship  requires a  price 
from  us. 
The chances are,  however,  that the appearance of the anima 
or animus  in  a  projected  form  is  simply  an  effort  on the  part of 
these  inner  figures  to  gain  our attention,  in  the  manner  already 
noted.  An  attempt  must  then  be  made  to  withdraw  the  projec-
tion,  that is,  to  understand  that  the  attraction  or fascination  we 
feel  for  another person stems  from  the projected psychic  content 
within us.  In this way we can begin to relate to the numinous im-
age of the anima or animus as an inner factor of our own psyche, 
and thus begin  to achieve  that vital relationship  with the  uncon-
scious  which  is  such  an  aid  in  our  process  of individuation.  Of 
course,  as  was  noted  in  chapter  one,  projections  can  never  be 
withdrawn completely,  for  they are out of our conscious control; 
nor can  we  ever  become  so  conscious  of the inner images  of the 
anima  and  animus  that  projections  do  not  occur.  Withdrawing 
projections  does  not  mean  that  they  no  longer  occur,  but  that 
we  understand them as images  within ourselves when they do. 
A special instance of anima projection in masculine psychol-
ogy  comes  from  the  problem  of the "double anima."  The anima 
often  comes  up  in  a  man's  psychology  as  a  double  figure.  The 
first  anima  image  may  draw  a  man  to  wife,  family,  and  home. 
The second anima image draws a man into a world of emotional-
ly  toned experiences or images outside of the wife-children-home 
pattern.  (We can call one image endogamous and the other exog-
84  The Invisible Partners 
amous.)  Many  men  initially  fulfil  the first  anima image and  pro-
ceed  to  settle  down  to  the  pleasures  and  satisfactions  of family 
life,  only  to  find  that  their  consciousness  is  later  stirred  by  the 
second anima image,  for  the effect of the anima is  always to  "stir 
up" a  man's consciousness to greater life.  It is  as  though the sec-
ond image  comes  in  order to  awaken  a  man to further  inner  de-
velopment,  or lead  him  into  more  life  experiences.  She  serves  to 
keep  his  eros  from  becoming  too  passive,  his  state of mind  from 
being  too  satisfied,  comfortable,  and,  eventually,  stagnant.  In 
short,  she brings fire  into a man's life,  and adds color to his  per-
sonality. 
When such anima entanglements develop in a man there are 
no  rules  about  how  to  proceed.  Theology  may  try  to  lay  down 
general  principles  for  the  regulation  of mankind's  love  life,  but 
psychology  cannot  do  this,  for  matters  of eros  permit  only  indi-
vidual  solutions.  Each  man  must  find  his  own  way  through  the 
labyrinth  of  relationships,  emotions,  yearnings,  and  complica-
tions  that  the  emergence  of  the  double  anima  image  always 
brings. 
There may be some men who need concrete experiences with 
women  in  order  to  realize  their  own  emotions  and  begin  to  un-
derstand  what  women  mean  to  them.  This  may  particularly  be 
true for  a  man  who  has  not had sufficient  experience  in  matters 
of women,  love,  and  relationship;  who  has,  as  it  were,  an  "un-
lived  life"  in this area. 
A  man who is  "caught" by the anima,  and drawn by  her to-
ward  a  relationship  with  another  woman,  will  have  to  take  into 
account  his  primary  relationship.  Many  men,  out of loyalty  and 
love for  their wives,  quite correctly (for them) refuse to have a re-
lationship  with  another  woman.  Some  men,  however,  do  have 
such  a  relationship,  but  keep  it  a  secret,  telling  themselves  that 
they do not want to hurt their wives,  and that what their partners 
do not know will not hurt them.  Usually the truth is  that they do 
not  want  to  go  through  the  emotional difficulties  of telling  their 
wives  the  dilemma  they  are  in  and  what  they  are  doing.  Most 
men  do  not  like  unpleasant  emotional  scenes  and,  understand-
ably enough,  their wives  are likely to be hurt, angry,  and perhaps 
vindictive if they know that their husbands are sharing their love 
with  other  women.  "What  my  wife  (or  husband)  doesn't  know 
Chapter Four  85 
won't  hurt  her  (or  him)"  usually  translates,  "I  don't  have  the 
courage to go  through the emotional hassle of bringing things out 
into the open." 
If an  extramarital  relationship  is  frequent  or  long-lasting, 
the spouse is certain to be affected by it eventually via the uncon-
scious,  that is,  there will be effects  on the psyche of the marriage 
partner  even  if on  a  conscious  level  that  person  does  not  know 
that anything  is  going  on.  Occasionally  it  happens,  for  instance, 
that  a  person  comes  to  analysis  because  of a  marriage  relation-
ship  that  is  disturbed,  yet  he  or  she  is  unable  to  pinpoint  the 
problem.  When  discussion  with the spouse is  attempted,  nothing 
comes  from  it.  Later  it  usually  comes  out  that  one  of them  has 
been  involved  in  a  relationship with someone else  for  some  time. 
Then it  is  clear why  the  marriage  partner acted  so  differently  at 
different  times,  why  so  often  there  was  a  kind  of secretiveness, 
and  why  their  discussions  seemed  to  bear  little  fruit.  There  are 
even  cases  in which  a  person  dreamt that his  or her partner was 
involved with someone else.  Naturally the dreamer was disturbed 
by  this,  but did not know what to do with the dream because the 
facts  were not known. 
So  in  the  long  run  the  extramarital affair  that is  kept  secret 
is usually unfair to the other person in the marriage,  and,  when it 
comes to light,  it is found that damage has been caused by the se-
crecy.  The  one  who  has  been  unaware  of the  partner's  involve-
ment feels  hurt and slighted,  and, of course, the trust between the 
two people has been injured and may be difficult to rebuild.  Also, 
a  person  who  loves  secretly  tends  to  damage  himself or herself. 
For one  thing,  it  takes  energy  to  keep  a  secret.  Secrets  are  like 
corks  that  can  be  held  under  water  only  by  applying  constant 
pressure.  For this  reason  we  lose  some  psychic  energy  when  we 
keep a secret life hidden.  A  man also damages his own soul when 
he damages the woman in his life because he alienates the anima. 
We cannot try to find  happiness and fulfillment  at someone else's 
expense without damaging our own souls in the process.  In more 
metaphysical  language,  an  attempt  to  find  happiness  at  the  ex-
pense  of others  develops  a  bad  "karma"  within  us,  that  is,  it 
causes  retribution from  within. 
And what of the anima who is  behind all of these complica-
tions,  whose  projected  image  onto  the  other  woman  has  entan-
86  The Invisible Partners 
gled a  man in fantasies,  aroused his  yearnings,  and stirred up his 
unfulfilled  emotional life?  It often  seems  as  though  she does  not 
care  about  the  difficulties  she  is  creating.  Like  Aphrodite,  her 
concern  is  that  men  and  women  love  and  make  love,  and  she  is 
not  concerned  with  human  happiness.  So  there  is  this  difficulty 
for  a  man:  Human  relationships,  which  call  for  an  ethical  and 
moral  attitude,  and  for  their  continued  success  require  qualities 
of integrity  and fair  play,  are  greatly  troubled by  an anima who 
doesn't  care  about  these  matters  as  long  as  she  succeeds  in  stir-
ring up more life.  Yet it is  not true that Aphrodite has no moral-
ity,  for  her moral code  extends  to  all  matters of relationship.  In 
the long  run,  if a  man is faithless  in matters of love and relation-
ship,  the goddess  within  turns on him  with  a  vengeance  and de-
mands retribution in the form of what has been called "feminine 
justice." 
As  Marie-Louise  von  Franz has  pointed  out/ there  is  femi-
nine justice as  well  as  masculine justice.  Masculine justice is  im-
personal and objective. It is enshrined in our legal code and penal 
system,  and calls for an impartial and uniform meting out of jus-
tice as  society  requires  it,  for  various  offenses,  without  regard  to 
individual considerations.  Feminine justice, on the other hand,  is 
the justice  of nature.  It is  personal,  and  suited  to  the  particular 
circumstances. 
An example of feminine justice is the story of a woman who 
advertised  a  new-model  Porsche  for  sale  at  the  ridiculously  low 
price of $75.00.
4 
A  man read the ad and contacted the woman.  "I 
have only a  check," he is  reported to have told her.  "That will be 
perfectly all right," the woman said.  Amazed and delighted at his 
good  fortune,  the  man  gave  her  the  check  and  drove  off in  the 
Porsche,  but his  conscience troubled  him and he  returned to  her 
and said, "Lady, do you know what this car is worth?" "Oh yes," 
she  answered.  "Well  then  why  are  you  selling  it  to  me  for  only 
$75.00?"  "Well,"  she  replied,  "It is  like  this.  My  husband  left 
yesterday  for  Europe  with  his  mistress  and said  to  me,  'Sell  the 
3 
Von Franz, Feminine  in  Fairy  Tales,  pp.  33-34. 
• This story  was  reported  to me by  people who heard it over the radio  and 
read it in the newspaper.  The quotations may not be exact.  Factual or not,  it  il-
lustrates what feminine justice means. 
Chapter Four  87 
Porsche  for  me  and send  me  the  check.'"  Now  that is  feminine 
justice. The essence of it?  Her husband got just what he deserved. 
Feminine justice  prevails  in  matters  of human  relationship, 
and  also  in  the  matter  of our  relationship  with  the  unconscious 
and with nature.  If we alienate the unconscious, or damage or ig-
nore  the  laws  and  demands  of Mother  Nature,  we  get  what  we 
deserve.  That is,  there is a punishment meted out that exactly fits 
the  individual  circumstances.  Thus  if we  abuse  our  bodies,  we 
pay the appropriate price;  when we contaminate the air and earth 
and sea,  nature metes  out a  punishment to us,  as  we  are just be-
ginning  to realize.  When we  despise  the unconscious, justice will 
be  demanded from  within us  by all those inner powers whom we 
have offended,  and if we are false  in our relationships,  we  have to 
pay a price of some kind. 
I  have  discussed  the  problem  of a  man's  double  anima  im-
age,  but  a  woman  also  has  a  double  animus  image,  as  Robert 
Johnson has  shown in  his  study  of the  Hindu story  "The Trans-
posed  Heads. "
5 
When  the  animus  comes  up  as  a  double  image, 
one man may carry part of her animus for a woman, and another 
man  may  carry  another  part.  Because  these  animus  images  are 
projected, the woman finds  herself torn between the two men,  for 
she  experiences  a  different  part  of herself coming  into  being  as 
she  comes  into  relationship  with  each  man.  Naturally  she  has 
great difficulty in making a choice between the two men, for until 
she  is  able  to  take  back  the  parts  of her  psyche  that  have  been 
projected she is compulsively related to both of them, and finds  it 
as difficult to give up one of them as she would find it difficult to 
give  up  her  right  or  left  arm.  Her  difficulty  may  be  resolved, 
however,  as  she  withdraws  the  projections  through  becoming 
conscious of them, and also as the personal relationship, as differ-
entiated from  the relationship that is  engendered through projec-
tion,  begins  to  develop  more  intensely  with  one  man  than  with 
the other. 
It is  quite natural for a  young woman to first  experience her 
own  personality  through  relationships  with  different  men.  One 
'  From  a  lecture  by  this  title  given  by  Robert  Johnson  in  1979  for  the 
Friends  of Jung.  Available  from  the  Friends  of Jung  Tape  Library,  P.O.  Box 
33114,  San Diego,  Calif.  92103. 
88  The Invisible Partners 
young  woman  was  sent  to  me  by  her  parents  for  counseling  be-
cause  she  went  so  quickly  from  one  unlikely  love  affair  to  an-
other.  And it was  true that she had a bewildering number of dif-
ferent  men  in  her  life:  students,  sailors,  older  men,  young  men, 
white men, black men-there seemed to be no rhyme or reason to 
it.  It was  as  though  a  different  facet  of her personality  emerged 
with  each  relationship.  Eventually,  however,  she  did  make  a 
choice,  married one of the men,  and lived  a  monogamous life.  It 
was  important for  this  young woman to go  through this phase of 
her  development.  In  some  cases,  when  a  woman  marries  quite 
young,  the  need  for  such  experiences  may  not  have been  met.  If 
romantic fantasies  have not been properly lived out in youth,  and 
if there  are  elements  of emotional  immaturity,  and  unlived  life 
may emerge into consciousness  later and disturb the marriage. 
Many people feel  that monogamy  is  more natural to women 
than it is  to men.  This may be,  but it may also be  that women,  in 
general,  are more personally related than men.  That is,  a woman 
who has decided on who "her man" is,  is  less likely to be diverted 
to other relationships by her fantasies than is a man whose capac-
ity  for  personal  relationship  is  not  as  well  developed.  Of course 
this is a generalization and sometimes it may be the man who has 
more capacity for personal relationship than the woman and who 
is,  accordingly,  more  resistant  to  seductive  fantasies  about  other 
people. 
However,  where a  woman's energy is  drawn toward  person-
al  relationships,  and  especially  toward  developing  a  family,  her 
monogamous  tendencies  may  prevail.  Once  such  a  woman  has 
emotionally  accepted  a  man as  her partner,  she  tends  to exclude 
other men  from  her emotional  life,  just as  the ovum,  once  it  has 
acepted  one  sperm,  shuts  the  other  sperms  out.  In  our  present 
time  the  monogamous  tendency  among  women  does  not  appear 
to be  as  great as  it was  previously-at least  many  women  report 
today that they can have more than one man in  their lives  at the 
same time.  Men  have  often been  said  to be  more polygamous  by 
nature,  and,  in  our  culture,  may  have  to  sacrifice  some  of this 
tendency  in  order  to  make  a  monogamous  marriage  work,  but 
this  too  is  a  generalization  and  there  are  certainly  many  men 
whose emotional lives center around one,  and only one,  woman. 
Whether it be  a  man or a  woman,  the most important thing 
Chapter Four  89 
to  remember  when  the  anima  or  animus  stirs  up  our  erotic 
thoughts is  that the underlying force  behind  them  is  the drive of 
the unconscious  to relate  to consciousness.  The union of the per-
sonality  is  represented  in  the  imagery  of the  unconscious  as  a 
great  love  affair.  The  opposites  within  us  are  so  far  apart  that 
only  the  great  unifying  power  of eros  can  bring  them  together. 
This  can  be  said  to  be  the  common  denominator,  the  basic  psy-
chological fact,  in  all  love  affairs,  and for  the person  who  wishes 
to become  whole  it  is  the  great  underlying  factor  that can never 
be disregarded. 
It is  clear from  what has been said that sexual fantasies  and 
yearnings are closely connected with inner psychological process-
es.  A word about the symbolic meaning of such fantasies is in or-
der at this  point. 
As  a  rule  of thumb,  it  can  be  said  that  what  we  yearn  for 
sexually is  a symbolic representation of what we  need in order to 
become  whole.  This  means  that  sexual  fantasies  symbolically 
complement  ego  consciousness  in  a  way  that  points  us  toward 
wholeness.  Understanding  the  symbolic  meaning  of our  sexual 
fantasies  enables  us  to  become  less  compulsive  regarding  them, 
that is,  instead of being driven and possessed by  them,  our range 
of consciousness can be  expanded by them. 
The most frequent  example of how a  sexual  yearning repre-
sents what is  needed to bring us to wholeness is  the sexual desire 
of a  man for  a  woman,  and  of a  woman  for  a  man.  Images  of a 
woman appear in a man's sexual fantasies because she represents 
his  missing  half,  the  other  side  of his  personality  to  which  he 
needs to relate if he is to be complete, and vice versa with a worn-
an.  Of course  this  is  not to  say  that this  is  all that sexual  yearn-
ings  mean.  There is  always  the desire for  physical  release  of ten-
sion, for the meeting of body with body, and for the closeness and 
intimacy  with  another  person  that  sexuality  achieves  and  ex-
presses.  But it is  to say that in addition to these aspects of sexual-
ity  there is  also a  spiritual or psychological meaning. 
Sexual  fantasies  are  usually  complex.  We  do  not  simply 
yearn for a woman or for a man,  but have fantasies  about the ob-
ject of our desire  in  a  particular way.  There  may  be  all  kinds  of 
romantic  stories  that  accompany  our  desires,  or  there  may  be 
90  The Invisible  Partners 
fantasies  of seduction or rape.  The possibilities of sexual fantasies 
are innumerable,  and it is  quite natural for  people to have highly 
colorful sexual fantasies.  If the content of these fantasies becomes 
too  unusual,  we  call  them  "perversions,"  but it  is  too  bad  if this 
leads  us  to dismiss  them out of hand;  instead  we  need  to  under-
stand  why  we  have  this  particular  sexual  fantasy,  that  is,  what 
the fantasy  symbolically expresses. 
Edward  C.  Whitmont,  in  his  book  The  Symbolic  Quest,
6 
gives  us  an  example  of how  one  man's  unusual  sexual  fantasy 
represented  symbolically  exactly  what  changes  he  needed  to  un-
dergo in order to become more whole.  Whitmont's client came to 
him because he was incapable of having sexual intercourse with a 
woman  until  he  had  first  kissed  her  feet.  Naturally,  this  sexual 
fantasy  was disturbing to him and he saw himself as  perverted in 
some  way.  Analysis revealed  that this  man was  unusually identi-
fied  with his intellect and regarded himself as superior to women; 
accordingly  he  devalued  the  feminine  side  of himself and  of life 
and  cultivated  an  arrogant  masculinity.  In  the  act  of kissing  a 
woman's foot  he had,  symbolically,  to lower his head.  His sexual 
fantasies and desires thus forced the man to do symbolically what 
he had to accomplish  psychologically in order to become a more 
whole person: sacrifice the domination of his intellect, give up his 
masculine arrogance,  and,  as  it were,  worship what  he  had  hith-
erto devalued.  As  long  as  he  did  not  understand the  meaning  of 
his sexual fantasies,  Whitmont's client was simply seized by them 
compulsively  and driven  to act them out.  As he began  to  under-
stand what his fantasies  meant, and why he had them,  he was led 
to  a  change  of consciousness,  and became both  more  free  in  his 
love making and more whole as  a person.  One could say that his 
sexual fantasy  came to cure him of a maladaptation of conscious-
ness.  The sexual fantasy  was  not an illness;  he was  one-sided and 
out of balance in his development and the sexual fantasy was pro-
duced by the unconscious to correct this. 
Adolf Guggenbuhl-Craig  gives  us  another  example. 
7 
A  stu-
dent whom  he  once  had as  a  client  had gotten  into  trouble  with 
6 
Edward  C.  Whitmont,  The  Symbolic  Quest,  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton 
University Press,  1978  edition),  pp.  20-23. 
7 
Guggenbuhl-Craig, Marriage,  p.  84. 
Chapter Four  91 
the  police  because  of a  sexual  compulsion  to steal female  under-
wear.  One  day,  Guggenbuhl-Craig  reports,  his  client  came  in  to 
him triumphantly and read to him a passage from Goethe's poem 
Faust  in  which  Faust  meets  the  beautiful  Helen:  Faust,  after  a 
long  search,  finally  meets  this  most  beautiful  feminine  being  in 
the  world,  only  to  have  her  disappear,  leaving  Faust  standing 
there  with  her  garment  and  veil  in  his  hands.  The  young  man 
concluded  from  this  story  that  he  was  seized  by  a  vision  of the 
beauty  of the  eternal  feminine  image,  which  was  symbolized  by 
the feminine  garment  that so  occupied  his  sexual  thoughts.  The 
object  of his  desire,  in  short,  was  not  woman  as  such  but  what 
woman  symbolized  to  him:  the  eternal  feminine  with  all  of her 
majesty and numinosity.  Like Faust, he had glimpsed somewhere 
a vision of this, but had been left with only the symbol of the gar-
ment in his hands. 
Another  common  sexual  fantasy  among  men  as  they  enter 
into  middle  age  is  the  fantasy  of meeting  and  relating  sexually 
with  a  much  younger  woman.  In  many  respects,  of course,  the 
meaning  of such fantasies  is  obvious,  since younger  women  may 
be supposed to be more physically attractive. But on a deeper level 
these desires express the difficulty a man encounters in accepting 
the  fact  that  he  is  aging,  his  desire  to  hang  on to  life  and  retard 
the progress of the years,  and,  at its deepest  level,  his  hunger for 
the renewal of his consciousness and for immortal life.  The latter 
desires  cannot  be  fulfilled  through  any  sexual  relationship,  of 
course,  but  can  be  fulfilled  through  a  contact  with  the  uncon-
scious  that  the  anima  provides,  that  is,  through  individuation. 
Such a  fantasy  thus expresses  not so  much a  physical  desire as a 
religious  need. 
Fantasies  such  as  these  are  quite  impersonal;  they  operate 
within us independently of any personal or feeling  relationship to 
any particular individual. They are a kind of impersonal sexuality 
that might or might not be conjoined with personal love and feel-
ing for  a  sexual partner.  Men in particular seem  prone to discon-
nect their sexual  lives  from  their personal feelings,  while  women 
are more likely  to report that they cannot do this,  that their sex-
ual  feelings,  while  every  bit  as  intense  if not  more  intense  than 
a  man's,  are  more  romantic  and  more  personally  oriented  to  a 
particular person to whom they feel  close. 
92  The Invisible Partners 
It is  because  there  is  so  much  symbolic  meaning  in  sexual 
fantasies  that  Adolf Guggenbuhl-Craig  has  referred  to  them  as 
"individuation  fantasies."  In  his  book  he  says,  "Sexuality,  with 
all its variations, can be understood as an individuation fantasy,  a 
fantasy whose symbols are so alive and so effective that they even 
influence  our physiology  ... sexual  life,  above  all  as  it shows  it-
self in  fantasy,  is  an  intensive  individuation  process  in  symbols. 
This form  of the process  must be  respected  and recognized."  He 
goes  on  to  argue  that sexual  fantasies  that  seem  to  deviate  from 
the "norm" should not be  pathologized.  "The sexual fantasies  of 
most  men  and  women  are  wilder  and  more  bizarre  than  actual 
sexual life as it is  lived.  Unfortunately, analysts and psychologists 
often  react  to  such  fantasies  condescendingly  and  pathologize 
them.  A  commentary on a particularly lively  and unusual sexual 
fantasy  of a patient might be  the following:  'This young man--or 
woman-is not  yet  capable of relationship.  He is  still completely 
the victim  of his  non-human sexual  instinct.' "
8 
This  disparaging 
attitude  on  the  part of therapists  toward  sexual  fantasies  simply 
engenders guilt,  inhibitions,  and isolation,  and prevents a  patient 
from  more openly investigating important psychological  process-
es.  This  negative attitude came partly,  at least,  from  Freud,  who 
regarded  all  sexual  desires  except  the  most  "normal"  as  symp-
toms  of maldevelopment.  Currently therapists  are  changing  to  a 
much  more  accepting  attitude  that  regards  a  variety  of sexual 
fantasies  as  natural and tries  to  reduce guilt about them,  though 
the  living  out  of sexual  fantasies  is  another  matter,  of course. 
However,  there  is  very  little  understanding  among  therapists  to-
day of the symbolic meaning of such fantasies,  even among those 
who  are  more  progressively  oriented  than  the  old-style  psychia-
trists. 
What to  do  with the sexual  energy aroused  by  our fantasies 
is,  of course,  a  difficult  question.  When,  where,  and  how  sexual 
life  should be lived  out has always been a  moral and social  prob-
lem of great complexity, and different cultures have had different 
attitudes toward it. 
Christian  culture  has  generally  been  exceedingly  restrictive 
of the sexual impulse, as will be seen in more detail later.  Because 
'  Ibid.,  pp.  82-83. 
Chapter Four  93 
of this a  peculiar situation has existed in our culture:  We  tend to 
impart  to  children  the  feeling  that  sexuality  is  bad,  yet  at  the 
same time we give young people every opportunity to experiment 
with this fascinating  instinct.  Every psychotherapist hears stories 
from  his  or her clients of childhood sexual experiences that were 
shrouded in secrecy  and guilt,  which the child kept hidden from 
parents out of fear of punishment or a  vague but powerful feeling 
of having done something wrong.  The result is  that a  lot of guilt 
tends to become  associated  with sex,  which  damages  the instinc-
tual  life.  In  l:Ontrast,  American  Indian  culture  reversed  this.  In 
Indian culture,  sexuality  was  regarded as  something  natural and 
innocent,  but  at  the  same  time  young  people  were  carefully 
watched  to  make sure  that it  was  not  expressed  until  the proper 
time  had come for it.  No doubt much psychological damage was 
avoided  in  this  way.  At the  present  time  in  our culture  the  pic-
ture is changing.  Christian restrictiveness is giving way to license; 
where  before  there  were  too  many  restrictions,  now  there  are 
sometimes none at all.  It might be said that constipation has giv-
en  way  to  diarrhea,  but the one has  never  been  known  to  be  the 
cure  for  the  other.  Too  much  direct  expression  of  sexual  life, 
without  regard  for  the  elements  of romance,  personal  relation-
ship,  and  psychological  understanding  of its  meaning,  damages 
the spiritual life just as too many restrictions damage the instinc-
tual  life.  The  two,  of course,  affect  each  other.  A  person  whose 
instinctual life is damaged suffers sooner or later from  atrophy of 
the spiritual life as well, and damage to the spiritual life sooner or 
later results  in a jaded instinctual life  that has lost its dynamism. 
In fact,  sometimes men become impotent when they are continu-
ing to live  out an unbridled sexuality after the time has come for 
them to sacrifice some of their sexual desires for the sake of a dif-
ferent level of consciousness.  For the sensual and the spiritual are 
not separate realities;  both embody the same mystery.  The life of 
the spirit may well be enhanced by the physical expression of sex-
uality;  many people need to find  and express  the fire  of the spirit 
through sensuality and other physical expressions of their bodies, 
such as dancing. On the other hand, sexual tension and the quali-
ty  of sexual  life  can  be  increased  by  allying  the physical  instinct 
with a  developing spiritual consciousness. 
If sexual  fantasies  become  compulsive,  or if living  them out 
94  The Invisible Partners 
concretely  would  be  destructive  to  our important  personal  rela-
tionships,  we  may need to make special efforts to bring the ener-
gy of such fantasies  to a higher level of consciousness in a special 
way.  This  is  where  we  need  psychology  to  help  us  understand 
their  symbolic  meaning.  Active  imagination,  in  the  manner  de-
scribed  in  the  appendix  to  this  book,  may  also  be  particularly 
helpful in this task. 
A  special  instance  of sexual  fantasy  life  lies  in  the  area  of 
male  homosexuality,
9 
and  because  homosexuality  is  so  frequent 
among men these fantasies  are worth some special comments. 
To  begin  with,  to  refer  to  homosexuality  as  though  it  is  a 
uniform  phenomenon  is  misleading,  for  there  are  many  expres-
sions of male sexuality that we  call homosexual that actually dif-
fer  markedly.  In general,  we  refer  to  homosexuality  whenever  a 
man has  a  sexual  erotic desire  for  another male,  or for  the  male 
organ.  Yet such desires  may take  quite  varied  forms.  Some  men 
are exclusively  homosexual  and have intimate  relationships  only 
with  other men.  But others  marry,  have  children,  and  develop  a 
satisfactory  heterosexual  life,  yet  are  overwhelmed  from  time  to 
time  with  what  appears  to  be  a  desire  for  a  homosexual  experi-
ence. 
In the latter case,  we  often find  that a  middle-aged or older 
man has fallen in love with a younger man who has the attributes 
of a  young  Adonis.  The young  man who receives  the  love of the 
older man seems  to embody in himself both masculine and femi-
nine  virtues.  Typically  he  has  a  strong,  virile  body,  yet  he  also 
has certain feminine attributes and graces that give him a beauti-
ful,  youthful quality; he appears as a young David, an Antinous, 
10 
or a  young  god,  rather  than  as  a  one-sidedly  masculine  person. 
Such  a  youth  receives  the  projection  of the  Self,  the  image  of 
wholeness  in  the psyche of the older man.  Most men,  as  we  have 
seen,  project  their  missing  half,  the  feminine  element,  onto  a 
• I am going to confine my remarks to male homosexuality, for  I do not feel 
I  have sufficient knowledge to venture into the subject of homosexuality among 
women. 
10 
The young lover of the Roman Emperor Hadrian.  See  Marguerite Your-
cenar, Memoirs of Hadrian  (New York:  Farrar, Strauss and Co.,  1963). 
Chapter Four  95 
woman.  The  man  then  represents  the  masculine  side,  and  the 
woman the feminine  side,  of a  masculine-feminine totality.  In the 
instance we are now considering,  however,  totality is  represented 
in the young man, who seems to include both masculine and fem-
inine  in  himself.  The  actual  young  man  is  himself not  this  com-
plete  person;  he  is  simply  the carrier of the projection of the an-
drogynous  soul  of the  older  man.  In  fact,  when  the  two  people 
get to know each other as human beings,  they may be keenly dis-
appointed in each other. 
So  there  are  some  men  whose  other side,  which  represents 
wholeness  for  them,  is  not  represented  by  a  woman,  but by  this 
figure  of the androgynous, divine youth.  Marie-Louise von Franz 
writes,  "There  is  the  same  idea  in  Persian  teaching  which  says 
that after death the noble man meets either a youth who looks ex-
actly like himself,  ... or a girl of fifteen,  ... and if he asks the fig-
ure who it is,  then it will  say,  'I am thy own self.'  "
11 
A good example of this kind of homoerotic desire is found in 
Thomas Mann's novelette Death in  Venice.  Author Mann says of 
the  aging  Aschenbach,  who  has  fallen  in  love  with  the  youthful 
Tadzio,  "His eyes  took in  the  proud bearing of that figure  there 
at the blue water's edge;  with an outburst of rapture he told him-
self that  what  he  saw  was  beauty's  very  essence;  form  as  divine 
thought,  the  single  and  pure  perfection  which  resides  in  the 
mind,  of which  an  image  and  likeness,  rare  and  holy,  was  here 
raised up for  adoration."
12 
Such a  projection of the Self onto a  younger man is  possible 
because the Self image is  typically represented for a man as either 
an older man or a  younger man,  as  Marie-Louise  von  Franz has 
pointed out in her book The Feminine in  Fairy  Tales. 
13 
This helps 
us  understand  the  strong  bond  that  sometimes  springs  up  be-
tween  a  young  man  and  an  older man.  For the  young  man,  the 
Self is  carried  by  the  older  man,  who  represents  the  positive  fa-
11 
Marie-Louise  von  Franz,  Puer  Aeternus  (Zurich:  Spring  Publications, 
1970),  p.  IX-17. 
12 
Thomas  Mann,  Death  in  Venice  (New  York:  Random  House,  1936),  p. 
44. 
13 
Pp.  151-152.  For a  woman,  an  older  or a  younger  woman  might  carry 
the projection of the  Self image. 
96  The Invisible Partners 
ther,  power,  and the authority of the Self.  For the older man,  the 
Self  is  carried  by  the  youth,  who  represents  son,  eros,  and  the 
eternally  youthful  aspect  of the  Self.  Because  these  projections 
are so  numinous,  and the longing for  a  relationship  with  the Self 
is  so  great,  the  bond  between  them  readily  becomes  tinged  with 
sexuality,  and  becomes  what  we  think  of as  a  homosexual  rela-
tionship.  Indeed, the relationship does tend to become sexual, but 
at its  core there  is  the  longing for  wholeness,  and  energy  for  the 
relationship  is  supplied by  the deep  need each  of the men has  to 
integrate into himself what the other represents. 
As we  have seen,  we  tend to  long sexually for  whatever it is 
that we  lack in our conscious development.  In the case of the old-
er man  who  longs  for  the  young  man,  we  usually  find  a  person 
who  has  been  too  connected  to  the  senex  archetype,  that  is,  too 
rigid,  too  aging,  too  caught  up  in the  drive  for  power,  or too  in-
tellectual. So the longing is for eros, for the puer or eternal youth, 
in short, for  the spirit,  in the form  of a symbolic figure  that com-
pensates  the  man's  conscious  one-sidedness  and  offers  to  bring 
the ecstasy of totality. 
In  other  types  of homosexuality  the  object  of sexual  desire 
may not be another male as such, but a yearning for  contact with 
the male organ.  Again,  this  may  occur in  a man who  is  married, 
or has an otherwise normal heterosexual life,  into which  this  ho-
moerotic  yearning  intrudes  from  time  to  time.  Often  such  a 
yearning represents symbolically a deep need for connection with 
the  Self,  represented by  the  phallus,  symbol  of the  creative  mas-
culine  spirit.  Such  a  longing  often  intrudes  into  a  man's  con-
sciousness  when  he  feels  particularly  exhausted  or  fragmented, 
and needs  the healing and synthesizing of his ego  through a con-
tact  with  the  Self.  It may  also  come  as  a  compensation  for  too 
much  exposure  to  the  woman,  both  the  woman  within  and  the 
woman without, for man finds woman dangerous, and in order to 
maintain himself in relationship to her he must from  time to time 
renew and consolidate his  masculinity. 
It is  quite  common  to  find  among  all  of these  men  we  have 
described  a  love  problem  of long  standing.  Often  there  was  too 
little love between the mother and the boy,  or the wrong  kind of 
possessive  or overwhelming  love.  Of equal  importance,  however, 
may  be  the  missing  love  of the  father.  There  is  a  time  in  a  boy's 
Chapter Four  97 
life  when  he  needs  and  craves  love  from  his  father,  including 
physical expressions of the father's  affection  for  him.  In the type 
of homoerotic yearning we  have described there usually has been 
a lack of such expressions of love between the boy and his father. 
Either the father  was  missing,  or was  not capable of that kind of 
love,  or hated and rejected the boy,  or was such a weak man that 
his love  was not worth having.  Such unfulfilled needs in the area 
of masculine affection create an uncertainty in the developing ego 
of the boy about his own masculinity, for masculine identification 
in a boy develops partly as a result of the boy's identification with 
his  father  and  the  resulting  feeling  that  he  is  included  in  the 
world of men as  a man among men. 
This need will be particularly great if the mother's animus is 
directed toward the boy  in a way  that cuts him off from  his bud-
ding,  primitive masculine side.  As von Franz has pointed out, 
14 
in 
an  effort  to  socialize  the boy  a  woman  may  allow  her animus  to 
cut him  off from  too  much of his  budding  masculinity,  the  kind 
of boyish  masculinity  that  tracks  dirt  into  the  house,  uses  dirty 
words,  and struts about like a bantam rooster.  Such outbreaks of 
boyish earthiness are,  naturally, difficult for  the mother to accept 
on  a  social  level,  yet  they  contain  the  seeds  of a  later  positive 
masculine development.  Too often the mother's animus squashes 
these signs of masculinity in the boy too much,  and,  especially in 
a  sensitive  youngster,  the  boy  may  lose  touch  with  that  side  of 
himself as  a  result.  An overly  strict  religious  training  may  rein-
force  this process,  stressing too much the values of kindness,  for-
giveness, and so forth,  when the boy has not yet succeeded in first 
becoming confident of his  budding masculine prowess. 
When  this  happens,  the  young  man's  unfulfilled  needs  for 
primitive masculine development,  and for the masculine affection 
he  missed  from  his  father,  may be  reflected  in  sexualized  yearn-
ings  for  closeness  with  other males.  Women,  on the  other hand, 
are shunned,  for  a man has a fear  of the sexual power of woman, 
her  emotionality  and  her  animus,  which  can  be  assuaged  only 
14 
Marie-Louise  von  Franz,  A  Psychological  Interpretation  of The  Golden 
Ass of Apuleius (Zurich:  Spring  Publications,  1970),  pp.  XIII-lotf.  and  11-3fT. 
Cf.  Puer Aeternus. 
98  The Invisible Partners 
when  a  man  is  sufficiently  confident  of his  chthonic,  instinctual 
masculine side. 
This  is  why  at puberty  young  men  in  primitive  cultures  are 
initiated by the men into an exclusively masculine world via trials 
of strength and secret rites.  Women are prohibited from  witness-
ing these male rites,  not only,  perhaps, because they might prove 
a softening influence, but also because they might laugh,  and this 
would  wound  the  masculine  self-esteem  that  the  boy  so  greatly 
needs to build up.  In addition to the trials of strength and the en-
durance of pain that these  rites  contain,  which serve  to strength-
en  the  boy's  ego,  there  is  the  transmission  to  the  young  man  of 
the spiritual  lore  of the  tribe that is  passed  down  from  the older 
men  to  the  younger.  Thus  the  boy  comes  into  the  possession  of 
secrets known only to the men (an analogous lore is  passed down 
from  the older women  to the young women  in female  initiation). 
Only  after  the  boy  is  properly  initiated  into  this  all-masculine 
world is  he  ready for  contact with  the fascinating  but dangerous 
world of women.  Our present culture makes no provision for  this 
kind of initiation  ritual,  and a  good  deal  of what  we  call  homo-
sexuality is an attempt to fill  the psychological need that is left by 
this omission. 
We have been considering types of homosexuality that seem 
to  represent  an  incompleted  masculine  development,  or the  pro-
jection  of  the  soul  image  in  an  androgynous  form.  However, 
there are other types of homosexuality where the anima seems to 
play  the  dominant  role  because  she  seems  to  be  in  more  or less 
complete control of the man's ego.  In these cases,  the qualities of 
the  anima  have,  as  it  were,  homogenized  themselves  with  the 
masculine  ego  qualities  and  produced  a  kind  of feminized  male 
ego.  This  leads  to  what  we  might  call  classic  homosexuality. 
While  usually  a  man  identifies  his  ego  with  masculinity,  or tries 
to,  this type of man has refused or has been  unable to make such 
a  masculine  identification,  and  his  ego  structure  has  a  certain 
hermaphroditic structure as a  result.  In his  ego  psychology,  con-
sequently,  the  anima  plays  a  dominant  role.  Under  such  condi-
tions  heterosexual  relationships  are  out  of the  question,  for  the 
opposites cannot relate and unite  until they have first  been  sepa-
rated  and  distinguished  from  each  other.  Homosexual  relation-
ships,  therefore,  are the norm for  such a man. 
Chapter Four  99 
These  men  may  have  many  positive  qualities.  They  can  be 
quite sensitive,  are often easy to talk with, frequently  have a  gen-
tle,  healing quality, and are given to artistic inclinations.  In prim-
itive  communities,  many  shamans  were  homosexual,  and  in  our 
own day there are certain individuals with healing gifts who have 
such a  homosexual disposition.  On the negative side,  they can be 
peevish,  fickle  in  relationships,  and  oversensitive,  which  often 
makes long-lasting,  intimate relationships difficult. 
The  American  Indians  had  an  explanation  for  this  kind  of 
homosexuality  that  is  as  good  as  any  I  know,  even  though  it  is 
couched  in  mythological  rather  than  scientific  terms.  The  Indi-
ans believed  that during puberty the moon appeared to a  boy  of-
fering  him  a  bow  and  arrow  in  one  hand,  and  a  woman's  pack 
strap in the other.  If the boy hesitated when reaching for the bow 
and  arrow,  then  the  moon  handed  him  the  pack  strap.  These 
young  men  became  "berdaches,"  or  homosexuals.  They  wore  a 
special kind of dress and performed special functions  in the tribe. 
For instance,  they  often  served  as  matchmakers,  and  while  they 
did  not  go  to  war,  as  did  the  other  young  men,  they  might  ac-
company the war party to care for  the wounded.  Berdaches were 
perfectly accepted in  the Indian community.  They  were not ridi-
culed or despised,  but simply regarded as a  special sort of man. 
15 
In psychological language,  this is a  way of saying that if a  young 
man does  not reach  out to identify  himself with  his  masculinity, 
symbolized by the bow  and arrow,  he falls  into the hands of the 
anima. 
There are few  more convincing demonstrations of the reality 
of the anima in a man than these types of masculine homosexual-
ity  in  which  the  presence  of the  feminine  power  is  so  conspicu-
ous.  In mannerisms,  dress,  the language system that arises in the 
subculture such men create for themselves, even in assumed femi-
nine names,  these  men show  forth  the  reality  of the anima to an 
otherwise unbelieving  world.  It may be that a  certain  number of 
males  in  each generation  are chosen  in  some  way  by  the uncon-
scious to live life in such a hermaphroditic way,  that they are fat-
ed,  as  Jung  once  said, 
16 
to  refuse  to  identify  with  "the  role  of a 
IS  cr.  Indians (Alexandria,  Va.:  Time-Life Books,  1973),  p.  129. 
16 
Jung,  CW9,  1,  p.  71. 
100  The Invisible Partners 
one-sided sexual being," as though to remind us that no one is ex-
clusively male or female,  but that each of us  has an androgynous 
nature. 
In addition to men with a homoerotic tendency or homosex-
ual  nature  there  are  other,  heterosexual  men  who  also  lie  very 
close  to  the  feminine  archetype.  These  men  have  succeeded  in 
making  a  male  ego  identification,  and  their  sexual  feelings  and 
love  needs  are  directed  toward  women,  but  it  is  as  though  the 
feminine  archetype  is  unusually  numinous  to  them  and  looms 
large  in  their  psychology.  They  too  are often  sensitive  men  with 
healing  gifts  or artistic  inclinations,  although  their  proximity  to 
the anima may result in unusual sexual fantasies.  These fantasies, 
as Guggenbuhl-Craig has pointed out, 
17 
should not be regarded as 
perverse,  for  they  may  be  evidence  of a  potentially  sensitive  and 
differentiated  personality.  With  these  men,  the  Dr.  Zhivagos  of 
our  society,  there  seems  to  be  a  need  to  be  initiated  into  the 
meaning  and  mystery  of the  feminine  on  all  of its  levels.  Such 
men are called on to understand women,  to understand the femi-
nine in themselves,  to recognize and give  importance to feminine 
values  in  life,  and to have  an immediate and personal experience 
with  the  unconscious.  In  this  way  they  become  initiates,  as  it 
were,  of the Great Goddess.  Such  an  initiation  into the  meaning 
of the feminine does not feminize  these men, for in. understanding 
the feminine they also differentiate the feminine from  themselves. 
Their ego remains masculine, but is transformed by this initiation 
into a more differentiated state of consciousness. These cases sug-
gest  that  the  psychological  influence  of the  anima  is  greater  in 
some  men  than  in  others.  Because  of her numinosity,  the  anima 
exerts  a  profound  influence  on  the  psychology  of certain  men, 
fating  them to lead a special kind of life  that requires them to ac-
quire unusual self-knowledge. 
It is  this  numinous  element  that  the  anima  introduces  that 
can enter into sexuality and be the link between sexuality and re-
ligion. If we used the language of ancient times we would say that 
a  god  or goddess  has  entered  into  the  situation  whenever  sexual 
attraction  becomes  numinous.  In  psychological  language  we 
would  say  that  an  archetype  is  exerting  its  fascination  on  us. 
17 
Marriage,  p.  78. 
Chapter Four  101 
Thus  in  sexuality  we  not  only  seek  the  satisfaction  of physical 
needs,  the  release  of physical  tensions,  and,  sometimes,  psycho-
logical intimacy with other people;  we can also be expressing our 
longing  for  ecstasy,  that  is,  for  an  enlargement  of narrow  ego 
consciousness  through  contact  with  the  divine.  If,  however,  our 
consciousness  is  at  a  low  level,  the  religious  urges  contained  in 
sexuality are not fulfilled.  At its worst,  we then have only expres-
sions  of greed  and  egocentric  desires  and  not  the  fulfillment  of 
our need  for  ecstasy.  For the religious  side of sexuality to be ful-
filled,  we must relate to the archetypal factors in sexual desires in 
the correct way.  We need to "worship" them by giving them cor-
rect and conscious attention. 
The  connection  between  sexuality  and  religion  leads  Adolf 
Guggenbuhl-Craig to make the interesting observation that while 
Freud tried  to  show  that religion  was  a  sublimation of sexuality, 
it is  closer  to  the  truth  to  say  that sexuality  can  be,  at  its  heart, 
the expression of mankind's religious urge,  that is,  the urge to ec-
stasy and wholeness.  He writes, 
Freud sought in  his  own  very  impressive  way  to understand all 
of the so-called higher activities of man (such as art,  religion,  etc.) 
as sublimated sexuality.  We can attempt to tum this around and to 
ask:  can the totality of sexuality be comprehended from  the view-
point  of individuation,  of the  religious  impulse?  Are  the  deeply 
sexually-colored  love  songs  of  medieval  nuns  really,  as  Freud 
would  have  it,  expressions  of frustrated  eroticism?  Do  the  many 
modem  songs  and  the  folk-songs  that  sing  sentimentally  about 
love and leave-taking have to do only with the unlived sexuality of 
adolescence? Or are they symbolic forms of expression for individ-
uation processes and for  the religious quest?
18 
So  far  in  discussing  sexuality  and sexual  fantasies  very  little 
has  been  said  about  love.  I  have  discussed  being  in  love,  but not 
love  in  the  sense  of personal  caring between  one  person  and an-
other. Later I will make a few comments about love, but the fact of 
the matter is  that love  is  a  great  mystery  that is  not understood. 
We  can  describe  psychologically  what  happens  when  we  are  "in 
love,"  and  to a  certain extent can understand  this  powerful  phe-
"Ibid., p.  80. 
102  The Invisible Partners 
nomenon, and we can discuss sexuality in its objective,  imperson-
al  workings.  But  why  one  human  being  should  truly  love  an-
other,  why  we  are  capable  of actually  caring  for  another  person 
to  the  point  where  we  are  willing  and  able  to  sacrifice  for  that 
person is  a sublime mystery.  If I  have not discussed  love at more 
length it is  not because it is  unimportant, but because it is so  im-
portant that to psychologize it or make pronouncements about it 
is  to  devalue  it,  not value  it.  When all  is  said and done,  after  all 
the  discussion  of being  in  love,  sexuality,  fantasies,  projections, 
and  so  forth,  we  wind  up  confronted  by  something  we  know 
practically nothing about:  human love. 
Another reason  that the nature of love  is  so  hard to  discuss 
in  a  book such as  this is  because  of its  highly individual  quality. 
Inevitably  in this  discussion  I  have  had to  make generalizations, 
but the  expression  of eros is,  in  the last  analysis,  always  an  indi-
vidual  matter.  As  von  Franz once  pointed  out,  no  love  problem 
can be solved by following  a general principle.  "If there is a solu-
tion," she wrote,  "it can only be unique,  from  individual to indi-
vidual,  from  one  woman  to  one  man.  Eros  is  in  its  essence  only 
meaningful  if it  is  completely,  uniquely  individual."
19 
For  this 
reason,  while I feel  able to make certain general statements about 
projection,  transference,  sexuality,  and  so  forth,  it  is  impossible 
to make general statements about the mystery of human love.  In 
the final analysis,  poets and novelists will have more to say about 
love  than  psychologists,  for  they  express  the  inexpressible,  and 
describe  individual  persons  and  their  love  problems,  with  their 
individual  solutions  and  failures,  and  this  is  true  to  life  and  to 
eros. 
I  have been  discussing  the  role  of the feminine  archetype  in 
the  psychology  of men.  It is  now  necessary  to  say  some  things 
about  how  the  feminine  archetype  appears  in  the  psychology  of 
women  in  different  ways  and  creates,  as  a  result,  different  types 
of personalities. 
In  a  paper  entitled  "Structural  Forms  of  the  Feminine 
19 
Von  Franz,  The  Golden  Ass,  p.  XIII-1. 
Chapter Four 
103 
Psyche,"
20 
the  late  Zurich  analyst  Toni  Wolff  described  four 
types  of women:  the  mother,  the  hetaira,  the  amazon,  and  the 
medium (medial).  Toni Wolff argues that although every  woman 
embodies each of these four types in herself,  one or more of them 
tends  to  be  of primary  importance,  and  this  primary  identifica-
tion  gives  to a woman's personality a  particular form. 
The  woman  who  is  most  identified  with  mother  finds  her 
primary  identity  and  fulfillment  in  nourishing  life.  Usually  she 
will  be  fulfilled  in  bearing  and  raising  children,  and  it  is  to  this 
that  such  a  woman  will  primarily  be  drawn;  when  she  marries, 
the children will  tend to be  more important to her than her hus-
band.  She  is  of great  value  to  people  because  she  nourishes  life, 
although there is  always  the negative  possibility  that in her need 
to  be  mother  she  may  unconsciously  retard  the  development  of 
her children,  holding them to her for  too long a time, or she may 
marry a  man  who  is  psychologically  crippled  so  that he  too  is  a 
child for  her. 
The  word  hetaira  refers  to  a  class  of  women  in  ancient 
Greece who were especially educated so they could be psycholog-
ical  companions  to  men.  The  hetaira  woman  finds  her  primary 
identity  and  fulfillment  in  achieving  relationships  with  men. 
These relationships may or may not include sexual love,  but they 
certainly will  include psychological  relating on  all levels.  Her in-
stinct is  to relate to a man and draw out his  eros.  Men often find 
such  a  woman  very  valuable,  for  she  is  able  to  elicit  a  develop-
ment  in  the  area  of personal  interaction  and love  that otherwise 
might be lost to them.  There is  always  the danger,  however,  that 
such a woman may be unable to achieve or remain in a lasting re-
lationship,  but may  move  continually from  one  man to another, 
always  making  a  relationship  but  not  being  capable  of seeing  it 
through the vicissitudes  of life.  Needless  to say,  such a woman is 
not likely to be as  popular with other women  as  she is  with men. 
The amazon  type is  the woman who finds  her primary iden-
tity  and  fulfillment  in  the  outer  world.  In  our  society  this  will 
usually be  in some type of career.  She does  what men do,  and of-
20 
Edward  Whitmont  also  has  a  good  summary  in  his  book  The  Symbolic 
Quest,  pp.  178-181. 
104  The Invisible  Partners 
ten  is  capable,  resourceful,  and skillful  at her  work,  making  sig-
nificant  social contributions as  a  doctor,  scientist,  administrator, 
secretary,  or whatever  it  might  happen  to  be.  Many  greatly  ad-
mired women  have  no  doubt been  of this  type,  all  the way  from 
Queen Elizabeth I to Susan B.  Anthony.  The dangerous possibili-
ty for such women is,  however,  that they may become too mascu-
line in  their orientation  and lose  contact  with  their  feminine  na-
ture. 
The  medium  or  medial  type  is  hardest  to  describe  because 
we  have practically no provision in our society for  such a person. 
These women find  their primary identity and fulfillment  in  mak-
ing a relationship with the collective unconscious and being,  as  it 
were,  a bridge between the world of the unconscious and the hu-
man community.  These women  may be  visionaries,  mystics,  psy-
chics,  healers,  poets,  or  mediums.  Generally  we  look  at  them 
with  all  the suspicion  that we  direct  toward  the  unconscious.  In 
other  cultures  than  our  own,  such  women  might  have  been 
priestesses or prophetesses,  shamanesses  or sybils.  In our culture 
there is  little place for  them, and their often considerable psycho-
logical  gifts  being  unfulfilled,  they  may  experience  difficulty  ad-
justing to  other more socially  approved  vocations in life  and feel 
overwhelmed  by  the  proximity  of the  unconscious.  The  medial 
type  of woman  may  have  a  great  contribution  to  make  to  the 
healing  of mankind.  Joan  of Arc,  for  instance,  no  doubt  had  a 
great deal  of the medial type in her,  as  did the so-called Witch of 
Endor who healed King Saul of his lack of courage and sent him 
out to  die  like  a  man  and  a  hero. 
21 
On  the  negative  side,  unless 
her  gifts  are  balanced  by  a  certain  scientific  attitude  or  psycho-
logical insight,  she may fall  prey to inflation or to wildly specula-
tive  ideas. 
It will  be  noted  that  the  mother  and  hetaira  are  personally 
oriented,  and people and relationships are of primary importance 
to  them.  The  amazon  and  medial  types  are  more  impersonally 
oriented,  the  one  being  impersonally  related  to  the  outer  world, 
the other to the world of the psyche. 
It is  also  to  be  noted  that  a  woman  may  fulfil  one  part  of 
herself,  and  later  be  drawn  to  fulfil  another.  So  a  woman  may 
21 
1 Sam.  28. 
Chapter Four  105 
complete  herself as  mother,  then  find  the  hetaira or the  amazon 
rising  up  in  herself  demanding  fulfillment  as  well.  Tension  be-
tween  one  or  more  of these  structural  forms,  which  obviously 
may conflict with each other, may greatly complicate her psycho-
logical  and social situation. 
It is  also  to be  noted  that men  who think of women  only  as 
mothers and wives will have difficulty understanding and accept-
ing a woman who  finds  that she must fulfil  herself as  an amazon 
or medial type as  well.  A  married man who attempts to suppress 
these other aspects of his wife can expect only trouble and unhap-
piness  as  a  result.  If he  is  able  to  accept  his  wife's  other  side, 
should  it  turn  up,  he  may  find  himself ultimately  blessed  by  the 
love  of a more complete and fulfilled  woman. 
In  these  different  types  of women  the  animus  may  have  a 
different  weight,  or at least come up with a  different  quality.  He 
appears  to be the strongest force  in the amazon,  who,  as  we  not-
ed,  runs the danger of becoming too identified with her masculine 
side.  He seems to play the least role in the hetaira, though he can 
be  seen  there  too  in  the  ruthlessness  with  which  such  a  woman 
may  pursue her love  goals  in relationship to a  man. 
The hetaira woman introduces an  intriguing question:  Does 
the  quality  of anima  belong  only  to  the  man?  Or are  the  terms 
anima  and  animus  descriptive  of  feminine  and  masculine  ele-
ments within both men and women? 
As we have seen, the way in which Jung used these terms re-
served anima as the name for the feminine qualities in a man, and 
animus  as  the  name  for  the masculine  qualities  in  a  woman.  He 
once wrote,  "The anima,  being of feminine  gender,  is  exclusively 
a figure  that compensates the masculine consciousness. "
22 
By the 
kind  of parallel  thinking  that  Jungians  love,  the  same  would  be 
said of the animus:  that he is  exclusively a figure  of feminine  psy-
chology,  the  personification  of her masculine  element  that  com-
pensates her feminine  consciousness.  The idea is  that a woman is 
feminine  to begin  with,  and a  man is  masculine,  so  it is  simply  a 
matter  of designating  the  contrasexual  aspect  that  rules  the  un-
conscious. 
However,  James Hillman challenges this thesis in the Spring 
22 
Jung,  CW7,  par.  328. 
106  The Invisible Partners 
articles referred to earlier. Exploring the argument that the anima 
cannot be  limited  to  the  male  sex  alone  (and  the  corresponding 
argument could  be  used  for  the  animus),  Hillman  notes  that the 
anima  is  an  archetype  and  "an archetype  as  such  cannot  be  at-
tributed  to  or  located  within  the  psyche  of either  sex."
23 
He  ar-
gues that the anima as  archetype should be released from the no-
tion of contrasexuality (that is,  that it is  the feminine  opposite  to 
masculine  consciousness),  for  it  can  be seen  to  apply  to  the  psy-
chology of women as well.  It would appear then that women, too, 
need to discover anima, the elemental feminine soul within them-
selves,  and that the complaint of many women,  that they feel  in-
wardly  empty,  points  to the  area  of soul as  their need.  It cannot 
be said that a woman has soul merely by  virtue of her birth.  She, 
too,  must find  the  soul  (anima)  who  is  the wellspring  of her in-
ward life.  And just as  a  man may develop  his  spirit and logos  to 
the  exclusion  of his  feminine  side,  and  so  lose  his  soul,  so,  too, 
a woman may develop the animus (the spirit) and exclude her soul 
in  the  process.  Indeed,  Hillman  argues,  many  women  today,  in 
their  pursuit  of academic  studies  and  masculine-oriented  goals, 
suffer as  a  result  from  exactly  the  same  problem  as  men:  loss  of 
anima or soul. 
This  is  a  particularly  trying  problem  in  the  field  of psycho-
therapy.  Above  all,  the  psychotherapist  needs  to  have  "soul"  in 
order  to  be  able  to  help  his  or  her  patients.  Yet  the  process  of 
training through which the prospective therapist must go,  be that 
person  a  psychiatrist,  psychologist,  or some  other type  of coun-
selor, is  likely to produce a one-sided and collective person whose 
consciousness  has  been  poured  into  a  rationalistic  straitjacket 
and who has,  as  a result,  lost contact with anima or soul. 
The instance of the so-called anima woman tends to substan-
tiate  Hillman's  point.  The anima  woman  is  a  woman  who  has  a 
particular  knack  for  gathering  in,  and  reflecting  back,  a  man's 
anima projection.  She is said to catch,  mirror,  and mimic the an-
ima in men,  and so to fascinate  and beguile  them.  It has been  ar-
gued  that instead  of having an authentic personality  of her own, 
such a  woman lives  out the anima of the man for  him,  while  she 
herself  is  like  an  empty  vessel.  Hillman  argues,  however,  that 
23 
Hillman,  "Anima,"  p.  111. 
Chapter Four  107 
such women are not empty vessels  at all,  but that we  are dealing 
here  with  a  type  of woman  who  lies  very  close  to the  elemental 
feminine  quality  called  anima.  She  possesses  and  radiates  anima 
as  a  quality  of her own,  and  gathers  in  men's  anima  projections 
because she  herself is  anima.  The apparent emptiness,  he contin-
ues,  "would be  considered an authentic archetypal  manifestation 
of the anima in one of her classical forms,  maiden,  nymph,  Kore, 
which  Jung  so  well  describes  (CW  9,1;  para.  311)  and  where  he 
also  states that 'she often appears in  woman.' "
24 
What is  lacking 
in such  a woman would  not be personality,  for  her personality  is 
defined by  the anima quality,  especially in its maiden aspect,  but 
rather by her failure to differentiate her individuality.  Her danger 
is  remaining  too  closely  identified with  an archetype,  and failing 
to  achieve  her  individual  relatedness  to  her  marked  anima  na-
ture. 
That Jung himself seemed to sense that anima was  a quality 
belonging  to  women  as  well  as  to  men  is  expressed  in  a  letter  he 
wrote in  1951  to  Fr.  Victor  White  about an unusual  woman  cli-
ent.  He comments, 
I  have  seen  Mrs.  X  and  I  assure  you  she is  quite an eyeful  and 
beyond!  We  had an interesting conversation and I  must admit she 
is  quite remarkable.  If ever there  was  an  anima it is  she,  and there 
is  no doubt  about it. 
In  such  cases  one  had  better  cross  oneself,  because  the  anima, 
particularly when she is quintessential as in this case, casts a meta-
physical shadow which is long like a hotel-bill and contains no end 
of items  that  add  up  in  a  marvellous  way.  One  cannot  label  her 
and  put  her  into  a  drawer.  She  decidedly  leaves  you  guessing.  I 
hadn't expected anything like that. At least I  understand now why 
she  dreams  of Derby winners:  it just belongs  to  her!  She  is  a  syn-
chronistic  phenomenon  all  over,  and one can keep  up  with  her as 
little as  with  one's own unconscious. 
I  think  you  ought  to be  very  grateful  to  St.  Dominicus  that  he 
has  founded  an  order of which  you  are  a  member.  In  such  cases 
one appreciates the existence  of monasteries.  It is just as  well  that 
she  got  all  her psychology  from  books,  as  she  would  have  busted 
24 
Ibid.,  p.  118. 
108  The  Invisible Partners 
every  decent  and  competent  analyst.  I  sincerely  hope  that  she  is 
going on dreaming of winners,  because such people need money  to 
keep them afloat. 
25 
We  do  not know  who  this  remarkable  woman  is  who  made 
such an impression on Dr. Jung and Fr. White,  but she evidently 
has  an  elusive,  distinct  feminine  quality,  a  primitive  soul,  as  it 
were,  and  in  this  case  it  is  not  a  matter  of this  being  projected 
onto  her  by  a  man;  rather,  it  belongs  to  her  as  a  woman.  This 
would  seem  to  give  credence  to  Hillman's  thesis  that  "anima" 
properly  refers  to  an  elemental  feminine  quality  in  men  and 
women  alike,  and  "animus,"  by  the  Jungian  logic  of opposites, 
likewise  to  an  elemental  masculine  quality.  This  way  of looking 
at things is  reflected in  the Chinese conception of psychic energy 
as flowing  between two polarities.  As mentioned earlier,  the Chi-
nese  envisaged  Yang  and  Yin  as  ubiquitous,  cosmic,  psychic 
poles  of equal  weight  and  value.  The  ancient  Chinese  document 
"T'ai  I  Chin  Hua  Tsung  Chich,"  for  example,  spoke  of the  p'o 
soul and hun soul,  feminine  and masculine  respectively,  and said 
they were both in each individual. 
An  interesting  passage  in  Esther  Harding's  book  Woman s 
Mysteries also points to the presence in women,  as well as in men, 
of an elemental feminine  quality best called anima.  Harding first 
describes  the  anima  in  man  as  a  "feminine  nature-spirit,  which 
reflects  the  characteristics  of  the  daemonic,  nonhuman  moon 
goddess,  and  gives  to  man  a  direct  experience  of the  nonhuman 
Eros  in  all  its  power,  both  glorious  and  terrible."  She  then  con-
tinues: 
With  the  woman  the  situation  is  somewhat  different.  She  usually 
does  not  experience  the  feminine  principle  directly  in  this  dae-
monic  form.  For  it  is  mediated  to  her  through  her  own  woman-
hood  and  her  own  developed  feeling  approach  to  life.  But  if she 
will  stop long enough  to  look within,  she also  may  become  aware 
of impulses  and  thoughts  which  are  not  in  accord  with  her  con-
scious  attitudes  but  are  the  direct  outcome  of the  crude  and  un-
25 
Jung,  Letters 2,  p.  24.  Italics mine. 
Chapter Four  109 
tamed  feminine  being  within  her.  For  the  most  part,  however,  a 
woman will  not look at these  dark secrets of her own  nature.  It is 
too painful,  too  undermining of the conscious character which she 
has built up for herself; she prefers to think that she really is as she 
appears to be.  And indeed it is  her task to  stand between the Eros 
which is  within  her,  and the world  without,  and through her own 
womanly  adaptation  to the world  to  make  human,  as  it were,  the 
daemoniac  power of the nonhuman feminine  principle. 
26 
This  "nonhuman  feminine  principle,"  according  to  Harding,  is 
an  elemental  feminine  spirit  a  woman  may  discover  in  herself, 
just as  a  man discovers  it  in  himself,  and it is just this  that Hill-
man suggests  is  anima. 
This  also  brings  up  the  question  of whether  the  anima  is  a 
unipersonality or a  rnultipersonality.  Jung's original thought was 
that the anima had a unified personality, but that the animus rep-
resented himself as  a number of men and was a multi personality. 
It is  hard,  however,  to  see  what  empirical  basis  there  is  for  this 
idea.  In a  man's dreams  there may  appear  any  number of differ-
ent  women,  just as  in  the  dreams  of a  woman  there  may  appear 
any number of different men.  It is  prejudicial to say in the former 
case that this is  not as  it "should" be,  and that the various  worn-
en figures  in a man's dream mean a breaking up of a unipersona-
lity.  For it  could just  as  easily  be  said  that  the  dream  in  which 
many  women  appear  represents  the  many  feminine  elements  in 
that man's soul,  or,  at least,  the many different faces  of the femi-
nine archetype.  It is true, of course,  that in the dreams of women 
many  men  sometimes  appear.  A  woman  may  dream,  for  exam-
ple,  of a court of male figures,  or a number of men sitting around 
a  table,  or  a  group  of soldiers.  Jungian  psychologists  then  feel 
comfortable  and  say,  "Ah!  There  is  the  animus  as  a  number  of 
men just  as  he  should  be!  All  these  men  personify  the  different 
opinions  of the animus!"  However,  a  woman  may just as  readily 
dream of a single man who appears as robber,  lover,  guide, priest, 
or whatever  it  may  be.  If in  the earlier  examples  it was  the  ani-
26 
Esther  Harding,  Woman's  Mysteries,  Ancient and Modern,  (New  York: 
G.  P.  Putnam's Sons,  1971  edition),  pp.  35,  36. 
110  The Invisible Partners 
mus  as  the  "many  opinions,"  then  what  is  it  in  the  other  cases 
when the animus appears as  a single person? 
Indeed,  we  cannot  even  say  for  sure  whether  the  "negative 
anima"  and  "positive anima,"  the  "negative animus"  and  "posi-
tive  animus"  (to  use  these  stilted terms),  are separate realities  or 
two  sides  of one  coin.  It is  usually  said  that  they  represent  the 
dark  and  light  sides  of one  reality,  the  destructive  and  helpful 
sides  of a  single  archetype.  Yet,  experientially,  they  appear  as 
quite distinct from  each  other,  and certainly in practical life  and 
analysis  we  do  well  to  differentiate  between  them  and  speak  of 
them as  though they were separate beings. 
That the anima,  as  well  as  the animus,  can appear as  multi-
ple figures  is .seen,  of course,  in mythology.  In Greek mythology, 
for  instance,  there  are  innumerable  goddesses.  Athena,  Aphro-
dite,  Demeter,  Hera,  and  Artemis  make  up  the  five  major  god-
desses of the upper world,  and there are also  Kore and Hecate of 
the  underworld,  not  to  mention  lesser  goddesses  such  as  Hestia 
and innumerable nymphs and nixies.  In his  helpful  article "God-
desses  in  Our  Midst,"
27 
Philip  Zabriskie  discusses  the  five  god-
desses of the upper world,  whom he regards as a kind of "typolo-
gy  of the  feminine."  Each  goddess,  he  suggests,  is  different,  and 
each  is  "an image of a  genuine,  ancient,  valid  mode of the  femi-
nine."  Aphrodite  personifies  "that aspect  of the  feminine  which 
continually seeks union with the masculine, for the erotic magne-
tism which powerfully pulls opposites to unite." Hera is  the femi-
nine  that  is  also  related  to  the  male  world  but  "impersonally," 
even  "institutionally,"  rather than intensely and individually,  for 
as  Queen  of Olympus  she  guards  the  sanctified  institutions  of 
throne  and  home.  Demeter  is  related  to  the  child,  not  to  the 
male,  and embodies  the elemental feminine  power to "give birth, 
to  love,  to  nourish."  Artemis,  goddess  of the  amazons,  virgin, 
chaste,  sufficient  unto  herself,  is  the  feminine  in  an  impersonal 
aspect, and can be seen as dominant in "women of grace,  vitality, 
freedom,  un-stuckness,  perhaps  even  psychic  powers,"  Athena, 
also  a  virgin  goddess,  hence  complete-in-herself,  born  from  the 
27 
Philip  Zabriskie,  "Goddesses  in  Our  Midst,"  Quadrant,  no.  17,  Fall 
1974. 
Chapter Four  111 
head  of her  father,  Zeus,  personified  the  feminine  as  concerned 
with  "the  world  of consciousness,  of time,  of ego,  of work  and 
growth." 
In  these  five  goddesses  Zabriskie  sees  the  models  of certain 
typically feminine  modes of life and behavior.  They are all,  to be 
sure,  aspects  of the  one  Great  Goddess,  but  nevertheless  appear 
as  distinct  personifications.  The  goddesses  are  still  alive  in  the 
psychology of women,  and, depending on which goddess is  domi-
nant in the psychology of a woman,  give  to her personality a dis-
tinct stamp.  The hetaira,  for instance,  would  have Aphrodite up-
permost  in  her  psyche;  the  mother,  Demeter;  the  amazon, 
Athena perhaps,  and the medium,  Artemis,  while Hera would be 
seen  in  those  women  who  devote  themselves  to  the  causes  of 
home,  community,  church,  and  so  forth.  But  the  goddesses  do 
not appear only in women,  they appear also in men,  and personi-
fy  the  typical  aspect  of that  man's  soul.  A  Dr.  Zhivago  would 
certainly  be  moved  by  the  spirit  of Aphrodite,  and  the  chaste, 
free-running  long-distance runner,  content in his solitude, by Ar-
temis. 
Zabriskie's article adds credence to the thought that the an-
ima  is  no  more  a  unipersonality  than  the  animus,  and  that  she 
can,  in  fact,  be  best  represented by  many different faces.  He also 
confirms Hillman's thought that anima and animus are terms ap-
plicable to men and women alike. 
These issues  cannot be  decided  here and now,  and that is  as 
it should be,  for  anima and animus  remain  somewhat borderline 
concepts,  verifiable  in  experience,  useful  in  therapy,  practical 
when we  apply them to ourselves,  but at the same time not capa-
ble  of being  precisely  defined.  When  we  shine  the  flashlight  of 
our understanding on them we see them at first fairly  clearly,  but 
the farther  back  our eye  travels  along  the beam  of our light,  the 
less  distinct  they  appear  to  be.  For practical  purposes,  it  is  per-
haps better to stick with Jung's original definition and reserve the 
anima  as  a  term  for  masculine  psychology,  and  the  animus  for 
feminine  psychology,  but it  would  be  a  mistake  to  cast  this  into 
the form of a dogma and insist that this be so.  For in dealing with 
the  anima  and  the  animus  we  are  dealing  with  figures  that  are 
largely unconscious to us.  Try as we might,  the light of conscious 
112  The Invisible Partners 
discrimination  does  not  penetrate  deeply  enough  into  the  dimly 
lit and labyrinthine  passages  of the  unconscious  to  perimit  us  to 
make any final  statements. 
The  most  important  contribution  Jung  makes  in  his  con-
cepts  of the  anima  and  animus  is  to  give  us  an  idea  of the  po-
larity that exists within each of us.  We are not homogenous units 
of psychic life,  but contain an inevitable opposition within the to-
tality that makes up our being.  There are opposites within us,  call 
them what we  like-masculine and feminine,  anima and animus, 
Yin  and  Yang-and these  are  eternally  in  tension  and  are  eter-
nally seeking  to  unite.  The human soul is  a  great arena in which 
the Active and the  Receptive,  the  Light and the  Dark,  the Yang 
and the Yin,  seek  to  come together  and forge  within  us  an inde-
scribable unity  of personality.  To achieve this union of the  oppo-
sites  within  ourselves  may very  well  be the  task of life,  requiring 
the  utmost  in  perseverance  and  assiduous  awareness.  Usually 
men  need  women  for  this to  come about,  and women  need  men. 
And yet,  ultimately the union of the opposites does  not occur be-
tween  a  man  who  plays  out  the  masculine  and  a  woman  who 
plays out the feminine,  but within  the being of each man and each 
woman in  whom the opposites are finally  conjoined. 
It will  be  clear  by  now  that  the  erotic  imagery  that  comes 
when  the  anima  and  animus  begin  to  emerge  into  conscious-
ness  has  behind  it  the  urge  toward  wholeness.  The  desire  of the 
soul to unite with consciousness and forge  an indivisible and cre-
ative personality is  the most powerful urge within us.  On this lev-
el,  the urge toward wholeness  and the urge to find  God are iden-
tical,  and so  this urge to wholeness or individuation is  also called 
by Jung the religious instinct. The image of the Coniunctio, of the 
union of the opposites,  of the joining together of the male and fe-
male,  is  the  image  par  excellence  of the joining  together  of the 
conscious  and  unconscious  parts  of the  personality.  That is  why 
so many of our dreams, and the parables of Jesus as  well,  concern 
weddings-apt  symbols  of  the  union  of  the  opposites  toward 
which the living  energy within us  strives. 
In the final  analysis,  the opposites can be  united only within 
an  individual  personality.  The  union  of male  and  female  cannot 
Chapter Four  113 
be  achieved  while  we  unconsciously  project  one  half onto  a  hu-
man partner and act out the other half.  Rather,  as  Nicholas Ber-
dyaev noted,  "it is only the union of these two principles (mascu-
line  and  feminine)  that  constitutes  a  complete  human  being."
28 
We  are not the prince or princess who is  going to unite with that 
person  who  is  going  to  play  out  for  us  the  role  of our  mystical 
partner.  Rather,  the  prince  and  the  princess,  the  divine  pair, 
unite within  us in  a  great nuptial action in the unconscious. 
For  this  reason,  if our  human  relationships  are  to  succeed 
we  must be able to distinguish between the divine and the human 
partners  in  our lives.  This  is  why  psychology  speaks  so  often  of 
the  need  to  "withdraw  projections."  As  we  have  seen,  we  can 
never completely withdraw all projections. The psychic images of 
the  anima  and  animus  are  so  rich  and  so  unknown  to  us  that 
they  will  always be  projected.  But it does  mean  that we  learn  to 
recognize  when  a  projection has occurred.  This act of conscious-
ness  gives  us  the  possibility  of integrating  projected  unconscious 
contents  bit  by  bit,  and,  equally  important,  of making  the  vital 
distinction  in  our own  minds between  what  is  a  projected  arche-
typal  image  on  the  one  hand  and  a  human  being  on  the  other. 
For the divine partners in our lives are the anima and the animus, 
and  their  love  affairs  are  matters  for  the  gods.  The human  part-
ners  are  the  actual  men and women  in our lives,  and  while  their 
love  may  seem  at  first  to  be  ordinary  and  mundane  when  com-
pared to the fire  and mystery of divine love,  yet both human and 
divine  love  can  be  fulfilled  only  when  we  are  able  to  distinguish 
between  them. 
A  final  word may  be  in  order about  the  relationship  of our 
discourse  to a  religious  understanding of marriage and sexuality. 
A  proper  Christian  understanding  of marriage,  for  instance,  is 
based on the archetypal image of the Coniunctio.  The church re-
gards the marriage relationship as a representation on the human 
level  of the  divine  mystery  of the  union  of Christ  with  the  soul, 
which  has been  the church's particular formulation  of the arche-
type  of the  union  of the  opposites.  By  holding  up  to  people  the 
distinction  between  the  union  of Christ with  the soul  on the one 
28 
Berdyaev,  Destiny of Man,  p.  62. 
114  The  Invisible  Partners. 
hand,  and  the  human  marriage  relationship  on  the  other,  the 
church has  maintained  an  important  distinction  between  the  di-
vine  and the human dimensions of love. 
Christian mysticism has long been fascinated  with the image 
of the Coniunctio, and justly so,  since it symbolizes so profoundly 
the  relationship  with  God  that  the  Christian  was  seeking.  So 
Christ  was  likened  by  the  Church  Fathers  to  a  bridegroom,  the 
soul was  his  bride,  and the  cross  was  the marriage bed on which 
the  union  of Christ  with  the  soul  was  consummated.  Saint  Au-
gustine wrote: 
Like  a  bridegroom  Christ  went  forth  from  his  chamber,  he  went 
out  with  a  presage  of  his  nuptials  into  the  field  of  the  world . 
. . . He came to the marriage-bed of the cross,  and there,  in mount-
ing it,  he consummated his  marriage.  And  when  he  perceived  the 
sighs of the creature, he lovingly gave himself up to the torment in 
place of his bride,  and he joined himself to the woman for  ever.
29 
Some  Gnostics told  the legendary  story of Christ going  to  a 
mountain,  producing  a  woman  from  his  side,  and  having  inter-
course with  her.  To a  chaste  Christian  ear  this  story  may  sound 
offensive,  but,  as  Jung  has  pointed  out,  the  Gnostics  did  not  in-
tend it that way.  They were simply  "stammering" in their efforts 
to express  the  elusive  but numinous  image  of totality  as  a  union 
of Christ with the soul. 
30 
Because  of its  rich  imagery,  Christian  mystics  particularly 
loved  the Song of Songs,  that most  erotic book  of the  Bible.  For 
the mystic this erotic imagery was  not simply sensuality,  but was 
the vehicle for  conveying the image of the union of God with the 
soul.  As Evelyn Underhill wrote,  " ... the mystic loved  the Song 
of Songs  because he  there saw  reflected,  as  in  a  mirror,  the most 
secret experiences  of his  soul."
31 
Origen  may  have  been  the  first 
to  elaborate  on  these  erotic  images  of wholeness, 
32 
though  the 
29 
Quoted  in  C.  G.  lung's  Symbols  of Transformation,  CW 5,  (Princeton, 
N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press,  1974),  p.  269  n.  152. 
30 
lung, Aion,  CW 9,  2,  pp.  202-203. 
"Evelyn  Underhill,  Mysticism  (New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton  and  Company, 
Inc.,  1930 edition),  p.  137. 
32 
Cf.  Hom.  in  Cant.  1. 7. 
Chapter Four  115 
list of Christian mystics who used this book as a source for  reflec-
tions  on  the relationship  of God to  man is  a  long  one,  including 
Bishop  Methodius,  who  went  so  far  as  to  declare  that  as  Christ 
unites  with  the  soul  each  person  becomes  himself  or  herself  a 
Christ.
33 
The use of the Song of  Songs as a mystical document did not 
end  with  the apostolic  era,  but continued  through  Christian  his-
tory  until  modem  times.  For  instance,  in  the  twelfth  century 
Saint  Bernard of Clairvaux elaborated  on  the  image  of the  Con-
iunctio  of  Christ  with  the  soul  in  a  series  of moving  sermons 
based  on  the Song  of Songs,  and  regarded  the  sensuous  imagery 
of the book as  a fitting  conveyor for  the divine mystery of the re-
lationship  of God with  mankind,  which was  better reflected  as  a 
great love  affair than as anything else. 
So  the  language  of the  Coniunctio  is  part of the  treasure  of 
the  church.  However,  the  church  today  may  need  the  language 
and  knowledge  of psychology  in  order  to  convey  its  treasure  to 
the modem mind.  The difficulty  is  that the church has,  in recent 
centuries,  lost  its  original  connection  with  the  human  psyche. 
The  teachings  of Jesus  are,  as  I  have  shown  elsewhere,
34 
filled 
with psychological meaning, and many of the early Christian Fa-
thers  were  psychologists  who  wrote  treatises  on  the  soul  and  on 
dreams.  The current denial on the part of the church of the reali-
ty  of the  psyche  is  unfortunate,  for  the  union  of Christ  with  the 
soul  cannot be  accomplished  if the soul  herself is  denied  and  re-
pressed.  Since  the  Invisible  Partners  are  the  doorways  through 
which  we  must  pass  to  enter  into  the  inner  life,  this  means  that 
they  too need recognition as  living  realities. 
Perhaps one reason for the refusal of the church to acknowl-
edge  the  reality  of man's  soul  lies  in  its  fear  of sexuality.  Unlike 
Saint  Bernard,  who  was  not  afraid  to  contemplate  the  sensuous 
imagery  of the  Song  of Songs,  the  church  as  a  whole  has  been 
"Methodius,  "The  Banquet  of the  Ten  Virgins,"  Ch.  VIII,  Ante-Nicene 
Fathers (Eerdmans Press, Vol.  VI),  p.  337.  See also  St.  Augustine,  "Concerning 
the  Faith of Things  Not Seen,"  par.  10;  and Cyprian,  "Treatises," Ante-Nicene 
Fathers,  Vol.  V,  p.  523. 
34 
John A.  Sanford,  The Kingdom  Within,  (New York: J.  B.  Lippincott Co., 
1970). 
116  The Invisible Partners 
frightened  by  man's  sexual  instinct  and  has  sought  to  repress  or 
deny it.  At times this fear  of sexuality has become a mania.  Saint 
Augustine,  for  instance,  called  woman  the  devil's  gateway,  and 
tried  to  envision  some  other  way  the  human  race  might  have 
been  reproduced  without  the  benefit  of  woman.  Sexual  inter-
course,  he stated,  was allowable  only for  the purpose of propaga-
tion;  if even married persons enjoyed the act it was a sin.  Saint Je-
rome  urged  husbands  to  honor  their  wives  by  abstaining  from 
intercourse  with  them,  and  claimed  that  to  engage  in  sexual  in-
tercourse with one's wife was an insult to her.  (As far as we know 
he  did  not consult  the wives  regarding  their  feelings  in  the  mat-
ter.)  He went so  far  as to deny the sacrament to married persons 
for  several  days after they  had performed  intercourse,  on the ba-
sis  that the  purity of the sacrament would  be  defiled  by  the sex-
ual  act.  Peter  Lombard  once  warned  Christians  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  left  the  room  when  a  married  couple  had  sexual  relation-
ships,  even  if it was  for  the purpose of conceiving a  child.  If sex-
uallife within marriage bordered on sin,  one can imagine the evil 
that fell  on one if sexuality were experienced outside of marriage! 
There was,  to  be  sure,  the  sanctity  of the  Virgin  Mary in  Chris-
tian thought, and one can be grateful that the feminine image was 
not  entirely  excluded  from  Christian  imagery,  but  even  she  has 
emerged  in  Christian  imagery  as  a  stainless  woman  who  con-
ceived  without  benefit  of a  man,  whose  own  birth  was  immacu-
late,  and  who  remained  a  virgin  throughout  her  life.  Thus  the 
church has expressed  its fear  of woman,  earth, and sensuality. 
Such a  fear  is  not shared by  Judaism,  however,  which  from 
the beginning  saw  the  act  of intercourse between man and  wom-
an  as  a  holy  act.  Certain Jewish  groups  even  today  prescribe  for 
scholars  and rabbis  that the Sabbath worship  shall be  ushered in 
on Friday evening with sexual union between a man and his wife. 
In  taking  her  stand,  the  church  has  separated,  in  Gnostic 
fashion,  heaven  and earth,  spirit and matter,  soul and body,  and 
in  so  doing  has  damaged  the  human spirit,  and has  been  false  to 
its  own  message  of the  Incarnation.  The  original  intent  of the 
church  was,  perhaps,  to  preserve  mankind's  hard-won  spiritual-
ity from  becoming lost in a sea of sensuality. The spirit and flesh, 
the spirit and matter,  are not so  easily  reconciled,  and the  one  is 
Chapter Four  117 
readily  inundated by  the other.  No doubt the church felt  it must 
throw  in  its  lot  with  man's  spiritual  development,  his  sensuality 
already  being  sufficiently  strong.  The  result,  however,  has  not 
been  the  unification  of personality,  but  the  denial  of wholeness, 
and a  swing from  one opposite to the other.  So  in Western  histo-
ry  we  have  a  continual  seesawing  back  and  forth  of extremes  of 
spiritual  ascetisim  on the  one  hand,  and sensuality  on the  other. 
Nor have  the  values  of the  spirit  ever  been  realized  through  the 
repression  of the  senses,  for  often  the  spirit  is  reached  through 
the  senses,  and  sometimes  spiritual  development  arouses  and 
needs  sensual  love  in  order to  be  grounded  and become  substan-
tial.  In seeking to avoid the conflict of the opposites by the denial 
of one  side  of life,  damage  has  been  done  to  the spirit  of whole-
ness. 
And  yet  it  is  strange  that  Christianity  should  for  so  long 
have  tolerated  a  teaching  about  sexuality  that  declared  that  its 
sole justification was  the propagation of the species.  As  Nicholas 
Berdyaev  has  pointed  out,  this  "is  transferring  the  principle  of 
cattle-breeding  to  human  relations,"
35 
and  is  a  denial  of Chris-
tianity's  highest  value:  human  personality.  For,  as  Berdyaev 
notes,  sexual  love  can  be  entered  into  in  order  to  express  love, 
personality,  and relationship,  as  well  as for  the purpose of propa-
gating children.  A  Christian  understanding of sexuality as an ex-
pression  of the  hungering  of man  for  the  fulfillment  of relation-
ship  and  personality  would  seem  far  more  consistent  with  a 
religion that has stressed the incarnation of God in an earthly hu-
man life. 
What is  needed  is  not a  denial  of sexuality and eros,  but the 
purification  of eros  from  egocentricity,  possessiveness,  and  un-
consciousness.  Eros is  not identical with sexuality, but when sex-
uality  is  repressed  eros  is  repressed  too.  Eros  is  a  mighty  power, 
which  is  at  the  heart  of all  human  creativity,  all  love  between 
people,  even at the heart of the relationship between a human be-
ing and God.  Eros warms all life,  gives  hope to living beings,  and 
alone  makes  a  sacrificial  life  possible.  But  when  a  human  being 
wishes to claim eros as his or her own,  to lay hold on the mystery 
35 
Berdyaev,  Destiny of Man,  p.  240. 
118  The Invisible Partners 
of the  Coniunctio  as  his  or  her  private  possession,  then  eros  is 
corrupted by  greed and possessiveness,  and its  promise of higher 
consciousness is  negated. 
For these  reasons,  a  Christian  theology  of marriage  should 
call not for  the denial of eros and sexuality,  but for  a heightened 
awareness  of eros  and what it  means.  The great  Christian  virtue 
of agape is not reached by denying eros, but by the purification of 
eros.  Just  as  gold  must  be  extracted  from  the  ore by  sifting  and 
purifying the ore,  so  must the gold of human eros be purified  by 
the  sifting  out  of the  impurities  of human  egocentricity.  But  no 
one ever obtained the gold by throwing out the ore.  For this to be 
accomplished  in  our  day,  psychological  awareness,  as  well  as 
spiritual sensitivity,  is  needed.  The mighty power of eros  can be-
come destructive if it is  blind,  and eros is blind as long as the hu-
man beings who carry  in themselves  this mighty  power are blind 
and do not understand their own natures.  Eros needs the enlight-
enment of a  developed  consciousness in order to reach its proper 
goal.  Yet,  without  eros,  consciousness  cannot  develop  and  the 
goal  cannot be reached. 
In the  last  analysis,  eros  is  a  great  mystery.  We  can  talk  of 
sexuality,  we  can  understand  projections,  we  can  speak  of the 
transference,  but  when  we  add  it  all  up  it  comes  to  zero,  for  it 
ends at the great mystery of Love. 
Psychological  analysis  alone  is  not  enough  to  bring  about  the 
healing of the soul.  Even though we understand all of our person-
al  past history,  and see  the forces  at work in  us  that have shaped 
our  lives,  this  by  itself will  not  heal  us.  The  chief value  of such 
analysis is  that it gives us conscious orientation and a certain per-
spective.  It also  generally  increases  ego  strength,  thus freeing  us 
to make certain choices and find  new attitudes.  All of this is  very 
helpful,  but not  enough.  Something  more must  be  done in  order 
to reconcile the conscious and the unconscious, to alter a destruc-
tive  inner situation,  or bring  new  life.  This  calls  for  some  means 
of establishing  and  keeping  alive  the  ongoing  relationship  with 
the inner world  out of which  new  life  comes  and  through  which 
eventually our conflicts may be  resolved. 
One special  tool for  working  with  the unconscious  that  was 
developed by C.  G. Jung is  "active imagination." Active imagina-
tion  goes  a step beyond meditation.  Meditation involves  the con-
templation  of an  image;  active  imaginaton  is  interaction  with  an 
image.  The  technique  of active  imagination  brings  into  focus  an 
image,  voice,  or figure of the unconscious and then enters into an 
interaction  with  that  image  or  figure.  In  active  imagination  the 
ego is definitely a participant.  We are not passively watching,  but 
are  positively  involved  in  what  is  happening.  It calls  for  an acti-
vation of the image from  the unconscious and an alert and partic-
ipating ego. 
* Originally  published  in  Chapter  6  of my  book  Healing  and  Wholeness, 
Paulist Press,  1977. 
119 
120 
The  Invisible Partners 
One word of caution:  Active imagination can start a flow  of 
images from the unconscious that, in a few  cases, may be difficult 
to  stop.  This  can  be  frightening,  for  the  images  are  then  like  a 
flow  of water that cannot be turned off and there is  the fear of be-
ing  inundated  from  within.  I  have  never  known  anyone  actually 
to  be  injured  in  this  way,  but  I  have  known  one  or  two  people 
who  became  quite  frightened.  This  is  not  likely  to  happen,  for 
most  people  can  turn  off active  imagination  any  time  they  want 
to, but it is a possibility if someone is  too close to the unconscious 
and  has  not  sufficient  ego  strength.  In  this  case  active  imagina-
tion  should  not be  undertaken  without  the  guidance  of a  skilled 
spiritual  director  or therapist  with  whom  the experiences  can  be 
shared if necessary. 
Active  imagination  can  begin  in  several  ways.  A  dream  is 
one  place  to  start.  In  this  case  we  continue  the  dream  in  our 
imagination as  a  story,  writing down  whatever comes to us.  This 
is  especially helpful in certain dreams that do not reach a conclu-
sion.  For  instance,  maybe  we  dream  we  are  being  pursued  by 
some figure;  we  run and  run and the dream  suddenly  ends  while 
we  are  still  running  from  this  figure.  This  is  an  "unfinished" 
dream.  It does  not end because  the  unconscious  cannot  take  the 
action  any  further.  We  can  continue  the  dream  by  finishing  its 
story  in  active  imagination.  What  happens  now  as  that  figure 
pursues us?  Perhaps we  see ourselves stopping and facing  our ad-
versary,  or maybe  someone  comes  into  the  situation  to  help  us. 
Any number of possibilities  present themselves,  but only one can 
be selected and this is the one we will follow through to see where 
it leads  us. 
A fantasy can also be utilized as the basis for active imagina-
tion.  The place to begin  would  be with the fantasy  that has  been 
haunting  our  minds,  the  uninvited  train  of thought  that  keeps 
coming back to us again and again.  Maybe it is a recurring fanta-
sy  of a burglar breaking into our house,  or perhaps of some  kind 
of doom descending on us,  or perhaps it is  a powerful sexual fan-
tasy.  One can take the fantasy and deliberately develop it,  writing 
down whatever occurs to us as we  continue the fantasy as a story. 
This has the effect  of altering  our psychological situation,  and of 
making clearer the underlying meaning of the fantasy.  With sex-
Appendix: Active Imagination  121 
ual  fantasies  this  may  be  the  only  way  to  avoid  living  them  out 
concretely in  ways  that may be destructive to our relationships. 
One source for Jung's ideas on active imagination was alche-
my.  Alchemy spoke of the adept (alchemist) giving careful atten-
tion to all  the elements in his retort and observing  their transfor-
mation with great concentration. Jung transliterates the language 
of alchemy  into  its  psychological  equivalent  and  sees  this  as  a 
prototype of active imagination.  What alchemy suggests,  he says, 
is  that we 
take the unconscious  in  one of its  handiest forms,  say  a  spontane-
ous  fantasy,  a  dream,  an  irrational  mood,  an  affect,  or something 
of the  kind,  and  operate  with  it.  Give  it  your  special  attention, 
concentrate on it,  and observe its  alterations objectively.  Spare  no 
effort  to devote  yourself to this  task,  follow  the subsequent trans-
formations  of the  spontaneous  fantasy  attentively  and  carefully. 
Above  all,  don't  let  anything  from  outside,  that  does  not  belong, 
get into it,  for  the fantasy-image  has "everything it needs."  In this 
way  one  is  certain  of not  interfering  by  conscious  caprice  and  of 
giving the unconscious  a free  hand. 
1 
In the same volume,  Jung puts it even more explicitly: 
This process can, as I have said, take place spontaneously or be ar-
tificially  induced.  In the  latter case  you  choose  a  dream,  or some 
other  fantasy-image,  and  concentrate  on  it  by  simply  catching 
hold of it and looking at it.  You can also use a bad mood as a start-
ing  point,  and  then  try  to  find  out  what  sort  of fantasy-image  it 
will produce, or what image expresses this mood.  You then fix  this 
image in the mind by concentrating your attention.  Usually it will 
alter,  as  the  mere  fact  of contemplating  it animates  it.  The  alter-
ations  must  be  carefully  noted  down  all  the time,  for  they  reflect 
the  psychic  processes  in  the  unconscious  background,  which  ap-
pear in the form of images consisting of conscious memory materi-
al.  In this way conscious and unconscious are united, just as  a wa-
terfall connects above  and below.' 
1 
C.  G.  Jung,  Mysterium  Coniunctionis,  CW 14  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton 
University  Press,  1963,  1974),  p.  526. 
'Ibid.,  p.  495. 
122  The Invisible Partners 
Active imagination can be started from  any manifestation of 
the  unconscious-dream,  affect,  mood,  or  whatever-but  the 
simplest  place  to  start  is  with  the  daily  running  dialogue  that 
goes  on  within  the  minds  of most  of us.  We  spend  a  lot  of time 
"arguing"  with  ourselves.  A  little  introspection  will  reveal  that 
there  are all  kinds  of voices  battling inside  of us.  Often  these  in-
ner dialogues  resemble  courtroom scenes,  and  it  is  as  if we  were 
on trial for  something.  There is  the inner prosecutor,  the critical 
voice  that  tries  to  convict  us  of this  or  that,  and  that  also,  as a 
rule,  constitutes  itself as  judge  as  well  as  accuser.  In  a  woman 
this voice usually has a masculine character, and in a man a femi-
nine  character.  These  "voices"  are  like  autonomous  thoughts  or 
moods that suddenly inject themselves  into our consciousness.  If 
we  are totally  unaware  of them,  we  become identical  with them. 
If the voice we are hearing is the accusing voice of the inner critic 
or  "prosecuting  attorney,"  we  become  depressed,  and  our  self-
image  goes  down  to  zero.  To  become  aware  of the  autonomous 
nature of these  voices  is  to  begin  to  make  a  distinction  between 
them and us,  and this dawning awareness brings the possibility of 
breaking free  from  what amounts to a  state of being possessed. 
To  begin  an  active  imagination  with  the  argument  we  are 
hearing  inside  of us  we  start  by  writing  down  the  thoughts  al-
ready  racing through our minds.  It helps  to  personify  the  differ-
ent  voices  we  hear.  The  "Prosecuting  Attorney,"  the  "Great 
Score Keeper," the "Cynical Bystander," the "Forlorn Woman," 
are personifications  of inner voices  that certain  people have  used 
from  time  to  time.  The  personification  should,  of course,  corre-
spond to the kind of voice  we  are hearing.  Transferring the inner 
argument  to  paper  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  respond  to  these 
autonomous  thoughts,  and  encourages  us  to  clarify  and  adopt 
our own point of view.  By writing things down we  really begin to 
hear  what  is  being  said,  and  are  now  in  a  position  to  examine 
these utterances for  what they are.  In doing this we  may discover 
that the authority of the inner critic,  for  instance,  may  not be so 
great  after  all,  that  while  this  critic  poses  as  God it  is  actually  a 
personification  of collective  opinions,  that  is,  of general  or  con-
ventional  points of view. 
Writing  things  down  also  strengthens  the  ego,  for  to  take 
pen in  hand and begin  to write is  an ego  activity,  and has  the ef-
Appendix: Active Imagination  123 
feet of solidifying and centering consciousness, and affirming it in 
the face  of destructive influences.  Hence it now becomes  possible 
to find  our position and, perhaps,  tum the tables on an inner ene-
my  who,  up  until  now,  has  had  the  advantage  of being  able  to 
work in  the dark. 
Of course  it  can  also  be  a  positive  voice  that  we  hear  and 
with which we  learn to talk.  Just as there is  a negative voice  that 
seems  to  want  us  to  fail  in  life,  so  there  is  a  positive  voice  that 
gives  us  helpful  insights  and flashes  of inspiration.  We  can culti-
vate  a  relationship  with  this  side of ourselves  by learning  to  dia-
logue with it,  and talk over with it our life situation. 
The ancients  used  to  call  such  a  figure  a  spiritus familiaris. 
Socrates referred  to it as his  "daimon," meaning not "demon" in 
the  negative  sense  of the word,  but his  "genius"  or inspirational 
spirit.  In Christian  parlance it  is  a  version  of the  guardian  angel 
or a manifestation of the guidance of the Holy Spirit.  Psychologi-
cally this positive figure  can be likened to a personification of the 
Self as  it  relates  to  ego  consciousness.  If a  relationship  with  this 
inner  figure  can  be  developed,  we  are  greatly  helped.  It is  like 
having  an  inner  analyst  or spiritual  director.  In some  cases  it  is 
the way to freedom from dependence on an analyst, for it gives us 
access  to our own  unconscious  wisdom. 
Notice  how  many  times  I  have  said  that  in  doing  active 
imagination  we  must  write  it down.  There are  many  reasons  for 
putting active  imagination  in  writing.  Writing  gives  reality  to  it; 
unless  it  is  written  it  may  seem  wispy  and vaporish  and lack im-
pact.  Writing  things  down  also  keeps  us  from  cheating  on  the 
process.  It may be that there are some unpleasant things we  have 
to  learn  about  ourselves  and  it  is  easy  to  avoid  these  unless  they 
are  written.  Writing  also,  as  mentioned,  strengthens  the  hand of 
the ego and develops our conscious position in the face  of the un-
conscious.  Finally,  it gives  us  a  permanent record and enables  us 
from  time  to  time  to  review  what  we  have  done.  Not only  does 
this refresh the memory,  but there are times when something has 
emerged  in  active  imagination  that  we  could  not  understand  at 
the time but is  clear to us  later. 
There  is  one  exception  to  the  practice  of  recording  active 
imagination; sometimes it works best when we are in a meditative 
state,  and  writing  it  down  might  interrupt.  Pursue  the  active 
124  The Invisible Partners 
imagination while meditating, but then record it immediately in a 
journal. 
I  mentioned  the  risk  in  doing  active  imagination,  but  the 
greater difficulty lies in getting people to do it at all.  Some of this 
has to  do with the fact  that it must be written to become real.  To 
write  down  active  imagination  is  work.  In  fact,  active  imagina-
tion  itself is  hard  work;  it  takes  discipline,  and to  do  it  we  must 
overcome the inertia that grips us when it comes to psychological 
matters.  People  are  lazy  about  their  own  psyches.  We  do  not 
want to  have  to work on ourselves,  but want everything to  come 
to  us.  This  is  a  common  difficulty  the  therapist  encounters:  He 
finds  that people come to him expecting him to have some magic 
with  which  to  make everything  all  right,  and they  won't  have  to 
do the work themselves.  Not only is  this exhausting for the thera-
pist,  who  has  to  provide  more  than  his  share  of energy  for  the 
process,  but  the  client  does  not  make  satisfactory  progress,  for 
the fact  is  that we  get  well  in  direct  proportion  to the energy  we 
put into our psychological development. 
In addition  to  the  lazy  streak  in  us,  which  resists  doing  ac-
tive  imagination  precisely  because it  is  "active,"  there is  also  the 
voice  within us that is  certain to comment that it is  "nothing but 
your own  thoughts."  As  soon  as  we  depart  from  the  known  and 
conventional,  this  cynical,  doubting  voice  begins  to  comment 
that  what  we  are  doing  is  nonsense,  banal,  or not  worth  writing 
down.  It is  another  aspect  of the  critical  voice  we  have  met  be-
fore,  and may also say to us when we awaken with a dream,  "Oh, 
that  dream  doesn't  mean  anything."  People  who  try  to  do  cre-
ative writing are certain to run into this voice too, and will hear it 
say things such as,  "Oh, that has already been written," or,  "You 
will never be able to get  it published." This voice  will  try to keep 
us  from  doing active  imagination,  and will make poisonous com-
ments  as  though  it  wants  to  keep  our development  on  the  most 
mediocre  level  possible.  It acts  like  a  negative-mother-voice  in  a 
man,  or  a  poisonous-father  voice  in  a  woman,  a  version  of the 
witch  who,  in  fairy  tales,  paralyzes  the  young  hero  or  heroine, 
turning  them  into  stone,  or  sending  them  into  sleep,  or causing 
them to lose  their heads. 
There are two ways  to deal with this voice as it relates to ac-
tive  imagination.  One  method  is  to  resolutely  go  ahead  anyway, 
Appendix: Active Imagination  125 
to say something like,  "I don't care what that voice says,  I am go-
ing  to  do  this  active  imagintion  and  when  it  is  done  we  will  see 
what it is  like."  The other method is  to begin the active imagina-
tion by dialoguing with the voice itself.  If we have it out with this 
voice to begin with we may find that the battle is half won and we 
are  beginning  to  free  ourselves  from  something  paralyzing  that 
has  affected us  on many levels of life. 
In  the  dialogue  form  of active  imagination  it  often  works 
best  to  write  down  the  first  thoughts  that  come  into  our  minds. 
We identify  the voice  with whom we  wish to speak and say  what 
we  want,  and  then  record the first  "answering thought"  that oc-
curs to us.  Then we answer back, and so the dialogue proceeds.  It 
is  important not  to  criticize  or examine what is  being  said  as  we 
go  along,  but to proceed as  if it were a normal conversation.  Lat-
er, when it is all finished,  we can go back over what we have writ-
ten  and examine it for  some of its content if we  wish. 
Active imagination sometimes has more vitality than at oth-
er times.  There are times when an image,  voice,  or fantasy is right 
there  and  becomes  activated  at  once  and  interacts  with  us.  At 
other times  the  results  may  not be so  vital.  Some  people,  for  in-
stance,  may be  able to  do  active  imagination in the morning,  but 
not  in  the  evening.  For others  it  may  be  the  other  way  around. 
Each  person  must  find  his  own  way  of working  and  discover 
what suits his personality the best. 
Active  imagination  can  be  very  long  or  very  short.  A  good 
example of a long active imagination is found in Gerhard Adler's 
book  The  Living Symbo/,
3 
in which he discusses a  series  of active 
imaginations a woman did over many months, out of which there 
evolved  a  long  and  elaborate  fantasy.  On  the  other hand,  active 
imagination may also  be quite brief.  The shortest active  imagina-
tion I know of came to a writer who was attempting for the third 
time to  revise  a manuscript to please his publisher.  Previously he 
had been able to make certain changes,  but this time when he sat 
at his  typewriter absolutely  nothing came.  For three days he was 
in  depression  as  not  a  single  thought  or  word  came  to  him,  al-
though  usually  words flowed  like  water.  At least it became clear 
3 
Gerhard  Adler,  The  Living Symbol,  (New  York:  Pantheon Books,  1961). 
126  The Invisible Partners 
that  something  in  him  was  resisting  revising  the  manuscript,  so 
he  decided  to  personify  this  resistance  and  talk  to  it.  The result-
ing active imagination went like this; 
Author (to his resistance):  "Okay,  why  are you resisting do-
ing this  work?" 
Answering voice  (immediately):  "Because it is  already  writ-
ten." 
That was  it;  there was  nothing more that needed  to  be  said. 
With this the author realized that the book was in its proper and 
completed form  as  it now stood,  and if the publisher with whom 
he was corresponding did not want it that way he had to find an-
other publisher.  And this is  exactly what happened. 
Ultimately  active  imagination  is  helpful  because  it  tends  to 
reconcile the conscious and the unconscious.  It takes us into a re-
lationship with the figures  of the unconscious,  "negotiating" and 
working things  out with  them.  This helps bring about  that para-
doxical union of the conscious and unconscious personalities that 
corresponds to what the alchemists called the unio mentalis.  Just 
as the alchemists, in the search for  the stone, started with materi-
als  that  were  commonly  rejected,  so  we  start  with  the  otherwise 
rejected  material  of the  unconscious  and,  through  meditation  or 
active imagination, activate an inner process.  Jung, in a commen-
tary  on  alchemical  symbolism,  gives  us  this  apt  description  of 
how this  process works  to bring us closer to wholeness: 
Thus the modem man cannot even  bring about  the unio  mentalis 
which  would  enable  him  to accomplish  the second  degree  of con-
junction. The analyst's guidance in helping him to understand the 
statements of his unconscious in dreams,  etc.  may provide the nec-
essary insight, but when it comes to the question of real experience 
the analyst can no longer  help  him:  he  himself must  put his  hand 
to the work.  He is  then in the position of an alchemist's apprentice 
who is inducted into the teachings by the Master and learns all the 
tricks of the laboratory.  But sometime he must set about  the opus 
himself, for,  as the alchemists emphasize, nobody else can do it for 
him.  Like this apprentice, the modem man begins with an unseem-
ly  prima materia which presents itself in unexpected form-a con-
temptible fantasy which, like the stone that the builders rejected, is 
"flung into  the  street"  and  is  so  "cheap"  that  people  do  not  even 
look  at  it.  He  will  observe  it  from  day  to  day  and  note  its  alter-
Appendix: Active Imagination 
127 
ations until his eyes  are opened or,  as  the alchemists say,  until  the 
fish's  eyes,  or the sparks,  shine in the dark solution .... 
The  light  that  gradually  dawns  on  him  consists  in  his  under-
standing that his fantasy is a real psychic process which is  happen-
ing  to  him  personally.  Although,  to  a  certain  extent,  he  looks  on 
from  outside,  impartially,  he is  also  an acting  and suffering  figure 
in the drama of the psyche .... If you  recognize your own involve-
ment  you  yourself must enter into the process  with  your personal 
reactions, just as  if you  were  one of the fantasy  figures,  or rather, 
as  if the  drama  being  enacted  before  your  eyes  were  real.  It is  a 
psychic  fact  that  this  fantasy  is  happening,  and  it  is  as  real  as 
you-as a psychic entity-are real.  ... If you place yourself in the 
drama as  you  really  are,  not only does it gain in  actuality but you 
also  create,  by  your  criticism  of the  fantasy,  an effective  counter-
balance  to  its  tendency  to  get  out of hand.  For what  is  now  hap-
pening  is  the  decisive  rapprochement  with  the  unconscious.  This 
is  where insight, the unio meta/is, begins to become real.  What you 
are now  creating is  the beginning of individuation,  whose immedi-
ate goal is the experience and production of the symbol of totality.• 
While Jung is  the one who first developed active imagination 
as  a  psychologically  refined  tool  for  working  with  the  uncon-
scious,  it  has  been  used  before.  A  very  good  example  of active 
imagination  is  found  in  Matthew's  Gospel  in  the  story  of  the 
Temptations  in  the  Wilderness.
5 
Jesus  has  gone  into  the  wilder-
ness  to  be  alone  after  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit  from  God  and 
hearing  the  voice  that  proclaimed  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Naturally,  the  first  thing  that  would 
happen  after  such  an  experience  is  an  inflation,  a  temptation  to 
take the experience in the wrong way,  and this temptation is  pre-
sented  in  the  voice  of Satan,  who  says,  "If thou  be  the  Son  of 
God,  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bread."  Jesus  hears 
that voice  within himself and answers it.  The voice then speaks a 
second time,  and a third,  and each time Jesus hears the voice and 
replies  to it.  This is  active  imagination.  Nor is  this  a  way  of say-
ing  that the Satan in the story is  not real.  Such  a voice  within  us 
is  very  real,  so  real  that unless  we  hear it,  recognize  it for  what it 
• Jung,  Mysterium  Coniunctionis,  pp.  528-529. 
'Mt. 4:1-11  KJV. 
128  The Invisible Partners 
is,  and respond  to  it,  we  will  likely  be  taken over  by  it.  Had this 
happened to Jesus his whole life would have gone the wrong way. 
His dialogue  with  Satan  was  the cornerstone of the life  and min-
istry  that  he  built  and  is  a  vivid  illustration  of how  vital  active 
imagination can be. 
Finally,  note  that  the  term is  active  imagination.  It is  not  a 
technique in which the movements of the unconscious are simply 
observed.  Rather the ego  asserts itself in  the process,  and the de-
mands of the unconscious must be measured against the reality of 
the ego.  In his  dialogue  with  Satan,  Jesus'  ego  was  very  evident. 
He did not just hear the voice,  but reacted to it and responded  to 
it.  Of course the dialogue might be with a helpful voice  too,  such 
as  the  dialogue  Elijah  had  with  Yahweh's  voice  in  the  cave  on 
Mt.  Sinai.
6 
But  in  either  event  the  process  of active  imagination 
calls  for  active  participation  by  the  ego,  and  represents  an  at-
tempt  of consciousness  and  the  unconscious  to  have  it  out  with 
each other and work out together a  creative life. 
'  1 Kings  19:9. 
BOOKS 
Bronte,  Emily.  Wuthering  Heights.  New  York:  Random  House, 
Inc.,  1943. 
Castilleja,  Irene de.  Knowing  Woman.  New York: G.  P.  Putnam's Sons, 
1973. 
A  highly  provocative study of feminine  psychology. 
Drury,  Michael,  To  a  Young  Wife from  an  Old Mistress.  Garden City, 
New  York:  Doubleday and Company,  Inc.,  1966. 
Wise,  profound advice from  one woman to another. 
Franz,  Marie-Louise  von.  The  ~ F e m i n i n e   in  Fairy  Tales.  Zurich:  Spring 
Publications,  1972. 
An excellent study of the feminine  in men  and women. 
---. Apuleius'  The  Golden  Ass.  Zurich:  Spring  Publications,  1970, 
1974. 
---.Individuation in  Fairy  Tales.  Zurich: Spring Publications,  1977. 
Guggenbuhl-Craig,  Adolf.  Marriage,  Dead  or  Alive.  Zurich:  Spring 
Publications,  1977. 
Modem,  timely  thoughts  on  marriage,  with  good  chapters  on  the 
meaning of sexuality. 
Hannah,  Barbara.  Striving Towards  Wholeness.  New  York:  G.  P.  Put-
nam's Sons,  1971. 
The chapters on the Bronte sisters and  Wuthering Heights are an  im-
portant  contribution  to feminine  psychology  and  the  psychology  of 
the animus. 
129 
130  The Invisible Partners 
Harding,  Esther.  The  Way  of All  Women.  New  York:  David  McKay 
Company,  Inc.,  1933,  1961. 
An "old timer" now,  but still valuable. 
---. Woman's  Mysteries,  Ancient  and  Modern.  New  York:  G.  P. 
Putnam's Sons,  1971. 
Valuable archetypal material on the nature of the feminine. 
Johnson,  Robert,  HE!  King  of Prussia,  Pa.:  Religious  Publishing  Co., 
1974. 
A  little jewel;  a  splendid study of the psychology of men. 
---.SHE! King of Prussia,  Pa.:  Religious Publishing Co.,  1976. 
A  succinct study of feminine  psychology. 
In the following  Jung entries,  consult the Table of Contents and the In-
dex for  passages regarding the anima and animus. 
Jung,  C.  G.  Collected  Works  [hereafter  cited  as  CWJ  7,  Two  Essays  in 
Analytical Psychology.  New York:  Pantheon Books,  1953. 
---. CW 9,  1,  The  Archetypes  of the  Collective  Unconscious.  New 
York:  Pantheon Books,  1959. 
---. CW9, 2,  Aion.  New  York:  Pantheon Books,  1959. 
---. CW 13, Alchemical Studies.  Princeton,  N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press,  1967,  1970. 
---. CW 14,  Mysterium  Coniunctionis.  Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton 
University Press,  1963,  1974. 
---. CW 16,  The  Practice  of Psychotherapy.  New  York:  Pantheon 
Books,  1954. 
---. C.  G.  Jung Speaking.  Edited by  William McGuire and R.  F.  C. 
Hull.  Princeton,  N.J.: Princeton University Press,  1977. 
---.Letters 1.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,  1973. 
---.Letters 2.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,  1975. 
---. Man  and  His  Symbols.  Garden  City,  N.  Y.:  Doubleday  and 
Company,  Inc.,  1964. 
---. Memories,  Dreams,  Reflections.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books, 
1963. 
---. Visions Seminars,  Part One and Part Two.  Zurich:  Spring Pub-
lications,  197 6. 
Jung, Emma. Animus and Anima.  Zurich: Spring Publications,  1974. 
Particularly good on the animus. 
Neumann,  Erich. Amor and Psyche.  New York:  Pantheon Books,  1956. 
A  study  of the  most  significant  myth  of the  feminine  in  Greek  my-
thology. 
Sanford, John A.  Healing and Wholeness.  New York: The Paulist Press, 
1977. 
Bibliography  131 
The last chapter contains a summary of the process of active imagina-
tion,  a  useful  tool in              to integrate the anima and animus. 
---. The  Kingdom  Within.  New York:  J.  B.  Lippincott Co.,  1970. 
Chapters  9  and  10  contain  material  relevant  to  the  anima  and  ani-
mus. 
Singer,  June.  Androgyny.  Garden  City,  N.  Y.:  Doubleday  Company, 
Inc.,  1976 
A  woman analyst looks  at the  problem of man/woman today  with  a 
special  view  to the problems facing  modem women. 
Ulanov,  Ann  B.  The  Feminine  in  Jungian  Psychology  and in  Christian 
Theology.  Evanston,  Ill.:  Northwestern University  Press,  1971. 
Whitmont, Edward C.  The Symbolic Quest.  New York:  G.  P.  Putnam's 
Sons,  1969. 
The  closest  thing  there  is  to  a  textbook  in  Jungian  psychology  with 
good chapters on the masculine and feminine. 
Wilhelm,  Richard,  trans.  The  Secret of the  Golden  Flower.  New  York: 
Harcourt,  Brace &  World,  Inc.,  1931;  revised and augmented,  1962. 
ARTICLES 
Binswanger,  Hilde.  "Positive Aspects  of the Animus." Spring,  1963. 
Heisler,  Verda.  "Individuation in  Marriage." Psychological Perspectives 
1,  no.  2,  Fall  1970. 
A  valuable contribution to the psychology  of marriage relationships. 
Hillman, James.  "Anima." Spring,  1973  and  1974. 
Hillman  boldly  explores  the  concept  of the  anima  and  adds  many 
new  thoughts.  Not for beginners,  but thought-provoking. 
Hough,  Graham.  "Poetry and the Anima." Spring,  1973. 
Ostrowski,  Margaret.  "Anima  Images  in  Carl  Spitteler's  Poetry." 
Spring.  1962. 
Wolf,  Toni,  "Structural Forms of the Feminine Psyche." 
This was  privately printed and is  out of print, but there is  a  good  re-
sume of it in Whitmont's book,  already cited. 
Zabriskie,  Philip.  "Goddesses  in  our  Midst."  Quadrant,  no.  17,  Fall 
1974. 
An important article on the nature of the feminine based on studies of 
five  Greek goddesses. 
PAMPHLETS 
Hannah,  Barbara.  "The  Problem  of Contact  with  Animus."  London: 
Guild of Pastoral Psychology,  1962. 
132  The Invisible Partners 
---"The Religious  Function of the Animus in the Book of Tobit." 
London:  Guild of Pastoral Psychology,  1961. 
Heydt,  Vera  von  der.  "On  the  Animus."  London:  Guild  of Pastoral 
Psychology,  1964. 
Lander,  Forsaith,  "The Anima."  London:  Guild  of Pastoral  Psycholo-
gy,  1962. 
Metman,  Eva,  "Woman and the Anima."  London:  Guild  of Pastoral 
Psychology,  1951. 
A 
Actium,  battle of,  23 
active  imagination,  42,  61n,  94, 
Appendix 
agape,  118 
Age of Faith,  The,  21n 
Aion,  CW 9,2,  41n,  50n,  75n,  114n 
alchemists,  3 
Alchemical Studies,  CW  13,  70n 
American  Indian(s),  3,  65,  93,  99 
androgynous,  3,  4,  5,  6,  95,  98, 
100 
anger,  36,  37,  38,  39,  40,  50,  53 
animare,  6 
"Anima," 40n 
anima:  12,  22,  25,  34,  35,  36,  37, 
40,  41,  42,  43,  44,  49,  50,  53, 
54,  55,  58,  60,  64,  66,  67,  68, 
69,  70,  72,  75,  78,  84,  85,  86, 
91,  100,  105,  106,  107,  108, 
109;  an  archetype,  12,  66, 
106;  correct/proper  place, 
40,  65,  69-70;  development, 
68f;  dialogue  with,  61fT;  dou-
ble,  83,  87;  and  man's  ego, 
98;  emotion(s),  37,  40,  41, 
50-51;  and  eros,  67,  75;  fan-
tasies,  25,  59,  71,  72,  73,  82, 
100;  four  stages,  68;  hideous 
maiden/damsel,  57,  72;  and 
homosexuality,  98,  99;  how 
to defeat it,  43;  image,  14,  21, 
25,  72,  83,  84,  87;  Jung's 
term/definition,  12,  42,  64, 
111;  match  and  gasoline  37, 
49;  mood(s)  35,  36,  43,  49, 
59,  61,  71;  mouthpiece/ 
bridge  and  the  unconscious, 
43,  64,  70,  72;  neither  good 
nor bad,  67;  and persona,  70, 
71;  personification  of,  64,  69, 
70;  positive/negative,  15,  32, 
36,  38, 41, 42,  43,  60,  72,  110; 
possession,  35,  36,  41,  49,  51, 
53,  54;  power,  24,  32;  projec-
tion(s),  14,  15,  20,  24,  25,  67, 
73,  83,  85,  106,  107;  relation-
ship,  35,  36,  40,  41,  67,  70, 
71,  84;  resentment,  36;  and 
soul,  25,  66,  74,  106;  uni/ 
multi-personality,  109,  Ill; 
as  witch,  11,  15,  37,  43,  44, 
49,  50,  51,  54;"  ___  _ 
woman,"  106 
anima/animus:  1,  6,  7,  9,_  10,  11, 
12,  13,  17,  20,  31,  54,  58,  59, 
133 
134  The  Invisible Partners 
60,  61,  62,  63,  64,  65,  68,  76, 
82,  83,  89,  105,  111,  112,  113; 
archetypes,  6,  13,  62,  80;  cor-
rect  place,  63,  65;  no  ego  re-
ality,  11;  and  evil,  65;  fanta-
sies,  61,  82;  Jung's  term/ 
definition,  6,  11,  12,  63,  64; 
"master-piece,"  10,  65;  most 
important  contribution,  112; 
personified,  12,  64,  70;  posi-
tive/negative/dark, 13,  17,  34, 
44,  50,  54,  55,  56,  58,  59,  63; 
possession,  51;  projection,  10, 
11,  17,  20,  24,  30,  50,  59,  64, 
65,  80,  83,  113;  quarrel,  18, 
49,  50,  63;  relationship  dia-
gram,  17;  relationship,  30, 
54,  62;  witch  and  medicine 
man,  11 
animus:  11,  39n, 40,  43, 44, 45,  46, 
47,  48,  49,  52,  53,  54,  58,  59, 
60,  68,  72,  73,  74,  75,  76,  77, 
78,  79,97,  105,106,108,109, 
111;  anima's,  41;  creative,  26, 
72;  quotation  from  de  Castil-
lejo,  76;  dialogue  with,  62f, 
78;  double,  87;  fantasies,  59, 
73;  "ghostly lover," 73;  guide/ 
psychopomp/torch  bearer/ 
bridge,  72,  75,  76;  how  to 
defeat  it,  34;  individuation, 
73,  74;  Jung's  term/defini-
tion,  12,  111;  logos,  75;  a 
mother's,  45,  97;  multi-per-
sonality,  109;  opinion(s),  41, 
43,  44,  45,  48,  49,  59,  60,  62, 
78,  109;  personification,  33, 
47,  74;  positive/negative/ 
dangerous/  destructive,  15, 
16,  32,  34,  43,  47,  54,  60,  72, 
73,  75,  76,  77,  78,  110;  pos-
session,  33,  39n,  43,  52;  pro-
jection,  15,  16,  73,  77;  sword, 
48,  49,  50,  51;  in  Wuthering 
Heights,  46,  47,  74 
Animus and Anima,  48,  75n 
Ante-Nicene Fathers,  115n 
Anthropos, 4 
Antony,  Mark,  20,  22fT,  32 
Aphrodite:  3n,  68,  86,  110,  111; 
Pandemos and Ouranos,  68f 
Apocrypha,  33 
"apprentice-piece,"  10 
archetype(s):  6,  100,  113;  ani-
ma/animus,  13,  66,  80,  106, 
107,  110; Jung's term,  6;  mas-
culine/feminine,  7,  10,  100, 
102,  109,  110;  senex,  96 
Archetypes  of the  Collective  Un-
conscious,  The,  CW  9,1,  10n, 
37n,  65n,  67n,  99n 
Artemis,  110,  111 
Athena,  110,  111 
B 
berdaches,  99 
Berdyaev,  Nicholas,  5,  6,  113,  117 
Bronte,  Emily,  46,  47,  73 
c 
Caesar and Christ,  22n,  71 n 
Christ,  113,  114,  115 
Circe,  31f,  34 
Cleopatra,  22fT,  32 
collective unconscious (see  uncon-
scious,  collective) 
complex(es):  34;  Mother,  38 
Coniunctio,  112,  113,  114,  115, 
118 
container and contained,  27f,  81 
Cyprian,  115n 
D 
Dante,  20fT,  24 
Index 
135 
Death in  Venice,  95 
de Castillejo,  Irene,  16,  75,  76,  77, 
78 
Demeter,  110,  111 
depression,  35,  57,  58 
Destiny of Man,  6n 
Development  of Personality,  The, 
CW  17,  27n 
Divine  Comedy,  The,  21 
dream(s):  85,  109,  112,  115;  ani-
ma/animus,  6,  61,  65,  66,  70, 
72,  73,  109;  Jane's,  26;  nega-
tive animus,  43;  in  Wuthering 
Heights,  46f 
Durant,  Will,  2ln, 22,  71n 
E 
ecstasy,  96,  101 
ego:  11,  12,  13,  17,  43,  51,  61,  62, 
63,  70,  89,  97,  98,  101,  111; 
and  collective  unconscious, 
64;  feminine,  76;  homoge-
nized,  13;  masculine,  13,  98, 
100;  possession by anima/an-
imus,  51, 98;  relationship dia-
gram,  17;  and  the  Self,  96; 
and writing,  61,  62 
Eliade,  Mircea,  5n 
emotion(s):  18,  36,  37,  39,  40,  66, 
69,  84;  and the anima,  37, 40, 
51,  64:  life-giving,  65,  67 
endogamous,  83 
energy(ies):  8,  9,  36,  66,  77,  88,  94, 
96;  creative,  27,  42;  life/liv-
ing,  58,  60,  112;  psychic,  8, 
13,  27,  80,  82,  85,  108;  and 
secrets,  85;  sexual,  92 
eros:  8,  34,  44,  45,  60,  67,  68,  75, 
84,  89,  96,  102,  117,  118; 
Greek god,  68;  and the hetai-
ra,  103;  masculine  and  femi-
nine,  68;  passive,  82,  84;  quo-
tation  from  Harding,  . 108, 
109;  quotation from Jung,  75; 
quotation  from  von  Franz, 
102;  values,  34 
evil:  34,  44,  65,  74,  116;  can  en-
gender  good,  56;  Mephis-
topheles,  56;  quotation  from 
St.  Paul,  9 
exogamous,  83 
F 
fairy  tales,  6,  31 
fantasy(ies),  18,  19,  25,  40,  71, 
81n,  82,  88,  102;  anima/ani-
mus,  25,  61,  64,  65,  66,  72, 
73,  82,  86;  archetypal,  40; 
dark,  48,  71;  death,  28;  ero-
tic/sexual/seductive,  14,  59, 
69,  71,  73,  80,  81,  83,  88,  89, 
90,  91,  92,  93,  94,  100,  101; 
individuation,  92;  Jung's,  42f; 
love,  18,  19,  25,  73;  romantic, 
73,  88;  symbolic meaning,  92, 
94;  what we  do with  them 82 
Faust,  56,  91 
Feminine  in  Fairy  Tales,  The,  27n 
52,  86n,  95 
Freud, Sigmund,  92,  101 
G 
Gaius,  Suetonius,  71n 
Genesis,  Book of,  4 
"ghostly lover,"  73 
God,  4,  33,  68,  69,  112,  114,  115, 
117 
"Goddesses in our Midst,"  110 
gods/goddesses:  3n,  4,  10,  13,  15, 
18,  19,  31,  51,  72,  86,  94,  100, 
108,  llOf,  113;  Babylonian 
mythology,  44;  Eros,  68; 
Great  Goddess,  100,  111; 
136  The  Invisible Partners 
personification  of  archetype, 
10 
Goethe,  56,  91 
Golden  Ass of Apuleius,  The,  97n, 
102n 
Guggenbuhl-Craig,  Adolf,  81,  90 
91,  92,  100,  101 
guilt,  28,  47,  51,  53,  81,  83,  92,  93 
H 
Hannah,  Barbara, 46,  47,  74,  75n 
Harding,  Esther,  73,  108 
HE!,  56 
Hecate,  110 
Heisler,  Verda,  29 
Hera,  110,  111 
hermaphrodite,  3 
Hermaphroditus,  3n 
Hermes,  3n,  31 
Hestia,  110 
hideous  damsel/maiden,  56,  57, 
58,72 
Hillman,  James,  40,  68,  70,  105, 
106,  108,  109,  111 
homosexuality,  13,  94,  96,  98,  99 
hun soul,  8,  9,  108 
I 
I  Ching,  The,  8 
image:  8,  10,  18,  19,  64,  83,  89,  95, 
112,  114;  anima,  14,  15,  21, 
25,  57,  72,  83,  84,  87;  ani-
ma/animus,  11,  76,  83;  ani-
mus,  15,  47,  76,  87;  Anthro-
pos,  4;  archetypal,  64,  113; 
coniunctio,  112,  114,  115; 
emotional, 83;  erotic,  114;  en-
dogamous/exogamous,  83; 
feminine,  14,  91,  110,  116; 
God's,  4;  numinous,  73,  83, 
114;  positive/negative,  17, 
50;  projected,  11,  13,  14,  16, 
17,  26,  67,  80,  85,  87;  psy-
chic,  13,  14,  65,  113;  Self,  95; 
soul,  15,  25,  67,  76,  98;  of 
wholeness,  94 
individuation:  65,  72,  73,  74,  81, 
82,  83,  91,  92,  101,  112;  and 
fantasies,  92 
Individuation  in  Fairy  Tales,  4n 
"Individuation  Through  Mar-
riage,"  29 
Interpretation  of Visions,  lln, 72n 
Invisible  Partners,  6,  13,  20,  29, 
34,  50,  55,  58,  63,  80,  115 
J 
Jesus,  16,  28,  112,  115 
Johnson,  Robert,  56,  57,  72,  87 
Jung,  C.  G.:  1,  6,  9,  12,  54,  55,  64, 
67,  99,  108,  112,  114;  active 
imagination,  61n;  alchemy, 
3n;  anima,  37  40,  43,  51,  55, 
66,  67,  68,  69,  70,  107;  ani-
ma/animus,  1,  6,  12,  41,  50, 
63,  65,  70,  74,  75,  105,  109, 
111;  animus,  16,  46,  73; 
Anthropos,  4;  archetype(s), 
6,  7-8,  66;  autobiography, 
42,  43n;  collective  uncon-
scious,  65;  definition(s),  llf, 
63f,  111;  emotions  and  af-
fects,  37;  marriage, 27;  mono-
theism  of consciousness,  60f; 
possession  by  evil,  34;  the 
psyche,  61;  publications,  3n, 
9n,  10n,  lln,  12n,  16n,  27n, 
37n,4ln, 43n,  SOn,  55n,  6ln, 
64n,  65n,  66n,  67n,  68n,  69n, 
70n,  72n,  73n,  74n,  75n,  99n, 
105n,  108n,  114n;  shadow, 
10;  soul,  74 
Index 
137 
C.  G.  Jung Speaking,  12n,  54n 
Jung,  Emma,  48,  74 
justice,  feminine/masculine,  86f 
K 
karma,  85 
Kingdom  Within,  The,  115n 
Knowing  Woman,  16n,  75n 
Kore,  107,  110 
L 
La  Vita  Nuova,  21n 
Letters 1,  3n 
Letters 2,  3n,  55n,  66n,  67n,  108n 
libido,  27 
logos,  9,  41,  58,  75,  106 
Luke, Gospel According to,  14:26, 
29n 
M 
Man  and His Symbols,  12,  64 
Mann,  Thomas,  95 
"Marriage As a Psychological  Re-
lationship,"  27n 
Marriage-Dead or Alive,  81n 
"master-piece,"  10,  65 
Memoirs  of Hadrian,  94n 
Memories,  Dreams,  Reflections, 
42,43n 
Methodius,  Bishop,  115 
mood(s):  35,  36,  37,  40,  51,  52,  53, 
54,  59,  64,  69;  anima,  12,  35, 
36,  40,  41,  43,  53,  59,  61,  63, 
64,  67,  69,  71;  bad/dark/ter-
rible,  15,  20,  35,  49,  50,  51, 
57,  58,  71;  passive/aggres-
sive,  36;  personified,  61 
mother complex,  38 
Mysterium  Coniunctionis,  CW  14, 
66n 
mystery,  93,  100,  102,  113,  115, 
117,118 
Mysticism,  114n 
myth(s)/mythology(ies):  3,  6,  10, 
31,  44,  110;  Babylonian,  44; 
Circe,  31f;  Greek,  4,  10,  31f, 
110;  Persian and Talmudic,  4 
N 
numen/numinosity, 61,  70,  80,  91, 
100 
0 
Odyssey,  31 
opinion(s),  41,  43,  44,  45,  48,  49, 
59,  60,  62,  63,  64,  78,  109, 
110 
opposite(s):  89,  98,  106,  108,  110, 
112,  113,  117;  anima/animus, 
6 
Origen,  114 
Original Man,  4 
p 
persona,  70,  71 
phallus,  96 
Plato,  4,  5n 
Plutarch,  23 
Plutarch's Lives,  23n 
p'o soul,  8,  9,  108 
Practice  of  Psychotherapy,  The, 
CW  16,  68n,  74n,  75n 
projection(s):  10,  11,  13,  14,  15, 
16,  19,  20,  24,  25,  26,  27,  30, 
59,  65,  77,  80,  82,  83,  87,  95, 
96,  98,  102,  113,  118;  anima, 
14,  15,  20,  24,  25,  50,  67,  73, 
80,  83,  106,  107;  animus,  15, 
16,  20,  24,  50,  73,  77,  80,  83; 
as  mirrors,  11;  niether  good 
nor  bad,  20;  positive/nega-
tive,  16,  17;  a psychic, uncon-
scious  mechanism,  10;  the 
138  The Invisible Partners 
Self,  94,  95;  relationship,  13, 
19,  20,  87;  what  we  do  with 
it,  20;  withdrawal  of,  59,  65, 
83,  87,  113 
psyche:  6,  14,  20,  61,  65,  77,  78, 
83,  85,  87,  94,  104,  106,  111, 
115;  and  projection,  11; 
growth and development,  66; 
man's,  12,  64;  personified  in 
mythology,  10;  woman's,  47, 
73 
"Psychology  of the  Transference, 
The," 74 
puer,  96 
Puer Aeternus,  95n,  97n 
R 
rejection:  38,  53;  by mother,  53 
relationship(s):  1,  5,  14,  15,  16,  17, 
18,  19,  20,  25,  28,  29,  33,  34, 
37,  38,  39,  40,  41,  42,  52,  53, 
54,  55,  58,  59,  60,  61,  62,  63, 
67,  68,  70,  75,  79,  82,  84,  86, 
87,  88,  91,  92,  93,  94,  104, 
113,  117;  anima/animus,  6, 
30,  35,  36,  37,  40,  62,  63,  64, 
67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  77,  84;  be-
ing  in  love,  17,  18;  between 
the  sexes,  1,  13,  14,  15,  18, 
19,  24,  25,  28,  34,  38,  39,  40, 
49,  51,  54,  62,  63,  74,  80,  84, 
96,  103;  correct,  77,  79;  con-
tainer  and  contained,  27,  28; 
Dante  and  Beatrice,  21;  dia-
gram,  17,  29;  Eros,  75;  extra-
marital,  85;  with  God,  68, 
114,  115,  117;  heterosexual, 
98;  homosexual,  94,  96,  98, 
99;  to  inner  world,  66;  love, 
18-19,  20,  26,  48,  83,  105; 
marriage,  27,  80,  81,  82,  85, 
114;  and  moods,  35,  36;  to 
persona,  70,  71;  projection, 
19,  87;  to  the  psychic  world, 
1  0;  with  the  Self,  96;  sexual, 
14,  19,  91,  96,  116;  ultimate, 
17,  19;  and  the  unconscious, 
33,  64,  83,  87;  to  the  highest 
wisdom,  68;  Yang and Yin,  8 
resentment,  36 
Romans,  Epistle to the 7:19,  9n 
s 
St.  Augustine,  114,  115n,  116 
St.  Bernard of Clairvaux,  115 
St.  Jerome,  116 
St.  Paul,  9 
1 Samuel,  Bookof18:10-11,  71n; 
ch.  28,  104n 
Saul,  King,  71,  104 
Secret  of the  Golden  Flower,  The, 
8,  9n,  6ln, 64 
self/Self:  76,  94,  95,  96;  and  ego, 
96 
senex,  96 
Seven  Arrows,  3n 
sexuality,  4,  8,  68,  80,  89,  91,  92, 
93,  94,  96,  100,  101,  102,  113, 
115,  116,  117,  118 
shadow:  9,  10,  14,  70;  integration 
of,  10;  metaphysical,  107 
Shakespeare,  18 
shaman(ess)(ism),  5,  99,  104 
Shamanism,  5n 
Sirens,  31f,  34 
Song of Songs,  114,  115 
soul(s):  2,  19,  20,  24,  34,  57,  58, 
71,  73,  85,  106,  112,  114,  115, 
116;  androgynus,  95;  anima, 
6,  9,  66,  68,  70,  106;  animus, 
6,  9,  74fT;  Babylonian  my-
thology,  44;  Dante's,  21,  24; 
feminine/masculine,  10,  67, 
74,  75,  76,  77,  78,  106;  hun, 
Index  139 
8,  9,  108;  image,  15,  25,  67, 
76,  98;  inner  woman,  62; 
Mark  Antony's,  22,  24; 
man's,  10,  57,  58,  66,  67,  69, 
72,  74,  77,  85,  106,  109,  111, 
115;  p'o,  8,  9,  108;  projected, 
25,  67;  union  with  Christ, 
114,  115;  union  with  God, 
114;  woman's,  15,  16,  34,  72, 
74,  75,  77,  78,  106 
Storm,  Hyemeyohsts,  3,  5 
Striving  Toward  Wholeness,  46, 
75n 
"Structural  Forms  of  the  Femi-
nine  Psyche,"  102-103 
suicide,  35,  48,  57 
symbol(s),  57,  74,  91,  92,  96,  112 
Symbolic  Quest,  The,  90,  103n 
Symbols  of Transformation,  CW 
5,  114n 
Symposium,  4,  5n 
T 
T'ai I  Chin  Hua  Tsung  Chih,  The, 
8,  108 
Tobit,  Book of 6:3,  33n 
torch bearer (see  animus) 
"Transposed Heads,  The,"  87 
Two  Essays in Analytical Psycholo-
gy,  CW  7,  12n,  64n,  65n,  69, 
105n 
types of women,  102fT,  110 
u 
Unconscious:  13,  17,  18,  42,  62, 
64,  65,  66,  77,  85,  87,  89,  90, 
100,  104,  105,  107,  113;  ar-
chetypal  figures  of,  35,  59; 
and  active  imagination,  61n; 
anima/animus, 36, 41,  43,  64, 
70,  72,  91,  111;  and complex-
es,  34;  coniunctio,  112;  heal-
ing powers,  34;  and homosex-
uals,  99;  projection,  59;  and 
relationship,  33,  83,  87 
unconscious,  collective:  64,  65, 
104;  personified  by  ani-
ma/animus,  63 
Underhill,  Evelyn,  114 
v 
Visions Seminars,  The,  16n 
von  Franz,  Marie-Louise,  4n, 
26-27,52,64, 86,95,97,102 
w 
Way  of  All Women,  The,  73n 
Whitmont,  Edward C.,  90,  103n 
wholeness:  6,  58,  65,  72,  89,  95, 
96,  101,  112,  117;  denial  of, 
117;  image  of,  94,  114;  sym-
bols  of,  19,  57,  74 
Wilhelm,  Richard,  9 
Wolff,  Toni,  103 
women,  types,  103fT,  110 
W o m e n ~   Mysteries,  108 
Wuthering Heights,  46,  47n,  73 
y 
Yang  and  Yin:  8,  9,  12,  66,  108, 
112;  Yang  and  hun  soul,  9; 
Yin and p'o soul,  9 
Yourcena,  Marguerite,  94n 
z 
Zabriskie,  Philip,  110,  Ill 
Zeus,  111 
g
green 
press 
I  INITIATIVE 
Paulist  Press  is  committed  to  preserving  ancient  forests  and 
natural  resources.  We  elected  to  print  this  title  on  30%  post 
consumer recycled  paper,  processed  chlorine  free.  As  a result, 
for this printing, we  have saved: 
3 Trees (40' tall and 6-8"  diameter) 
1 Million BTUs of Total Energy 
344 Pounds of Greenhouse Gases 
1,549 Gallons ofWastewater 
98  Pounds of Solid Waste 
Paulist  Press  made  this  paper  choice  because  our  printer, 
Thomson-Shore,  Inc.,  is  a member  of Green  Press  Initiative, 
a nonprofit program dedicated to  supporting authors,  publish-
ers,  and  suppliers  in  their  efforts  to  reduce  their  use  of fiber 
obtained from  endangered forests. 
For more  information, visit www.greenpressinitiative.org 
Environmental  impact estimates were made using the Environmental  Defense 
Paper Calculator.  For more information visit:  www.papercalculator.org. 