
 
 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
C.G. Jung, The Red Book,  125 
 
 
 
A Pictorial Guide to THE RED BOOK 
 
Jay Sherry 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
1
The publication of The Red Book by W.W. Norton & Co. last October was a 
major publishing event not only for the Jungian community but for all those 
interested in psychology and 20
th
 century culture.  The fact that Jung circulated 
drafts of it and showed it to many different people makes it clear that he did 
intend it to reach a wider public.  The Philemon Foundation and the Jung family 
are to be thanked for doing just that.  The book is selling well and is now in its 
sixth printing; the original was on display at the Rubin Museum of Asian Art in 
New York and now travels to the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles where a series 
of events are planned in coordination with its exhibition.  (Readers should look 
for specific information about these events on the front page of this issue.)  It 
then goes to the Library of Congress with final stops in Paris and Zurich.  How 
lucky we are to realize that when we read Jung addressing himself to “my friends” 
that we are now included in his salutation.  Sonu Shamdasani’s commentary and 
footnotes brilliantly elucidate the text and its evolution while the cross-
referencing system helps us navigate its complexities with relative ease. 
I will confine my observations to its imagery because the text will take time 
to unravel.  The book is like a primeval forest that readers enter at the spot meant 
for them alone; it is a hermeneutistic delight! 
It was with a sense of excitement that I opened the book and paged 
through it for the first time.  How would Jung’s depictions of his fantasies 
compare to the images I had formed in my mind over the years from reading 
“Confrontation with the Unconscious”?  They unfold in the Liber Primus in a 
series of panels done in a style reminiscent of illustrations found in the popular 
historical literature of the period which would have inspired his boyhood 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
2
drawings of battles and castles.  In his 
Red Book picture of the ambush of 
Siegfried on the mountain path Jung 
and his brown-skinned companion 
fire their guns and the hero is thrown 
back, his shield aloft.  Jung reported 
that in the dream Siegfried was riding 
in a chariot made out of the bones of 
the dead but this does not appear in 
the picture.  Apparently Jung felt that drawing it was beyond his artistic skill and 
settled for a simpler layout. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 1   Si egfri ed, C.G. J ung, The Red 
Book,  foli o i v, verso. 
We finally get to meet 
Salome one of the most important 
figures in his active imaginations 
and learn that we already know her 
from the previously published 
mandala on p. 105.  She turns out to 
be a demure young woman, more 
an incarnation of Rebecca in 
femme fatales appearing on the 
stage at this time when the Salome 
story inspired works in all the performing arts.  Jung’s vague associations to 
Ivanhoe than one of the voluptuous 
Salome should not distract us from looking at the cultural context that shaped his 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 2   Salome, C.G. J ung, The Red Book,  
foli o v, verso. 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
3
image of her.  She captured the 
imagination of the artists of the time and 
was one of Franz von Stuck’s favorite 
subjects.  Her Dance of the Seven Veils was 
in the process of giving birth to modern 
dance and strip-tease.  A generational 
crush on Sarah Bernhardt to whom Oscar 
Wilde dedicated his play Salome would
have been Jung’s entré into the period’s 
Salomania.  In preparing for her role in 
Theodora, a play about a 6
th
 century 
Byzantine empress, Bernhardt visited 
Ravenna, Italy where one of the famous 
mosaics depicts the main character.  Jung 
also traveled to Ravenna and became 
fascinated with the Tomb of Galla Placidia 
and things Byzantine.  I believe that 
Salome was an important element in Jung’s 
erotic-mythical projections onto Sabina 
Spielrein.  In a letter to Freud (June 4, 
1909) Jung wrote about how she was 
“systematically planning my 
 
seduction…[and] now is seeking revenge.” 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 3   J ung i ncluded Salome, 
left, and Eli j ah, top, i n thi s 
mandala.  C.G. J ung, The Red 
Book, 105. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 4   von Stuck’s “Salome”. 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
4
(1974 p. 228)  He connected it to “an amiable complex” that involved a strong 
attraction to Jewish women. (ibid. p. 229) 
Freud represented another Jewish figure who served as a human 
embod on.  In 
e 
be found 
g 
on.  
f) 
 is 
e 
iment of Elijah, the white bearded prophet and Salome’s compani
time Elijah transformed into Philemon, the central wisdom figure in Jung’s activ
imaginations.  One source for the origin of Philemon’s name is the New 
Testament where he is a recipient of a letter from St. Paul, the other can 
in classical mythology and in Goethe (who elaborates on the story) where he is 
depicted as the husband of Baucis.  I would like to propose another source.  Jun
owned a copy of the novel Hypatia by the Victorian writer Charles Kingsley.  It is 
a historical romance about the life of the female Neo-Platonic philosopher 
Hypatia.  The book also includes another character, a monk named Philamm
In The Red Book chapter entitled 
“The Anchorite,” Jung meets a 
monk called Ammonius (p. 267
whose name has resonance to 
Philemon.  The novel Hypatia
set in ancient Alexandria and 
Jung’s reading of it may have 
influenced his description of 
Philemon’s emergence from th
Elijah figure as “…a 
Fi gure 5   J ung’s fi rst Phi lemon.  An 
I llustrated Bi ography of C. G. J ung by 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Ger hard Wehr , p. 72. 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
5
pagan…[who]…brought with him an Egypto-Hellenistic atmosphere with a 
Gnostic coloration.” (1961/1989, p. 182)  This evidence indicates another 
histori
m.  
 a 
t in 
 
 
 my bed thou scarest me & affrightest me with 
Visions.” (1977, pgs. 57 and 135) 
The most familiar picture of Philemon is the one he painted in The Red 
Book (p. 154) sometime after 1924, possibly during his 1925 seminar on 
cal source for this central figure in Jung’s active imagination. 
Jung painted three versions of Philemon.  The first was based on a drea
A winged Philemon flies across from left to right gazing out at the viewer; he 
holds a key ring in his right hand and holds a key aloft in the left.  He has the 
horns of a bull with a sun in the background creating a halo-effect. (Wehr, 1989, 
p. 72)  Shamdasani mentions Blak
needs more elaboration.  Timing 
is important here as there was
significant rediscovery of this 
visionary poet made manifes
the founding of the William 
Blake Society in 1912.  We know
that Jung owned The William 
Blake Calendar (1913) and its 
daily quotes celebrating the life 
of the imagination would have given Jung encouragement in the experiment that 
he was about to undertake.  His depiction of Philemon owes something to Blake’s
The Elohim Creating Adam and Plate 11 of the Book of Job that is accompanied 
by the quote “With Dreams upon
e’s influence on Jung’s artistic project but this 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 6   “Elohi m Creati ng Adam” by 
Wi lli am Blake.  The Seer and Hi s Vi si ons, p. 
57. 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
6
“Analytical Psychology” when he spoke for 
 
he 
s.  
n 
n-
Bollingen. (1964/1972, p.198) 
The technique of active imagination 
that Jung was developing helped him process 
the libido that was building up during this 
period of deep introversion.  He described  
the first time about his encounter with the 
unconscious.  Philemon wearing a floral 
tunic with his hands cupping a precious
light hovers over a domed building.  In t
background is a grove of palm tree
Philemon’s costume and axial compositio
are clearly derived from Byzantine 
iconography.  I would also suggest that the 
picture more specifically reflects the o
going influence of Ravenna on Jung’s 
imagination.  The domed building closely resembles the Tomb of Theodoric 
found there.  Furthermore, the blue 
background and rondels across the top of the 
picture are similar to those that decorate the 
Tomb of Galla Placidia.  It was this version of 
Philemon that Jung later painted as a fresco 
in the guest bedroom of his tower at 
Not for  r epubli cati on
Fi gure 7   Phi lemon, C.G. J ung, 
The Red Book, 154. 
Fi gure 8   Actual domed 
bui ldi ng at top of Fi gure 7.  
Tomb of Theodori c.  Author’s 
photo. 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
7
the fig
al, symbolic form.  The 
 
ital 
 
den 
ome.  
ized 
 
Liber P d 
 
His robe later becomes green as he kneels be
ures that he encountered as 
“personified emotions” and “realized” 
them in pictori
Fi gure 9   Mosai c cei li ng from 
the Tomb of Galla Placi di a. 
symbol that Jung uses most frequently 
throughout the book is the snake which
appears on the very first page in the cap
“D.”  It emerges from a pot of fire with a
crown on its head and symbolizes the 
Kundalini energy that was being activated 
in Jung.  The snake appears in many 
different ways, as a harmless black gar
snake in two following capitals before 
appearing at the feet of Elijah and Sal
On page 54 the snake erupts with volcanic 
force and from its mouth sprouts a styl
tree.  Jung enhanced the snake’s power and 
majesty by his attention to its twisting body
and beautifully intricate pattern of scales. 
One of the most interesting new 
elements to be found in The Red Book is 
Jung’s representation of himself.  In the 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
rimus we see him as a white robe
pilgrim with black hair in a page-boy cut. 
Fi gure 10   Snake erupti ng, C.G. 
J ung, The Red Book, 54. 
fore the giant Izdubar, an early name  
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
8
of Gilgamesh (p. 36), one of the most important figures Jung was to encounte
his inner journey.  An interesting amplification of 
this motif of the pilgrim is found in a bookplate of 
r on 
 
e 
 
as 
or 
 Ed  of 
 (
d in 1909 and very possibly 
irst appears on p. 29.  It rises up from a 
subterranean ball of magma and glares at us with its sharp set of teeth.  I think 
Jung’s that dates from this period (it appears in a 
book published in 1918).  This bookplate shows a 
kneeling woman drinking from a cup offered by a 
robed man.  A river winds through the middle 
ground and the sun rises in the distance.  The 
accompanying motto reads “POST TENEBRAS 
LUX” (“After darkness, light”).  The lettering of
Jung’s name is done in an art nouveau style; th
skilled rendering of the figures indicates either a
major step in his artistic skill or the fact that it w
done by another hand.  One possible inspiration f
its iconography was the Tarot deck designed by 
Pamela Colman Smith under the direction of Arthur
the Order of the Golden Dawn.  The Temperance card
suggestive in this regard.  The deck was publishe
became familiar to Jung, who owned several books by Waite, while he was 
immersing himself in astrology. 
We also get to watch several other of Jung’s symbol systems unfold 
through the pictures.  An example of this can be found with the image of 
Atmavictu (“breath of life”) who f
Fi gure 11 Temperance 
Tarot Card.   Illustrations 
from the Rider-Waite Tarot Deck® 
r
ward Waite, a member
XIV) is the most 
eproduced by permission of U.S. 
Games Systems, Inc., Stamford, CT 
06902 USA.  Copyright ©1971 by 
U.S. Games Systems, Inc.  Further 
reproduction prohibited.  The 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Rider-Waite Tarot Deck® is a 
registered trademark of 
U.S. Games Systems, Inc. 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
9
that th
 
 
r 
rs. 
 of 
associated with Phanes who in Orphic 
mythology was born from an egg.  
Telesphoros was one of the Cabiri, phallic 
daimons who can be seen sprouting from 
the flowers.  These figures had lifelong 
significance for Jung and were the subject 
of sculptures that he later carved. 
e decorated border gives us a clue as 
to one of its meanings.  The colorful images
are rendered in a child-like style; the image
directly below Atmavictu shows a 
caterpillar with a reclining figure inside.  
We are reminded that from the caterpilla
emerges the butterfly (psyche).  Jung 
included many alligators, insects, and 
scarabs to go along with all the snakes, a 
sea monster, dragon, and a dinosaur.  He 
concentrated on “cold-blooded” creatures 
more distant from the human experience than their mammalian successo
Atmavictu was connected to Philemon and Izdubar in a complex web
correspondences discussed in the 
footnotes.  The last major figure to emerge 
was Telesphoros, a god of healing 
Not for  r epubli cati on
Fi gure 12   Atmavi ctu, C.G. J ung, 
The Red Book, 29. 
Fi gure 13   C.G. J ung, The Red 
Book, 123. 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
10
What have we learned now 
an art-historical approach to better
We have already noticed the neo-Byz
Jung’s preference for Middle Easte
throughout.  One highly visible contem
source was the popularity of the Ballet Russe 
with its extravagant Orientalist productions, 
many of which were designed by Leon Bakst to 
that we didn’t know from the images 
previously published in the 
illustrated biographies by Aniela 
Jaffe and Gerhard Wehr?  Although 
Jung resisted “the voice’s” 
characterization of what he was 
doing as being “art” we must pursue 
 understand Jung’s project. 
antine style of Philemon; in addition, 
rn costumes and arabesques can be found 
porary 
showc
connection can be found via Robert Edmun
American tour of Till Eulenspiegel.  In the 
1920’s, Jones went to Zurich for analysis with 
Jung and was shown The Red Book  which 
impressed him with its theatricality.  Even if he did not visit it, it is likely that 
ase Nijinsky’s dancing.  Nicholas Roerich 
was another of its designers and Jung owned 
his 1925 Tibetan Paintings.  A further 
d 
Jones who did sets for the company’s 1916 
Fi gure 14   Ballet Russe set. 
Fi gure 15   Ballet Russe
costume. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
11
Jung w
 
d Book reflects a great many other 
h, a view he 
picked
 to 
,
 do 
n dr
as aware of the Muhammedan Art Exhibit held in Munich in 1910 which 
brought the glories of Islamic civilization to the attention of a wider European
audience. 
What is new and exciting is how The Re
artistic traditions as well.  One can see 
Jung experimenting with Navajo sand 
painting, Aztec jade masks, Celtic, and 
tribal art.  Jung even includes a Minoan 
double-bladed ax in his picture of Izdubar.  
Jung’s research into anthropology, 
mythology, psychology, and the history of 
religions along with his field trips to North 
Africa, the American Southwest, and Africa 
tuned him into the global culture just 
beginning to emerge in the years after 
1900.  Jung was keenly aware that modern society was so individualized and 
secularized that it no longer operated within a single collective myt
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gur  drawi ng i n e 16   J ung  
Navaj o style.  C.G. J ung, The Red 
Book,  96. 
 up from Nietzsche’s The Birth of Trag
considered his era’s spiritual template
went on to develop a psychology appropriate 
15, 1909) Jung wrote that “Greek syncretism
theogony and theology, can nevertheless
and the recognition of similarities, as i
edy.  Like many of his generation he 
be Alexandria rather than Athens and 
to it.  In a letter to Freud (November 
 by creating a hopeless mishmash of 
us a service:  it permits reductions 
eam analysis.” (1974, p. 264)  As time 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
12
went on his therapeutic goal became that of helping people discover mea
their often fragmented sense of self and society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ning in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fi gure 17   Navaj o Sand Pai nti ng.
Fi gure 18   J ung drawi ng i n Aztec
style.  C.G. J ung, The Red Book,  
133. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fi gure 19   Mask of J ade.  From 
Palenque, Mexi co. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 20   J ung drawi ng i n Celti c 
sty .  le.  C.G. J ung, The Red Book,  152
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 21   The Book of Kells.
Not for  r epubli cati on 
 
Fi gure 22   J ung drawi ng resembli ng 
Cuna art from Panama.  C.G. J ung, 
The Red Book,  22.
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ung’s encyclop progressive demeanor were moderated 
by an ingrained allegiance to the conservative humanism taught in his native 
rprised by the 
y first 
i, Taurus, 
Aries, Pisces, and Aqu ges late (folio 
) and again tow  an image that echoes the 
Temperance card. 
Fi gure 23   Cuna art from Panama.
Not for  r epubli cati on 
J edic appetites and 
Basel.  This side of Jung’s nature is most vividly reflected in The Red Book by his 
devotion to the traditional form of medieval manuscripts.  I was su
large number of illuminated capitals that grace its pages from beginning to end.  
In them many different kinds of flowers are depicted in loving detail.  He paid 
homage to that era’s genius by including a stained glass window (p. 79) and 
multiple references to astrology.  The band across the top of the ver
decorated capital letter is inscribed with the signs of Cancer, Gemin
arius rs several pa .  The Water-carrier appea
v ard the end of the book on p. 123 in
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
16
Jung mixed avant-garde elements 
with traditional forms throughout the 
book.  He wrote pictographs on some of his 
mandalas as if he were trying to recreate a 
primordial writing system.  Remember that
the avant-garde artists of the years before
World War I were obsessed with 
discovering the “primitive” as a mea
escaping the iron cage of civilization.  
Besides tribal art, they turned to the art of
children and the insane for inspiration.  
The boldest part of 
 
 
ns of 
 
the book is the section entitled “Incantations” in which the 
hing from the cosmic egg.  Rather than 
a
g rated 
n
d
k
o
 t
Front while he sought to discover a new birth of meaning by going on a journey 
p
directed to the psyche rather than to a c 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 24   C.G. J ung, The Red 
Book,  50. 
rebirth of Izdubar culminates in his hatc
simply reading the text we should im
an association heightened by noticin
like a Tibetan prayer rug.  Participati
help in re-enchanting a dis-enchante
nihilistic assaults on culture underta
same time he was doing The Red Bo
meaninglessness of a world bleeding
within.  He found their blasphemies 
gine chanting the verses like some shaman, 
 that the first page of the series is deco
g in this auditory-visual experience would 
 world.  Jung was uncomfortable with the 
en by the Dadaists active in Zurich at the 
k.  They savagely celebrated the 
o death in the trenches of the Western 
uerile and sought to foster a new piety, one 
 deity.  Artistically he had a neo-Romanti
distaste for the modernist ethos then gaining ascendancy, an ethos that favored
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
17
the elimination of all ornamentation 
and historical reference in a work of 
art.  Years later Jung registered his 
disdain for this development when he 
wrote “How are we to explain the 
blatantly pathological element in 
modern painting?” (CW 10: 430) 
Jung was an “avant-garde 
conservative” and this duality is best 
expressed by the mandala on p. 125.  
As he often did, Jung divided this 
picture into transcendental and 
mundane zones.  The upper zone is do
while below he paints a Swiss landsca
by a yogi, eyes closed in meditation,
further divided into left and right:  the 
the right shows its industrial realit
the left to keep the gritty smoke of
pastoral world. 
Fi gure 25   C.G. J ung, The Red Book,  
125.
Not for  r epubli cati on 
mi
pe 
 hold
le
y.  Sig
 mo
entary 
 20
(1909). A more serious omission is the 
Wilhelm Worringer whose Abstraction and Empathy
nated by a radiating golden mandala 
in a folk-art style.  The two are mediated 
ing a vase aloft.  The landscape can be 
ft shows the country’s rural side while 
nificantly, a strong wind is blowing from 
dernity from polluting the traditional, 
needs amplification is the account of 
3).  First, there is no mention of the fact 
fact that Jung owned four books by 
One place where the comm
Jung’s library of modern art books (p.
that Jung owned a book by the Swiss Symbolist painter Giovanni Segantini 
 (1908) was revolutionizing 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
18
the study of art with its analysis of the psychological foundations of artistic styles.  
Jung had used the book in his paper on psychological types at the psychoanalytic 
congress held in Munich in September 1913, the last he was to attend.  
Furthermore, his Red Book pictures show his application of Worringer’s ideas.  
To use just one example look again at the picture of Elijah and Salome (Figure 2
To more fully grasp his intentions one must treat the border and the picture as a
totality; it is only then the polarities that J
).  
 
ung was trying to convey become clear:  
star/b . 
ion 
n of 
ic, 
eminiscent of the Belgian 
Symbolist painter James Ensor.  It serves 
memento mori and a kind of closure 
lue/masculine/linear/thinking and snake/red/feminine/sinuous/feeling
In The Transformative Vision Jose Argüelles wrote that “most observers 
did not appreciate the creative, artistically transformative value of Jung’s vis
until they were plunged into greater awareness by the psychedelic revolutio
the 1960’s.” (1975, p. 223)  Since the days when Jung dreamed of Liverpool and 
joined Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Hearts 
Club (top row between W.C. Fields and 
Edgar Allen Poe) his sense of mag
mystery, and touring has caught on with 
more people than ever before. 
In the last picture of the book, faces 
arranged around a mandala morph 
outward into skulls (p. 169) in a style 
uncannily r
as a 
Fi gure 26    “Self-Por trai t wi th
Masks”, J ames Ensor. 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
 
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
19
since i
familiar faces of people who soon afte
die.” (p. 30, 1961/1989)  Done in the 
mandala looks like a nuclear rainbow 
explosion.  Jung ended his book forty
after he started it, writing in his norm
stopping in the middle of a sentence, 
word “possibility” sitting alone at the top of 
page.  This, along with the fact that th
capital was blocked but not executed   the f
now letting go of a project that had be in
We might also understand it as his sly atio
sed bo a
 
t recalls caricatures he drew as a boy.  
“Similar caricatures sometimes appear to me 
before falling asleep to this day, grinning masks 
that constantly move and change, among them 
rward 
1950’s the 
-six years 
al script 
the last 
a 
e last 
(p. 187), conveys
en so crucial to his 
 hermetical invit
ok but a contempor
going play of creative fantasy.  One might imagine his Red
to the psyche, a personal odyssey that began in Basel and e
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not for  r epubli cati on 
Fi gure 27   The last i mage i n The Red 
Book.  C.G. J ung, The Red Book, 169. 
eeling that Jung was 
dividuation process.  
n to remember that 
ry template for the on-
Book as a user’s guide 
nded with Zen.  
what we are holding is not a clo
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
20
The images in this paper are strictly for educational use and are protected by United States copyright laws. 
Unauthorized use will result in criminal and civil penalties. 
21
ns, New York: 
armony Books. 
cGuire, W. Ed. (1974) The Freud/Jung Letters, Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
oerich, George (1925) Tibetan Painting, Paris: Libraire Orientalist, Paul 
Geuthners. 
ehr, Gehr (1989) An Illustrated Biography of C.G. Jung, Boston: Shambhala. 
lished 
 Francisco Jung 
ität 
hed 
by Palgrave Macmillan in October 2010. 
References 
 
Argüelles, Jose (1975) The Transformative Vision, Berkeley: Shambhala. 
Jung, C. G. (1964/1970) Civilization in Transition, CW 10. 
------------- (1964/1972) Man and His Symbols, New York: Doubleday. 
------------- (1961/1989) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, New York: Vintage 
Books. 
Klonsky, Milton (1977) William Blake, The Seer and His Visio
H
M
R
W
 
 
Biography: Jay Sherry is an educator living in Brooklyn, NY.  He has pub
in such journals as Harvest, Quadrant, Spring, and the San
Institute Library Journal.  He received his Ph.D. from the Freie Univers
Berlin.  His book Carl Gustav Jung, Avant-Garde Conservative will be publis