The Theory Behind the HBDI®
and Whole Brain Technology®

Ned Herrmann

better results through better thinking

Dominance, such as handedness, can occur
between two parts of a physically living
whole. Dominance is perfectly normal and
natural. It is part of the human condition, and
all human beings experience its consequences everyday.The human body is made up
largely of paired structures, most of which are
not perfectly matched. Stated differently, the
apparent mirror image symmetry of the
human body (arms, legs, face, eyes) is in
Dominant Eye – “Right-Eyed”

Dominant or “Strong” Arm

Dominant Hand – “Right Handed”

Dominant or “Strong” Leg
Dominant Foot – “Right Footed”

reality an array of asymmetrical parts. It is this
fundamental asymmetry that leads to the
concept of dominance. For example, most
people have a dominant arm and hand, a
dominant leg and foot, and a dominant eye.
For most of us, this choice is made early in life
and continues to gain strength through
usage. It stands to reason that if we prefer to
use our right arm and hand, we will use it
more often and use it in a variety of ways, all
of which will add to the strength of the right
arm and hand and its capability to perform
tasks such as carpentry, drawing and writing.
These physical examples of body preferences
are the more obvious illustrations of the presence and consequence of dominance.

The human body also has many other paired
structures that are located internally and not
visibly obvious. These include our two lungs
and kidneys. Of major importance are the
paired structures that exist in the brain. These
are comprised of the two big hemispheres
and the two halves of the limbic system, both
of which are connected together by powerful
links that allow the four of them to function
on a coordinated basis.
Just as is the case with our hands, feet, and
eyes, these paired brain structures are asymmetrical. They are different physically and
chemically as a result of being specialized
to think in different ways and to do different
things.
In the case of hands, feet and eyes, these
dominance differences are quite obvious.
For example, we use our dominant hand
more frequently than our non-dominant
hand and, therefore, it becomes stronger and
more capable. In the case of the brain, our
preference to think in particular ways results
in more frequent use of that particular brain
part (one hemisphere or one limbic half ) with
the resulting development of greater competency for that set of mental activities that are
located in those specialized parts. Just as our
less developed non-dominant hand assists
our stronger, more skillful dominant hand, the
less developed brain structures collaborate
with the more preferred (and therefore dominant) thought processes of our brain in order
to more fully apply our best mental ability
to everyday tasks and events. It is natural for
our brain to form a coalition of the specialized structures in order to deal with complex
situations.
At birth, the brain is without developed preferences, and, is therefore, essentially whole.
As the brain matures, it acquires preferences
as a result of the individual’s life experiences.
The developing brain is, therefore, an evolving
coalition of many different preferences.

2 better results through better thinking

Whole Brain Technology® provides a basis for
measuring these different preferences by
determining the degree of dominance that
has developed among the four thinking
structures of the brain. These parts consist of
the two cerebral pairs (hemispheres) and the
ARCHITECTURE
Four Interconnected Clusters of
Specialized Mental Processing Modes,

That Function Together and Iteratively,
Making up a Whole Brain in Which
One or More Parts Becomes Naturally Dominant.

The Organizing Principle
©1998 Herrmann International

and the left and right halves of the limbic
system. The two left side structures combine
to represent what is popularly called left
brain thinking. The two right side structures
combine to represent right brain thinking. The
two cerebral structures combine to represent
cerebral thinking and the two limbic structures combine to represent limbic thinking.
The HBDI® is capable of measuring the degree
of preference between each of the four individual thinking structures (quadrants) and
each of the four paired structures (modes).
This thinking assessment is accomplished
through a 120-question survey instrument,
the responses to which assess the strength of
the four different thinking quadrants and
compares each to one another. This results in
a four-quadrant profile, which displays the
degree of preference for each of the four
quadrants.These profiles are different for

two limbic pairs (limbic halves). All four of
which are massively interconnected. Taken
together, these represent a Whole Brain®
divided into four equal quadrants, designated
as A, B, C, and D.
The HBDI®, through its scientifically designed
questions, is capable of isolating out and
measuring the strength of preference for each
of these four thinking parts. These consist
of the left and right cerebral hemispheres

different occupations. Shown here is a representative array of occupational profiles. The
differences between the profiles result from
the mental differences required by different
occupations. Our active database of about
200,000 profiles represents over 200 occupations. Taken together, these profiles are
equally distributed in the four quadrant

3 better results through better thinking

model and can be thought of as a balanced
universe of thinking styles.
This ability to profile thinking styles is a major
application of Whole Brain Technology®. As
a tool, the HBDI® is the validated, worldwide
standard for accomplishing this assessment.
Once an individual or group has their HBDI®
profile, they are better able to successfully
apply not only their understanding of their
thinking style, but also their preferred learning, communicating, and problem solving
styles, to name a few. Experience over the last
20 years has shown that individual and group
applications of the HBDI® and the Whole
Brain Technology® are almost without limit.

December 1, 1998

4

better results through better thinking

Clients
The Herrmann International clients, for whom better thinking has become integral to their business culture,
include:

American Express

Harris Corporation

Rogers Communications

Bank of America

HBO

St. John’s University

BB&T

IBM

Schering-Plough

Blue Cross Blue Shield

Johnson & Johnson

Shell Oil

BMW

JP Morgan Chase

Target

Boeing

Kaiser Permanente

Telus Mobility

Chevron

Limited Brands

The Clarion Group

Cintas

Microsoft

Tommy Hilfiger

Cisco

Milliken & Company

3M

Coca-Cola

MTV Networks

University of Pretoria, S. Africa

Columbia Business School

National Semiconductor

US Navy

Disney University

Nortel Networks

Vanderbilt University

DuPont

North Carolina Courts

Victoria’s Secret

Gardian Life

Novartis

Wharton Business School

GE

Perdue Pharma

Weyerhaeuser Corporation

Global Lead

Proctor and Gamble

Xerox

The Originators of Whole Brain Technology® and the Creators of the Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument (HBDI)®
794 Buffalo Creek Road. Lake Lure, NC 28746. Phone: 1-828-625-9153 or 1-800-432-hbdi Fax: 1-828-625-2146

www.hbdi.com.

03-09

