Are you wearing

your own genes?

System makes the
claim, like astrology,
that at the moment of
birth we are genetically
imprinted with a unique
underlying blueprint. In
that split-second as
we emerge from the
unseen world, like a
photographic negative
exposed to the light,
every page of our life
story is encoded in the
sequence of our DNA.
The Human Design
System is founded upon
logic, and logic is
founded upon the
repetition of patterns.
The cracking of the
genetic code in the
1960s was perhaps the
most important
discovery of the last
century. It shows us
that there exists a
fundamental universal
on our planet. The
revelation of Human

clearly seen and read by
means of a simple chart
calculated from the time
and place of your birth,
a process known as
Human Design Analysis.

20

S

Projectors have no energy system linked to the throat,
and no sacral centre connected in their circuitry.
Projectors are the original mercenaries. They can do
the jobs that no one else in the world can do, and if
you call on them they can really deliver the goods.
Projectors are the first of the two non-energy types.
Obviously this does not mean that they have no
energy. In fact, they have access to more energy
than almost anyone else, but first they have to be
recognised. The projector is waiting for
‘investors’ to recognise their specific talents and
skills, whatever they may be.
Projectors are natural networkers, whose gift
is to manage the energy of other people. For
example, a projector who is a healer will be
much more successful if they accept only the
people who recognise their gift beforehand. Since
their personal fulfilment depends on having the
right people in their life, projectors have a natural
gift for reading the people around them.
Projectors have an extremely deep need to be
seen.The projector sitting at the dinner party with a
group of strangers has to trust in the power of their
own chemistry. Their silence will always draw the
invitation of the person or people who recognise them.
That is how they know who is right for them.They have to
be patient. If they jump into the conversation like a
manifestor they can end up feeling deeply drained by wasting
their energy on people who do not understand them. When the
projector trusts in the silent magic of their chemistry, many
incredible opportunities begin to come their way.
In our magic football team, projectors are the midfielders. They move
between the forwards and the defenders (manifestors and generators).They set
up the ball for the forwards, and feed it back to the defenders.Their skill is to direct
the entire game by co-ordinating with the other players as and when they are needed.

Kindred Spirit Issue 52 Autumn 2000

C

E

patterns can actually be

E

J

Design is that these

Projectors

S
R
TO

O
PR

pattern underlying all life

The manifestor is a design that has one of three energy systems in the body activated in a circuit
to the throat centre, the centre of manifestation and expression.
Manifestors are people of action. Of all the four human types these are the only people who
are specifically designed to act without waiting. This is often a shock to people who are
introduced to their true design, since the capacity to manifest and act is something we take for
granted in our society. The irony is that although a vast part of our conditioning is telling us all to
be manifestors, less than 10 per cent of us actually are manifestors.
The manifestor is by nature a lone wolf. Because they can act independently of other people,
they are not designed to be controlled by society in any way. They are regarded as dangerous and
unpredictable by others.The strategy that manifestors must learn is to inform before they act. For
example, if you are a manifestor attending a dinner party and you have something valuable to say,
your natural tendency will be to simply jump right in and say it. If you do so, you will soon discover
that you are either not heard, or vehemently resisted. We are talking about living biogenetic
strategies that are felt across rooms. If the manifestor simply asks politely before they speak, they
immediately put those around them at ease.
If we were to create an imaginary football team out of the four types of human beings,
manifestors would be the forwards. They are the talent, the ones we all like to
glamorise. They are the goal-scorers. Their style is often wild, unpredictable
and full of genius. But they pay a price for being in the limelight, a sense
of isolation that comes from others resisting and resenting their true
nature. If they can learn humility at the same time as retaining their
wildness, they can live deeply fulfilling and powerful lives.

IF

The Human Design

Manifestors

MA
N

The Human
Design System

Human Design
Analysis
Part two

T

O

RS

In the previous issue of Kindred Spirit, Richard Rudd (the first Human
Design analyst in the UK) presented a basic introduction to the Human
Design System, a revolutionary new synthesis. It makes the claim that
the true nature of any individual can be revealed through a genetic
imprint determined from the time of our birth. Here Richard takes us
further into this new paradigm.
Generators
Generators are designs that have a defined sacral centre, the centre of the life force itself.
If you want to see a truly powerful human being at work, you have only to watch a generator living
out their true nature in the world. Generators are pure energy beings, but unlike manifestors they
are not designed to initiate action. Generators are designed to respond to life and thus they have a
design to wait. Patience is the great key for generators. Statistically, generators make up over 65 per cent
of the population, which says something rather profound about human beings in general. Perhaps we
need to slow down a little!
The great theme of all generators is frustration. Being a generator is akin to having a Ferrari engine
under your bonnet, but being stuck in first gear.They have to wait until the gear-change is brought to
them. Generators never know what is right for them unless they have first waited to respond, for their
chemistry is designed to attract forces and people that initiate them and ask them. However, out of
ignorance of their own nature, generators rarely manage to live out their true potential. Feeling stuck is
a natural part of their process and needs to be understood as such. The generator who finds the
patience to wait out their process is always deeply rewarded.
Generators need more than anything to learn to trust in the power of waiting.They are
potentially the most powerful of all the four types, but for them action must first arise
out of receptivity.
In our mythical football team, generators are the defenders. They are
the backbone of humanity. They have to wait until the ball comes to
them, and if they can accept this limitation, then they can truly
excel at whatever they do.

GE
N

E

R

Reflectors

A

T

Reflectors have no defined centres and no fixed circuitry.
Reflectors are statistically by far the rarest of the four
types. They have nothing fixed in their nature at all. In
Human Design, the white or undefined centres in
someone’s chart are where we are open and
vulnerable to the conditioning of others. Because of
this the undefined centres represent the areas of
our life where we can be the most confused and,
paradoxically, where we can be the most wise.
Because reflectors are so open and unfixed in
their nature, they often look for the stability of
someone else’s chemistry in their life. More often
than not, this role is most comfortably filled for
them by the presence of children, who provide an
innocent aura around them.They also have a deep
need to regularly have time away from people in
order to clear the space within themselves.
Reflectors are also unusual in another way.
The openness of their design gives them a deep
affinity with the moon. Since the moon moves
around the entire Human Design Wheel (see image)
once in every month, it also opens up a regular pattern
of energy in our chemistry each month. This is where
reflectors can find stability. In other words, reflectors
have regular cycles each month where they can live out all
the other three energy types. For example, they may have
three days in every month when they are a manifestor, then
four when they are a generator, and so on.
In our team, the reflector is the goalkeeper. They are a rare
breed, being perhaps the most crucial single member of the team even
though they themselves do not move around the field like the other players.
They operate according to different laws; for example they are able to use their
hands whereas the other players cannot.They are perhaps the most limited and at the
same time the most unlimited people among us, and their perspective is truly unique.

O

C

T

O

RS

RS

F
E
R

L

E

Four types of
human beings
An empirical fusion of
both science and
esoterica, Human
Design draws on a vast
array of knowledge,
including the I Ching.
The I Ching is a logical
binary system that just
happens to dovetail
symmetrically and
exactly into the
mathematics of our
genetic code. What all
this reveals is the
existence of four very
specific types of human
being, reflecting the four
basic building blocks of
our DNA, known to
science as the ‘four
bases’.
These four distinct
human profiles are not
simply divisions made
according to psychology,
nor are they personality
types. According to
Human Design they are
the living biogenetic
patterns that are
stamped behind every
cell of our bodies. They
determine our health,
sexuality, relationships,
our dream life and even
the way in which we
breathe. They are the
very music of our
chemistry. The question
is: are we in tune
with them?

Kindred Spirit Issue 52 Autumn 2000

21

PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT

Human Design and relationships:

Chemistry

Adam

In a relationship we become someone
else. The great revelation of Human
Design is that chemistry isn’t personal. All
difficulties in relationships are because
people take it personally! When two
people stand within each other’s aura they
are no longer who they were before they
walked into the room. Look at the composite chart of the two people below. You
can see that two perfectly normal human
beings (but for the fact that they are made
up) turn into one whole new creature
with its own unique design and chemistry.
Now let’s have a look at how this works
through the lens of a Human Design
reading.
First of all, wherever you see colour in
someone’s chart, you are seeing what is
fixed in their nature. The centres in white
are the aspects of our life that we cannot
rely upon since they are not fixed. So we
can see that Adam is a strong mental type
(the green centre in the head), and that
since he is a projector, he needs someone
to recognise him for this and to engage
him intellectually. Eve, on the other hand,
has a very open nature, with only one
fixed channel in her design, the
channel of rhythm. She is a deeply
rhythmical woman who flows
through life responding to
whatever comes her way (she is a
generator).
And what do you think
happens when they meet?
Chemistry happens. Adam
has a real depth within him
that few people recognise
(the little black channel
in his spleen centre
that looks towards the
throat). Eve on the
other hand, has an
undefined (white)
Adam and Eve
throat
centre
with the opposite end of the channel to
Adam. She has the skills to express her
talent, but is always waiting for someone to
bring her the depth.This entire channel is
called the ‘channel of talent’, and that is
one of the themes of their particular

22

Kindred Spirit Issue 52 Autumn 2000

Eve

chemistry together. Eve ‘borrows’ Adam’s
chemistry to finally express her voice,
whilst Adam ‘borrows’ Eve’s skills and
finally gets to express all the deep ideas
that he probably didn’t even know he had!
There are many types of chemistries
that manifest between two people. The
couple below also have a deep emotional
connection together (the brown centre on
the right), which neither of them have
when they are alone. This channel 39/55,
the ‘channel of emoting’, is a deeply
romantic and specifically acoustic connection between our couple. It creates a
moody chemistry between them, which
means that if they stay together they will
be the kind of couple who are always
falling in and out of love with each other.
These types of connections, when two
different aspects of our chemistry create a
whole new circuit, are called electromagnetic, since they create sparks
between people. These sparks can be
love, or they can be hate.
Other types of connections between
humans are compromise, dominance and
companionship (see panel right). Most
relationships have a mix of them all,
but it is easy to get a flavour of any
relationship
through
Human
Design Analysis. Some are more
based on friendship than sexuality, others are steamy but
short-lived, others still can
encounter troubles because
of the balance of compromise in the relationship. According
to
Human Design, there is
actually no such thing
as ‘good’ or ‘bad’
chemistry.
Any
relationship can
be manageable
in relationship
and fulfilling as
long as both parties understand that the
true dynamic cannot be taken personally.
Many of us fall into the trap of trying to
change the people around us, instead of
understanding that our genes are simply
what they are.

The four types
of chemistry
in relationships

1 Electromagnetic:
The chemistry of love
When two
people have the
opposite ends of
the same
channel.
This is what is
described as the‘sparks’
between people. Love/hate,
attraction/repulsion.

2 Compromise:
The chemistry of yielding
When one person has one half of
a channel and the other
has the whole channel,
frustration can arise.
For example, if one of
them has a whole
communication channel
and the other has the
same channel half full,
the person with half a
channel may feel like
they have to wait for the
other person to finish speaking
before they can be heard. This
combination is not necessarily
negative and can be overcome
with compromise and
understanding.

3 Dominance:
The chemistry of others
When one person has a whole
channel and the other has
nothing in that channel.
This chemistry enables
us to differentiate
between our own
patterns and those of
others. From there we
either accept them,
learn from them or
leave them!

4 Companionship:
The chemistry of balance
When both people
have the same
channel. The most
comfortable chemistry
between two people, and
the source of friendship.
Too many of these
however, and you may
become bored!

PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT
The Geometry of Incarnation
Most of us tend to think of the idea of ‘reincarnation’ as a
concept that we have inherited from the East, but it is not
the case. In the days before Christianity, much of the
Western world shared a common belief in what was called
‘the transmigration of the soul’. Both Pythagoras and Plato
developed theories of reincarnation, as did the Druid
priesthood of Western Europe. Furthermore, both of these
schools of thought had a very profound knowledge of
geometry; the Ancient Greeks through their love of
mathematics and music, and the Celts through the precise
astronomical observations embodied in the great stone
circles of Europe.
At the heart of the Human Design System also lies a
single matrix that claims to represent the unfolding of the
entire evolution of life on our planet. This is the image of
the Wheel (see right). Every single type of chart that can be
calculated by the Human Design System originates
somewhere in this Wheel.

The Human Design Wheel is
a universal mandala for all
known life.
In the Wheel, we can
see
the
traditional
astrological division of
the zodiac into the
twelve basic signs
that we all know.
However, in Human
Design there are
69,200 permutations
going around the
Wheel. As the Wheel
turns, so life evolves.
Every single genetic
combination of life can
be traced within this
Wheel from the moment it
is born. It is literally the
stringing out of our genetic code.

Incarnation Crosses
According to the source of the Human
Design System, there are no such things as
old souls and young souls.We all began our
journey together at the same time, with the
Big Bang.We are a growing entity. Each one
of us is a cell within the giant body of the
universe and no single cell is more important than any other. We simply filter different
aspects of the whole. In Human Design
Analysis, when you come to a deeper level
of reading (the ‘Incarnation Cross’), we are
looking beyond our mere behavioural
patterns and out into the cosmos. It is here
that we find our life purpose and our
destiny. In the language of Human Design,
it is where we see our ‘geometry’.
Without getting too technical, this is
how it works: in Human Design our basic

duality is represented by the position of
both the Sun and the Earth at our birth.The
Sun is what we inherit genetically from our
father, and the Earth from our mother. In the
Wheel, these two are always exactly
opposite each other. Furthermore, in
Human Design we have two moments of
imprinting: one when we are born, and one
88 degrees (about three calendar months)
of the zodiac prior to our birth.
Thus every birth chart is made up of
four archetypal forces which form a cross in
the wheel (see above). This slightly offset
cross (since it is 88 degrees rather than 90)
is called our Incarnation Cross. Each
Incarnation Cross has a name and a specific
purpose (see right). Again, there are many
thousands of variations of these crosses.

The Cross of the Sleeping Phoenix: the coming of spirit
There is a buzz word in genetics: ‘mutation’.
Mutations are basically variations that are
made when our genes replicate themselves.
Mutations are a key to evolution for it is
these changes in the geometry that
ultimately create new variations within
species. It was a mutation in the larynx that
separated homo sapiens from our primate
ancestors, since it gave us the ability to
express complex sounds and, eventually,
language. According to the source of the
Human Design System, humanity is almost
ripe for its next major mutation.
As was mentioned earlier, the Human
Design System claims that in the mandala
of the Wheel lies the key to the
evolutionary pattern of all life on our
planet. By tracking the movement of the
precession of the equinoxes through the
Wheel we can actually watch the greater
unfolding of humanity itself. For the past
385 years, we have been moving through
an area of the Wheel that has to do with the

creation of a global community. The results
of this can easily be seen today.
In the year 2027, our global cycle will
trigger a new role for the Incarnation Cross
known as ‘The Cross of the Sleeping
Phoenix’. According to the source of the
Human Design System, this Cross is
holding a dormant potential. For countless
millennia the Phoenix has slept, hidden
away somewhere in our genes, waiting for
its moment. We are told that in the year
2027, this dormancy breaks and the first
children will be born carrying the
awakening Phoenix as a physical genetic
mutation. If it is true, it would be an
extraordinary moment in the history of our
species, for it is this very mutation that
brings with it the permanent awareness of
the realm of spirit. It is the Phoenix that
holds the final great mutation for the body
of humanity, for it promises the ultimate
flowering of our consciousness as a
KS
species.

Each Incarnation Cross is a fractal
archetype of our true purpose
during any lifetime. Below are some
simplified examples:
The Cross of The Laws: people
who enforce laws or bring new laws.
The Cross of Eden: people who
embody wisdom through the loss of
innocence.
The Cross of Denial: people who
bring boundaries through denial.
The Cross of Healing: people who
are here to heal and/or be healed.
The Cross of the Clarion: people
who are here to bring a new
message into the world.
MORE INFORMATION

•Since this article was written The Human
Design System has taken its first steps
towards being fully recognised as a new
science. A controlled research programme
led by qualified MDs in the USA has
statistically proven through thousands of
case studies that the human genetic
strategies outlined above have a solid,
scientific foundation.
•There are organisations throughoput the
world for the Human Design system, in the
USA, Austria, Spain, Japan, Australia,
Italy, Russia, Ukraine, Greece and many
more.
•Richard Beaumont (a fully accredited
Human Design Analyst with many years
experience) is the head of the National
organisation for The Human Design
System in the UK. He is actively involved in
lectures, workshops, events and producing
new information on The Human Design
system.
•For further details or to download your
own Human Design chart visit the national
website: www.humandesign-uk.com
•If you would like a personal Human
Design analysis from Richard Beaumont
or more details ring the main Human
Design UK number: 01803 861067.

Kindred Spirit Issue 52 Autumn 2000

25

