   C.G. JinTG'S THEORY OF THE C0LLECTI7E UNCONSCIOUS:
              A RATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION




                TMLTER A70RY SHELBURNE




A DISSERTATION PRESENTED TO THE GRADUATE COUNCIL OF
             THE UNIVTKSITr OF FLORIDA
IN PARTIAL FULFTLU^IENT OF THE REQUIREMEI'ITS FOR THE
          DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHUOSOPHT




                UNITERSITZ OF FLORIDA

                        1976
 UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA



3 1262 08666 238 3
    Copyright 1976



Vfelter Avoiy   Shelbume
                                ACKMOIilLEDOENTS


      I irould like to grateful^sr acloioirledge
                                                 the persons of     rcr   supervisory
committee for their help in this project:
                                                   Marilyn areig, Tom Aarber,
i^anz lifting, Richard Ilaynes and Tom
                                       Simon.        Special thanks to Iferiljoi
and Tom   Sijnon   for their   tiine,
                              encouragement and helpful criticism. I
would also like to thank Debbie Botjers of
                                           the Graduate School, who, in
addition to her technical advice, has through
                                               her friendliness contri-
buted in an immeasurable and intangible way
                                            to the final preparation of
this manuscript,

     3h addition to this personal assistance, I
                                                TTould also like to aclaiow-

ledge the help of the follo;.jing agencies:
                                                   the spirit of Carl Gustav Jung,
the Archetn>e of the Self, and the three
                                         luminous beings tAo cleansed           iry

spirit.




                                   iii
                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                                                Page

ACiaro V/LEDGlJEI'rPS
                                                                                                    iii
ABSTRACT                                                                          ,                 ^
HrPRODUCTION            ,,                                                                               .,




CHAPTER    1    JUl'JG'S I-IEMTAL    CONSTRUCTS..                                           ,,..,     3

               Pgyxjhe......                                                                  ,,,
                                                                          ,                           3

               Uiconscioiis.   . .               .,,                                         .,,, 16

               Collective Ifciconscious. . . . ,                                                    19

               Notes. .................,,..,,,,,,,,,                          ,                     28

CHAPTER 2      TI£EORr OF ARCHETTPES:              PART I                                    ,,,, 30

               Introduction,..,                             ,        ,,.,,.                ..,,,. 30
               The Syrabolic Mature of the Archetypes
                                                                                      ,,        ,   l^;^



               Archetiypes and Instincts                   ,,,,...                                  hi
               Notes....              ,          ..,,,..                ,,
                                                                ,                                   ^3
CHAPTER 3      THEOrar OF ARCHETn=ES:             PART II.....                                      ^
               The Origin of the Archetypes
                                                                                                    ^
               Archelypal    ninage       and Archetype Per Se                                ., 63

               Tlae .'irchetypes     as Autonomous Factors,.                  ,                     72

               Archeigrpes and Synchroniciiy
                                                                                                    77

               Archetypes and Teniporalitiy.                                  .......,,...,. 82

               Notes                        ^                       ......,,,                       8^




                                            iv
                                                            ,




                                                                                                                  Page

 CHAPTER   li    CRITICiaiS OF             TIIE   ARCIIETIPAL TlffiOHT:
                 GHJEI'JUL COITSIDERATIOHS.             .                                                           89

                 Preliminary Remarks,                                                        ,,,                    89

                 Psychoanalytic Criticism                                                                           9^

                 Iheological Criticism.,...,.....,....,..                                            ,            102

                Ifotes.      •.•••..••••.,•.«••.••..«..«.,,                                  ..........•,.,. .111

CHAPTER ^       JTJIIG      AMD THE SCIENTIFIC ATTITDDE:                         PART I                           II6

                The Relevance of the Question.,,.,.,...,,.,,..,,..,.,                                             116

                The Charge of I-^rsticism                           .,,,..                                        11?

                l-tjrsticism       Characterized, .,,,                                         ,,,.,...,...,.119

                Is Jung a Ifystic?                                           ,                                    120

                Jung's Attitude ToTrard Science..                                                         ,       12?

                Notes                                                                                             il;i


CHAPTER 6       JUITG       AMD   TIIE   SCIEIITIFIC ATTITUDE:                   PART II,,                        ll;6


                Can There Be A Science of Arche%pes?                                                           ...II16

                Jung s Ifethodology
                        '
                                                                                      ..................I63

                Ifotes.                                                                            ...........171

CHAPTER 7       THE STUDY OF ARCHETYPES AS A SCIEIITIPIC DISCIPLINE.,                                             I7I;


                Introduction. ,.,,................,,..,.,,,,,,                                           ,,..,,.17li

                Falsifiability                     ,«,,,..,,,                    .,,»,                    ,..,,,176

                Explanation. .••...•...•....••.....,......,...,,,.,,,,,,,,, i8li

                Evidence                                        ,                  ..•.,,.                    ....I88

                Archetypes and Evolution Theory                                          ,                        196

                Notes, .•,,.....••......,,••                                       ....................199

REFERENCES                                         L                                                              203

BIOGRAPHIC.VL SKETCH                     .......^                                                             ....206
  «-f. +1,
           ^f^^^a°* of dissertation Presented to the Graduate Council
  of   the University of Florida in Partial PiiLfirijaent
                                                          of the Itequireiaents
                    for the Degree of Doctor of Hiilosopl-cr


               C.G. JUNG'S THEOHY OF THE COLLECTIVE
                                                    UNCONSCIOUS-
                              A RATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION

                                                 By

                               Vfelter Avory          Shelbume

                                        June 1976

 Chairman:      Mu?ilyn   Zireig                                                            ;.   !•   "




 Ifejor Department:       Hiilosopl-y

          This study is an examination of Jung's idea of
                                                         the collective un-
 conscious being primariay concerned id.th the chief
                                                     aspect of the collec-
 tive unconscious, the concept of the archetype.

         In the first half of the dissertation, an
                                                   attempt is made to
understand what Jung means by the archetypes.
                                                                  The e.-cposition of the

theory of archetj-pes begins xrith a look at
                                             the basic Jungian mental
constructs,     p^che and unconscious, and              td.th   a stetch of Jung's theoiy
of mind.      Then the various aspects of the idea of
                                                      the archetype are
discussed treating such topics as the
                                      ontological status of the archetype,
the archetypes as a prfx)ri conditioners
                                         of*e:cperience, the symbolic

nature of archetypes, the archetypes and
                                         the instincts, the origin of
archetypes, the phenomenology of archetypes,
                                             personification of arche-
types, the archetjTes and ^ynchronicity and
                                            changes in archetypes through
tiiae.
                                             i




         Bie exposition of the archetypal theory
                                                 is undertaken with the aim
in mijid of shCTjing   hoT7   the idea of archetypes can be construed
                                                                      as a
plausible scientific theory compatible idth
                                            standard scientific



                                        vi
                                     vii




  imder^andins.     ^^ the second half of the disserbation,             v/e   discuss
  problematic aspects of our reconstruction
                                            from the point of vietr of
  criticisms which have been brought against
                                             the theory.                AS^er a
 preldjidnaiy chapter in which criticisms of
                                             a general nature are
 discussed, we treat specific problematic
                                          aspects involved i/ith under-
 handing the archetj^al theory as a plausible
                                              scientific one.                    !Ihe

 rationalily of the archetypal theoiy is
                                         discussed in reply to the
 accusation that Jung's theory is mrstical
                                           rather than scientific,
 nh addition to the question of
                                rationality, we treat the relationship

 bettTeen the practical and theoretical
                                        aspects of the theory in order
 to disbingulsh bettreen a theoretical and
                                           therapeutic discourse about
 archetypes, idth the latter discourse being
                                             concerned id.th personal
 meaningful interpretation of archetypal experience
                                                    and hence often
 justifiabHy employing philosophical and
                                         religious teminology.                    Thus
tre   attempt to show how the use of such teiroinology
                                                              bjr    Jung in dis-
cussions of archetypes does not count against
                                              the scientific nature
of theoretical claims about archetypes.

       In addition to attempting to show how
                                             the archetypal theoiy is
•a rational one and   how its relationship to philosopl^ and
                                                             religion
does not count against it as a scientific
                                          theoi^r,          ,re     also examine
how the theory can be understood in the
                                        context of general criteria
for scientific theories.    ]ii   this regard   ire   discuss the problem of
falsification shordiig how the theoiy can not be
                                                 interpreted as com-
patible Tjith all observational i?tates of affairs.
                                                             I-fe   also discuss
the explanations and predictions wliich can
                                            be expected from the

theory.    PinaTly the evidence for the theoiy is discussed.

       Qie conclusion is reached that the archetj-pal
                                                      theoiy can satisiy
                                viii




general scientific criteria and also meet specific criticisms of it

from the scientific point of   vieTr   and that thus the scientific plau-

sibility of the theoiy should be admitted.
                                   HWRODUCTION


         In this study   ire   attempt a rational reconstruction of J\mg«s

 theozy of archetypes ^d.th the goal in view of shoidiig
                                                         that this
 theoiy is a scientifically plausible one.              In regard to this task,

 some preliMnaiy questions need to be addressed.
                                                               Vhat is meant
by a rational reconstruction?           T*iy   is the reconstruction undertaken

 fl^    a scientific point of viesi and lAat is the purpose of
                                                               shoidng
that the archetypal theoiy is scientifically plausible?

        So far as the first question is concerned, the
                                                       idea of a rational
reconstruction is to clarify the meaning and interrelationship
                                                               of the
basic concepts of a theory so that the theory can be shoxm
                                                           to be con-

sistent and to be a theoiy >jith a clearly specified meaning.

        In.   Jung's style of theorizing, clairlty and precision of
                                                                    basic
concepts are much less important than fullness of meaning
                                                          and phe-
nomenologically accurate characterization of events.              As a consequence

many of Jung's ideas are as vague and ambiguous as
                                                               th^   are fas-
cinating and insightful.         However, the purpose of a rational recon-

struction as we understand it is not to oppose the
                                                   spontaneity and
riclmess of creativity vrith a        sljiiple   desire for order and clarity.

Rather the aim of a rational reconstruction is the
                                                   transformation
of the unti(^ richness of creativity into
                                          a more directly useable

form.     By attempting to clariiy the meaning of the
                                                      archetypal theoiy
then, we hope to bring about a vdder aclmowledgement
                                                     and study of
 the theoiy so as eventually to contribute to its dissemination as a

 fruitful conceptual schenK.

         Horrever, our reconstruction from the scientific point of view

 needs some Justification,     For a survey of Jungian literature in-

 dicates on the whole a tendency to eniphasize the therapeutic aspect

 of the theory and its immediate personal relevance rather than its
                                                          .




employment in an attempt to gain scientific knotrledge.         But unless

the scientific plausibility of the archetypal theoiy can be establii^ed

on firm ground, the personal and therapeutic relevance of the theory

will be undermined.      In Jung's terminology, the dilemma of     modem
man is that he can no longer simply believe, he must know.          The

modem individual's desire for a         conqjrehensive understanding of

the XTorld can thus not be satisfied by viei:s which are incompatible

T-Tith   scientific understanding.

         But if the author must confess that he is attracted to the arche-

igrpal   theory from the standpoint of its personal existential relevance,

it should not be concluded that the archetypal theory is seen only

as a therapeutic tool.      For in arguing for scientific plausibility,

\je   have in mind a more ambitious goal of eventually showing      hoir   the

theoiy can be used to gain theoretical unde,rstanding in a vride range

of scientific disciplines.      Vfe   believe that the theory is not only

scientifically plausible, but that it should be accepted and employed

as well.     Hovrever, this more ambitious aim must await the outcome

of our attempt to argue for scientific plausibility.          For a rational

reconstruction of the theory is necessary before its true scientific

merit can be appreciated.
                                        CHAPTEH    1
                             JUlTG'o MENTAL CONSTIIUCTS




                                         Pg/'che



 Preliminary Remarks

       In order to gain a full understanding of Jung's theoiy of
                                                                 arche-
 tjrpes,    it is necessary to see his vieiis on this matter within the
                                                                        con-
text of his p^yxjhology as a whole.            Hbt-rever,   within the scope of this
 study of the archetypes,        >7e   can not attempt to trace the relationship

beti-reen   all of Jung's    vier-rs   and the archetypes.     A principle omission
in this regard is Jung's theoiy of individuation where
                                                       he attempts to
examine the role which the archetypes play in the development
                                                              of per-
sonality.

      But if    ire   can not consider all of Jung's vies^s which are related

to the archetypal theory, it is essential to gain an
                                                     understanding of
his mental constructs,         Ihus, as a preliminary to discussing the arche-

typal theory itself, we i-dll examine these constructs.               Oar approach in

this regard will be to begin with the mental constructs of the
                                                               xd.de st

application.      I* i^ill consider first then the most general of
                                                                   the Jungian
mentalistic terras, the psyche,

Psyche-Body Relation

      Jung emphasizes that his notion of the psyche is
                                                       not intended to be
a precise notion in the sense that its limits are
                                                  well defined,                "I Imow
that veiy many people have difficulties id.th
                                              the             wrd   'psychological.
  To put these critics at ease, I
                                  should like to add that no one                       laior.s

  lAat    'psfyche' is,    and one knows    o'ust   as little   hoi-r   far into nature
  •psiyiche'   extends."^

          Before attempting a definitive cliaracterization
                                                           of the                   p^che then,
 TO will examine        hoi-i   the concept is used.       For if the p^che is a vague
 notion, we have, nonetheless, little
                                      trouble for the most part vrLth
 regard to deciding ^Aether or not to
                                      app^jr it in specific cases.

          Shics   hythe p^hic         Jung has in mind something close in
                                                                          meaning
 to mental, one flniitful way to see             ho>x   Jung uses this concept is to
 explore the intended .relation betwen
                                       pgyche and body.
         In this regard tlien, it is clear
                                           that            by p^/che Jung does not
 iiean   to imply a Cartesian dualism in .Aich
                                               the              p^he     would be a
 mental substance.         For rather than a thiiig or a substance,
                                                                    the psyche
 is to be considered in terms of a system of
                                             energy relations.                        The
terra    "libido" is used by Jung to designate the
                                                   psychic energy.                     'This

energetic vieiTponut seems to suggest a
                                        reductionist position in which
the     p^he      understood as physical energy was seen as
                                                            reducible to
physico-chemical terms or else a vitalist
                                          position in                    irfiich   a special
tgrpe    of mind energy     vxas   postulated.

         The possibility that Jung might be
                                            taking a reductive position is
suggested by the fact that the purpose of
                                          the energetic standpoint is
to enable the psychologist to understand
                                                        p^hological phenomena in
such tenns as entropy, conservation of
                                       energy and equilization of
differences in an analogous way
                                1^ the manner in which physical phe-
nomena can be so understood.            Thus Jung belives that the concept
                                                                           of
libido "accomplishes for           p^holdgy      the same advance that the concept

of energy introduced into physics" (Vol.
                                         TV, p. 112).
       3h the absence of any methods of exact measurement
                                                          of the energy,
 quantitative estimations can be reached through appeal to the
                                                               system
 of psychological values, as the value intensity of
                                                    psychological
 phenomena T/ill be held to be a quantitative estijnate of
                                                           the amount of
 psychic energy involved (Vol.   Vm,   p. 9),

      Hmrever, Jung makes clear that the analogy beti^een
                                                          plysical energy
 and p^srchic energy cannot be taken in too literal
                                                    a sense:

           ... in spite of the nonmeasurability of psychic
          processes, the perceptible changes effected by
          the psyche cannot possibly be understood except
          as a plienomenon of energy.   Biis places the
          p^chologist in a situation which is highly re-
          pugnant to the physicist: the psychologist also
          talks of energy although he has nothing measurable
          to manipulate, besides ^*ich the concept of en-
          ergy is a strictly defined mathematical quan-
          tity which cannot be applied to anything psychic. . .        .
          If psychology nevearfcheless insists on en^jloylng
          its OTjn concept of energy for the purpose of
          expressing the activity ... of the psyche, it
          is not of course being used as a mathematical
          formula, but only as its analogy (Vol. i/ITI,
                                                          p. 233).

     Jung's energetic standpoint is then obviously not
                                                       an attempt to
bring about a reduction of psychology to psychophysics.
                                                               Jung in-
sists on the autonomous position of psychology
                                               in relation to
other sciences:

          Since, unfortunately, we cannot prove scien-
          tifically that a relation of equivalence e:cists
          betTv-een physical and psychic energy, ire
                                                     have
          no alternative except eitlier to drop the ener-
          getic viei;point altogether, or else to postu-
          late a special psychic energy—which would be
          entirely possible as a hypothetical opera-
          tion.    Psychology as much as physics may avail
          itself of the right to build its o;m concepts
                                                           .   .   .
          (Vol,   vm,   p. 15-16).

     But this characterization of libido as a
                                              "special psychic energy"
would seem to imply a vitallst position.   This suspicion seems confirmed
 Trfien   we read:          "From a broader standpoint libido can be
                                                                     understood
 as vital energy in general, or as Bergon's llan
                                                 vital " (Vol. 17, p.
 2U8), and      "   .   .      .   tre   irould probably do   best to regard the psytjhic
 process siinply as a life-process.                    In this tray     ire   enlarge the
 narroxrer concept of psychic energy to a
                                          broader one of life-
 enei^, which includes »p^chic energy* as a
                                            specific part"                              (Vol.
 mi,       p. 17).

          However, Jung nalces clear that "this broader
                                                        standpoint" is
 a hcTJothetical and problematic one.2                    Jn order to maintain its func-

 tional autonany, p^chology must not conflate
                                              its concept of psychic
 enei^     vd-tli   a possible biological concept of vital energy.
                                                                                        "I have

 therefore sugge^bed that, in view of the
                                          psychological use                           ttb   intend
 to mabe of it,                    call our hypothetical life-energy 'libido.
                        ^-re
                                                                                        'To
this esrtent I have differentiated it fixan a
                                              concept of universal
energy, so maintaining the right of biology and
                                                psychology to foira
their oim concepts" (Vol. VEII, p. 17).                        Biere is also an explicit

disclaimer of the concept of vitalism:                        "Vfe   shall not be disturbed
if we are met vdth the cry of vitalism.                        Ife   are as far removed from
ai^y   belief in a specific life-force as fi-om ai^ other
                                                          metaphysical
assertion" (Vol. IV, p. 12^).

        I* see then that in regard to the
                                          question of reductionism,
Jung wants to avoid comraitinent to either
                                           reductionism or vitalism.
Jung's stand on this issue can then best
                                         be characterized as de
facto antireductionist.                    Father than attempting to defend the a

priori nonreduction of psychological
                                     phenomena to physics or chem-
istry, Jung holds to a de facto antireductionism.
                                                                              This nonreduction
as a matter of fact is supportable hy the
                                          available empirical evidence
  and is strictny speaking neutral        T^Tith   respect to the issue of reduc-

  tion in principle.

         Jung's noncoranital stand on reductionism
                                                   is characteriffbic of
 his   p^hology      as a whole i/here he attenpts to define
                                                             his psycholog-
 ical conrtructs      dji   ways which are as free as possible from
                                                                    philoso-
 phical controvert.           Howver, this   dislilce for philosophy frequently

 leads to the situation of unclarity with regard
                                                 to the full implica-
 tions of Jung's views.          This situation of ambiguity if well e:3eRrpli-

 fied when we attempt to comprehend          i-jhat   sort of psyche-bo(fy relation

 Jung has in mind in constructing his psychology.
                                                                For Jung's non-
 commital vieirs on reductionism fail to give
                                              us a definite clue as
 to his position on the        mind-bo^ problem.
       Hoirever, in regard to this clue, there
                                               are indications            that
 Jung holds to a nondualistic position
                                       in which the psyche is seen
as necessarily dependent on the brain, >7ith
                                                         p^he   entailing em-
bodied   pj^i-che.


             So far as our e:qperience permits of
                                                  any inference
             at all about the nature of the psyche,
                                                     it shotrs
             the p^rchic process as a phenomenon dependent
                                                             on
             the nervous sj-stem (Vol, VHI,
                                             p. 322, 1926).

             • . • the human psyche lives in indissoluble
             union idth the body (Vol. YUl, p. llii,
                                                     1936).
             Md just as the material of the body that is
             ready for life has need of the p^che in order
             to be capable of life, so the psyche pre-
             supposes the living body in order that its
             images may live (Vol. VHI, p. 326, 1926).

But Jung seems to call into question the view
                                              that the psyche is
necessarily embodied, thus suggesting a dualifffcic
                                                    position.             Ih a

193U essay   \je   read such irtatements as the follwdng:
              ... the psyche's attachment to the brain, i.e.,
              its space-time limitation, is no longer as self-
              evident and incontroviertible as we have hitherto
              been led to heUeve (Vol. vni, p. kl3).

              The l^rpothetical possibility that the pi^che
              touches on a form of ejdstence outside space
              and time presents a scientific question-mark
              that merits serious consideration for a long
              time to come (Vol, Vm, p. klh).

              LAt deatlQ we may establish T-jith reasonable
             certainty that an individual consciousness as
             it relates to ourselves has come to an end.
             But Tjhether this means that the continuity of
             the psychic process is also interrupted re-
             mains doubtful, since the psyche's attachment
             to the brain can be confirmed tdth far less
             cei'titude today than it could fifty years ago.
             Psychology must first digest certain para-
             p^'-chological facts, which it has hardly begun
             to do yet (Vol. Vm, p. 1,12),

        One vray to come to terras Td.th this apparent radical
                                                               shift in
position is to atten^jt to distinguish an earlier necessary
                                                            embodi-
ment view from a later view       \jhen,   in the last years of his life,

Jung held to the belief in the existence of disembodied
                                                        psyches.            A
consideration of the dates of       ttie   above quoted statements, however,

casts doubt on the idea that Jung's position can be neatly
                                                           divided
into an earlier and later period,^          Although there certainly is a slow

gradual shift airay from the necessary embodiment vleir, the certitude

wi-Ui   which Jung states that the psyche has a necessary connection

with the body is never replaced xjith another position which Jung

can state in an unhypothetical way and \M.ch can easily be
                                                           integrated
uTith   the rest of his vieirs.

        Just as the parapsychological data have to an esrtent
                                                              proved to
be anomalies inejrplicable in terns of present
                                               pl^sical Istis, so do
the considerations concerning the related phenomena
                                                    which caused
Jung to doubt the psyche's necessaiy connection
                                                vdth the brain prove
 to be anomalous in.th respect to his
                                      pgycholosy as a whole.            ]h order
 then to understand the place of these anomalous
                                                 statements in relation
 to the totality of what Jung says about the
                                             p^che, the sort of
 distinction to mxst bear in ndnd is that betireen a
                                                     T-rell-worked out

and fruitful concept, the notion of the    pj^yxshe   as embodied and de-

pendent on the brain, versus tentative, hypothetical
                                                     attempts to
see hOTj this vlerr could be expanded, or perhaps
                                                  revised, in order
to take into account the full range of the
                                           parapsychological phe-
nomena,

     ^though a full discussion of Jung's parapsychological
                                                           reflec-
tions can not be attempted here, it would seem
                                               that the parapsyxiho-
logical data did not lead Jung to conclude that
                                                comniiianent to a

position of dualism, in the sense that psj-che and
                                                   matter are radi-
caiay different types of entities, was necessaiy.
                                                          Ifather,   present
in the latest as well as earlier Tndtings is the
                                                       viei-;   that psyche
and bo(fy (matter) are different aspects of a
                                              common fundamental
entity.

          ... it is not on3y possible but fairly probable,
          even, that psyche and matter are two different
          aspects of one and ttie same thinp- (Vol. VIII
          p. 21^, 19li6).

           This living being appears outuardOy as the ma-
           terial boc^y, but inwardly as a series of images
           of the vital activities talcing place within
                                                         it,
           Ihey are tvro sides of the same coin, and vre
                                                         can-
          not rid ourselves of the doubt that perhaps
          this whole separation of mind and body may
          finally prove to be merely a device of reason
          for the purpose of conscious discrimination—
          an intellectually- necessary separation of
                                                      one
          and the same fact into two aspects, to
                                                   which
          we then Illegitimately attribute an
                                                inde-
          pendent existence (Vol. VHI,
                                          p. 326, 1926)
                                           10




              "Diat even the psychic world, which is
                                                      so e:d;ra-
              ordinarily different from the physical vjorld,
              does not have its roots outside the one cosmos
              is evident from the undeniable fact that causal
              connections e^dst betireen the pj^yche and the
              bo^' T/hich point to their underlying unitary
              natm'e (Vol. :crv, p. ^38, 19^).

              If one is untdUing to postulate a
                                                   pre-established
              haiTOory of pl^ysical and psychic events, then
              they can only be in a state of interaction. But
              the latter hypothesis requires a psyche that
              touches matter at some point, and, conversely,
              a matter idth a latent psyche, a postulate not
              so very far removed from certain fonnulations
              of modem physics (Eddington, Jeans, and
                                                       others).
              In this connection I would remind the reader
                                                           of
              the existence of parapsychic phenomena .
                                                       . ,
              (Vol. Vni, p. 23^, 19h6),

         In order to understand Jung's theoiy of mind,
                                                       it :rould seem
 essential to understand         t:ro   problematic aspects of Jung's views.

 On the one hand,     ire   need to understand how Jung's essentially dou-

ble aspect approach can be made compatible idth
                                                acceptance of dis-
embodied psyches.           On the othei' hand, as e:<Bmpliiled in the last

quotations, Jung appears to want to hold sijnultaneously
                                                         to a double
aspect theoiy and an interactionist             vie;j-.^

             ^uice   lie   cannot attempt a full discussion of the relevant

problems in the philosopliy of mind which these
                                                problems raise,             -je

vdll be content to point out that v^hereas the double
                                                      aspect theory
and interactionism can perhaps be shcfim to be
                                               compatible in principle,
it is clear that the acceptance of disembodied
                                               psyches would at least
greatly complicate such an endeavor.              For if it can be shoira that
pgyches can exist independently of bodies,
                                           then the essentially
monistic double aspect vieir irould be in
                                          great difficulty.
     But if   vre   have then good cause to tiy to construe
                                                            Jung's vieirs
on the   p^he-body relation independently of the statements about
                                          11




   disembodied psyches, ve can nonetheless
                                           understand hou Jung's vievrs
  on this matter can seem at one moment
                                        to be dualistic, ..hile in another
  instance he appears to hold to a monistic
                                            double aspect theoiy.                     For
  the   p^he        is to be studied from the standpoint of
                                                            the empirical data
  as if it Trcre a distinct entity from
                                        the bo<fy, although this phenomeno-
 logical approach does not for Jung entail
                                           a substantial dualism.                     Ife

 can then say both that         "...      ,je   have absolutely no means of dividing

 lAat is p^ycliic from the biological process
                                              as such" (Vol. VHI, p.

 16), and also that "so far, then, as our present
                                                                  loioirledge goes,

 neuroses are to be iiifluenced or cured
                                         by approaching them not from
 the proxiinal end, i.e., from the
                                   functioning of                tlie   glands, but from
 the distal end, i.e., from the psyche,
                                        just as if the psyche xmre
 itself a substance" (Vol. XI,
                               p. 329),

        The duaOlstic point of vie;/ is then
                                             assumed when xm vieu the psyche
 as phenomena.         Then ,m stop to consider ijhat the
                                                          psj-che is essentially

 and in its relation to the boc^,          .re   see that the psyche is in all

probability merely another aspect of the
                                                       bocfy-.

Characterization of the Psyche

        Ifeepijig   these considerations about the psyche-body
                                                               relation in
mind,   ire   are noT. prepared to appreciate Jung's
                                                     positive characteriza-
tion of the     p^he.       Moreover, this characterization is to
                                                                  serve as
a criterion of applicability of the
                                    tenn, defining the pemLssible

range of its use and giving us at least
                                        a method in principle of
discriminating the p^/chic from :the
                                     nonp^chic.                  It is to be then
a sort of operational definition.
                                                Frm   the point of vie:; of onto-
logical considerations,        vre   can not of course specify a psychic
                                                                         realm
as distinct from and uncontaminated
                                    ;;ith a nonpsychic realm.
                                        12




 PJeuriffticainy though    ire   can make such a specification in principle

 as this specification is to indicate the phenomenological difference

betiTOen the psychic and nonpsj'xjhic.

      Jung says then that 'H/hat I would call the psyche proper extends to

all functions which can be brought under the influence of a i/ill" (Vol,

YTLl, p. 183).        Ibreover, by irill is understood a form of disposable

energy (Vol, vni, pages 182-183).

      The sort of worldng model that emerges from this characteriza-

tion then is a separation of the p^jrche and the tru3y psychological

from the instincts and the only physiological in terms of the poss-

ibility of modification or fle:dLbility in the othen.dse rigid          c^'-

namisms of ph^rsiological compulsion,

     ySn ej:2unple    of what is meant by the nonpqrchic in terms of animal

life is perhaps instructive.          For in consideration of the insect

world, there seem to be no e:3ceptions to the rigid physiological

detenninisra of behavior,         An insect is essentially a physiological

automoton.    However, as we consider more coiig)lex forms of organisms

idth more centralized nervous systems, the hypothesis of the exis-

tence of at least a rudimentary form of consciousness becomes more

probable.    Vfi.th   the higher mammals the e:d.stence of psychological

processes becomes evident.          Thus Jung e3:plicitly affirms the eJcLs-

tence of psychic processes in dogs and domestic animals (Vol. VIII,

pages 173 and I89).        For Jung then the psyche is not restricted to

man but only finds its greatest development there as the outcome of

a continuous developmental sequence of gradual phylogenetic emergence.

     In specifying the relationship betiv^een the instincts and the

psyche then, the instincts are conceived to be ectopsychic in origin.
                                       13




  Jung summarizes his argument on this
                                       point in the folloxdng way:

                 If we started with the hypothesis that
                                                         the
              psyche is absolutely identical v/ith the state
              of being alive, then we should have to accept
             the e:d.stence of a psychic function even in
             unicellular organisms. ...
                 But if we look upon the appearance of the
             p^che as a relatively recent event in evo-
             lutionary history, and assume that the psychic
             function is a phenomenon accompanying a ner-
             vous :^stem which in some way or other has be-
             come centralized, then it woiad be difficult
             to believe that the instincts were originally
             psychic in nature, iind since the connection
             of the p^che T-dth the brain is a more probable
             conjecture than the pqychic nat\ire of life in
             general, I regard the characteristic compul-
             slmiess of instinct as an ectopi^ychic factor
             ^Vbl. vni, p. 11^).

         3h stating that instincts are ectopsychic,
                                                    Jung does not of
course vdsh to deny a psychological aspect to
                                              instinctual pheno-
mena,-   and thus he \Ashes to make clear that the instincts
                                                             can be
considered from    ti/o   potots of vier/:   as they appear in conscious-

ness, their    p^chic impact, as it     irere,   and as physiological stim-

uli.


             3hstinct as a ectopi^ychic factor would play the
             role Ox a stimulus merely, while instinct as a
             psychic phenomenon would be an assimilation of
             this stimulus to a pre-existent psychic pattern.
             A name is needed for this process. I should
             term it psvchization. Thus, what we call in-
             stinct offliand would be a datura already psychized,
             but of ectopsychic origin (Vol. VIII, p. n^).

       A further clarification of Jung's theoretical model
                                                           of the
psyche comes into play when this ambiguous interface
                                                     region betireen
the psychological and the physiological is
                                           explicitly considered.             For
the psychological phenomena associated idth the
                                                disposable energy
of the will are according to Jung's model
                                          merely the end of a con-
tinuum tTith the physiological at one end and the
                                                  psychic at the other.
                                        11;




  Ibreover, in     tlie   middle of this continuum, Jung identifies
                                                                    psychoid
  functions which are quasi-psychic yet not
                                            merely pliysiological.                  In-
  stincts are examples of these p:^nchoid
                                          phenomena          vrtiich   though not
 p^chic in the full sense of Jung's designation
                                                yet have p^chologi-
 cal aspects.          Jung states then that the teiro "psychoid"
                                                                  is "meant
 to distinguish a category of events
                                     from merely vitalistic phenomena
 on the one hand and from specifically
                                       psychic processes on the other"
 (Vol.     Vni, p. 177).

         Since in order to be influenced by the
                                                disposable energy of the
 vrill   a function or process must be capable of becoming
                                                           conscious, the
 characterLstic quality of those functions which
                                                 are psychoid is their

 incapability of reaching full consciousness.             The sense in which
 Jiing   sees the instincts as not capable of full
                                                   consciousness is made
 clear in the folloidng way:

              Ih spealc of"instinctive actions," meaning by
              tliat a mode
                         of behaviour of vxhich neither the
             motive nor the aim is fully conscious and \rh±ch
             is prompted only by an obscure inner
                                                   necessity. . .            ,
             Bius instinctive action is characterized by
                                                          an
             unconsciousness of the psychological motive be-
                                                                            -f-
             hand it, in contrast to the strictly conscious
             processes which are distinguished by the
                                                       conscious
             continuity of their motives (Vol. vni,
                                                      p. 130).
         Now the positive characterization of
                                              the psyche in terms of
functions    triiich   can become fully conscious and hence
                                                            capable of being
influenced by the disposable energy of the
                                           will is not fully described
by dlstlnguislTing betTreen the pi^he and the
                                              instincts.               For Jung
makes the point that there is another         tj^pe   of function which    liMts
the will and which cannot be described as
                                          instinctual in the pl^sio-
logical sense.         Ohis function is called spiritual.
                                                               Identical i^th
the factors lAlch Jung calls the archetypes,
                                             the spiritual function
                                                                                   -

                                        1^




 is like instinct a p^jrchoid function incapable of full consciousness,^

         A full discussion of what Jung means hy the spiritual Tdll be

 given in Chapter 3.         Here it Tdll suffice to state tliat for Jung the

 compulsiveness associated xiith the nonpsychic realm is due not only

 to (^araisras of pliysiological origin, the instincts; but, in
                                                                addition
 to this    loT-rer   limit, the psyche has an upper limit ijhere the pi^chic

 functions gradually fall under the influence of spiritual determinants.

 "Just as, in its louer reaches, the psyche loses itself in the organic

mateilal substrate, so in its upper reaches it resolves itself into

a 'spiritual' form about lAich         ire knoir   as little as we do about the

functional basis of instinct" (Vol. VIII, p. 183).

         Tn terms of the continuum model then, there wotild appear to be

psychoid pTOcesses on both sides of the p^che, and the psyche could

be figuratively sa±d to be surrounded by psychoid processes.                But

from a phylogenetic point of view, the question            non/   arises why the

spiritual function is said to be "higher" than the instinctual psy-

choid function, since the        p^che appears      to have developed out of

the psychoid processes considered as a whole and thus to be "higher"

than it in the sense of having developed later..            The solution to

this enigma seems to be that although the archetypal psychoid pro-

cesses are probabOy present, at least in rudimentary form, through-

out the animal kingdom, it is only vdth the development of the more

advanced foims of consciousness that there is a clear separation be-

tereen   instinctual and spiritual psychoid functions.            Moreover, it

seems to be just this separation which brings about the phenomenon

of consciousness so that "psychic processes seem to be balances of

energy floidng betireen spirit and instinct" (Vol,           Vm,     p. 207),
                                          16




      Not;   in this separation of spiritual and instinctual functions,

 the instinctual energies seem to be channelled by the
                                                       spiritual forms.
 3h a sense the spiritual function is then that which allmrs
                                                             the en-
 ergies of man to be employed in other than instinctual
                                                        activities.
 TMs is     the sense in T7hich the spiritual function is higher than the

 instinctual.     PVom the standpoint of phylogen^r,           hoi-rever,   the desig-
 nation of "higher" is misleading since both types of
                                                      psychoid pro-
 cesses are unconscious in relation to the later developing
                                                            conscious-
 ness associated    Td.tli   the psyche.       "Spirit and instinct are by nature

 autonomous and both limit in equal measure the applied
                                                        field of the
Tdll" (Vol. Vni, p. 183).


                                     Ihconscious

     Ifow    it vrould seem that an understanding of the positive
                                                                  charac-
terization of the psyche in terms of the \d21 leads
                                                    to the conclusion
that the psyche is to be conceived as equivalent to
                                                    consciousness or
atfareness in opposition to the          p^choid functions, the distinguishing
feature of which is their incapability of full
                                               consciousness and hence
relative autonomy from the will (Vol. VHI,
                                           p. 18U).                  Itorever, it is

only when ve consider        tlie   attribution of an unconscious dimension to

the psyche that a full characterization of what
                                                Jung intends by his

pgyche construct can be accomplished.

     3h order to resolve this apparent paradox of
                                                  the existence of an
unconscious psyche then, it is necessaiy to
                                            focus on the meaning Jung
gives to the notion of the unconscious.             He   s^s   that "since we per-
ceive effects whose origin cannot be found
                                           in consciousness,                  >re   are
compelled to allow hypothetical contents to
                                            the sphere of the non-
conscious, which means presupposing that the
                                             origin of those effects
                                      17




 lies in the unconscious precisely because it is not
                                                     conscious" (Vol.
 IV, p. lltO).       Thus   "...   eveiTthing in the personality that is not

 contained in the conscious should be found in the unconscious"
                                                                (Vol.

 HI,     p. 20U).

         Hie unconscious understood in this negative xra^ as the
                                                                 non-
 conscious is relatively unproblematic,          liiatever is not imraediately

 present in ai-jareness is said to be unconscious,        Ifenories, for e:c-

 aniple,   can be said to be unconscious contents ivhich can be brought

 into consciousness at idll.        Other unconscious contents such as re-
                                                                       s

 pressed experiences or subliminal perceptions nay also
                                                        be brought
 Into ai^areness, although a special effort or technique
                                                         is needed.
 Since   tlie   latter are not as easily recoverable to airareness as the

former, they are s&id to belong to a "deeper level"
                                                    of the uncon-

scious.         The analogy of depth then amounts operationally
                                                                to a func-
tion of energy.        Contents xd.th a certain critical energy stay in

consciousness and lacking it become unconscious.           IJien   contents
which are ordinarily unconscious became charged Td.th energy,
                                                              they
intrude themselves into conscious at/areness and produce a
                                                           so-called
'lOTrering of consciousness" with a consequent disruption
                                                          of conscious

intentionali tie s

       Ihe boundary or dividing point then betireen conscious
                                                              and un-
conscious is an energy threshold.          HoiTever, ttiis idea that conscious

and unconscious are qualitatively separate should not be
                                                         understood
to mean that a sort of energy membrane sharply divides
                                                       conscious from
unconscious contents.        For it rather the case that every psychic

content is to some degree unconscious and that
                                               consequently the
psyche is both conscious and unconscious at once.
              Consequently there is a consciousness in vrhich
              unconsciousness predominates, as ttbH as a con-
              sciousness in which self -consciousness predomi-
              nates. This paradox becomes immediately intelli-
              gible when we realize that there is no conscious
              content which can with absolute certainly be said
              to be totally conscious ... (Vol. VHI. pares
              187-188).                                '
                                                         ^^

              Vfe must, hoa/ever, accustom ourselves
                                                     to the thought
              that conscious and unconscious have no clear de-
              marcations, the one beginning where the other
              leaves off. It is rather the case that the psyche
              is a conscious-unconscious whole (Vol. VUI,
                                                             p. 200),

      It becomes clear then hour the characterization of
                                                         the psyche
 in terms of the      i.-ill   allows for an unconscious dimension to the

p^che.       For it is only the possibility of an influence by
                                                               the ^rUl
that is necessary to characterize the psychic as
                                                 distinct from the
p^jrchoid.    iAnd   although it is this possibility lAich is the distin-

guishing feature of the psyche, rather than being
                                                  identical vTith
consciousness, the psyche is better conceptualized as
                                                      for the most
part unconscious, Tiith the conscious region being of
                                                      congiaratively

narrow scope.

     Bie idea of the unconscious then adds a dimension of depth
                                                                to
the notion of the psyche.           ]h addition to those items of immediate

airareness, there are other contents on the fringes of
                                                       consciousness
or just beloi; the threshold of at/areness,         Jung catalogues these

unconscious contents in the follmnng way:            "   .    ,   ,   lost memories,
painful ideas that have been repressed (i,e,, forgotten on
                                                           purpose),
subliminal perceptions, by which are meant sense -perceptions
                                                              that
were not strong enough to reach consciousness, and finally,
                                        I


                                                            contents
that are not yet ripe for consciousness" (Vol.               Vn,      p. 66).   "...
Eroiything forgotten or repressed or othenn.se
                                               subliminal that has
                                       19




  been acquired by the individual consciously
                                              or unconsciousljr" (Vol.
  XVn,   p. 116).

         Often these unconscious contents group
                                                together to form subliminal
 functional units vM.ch then become sort of
                                            "splinter psfjrches" or "frag-
 mentaiy personalities" (Vol. VHI,
                                   p. 97).           These focal points of un-
 conscious psychic activity are designated as the
                                                  coniple^aes.                They are
 groups of oi^ten highly emotionally charged
                                             feelings, thoughts and
 images which are associated together so that,
                                               for instance, an
 environmental stiinulus which activates the
                                             comple:c results in the

 entirety of the associated psychic contents
                                             coming into play and
 affecting consciousness.     !IMs often leads to a response which
                                                                   is out
 of proportion to the initiating stimulus.
                                                   For Jung the ego itself is
merely a complex, "the complex of
                                  consciousness" (Vol. XTJ, p. 3^7).

             In so far as the meaning of the ego
                                                  is psycho-
             logxcally nothing but a complex of
                                                 imaginings
             held together and fixed by the coenesthetic
                                                            im-
             pressions, Cbodily feeling^ ... the
                                                       comolex
             of the ego may ^rell be set parallel T-rith
                                                         a^d com-
             pared to the secondary autonomous complex
             p. 601),
                                                          (Vol.       U   '




                        Collective Ifaconscious

     I'ath   the description of these unconscious
                                                  components to the
pjyche then, the concept of the psyche according
                                                 to Jung's "defini-
tion" of it in teiTOS of the idll is
                                     complete.         HoT-jever,   Jung goes
on to describe the p^choid region of
                                     the unconscious which is desig-
nated as a collective unconscious in contrast
                                              to the region of the
unconscious in relati^ly close association
                                   |
                                           to consciousness which
he calls the personal unconscious.
                                            "As to the no man's land which

I have called the 'personal
                            unconscious,' it is fairly easy to
                                                               prove
                                            20




 that its contents correspond exactly to our definition
                                                        of the pssrchic.
 But— as        tre   define 'psychic '--is there a psychic unconscious
                                                                        that is
 not a 'fringe of consciousness' and not personal?" (Vol. VIII,
                                                                p,
 200).

         !rhe    above quotation should make it clear that although
                                                                    according
 to Jung's specification of what the              psrsrche   means in the strict sense,

 it should be applied only to consciousness and the personal
                                                             unconscious,
 Jung frequently uses the tenn to include the collective
                                                         impersonal por-
 tions of the unconscious as well.               Thus Jung often speaks of a collec-

 tive   p^che or of an impersonal, objective psyche.                 Further discussion
 on this point of          hoir   the collective unconscious can be said to be

psychic on the one hand and not to fit into the
                                                definition of the
p^che on the other must wait until further in the exposition.
                                                                                  The
crucial distinction involves discz-lMnating between
                                                    the psychic con-

tents as they appear in consciousness and their
                                                postulated but unob-
served determinants xrhich are said to be psychoid
                                                   rather than psychic.
        There is then for Jung an impersonal and collective aspect
                                                                   to
the unconscious in contrast to the personal unconscious
                                                        described
above,     tbreover, this collective unconscious is said to
                                                            constitute
a deeper stratum of the unconscious than the
                                             personal.                   l*iereas for

the personal unconscious the "depth" of a content
                                                  represents a corres-
ponding lack of energy and hence a greater degree
                                                  of nonassociation
to the central focus of awareness, the collective
                                                  unconscious is
"deeper" In the additional sense of being the
                                              foundation of the
"upper" layers.           Consciousness and the personal unconscious then

represent the individual and personal heterogeneity
                                                    which develops
through maturation from a common and universal
                                               homogeneity.
                                      21




  "Individual consciousness is only the flower and the fruit
                                                             of a
  season, sprung from the perennial rhizome beneath the
                                                        earth                  .   .   .


  (Vol, V, p. xxiv).

            Jung then uses the terra "collective" to mean the opposite of

 personal or individual.        "I have chosen the teiro 'collective' be-

 cause this part of the unconscious is not individual but universal;

 in contrast to the personal psyche, it has contents and modes of be-

 haviour that are more or less the same everyiThere and in all indivi-

 duals" (Vol. IX-A, pages 3-k).

            Jung argues that since the bo(fy may be said to have certain

 universal features which form a common basis for the emergence of

 individual differences, it would then be reasonable to expect that

 the p^che, which is intimately related to the body, would also
                                                                have
 common and universal features:        "...            Just as the human bo(^ shows

 a common anatomy over and above all racial differences, so, too,

the human psyche possesses a common substratum transcending all

differences in culture and consciousness" (Vol, HII, p. 11),                       "For

just as taiere is an objective human body and not mere3y a subjective

and personal one, so also there is an objective psyche xjith its

specific structures and activities         ,   .   .   "   (Vol.   Ill, p. 267).

         The idea of a collective \mconscious thus understood as the

coMuon, universal element of the pqyche would seem relatively un-

problematic or perhaps even superflous as a concept since no one

would wish to deny that the psyche has foundations in the structure

of   -Oie   brain which are common to all men,             Ho;rever, the real import

of Jimg' s theoiy of a collective unconscious is brought into
                                                              clari-ty

^•jhen   Jung states tliat the contents of the collective imconscious are
                                          22




  in fact psychic contents      triiich   come into awareness but uhich are
                                                                            not
  the direct consequences of the
                                 individual's         om   personal experiences.
  "...      Si addition to memories from a
                                           long-distant conscious past,
  completely   ner.   thoughts and creative ideas can also
                                                           present themselves
  from the unconscious-thoughts
                                and ideas that have never been con-
  scious before."'^     Ihe collective unconscious is then
                                                           not only the
  structural element common to the
                                   psyches of all menj it is also the
 active source of original psychic
                                   contents.

        Mditional features of Jung's concept of the
                                                    collective uncon-
 scious come to light vrhen     v;e   learn that   "...    ego-consciousness
 seems to be dependent on      tr^o   factors:   firstly, on the conditions
 of the collective, i.e., the
                              social, consciousness; and secondly,
 on the archetjrpes, or domliiants, of
                                       the collective unconscious.
 The latter fall phenomenologic
                                ally into t>/o categories:         instinctual
 and archetypal" (Vol. VHI, pages
                                  217-218).
        Ohus both instincts as well
                                    as archetypes characterize the
collective unconscious.       Ifcreover, there is in addition
                                                              a concept
of collective consciousness which
                                  is to be distinguished from the
collective unconscious.  Jung states that by collective
                                                        consciousness
he has somethiiig sinilar     iji   mind to Preud's idea of the superego
(Vol.   EC-A, page 3, note 2).        like the superego, the collective

consciousness is partially conscious and
                                         partially unconscious.
It consists of "generally accepted
                                   truths" (Vol.VHI, p. 218),
i.e., of beUefs, values and ideals
                                   which are supposedly held in
common hy members of a community
                                 and which senre as a sort of common
ideological basis or cultural idea
                                   for the community. :ihe contempor-
a^   phenomenon of the so-called
                                 counter-culture would then represent
                                       23




 a process of development or change in the collective consciousness

 of our time.

         I^e collective consciousness has its ultimate source
                                                              in the
 collective unconscious.     For through the influence of the collective

 unconscious on individuals,    ner^   ideals, ethical and religious sys-

 tems, and basic scientific discoveries come into avrareness
                                                             for the
 first time.    Hoivever, the symbolic quality of these images from the

unconscious is eventually lost as the images and ideas are subjected

to the interpretative powers of generations in order to assimilate

them to the existing i^stem of culture.         !Ihrough this process the

manifestation of the collective unconscious in one pioneer individual

is gradually transforaied into the cultural heritage and collective

consciousness of the coraraunity.       The result is then often the sort

of transition that the religious insight of an individual undergoes

in the change from the teachings of the individual in his lifetime

to the formation of a doctrine of established belief ly his
                                                            later
followers.     It is the difference between an original religious
                                                                  ex-
perience and the dogma of an established church.        Jung states then

that    "...    we can hardly avoid the conclusion that betvreen collec-

tive consciousness and the collective unconscious there is
                                                           an aLnpst
unbridgeable gulf over which the subject finds himself suspended"

(Vol.   vni,   p. 218).

        Jung makes the point that through the process of socialization

and in attempting to adapt to the demands of society       v;e   tend to iden-
tify ourselves with the consequent roles T*ich to must play
                                                            in order
to fit smoothly into the social; order.       This part of the personalily

Jung calls the persona.    The word means mask and like a mask the
                                     2U




 persona is the person that   -.re   pretend to be In order to have a

 well-defined niche in the comnuniV.

           I'hen ire analyse the persona ire strip
                                                   off the mask,
           and discover that what seemed to be individual
           is at bottom collectivej in other words, that
           the persona was onlly a mask of the collective
           psyche. FtrndanentaTIy the persona is nothing
           real: it is a compromise betireen individual
           and society as to what a man shoidd appear
                                                         to
           be (Vol. TH, p. 1^8).

      By "collective p^/che" in this context
                                             it is clear that the
 collective consciousness is meant.           However, there are other
 passages in which the teiro "collective psyche"
                                                 means collective
unconscious.   For example:

           It is therefore absolutely essential to
                                                   make
          the sharpest possible demarcation betvreen the
          personal and the impersonal attributes of the
          psyche. O^is is not to deny the sometimes
          very formidable existence of the contents of
          collective unconscious, but only to stress that,
          as contents of the collective psyche, th^-^ are
          opposed to and different from the individual
          psyche (Vol. VII, p. 9k).

     "Collective p^che" is then an ambiguous           tem   leaving   stni to
be specified the amount of unconsciousness that is
                                                   implied.              This
foiTOulation is sometimes preferable when speaking of
                                                      the conscious-
ness of a group, particularly when there is a strong
                                                     group identity.
For since the collective consciousness is
                                          grounded in the collective
unconscious, there are then correspondences bettreen
                                                     the institutions
of culture and the related archetypes.           The effectiveness of the

conrmmity leader, for example, is often a function
                                                   of his capacity
to fulfil the expectations brought about by the
                                                projection of the
archetype of the hero or Old Vise      Ifen   upon him, and the guiding ideals
of the community remain cohesive factors for the
                                                 life of that coraraunity
                                          25




  oiLly so   long as they remain living symbols
                                                capable of constellating
  the appropriate archetyipal configurations.
                                                             The aribiguous "collective
  p^he"      is then sometLTies the best description
                                                     of the Zeitgeist of a
  people, as it aclmat7ledges the close
                                        relationship beti/een the founda-
 tions of culture in the collective
                                    unconscious and the eribodijnents
 of those foundations in the accepted
                                      standards of collective life.

       Iforeover,    Jung's use of the aiiibi^ous "collective
                                                              psorche" be-
 comes easier to appreciate when it
                                    is made clear that for him the

 relationship of the personal psorche to
                                         the collective unconscious
 is closely analogous to the
                             relationship of the individual to society.
 "Now, all that I have said here
                                 about the Influence of society upon
 the individual is identicaUy true
                                   of           tlie     influence of the collec-
 tive unconscious upon the individual
                                      psyche" (Vol. VII, p. 1^1;).
 Therefore the psychology of a comraunliy
                                          is not basically different
from the     p^hology       of an individual:    "
                                                     .   .   .   Ihe psyche of a

people is only a somer^hat more complex
                                        structure than the psyche
of an individual" (Vol.         X, p.   86).

      Collective consciousness and the collective
                                                  unconscious may then
both be subsumed under collective psyche
                                         due to the close relation-

ship beti-reen the   tt/o   and the siutilar relatlonsliip of the
                                                                  individual
to the collective aspect in each case.
                                                 Bie individual has thus both
an inner and an outer relationship to
                                      the collective as he                  mu^     con-
tend Tdth society ad.thout and the
                                   collective unconscious Td.thin.
      One point that sliould be made
                                     clear when use is made of the
te™   "collective p^che" is that Jung does
                                           not mean to                 iiiqjly   that
a group consciousness ercLsts in the
                                     sense of a psychic entity                   vrfilch
                                    26




  exists over and above the    p^hes     of individuals.   For the coimon
  aspects of the    p^hes   of a group can be abstract2y said to
                                                                 represent
  a group   p:^he vdthout this having to mean that there is
                                                            something
  P^TJhic which persists independently of the
                                              individuals involved.
          3h so far as the similarities rather
                                               than the differences betireen
 collective consciousness and collective unconscious
                                                     are emphasized as
 in "collective psyche," questions then arise
                                              concerning the e:d.stence
 of distinct kinds of group psyches.
                                           That is, to what extent is the
 idea of a collective unconscious meant to
                                           be truly transcultural and
 to what extent is there intended to
                                     be a different collective unc on-
 for each distinct community of
                                men?
         Evidence can be found in Jung's   wrk   to support either of the
 tiro   possible positions suggested above.    For example,   ,re   find:   "Ihe
 collective unconscious is sijnply the p^rchic
                                               e^xpression of the iden-

 tity of bradji structure irrespective of all
                                              racial differences" (Vol.
 XIII, p. 11).    But there are also abatements such as
                                                        the folloTTing:
             lb doubt, on an earlier and deeper
                                                 level of
             p^tjhic development, ifhere it is still imposs-
             ible to distinguish beti/een an Axjan,
                                                      Semitic,
             Hamitic, or Ibngolian mentality, all human
             races have a common collective psyche.
                                                        But
             Tiith the beginning of racial
                                           differentiation
             essential differences are developed in the
             collective psyche as well (Vol. Vn,        1<2 ,
                                                    p. -«-^
                                                 > F.
             note 8).

             Inasmuch as there are differentiations
                                                     corres-
             pondong to race, tribe, and even family,
                                                       there
             is also a collective psyche limited
                                                  to race,
             tribe, and family over and above the
                                                   "universal"
             collective psyche (Vol, VET, p.
                                             275).
        The difficulty of understanding
                                        is again partly the result of
the problematic interaction of foin
                                    and content, of the difference
betvreen a common universal rtructure
                                      and its concrete embodiment in
                                     27




  WS irhich    are characteristic of individual
                                                cultures.     Ibreover, the
  irord "collective    p^/che" tends to obscure these differences
                                                                  which
  arise from   ttie   fact that the collecti^ unconscious
                                                          is an abstraction,
  a theoretically postulated coinr»nallty
                                          derived from the phenomena of
 concrete cultures in Trhich the archetypes
                                            exist as actual symbols
 and images,

      Hoirever, this line of erqjlanation
                                          is only partially satisfac-
 toiy in LLght of the totality of Jung's
                                         vndtings.       It seems that
 notidthstanding the differences that come
                                           about when the common
 structure of the psyche is embodied in
                                        culturally characteristic
 ways, Jung means that the common
                                  structure itself is different Td.th

 respect to the different ethnic and
                                     racial groups,  ffis statements,

 for example, about the inapplicability
                                        of Indian yoga practises for
 the Ifestem psyche (Vol. XE,
                              p. ^3h) and the characteristic quality

 of JetTish p^chology which might not
                                      be appropriate for non-Jewish
peoples (Vol.    VH,    p. 1^2, note 8) seem to support this
                                                             idea.
     HoTTBver, the concept of racial
                                     differences in the collective
unconscious seems one of the least defensible
                                              of all Jung's ideas on
the unconscious. For nof.rLthstanding
                                      the lack of credibility In
the notion that Je^dsh      p^hology   or Indian yoga are inapplicable
                                                                       to
someone tdth a Ifcstem Christian heritage,
                                           it would seem that the
similarities of a universal structure of
                                         the psyche would greatily
overshadow, any racial differences
                                   that    Mght   exist in that struc-
ture, just as the bodies of persons
                                    of different races and ethnic
groups seem to be of overwhe3Mng
                                 simllapity differing only in veiy
minor ways.

     There are, of course, marked
                                  differences in the collective
                                                               .      —
                                     28




 p^/ches of distinct human groups, if
                                      ty this teiro is understood the
 culturally distinct ways in which the collective
                                                  unconscious is
 developed and expressed.    Iluch   of what Jung says about the inherent

 psychic differences of people of vai-ious human groups can
                                                            be under-
 stood in this way without the necessity of
                                            postulating significant
 racial or ethnic differences in the structure of the
                                                      collective
 unconscious itself.




         .£'^'; Ji»«* f^ollected Vforks. Vols. I-XC^C (Rrinceton:  Princeton
 TAixversiiy ft-ess, 1^6?;, Vol."Tm:; p. ]|09.    Quotations are from the
follovnng editions: Vol. I, Psychiatric Studies. First liiition,
                                                                       19^7'
Vol. II, aaaerimental Itesearches. 1973; Vol. ni. The
                                                            Psychogenesis
^J±^^        Qi-sease, 1960j Vol. IV, Freud and Psychoanalv^s 19^31
Vol. V, %mbols of Transfoiroation. Plrst Edition,
                                                        19^; Vol. ''H.
.I^cholof^ical, TvTjes. 1971; Vol. VII, Two Essays
cholof?^, Second Edition, 1966; Vol.      Vm,
                                                     ^   Malvtic4 Psy-
                                               The Structure and Dynamics
of the Psyche. Second Edition, 1969; Vol. IX, Part I, The ilrchetyTJes
and the Collective Ihconscious. Second Edition, I968 T!iereafter cited
as Vol. E(-AJ; Vol. IX, Part H, .Aion, Second Edition, I968
                                                                   (hereafter
cited as Vol. t;,>.b); Vol. X, Civilization in Transition. First Edition,
196it; Vol. XI, PgycholoCT- and Religion ;    Tfest and East, Second Edition,

nnJo'    1°}' ^^' Fsycholopiy ^2^ ^cheiir^. Second Edition, I968; Vol. XEII,
I960; Vol. 'Crv, I?;-sterium Coniunctionis. First Edition,
                                                              1963; Vol. XV,
Ihe Spirit in 1^      Art, and Literature. 1966; Vol. XVI, The Practise
of Psychotherapy. Second Edition, 1966; Vol. XVH, Tlie Develome
                                                                       n-b of
^rsonality. ig^Iit Vol. XVTII, ia.scellany; Vol. XIxT^blioirraphy a5d
Inde:-c.   Hereafter cited by volume nuriber,

        It is not in the passage where he spealcs of Bergson that this
is made clear but in the essay "On Psychic Qiergy," Vol. VHI,
                                                                 pages
3-66 where the implications of the libido theory idth respect to
                                                                    the
problem of the mind-body relation are discussed in detail. Ibfor-
tunately this seems to be characteristic of Jung's style. 1-fi.sunder-
standings^are pixjduced by a causal or parenthetical comment Trhich
then require manj' lengthy passages or even whole essays to correct.
     3
        3h determining the chronology of Jung's writings the volume
number of the collected irorks is not a reliable indicator, ^e
collected works are grouped by subject matter, and while this serves
as a rough guide to different periods of Jung's trork, some of the
ear^y and middle inltings appear in the last volumes.
                                      29



        h
            '*                anomalous facts i^ith respect to a given theoiy
 to be ones ^x.°°"^^^
 +«  K«        ..hich fail to be e:q,la3jied
                                             b7 the theory and whiS Sfcer a
 protracted period of such failure lead either
                                                     to the ad hoc revision
 of the theoiy^or to emergence of a new more
                                                   comprehensive theory which
icLll be able to encompass their e:^lanation
                                                   in a context i^ch pre-
          Pj^°js:iy exgLained data. The sense of anomaly is that used
h!TS
by   T.H.I^      in hxs Structure of Scientific Evolutions.
                                                                Second Edition
 C Chicago:   IMversity of Chicago Press, 1970)1
                                                        '




           Statements about the disembodied psj-che then have
                                                                 this anoma-
lous relaUonshxp to Jung's established theory.
                                                        Diis becomes evident
iTiiOT efforts are made to see hov:
                                       the statements can be made consistent
vath the established theoiy.

                 aspect theoiy is meant the viei^ that mental and pliys-
4  ,
ical     ^,J^
     are different aspects of some third entity xAich
                                                        is itself neither
mental nor pliysical. Lateractionism is the viei/ that
                                                        mental events can
cause physical events and vice versa.

        Strictly spealdng the archetypes are completely
                                                         incapable of
?!^^!Ln°°"^°J°x^      ^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^ '^a* appears in consciousness
                        P®^ s® ^* on^ an archetypal image. This
i,fJ^L^\^^^^^^
distinction bet^/een the archetype per se and the
                                                  archetypal image
loll be fully discussed in Chapter 3.


n d5.
p. 2'^   w:i=^'     ®f?"*'
         Hereafter cited as
                              ^
                              Ifen
                                     aal laa §m^2lS. dfew York: Den, 1968),
                                     and las Symbols.
                                     CHAPTER 2
                           THEORT OF ARCHETYPES:         PART I



                                   Introduction


Rrelindnaiy Remarks

         Our discussion of the notion of a collective unconscious sei'ves

as an introduction to the main concern of this stu^jr, the concept

of the archeiype.           For in addition to the instincts, the collective

unconscious is said to contain archetypes.                  It is the notion of arche-

Igrpes   then   irfiich   gives Jung's collective unconscious its real sub-

stance, and it is the resolution of questions concerning the arche-

types vcpon which the real point of a concept of a collective un-

conscious depends.

     Ihny such questions inhabit the fringes of consciousness while

reading about the archetypes:              I-Jhat   really is an archetype?         Vhat

sort of ontological status is it supposed to have?                 T-hat    is the

relationship betijeen the archetypes and the instincts?                    Irhere do

the archetypes come from?          \ha.t    is the difference betireen the

archetype in itself and as it apisears in consciousness?                    T'hat   are

the chief arche-types?         Vhat causes their appearance in consciousness?

     Ihese many questions about the archetype reflect the many aspects

and perspectives from which the idea can be considered.                     Th order to

gain an insight into the unii^ying elements of these different per-

spectives on the archetypes, our eaiposition toll proceed vjith a



                                       30
                                     31




 conceptual avervie:, fol3oT.;ed hy a detailed
                                               discussion of the different
 aspects of the concept,       vath this approach ve hope to gain
                                                                  a unified
 understanding of the archetype which .rill
                                                   mke   clear the reasons for
 the characteristic complexity- of the
                                       idea.

 Characterization of the Archeiype

      It Trill be remembered from the
                                      above discussion of the collective

unconscious then, that the contents of this
                                            portion of the psyche irere
said to be objective and iuipersonal in the
                                            sense that the collective
unconscious is the supposed source of
                                      original contents which appear
in consciousness but which seem not to
                                       have been conscious before.
For example, an individual has a dream,
                                        vision or fantasy composed
of alien images to which he has no personal
                                            associations.             IbreovBr,
parallels to the phenomena's basic themes
                                          can then be found in mater-
ials draim from comparative symbology
                                      irhich are unloioim to the person

previous to his e::perience of the archetypal
                                              event.
     The folloTTing dream illustrates these
                                            characteristic archetypal
qualities.

             3h   my dream, I am at an amusement   pai-k .rith   my
                and another couple. The first
             iTife
                                                  amusement
          we decide to see is a sorb of "haunted
                                                     house."
          To enter, we descend a ilight
                                           of stairs into a
          cool, damp cellar, consisting of an
                                                  empty main
          room. looIcLng into one i-oom I
                                            see nothing.
          At tills point a ghost-like figure
                                               appears.    I
          recognize the "ghost" as a child dressed
                                                       in a
          costume, and am friendly- to it.    The "ghost"
         then leaves. 3h the next room, I see
                                                    a table,
          upon the table is a small, incomplete
                                                    child-like
         body. A large knife is hovering in the
         ^e table, and proceeds to dismember the air      over
                                                       body,
         m^od gushes out, spurting into the air in
                                                         great
         streams.    I thinic that this "shoir" is a
                                                      little
         too much for an amusement for the
                                               general public,
         although I personally am not affected
                                                   by the erore
         The yey" then begins to cany
                                            on a noLS con-
         versation Tlth me, while the blood
                                                continues to
                                     32




               spurt and gush over the table top. The shcnr
               is then over, and the "body" disappears.'

      3h this particular case, it is the arche-typal motif of

 ritual disnonberment which is the most outstanding featiire
                                                             of the
 dream.   The dreamer had no idea as to what this ijnage
                                                         might mean
 and was unfamiliar idth the frequent occurrence of
                                                    tliis theme in

 the literature of alchei;^,

      I'hat    Jung means by an archetype then is a disposition in
                                                                   the
collective unconscious to produce such an        ±mge in consciousness
as the one above.       Ibreover, Jung distinguishes bettreen the actual

image, which he calls the archetypal image, and the archetype
                                                              per
se, which as a disfosition of the unconscious is
                                                 unobservable in

principle.       Hoirever, the teiro "archetype" is   used indiscriminately

for both the archetypal manifestation and the archetypal disposition.

     Bie archeiijrpal image is a concrete instantiation of the
                                                               hypothe-
tical, unobservable archetypal disposition.           Ibreover, archetypal

contents which emerge into airareness assume a form which is
                                                             a
reflection of the individual consciousness.           The fact that arche-

types appear in a personal foim seems to be an instance
                                                        of the ten-
dency to structure awareness of unfamiliar phenomena so
                                                        that they
resemble fainiliar forms of esqperlence,

              The unconscious supplies as it were the archel^rpal
              foiTO,which in itself is empty and irrepresentable.
              Consciousness immediately fills it TTith related
              or similar representational material so that it
              can be perceived. For this reason archetypal
              ideas are locally, terar>orally, and individually
              conditioned (Vol. XTIl", p. 3^6).

     In the case of the dismembenaent dream, this assimilation
                                                               of the
archetypal motif into an individual context is illustrated Tjhen
                                                                 the
                                     33




 uncannor and alien ritual of dismemberment,
                                             concerning which the dreamer
 had no knowledge,   >ras   represented in the familiar setting of an amuse-

 ment part,

 Qntolo£;ical Status of the Archetype

        As a disposition the archetype has then the
                                                    ontological status of
 a hypothetical construct.      Like the electron, the archetype can be

 detected on3y through the effects which it
                                            produces, but, as with
 the electron, this unobsenrability is not
                                           held to make the archetype
 ai^ less real than direct^jr perceivable
                                          ob.jects like chairs and door-

 knobs.   Unlike the electron, hoxrever, the archetypes
                                                        are unobsenrable
 in principle.   Since the unconscious can only be knotm
                                                         indirectly
 through its effect on consciousness, there is
                                               no possibility of a
 direct perception of these unconscious contents.
                                                       I-fareover,   the
archetypes per se, existing as dispositions, are only
                                                      possibilities
to form obsenrable phenomena with the deteircinate
                                                   foiro in which thej-

appear being the result of the interaction betireen
                                                    this disposition
in the collective unconscious and the infoirdng
                                                consciousness.

     Di basing the ontology of the archetypes on
                                                 a position of
scientific realism, Jung wants to carefully distinguish
                                                        his unobser-
vable theoretical entities from metaphysical
                                             concepts such as Plato's
foms.     Bie difference is that the archetypes are
                                                    empirically derived
and grounded.    Ihey are the product of Jung's therapeutic
                                                            work in
which he found it Increasingly difficult to
                                            fit all of the phenomeno-
logical material into an ejqplanatoiy frameirork
                                                 which included only
a personal unconscious.      Ihere exists then the possibility of falsi-

fication to the extent that the ^archetypal theoiy
                                                   falls to provide
adequate explanation for the observed phenomena.
                                                      The relationship
                                   3h




 betireen experience and the postulated concepts
                                                 of metapl^rsics, on

 the other hand, is too va^ue to allow for the
                                               possibility of dis-
 confirjaation in principle,

 relationship of Archet'/pes and Instincts

      Since the archetypes are not the product of an
                                                     individual's
 personal experience, they must then be the result of
                                                      inheritance.
 Rather than inherited experiences or inherited ijnages,
                                                         ho^rever,

 the archetypes are transmitted as the disposition to
                                                      form images
 and ideas.    There are close parallels here Td.th the instincts,
                                                                   which
 rather than being inherited behaviors are instead
                                                   inherited dis-
positions to produce certain behaviors when activated
                                                      by the appro-
priate environmental releasing stimuli.             Va.th   this similarity to the
instincts in mind, Jung often refers to the
                                            archetypes as patterns
of behavior.

              . they prove to be typical attitudes,
          . .
                                                      a»des
          of action~tho;;ight-processes and ijrpilses which
          must be regarded as constituting the instinctive
          behaviour i^ical of the human species. The
          term I chose for this, namsly "archetype," there-
          fore coincides id.th the biological concept of the
          "pattem of behaviour" (Vol, HI, p. 26l),

     Just as the body develops evolutionarily conditioned
                                                          modes of
responding to external and internal stimuli, Jung
                                                  hypothesizes the
development of similar phylogenetic patterns for the
                                                     psyche.               The
archetypes are then somer^hat like psychic instincts,
                                                                   Ibreover,
since the body is not functionally a separate
                                              entity from the ndnd,
these "mental instincts" are parallel psychic
                                              counterparts to the
inherited modes of bodiOy response.     "   ,   ,    .   There is good reason
for supposing that the archetypes are the
                                          unconscious images of the
instincts themselves   ..."    (Vol. IX-A, p. Uk),
                                      3^




         The fact that avchetypes can be understood as patterns of be-

 havior emphasizes then their biological aspect and their continuity

 Tdth natiu-alistically understood processes,           Ifith   a vddening of toe

 traditional use of "patterns of behavior, " this allows for the possi-

 bility of archetypes in anjjnals.         "There is nothing to prevent us frora

 assuming that certain archetypes exist even in animals, that they
                                                                   are
 grounded in the pecularities of the living organism itself                        .
                                                                                       "
                                                                           .   ,


 (Vol.    VU^    p. 69).

Archetypes as A Priori Conditioning Factors

         However, the archeiypes can also be seen from the cognitive
                                                                     point
of   vien-r   as inherent categories of apprehension (Vol.        ^71,   p. 376).

This perspective then underlines their role as the structuring
                                                               elements
of the psyche and focuses on those aspects of the archel^'pes which

seem least directly connected id.th instincts as ordinari^sr understood.

It   may then seen difficult to grasp       hot;   the archei^rpes can be at once

both patterns of behavior and "a priori conditioning factors. "                    Hott-

ever, man's characteristic pattern of behavior is to develop con-

sciousness which can then act at variance with or in relative in-

dependence of the instincts understood as drives of the body,
                                                                                   ^d,
since for Jung, the mind and bo<^ are not realOy separate
                                                          entities
but merely different points of view, his shift from the
                                                        archeiypes
as patterns of behavior to talk of archetypes as
                                                 categories of the
pgyche can be seen as a plausible move rather than as a
                                                        logical jump.
"As a priori conditioning factors they represent
                                                 a special, psycholog-

ical instance of the biological 'pattern of behaviour'"
                                                        (Vol. XI, p.

1U9, note 2).

       Ifcw   in characterizing the archetypes as a priori conditioning                    i
                                         36




 factors what Jung has in rdnd is similar to the idea
                                                      of categories
 worked out by Kant.       Moreover, it souEtimes appears as if Jung is

 attempting to breaden Kant's concept so that in addition
                                                          to

 necessary foniis of cognition, the archetypes T/ill also
                                                          be cate-
 gories of the imagination. 2         Specifically the archetypes are held

 to be foiTOs of thought, perception and imagination
                                                     (Vol. IX-A, p.

 l}h).     Ibirever, the comparison   of the archetypes to the Kantian

 categories is onlj- of limited usefulness.           For the archetj^es can
 be said to be necessary only in the biological
                                                sense of being part
 of our inheritance -Aich vdll then necessarily
                                                inQuence us.               They
 are not necessaiy in the sense that they could not
                                                    have been other
than they are.        3he archetypes are products of evolution and
                                                                   are
thus subject to vihatever contingent environmental forces
                                                          made them
an enduring part of the genotype.             A homtooid on a different planet

could then conceivably develop different archetypes.

         Ibreover,   I^t's categories    ^rere the   necessaiy fomal aspects

to irhich any experience must confonn ivhereas Jung's
                                                      archetjijes are

the fonas of only certain tj-pes of experience.           Biiia,   the archetypes
are more properly described as primordial images
                                                 than as categories
in Kant's sense.       For the archetypes as "thought-foims" (Vol.        vn,
p. S6), i.e., dispositions to form certain typical images and
                                                              thoughts
come into consciousness only under unusual
                                           circumstances, rather than
being the structuring aspect of experience in
                                              general.              Biis is then
what Jung has in mind when he states:            "Only, in the case of our

'foms,' we are not dealing       vzith   categories of reason but vdth cate-
gories of the ima<dLnation " (Vbli XE,
                                       p.         ^8).
         From the point of view of similaritj- >d.th Kant,
                                                           the archetypes
can be seen to be universal, inborn and foimal
                                               elements of the psyche
                                       37




 (Vol.    IX-A, p. hk).    Ibreover, the ijidividual and personal aspects

 of the psyche are held to develop from a universal
                                                    substratum in
 tlie   collective unconscious.    Prom this perspective the ego is itself

 an archei^^e in the sense that it is prefigured as an a
                                                         priori possi-

 bility in the collective unconscious of the individual before it

 emei'ges   by a process of differentiation.        -All   of the comple:aes,
 in fact, although th^^ are predominantly manifestations
                                                         of the
 personal unconscious, have a "nuclear element" (Vol. Vni,
                                                           p. 12)
which is an archetype.

               ... every complex, has or is a (fragmentary)
               personality. At any I'ate, this is how it looks
               from the purely observational standpoint. But
               when we go into the matter more deeply, we
               find that they are really archetypal forma-
               tions (Vol. V, p. 255).

        Vhat    this archetypal basis of complexes amounts to is
                                                                 that a
complex     iMch   can be traced to events in the individual's personal

history is often "magically" complicated because the personal
                                                              situa-
tion has been assimilated to the archetypal one.              For example,

problems originating from the relationship Td.th the parents
                                                             are

frequently the result of the fact that the individual has since

childhood seen the parents as gods.           The father is perceived as

God the Father and the mother in teiros of the
                                               Archetype of the
Great Ifother or Earth Ifother.    Tlie     troubled individual then can

not successfully distinguish betireen parents as individuals
                                                             and the
archetypal projections in teiros of         ^Mch he has    habitually perceived
them.                              i




        For eveiy typical human situation there is a
                                                     corresponding
archetype so that the experience of the individual in
                                                      such a situation
                                        33




 invariably falls under the influence of an archei?ypal pattern.
                                                                                  In

 this respect the description of the archetypes as "patterns of in-

 stinctual behaviour" seems awply justified.

          Ibwever, the arcliel^rpal notion runs      tlie   risk of beir^ over-

 generalized into triviality if the idea of the archetypes as formal

 a priori conditioning factors is taten as a guide for explaining all

 human behavior.      For example, the archetypes can be seen as the

phylogenetic forms to      ij-hich   ontogeny supplies the content.       But,

although this understanding of the archetypes is hypbthetically

plausible, it is misleading from an operational point of vier/.                  For
although in principle all aspects of the personality are founded
                                                                 on
the common stznicture of the collective unconscious out of which

individuality emerges like an island out of the ocean, the arche-

tj-pes    can not be exclusively appealed to in order to form a compre-

hensive theory of behavior.          This irauld be an incomplete and one-

sided perspective ignoming the vitally ijnpoi'tant ontogenetic factors

influencing individual development.

         In the case of the complexes, for example, Jung identifies them

ijitli   the personal unconscious,      Ihe archetypal nucleus is called upon

as an explanatory principle only         \ihen.   the psychological situation

seems incomprehensible from an exclusively personal point of viei/.

Qiat there is a common and universal structure to the psyche is then

a true statement but not always an informative one for all distinct

aspects of behavior.

Further Implications of Kantian IhfluKice

         On the basis of the discussion so far, it could be fairly
                                    39




 concluded that on the '.*ole it is more accurate to understand
                                                                the
 arche-types as patterns of behavior than to thinlc of them
                                                            in terms
 of Kant's theory of Imovrledge.    TMs   conclusion, hoiTever, would be

 too hastily arrived at as the full stoiy of Kant's
                                                    influence on
 June's idea of the archetypes has yet to be e:q)lained.

       Jung's insistence on the label of empiricism to
                                                       characterize his
work, for e:caiaple, is a consequence of his raethodological
                                                             ideal of
 staying ^jithin the bounds of possible experience.
                                                         Ibreover, in teims
of Juns's thought, the concept of the psyche describes
                                                       these bounds.
Biere is no possibility of getting outside the psyx:he
                                                       to detenrdne
hou the p^che djiterprets the world, for all e^qjerience
                                                         is most
djnraediately   and inescapably psychic experience.   !Ihe   psyche is the
mediator of all experience, both from ixithin and from without.

       If a tliinker comes up ^dth a metapl-^rsical scheme Trhich
                                                                  he
tliinlcs   grasps the essential nature of reality, Jung then cauti&ns

as to the need for a psychological critique.      The claims of universal

validi-ly which the gj^stem mater has put forUi transcend
                                                          possible ex-
perience and are justified on the basis of an intuitive
                                                        certainty.
It is just at this point that Jung's theoiy of
                                               archetypes assumes a
deflationary role by explaining the appeal of the
                                                  metaphysical system
on the basis of its confoimity to the fundamental
                                                  aspects of the
thinker himself rather than to conformity of the
                                                 system trlth the
ultimate nature of reality.

             lihen a speculative philosopher believes
                                                      he has
             comprehended the world once and for all in his
             system, he is deceiving himself; he has merely
             comprehended himself and then naively projected
             that view upon the world (Vol. HI, p. 185).
                                        1|0




 Archet?rpes and Scientific theories

          To conplicate matters at this point is the fact
                                                          that basic
 scientific insights are held to be fotaided on archetj-pes.                  For
 ercample, Robert Ifeyer's idea of the conservation       of energy (Vol.
 Vn,      p. 67), the concept of the atom (Vol, IX-A, p. 5?) and Ifekule's

 discoveiy of the structure of the benzene ring                 and
                                                        (Jfen          ffi£   Symbols.
 pages 2^-26) are all understood as illustrating the effect of
                                                               arche-
 "t^'pes,


                • • . we spealc of "atoms" today because v/e have

               heard, directily or indirectly, of the atomic
               theory of Democritus. But v:here did Democritus,
               or whoever first spoke of minimal constitutive
               elements, hear of atoms? !Ihis notion had its
               origin in archetypal ideas, that is, in pri-
               mordial images which trere never reflections of
               physical events but are spontaneous products
               of the pgyclTic factor (Vol. IX-A,
                                                   p. 57).

       This archetypal basis of scientific theory is supported
                                                                               i-jhen   it
is shorm that the ideas have been present in the histoiy of
                                                            diviliza-
tion for many centuries.          In Kekiae's case the solution to his

theoretical dilemma came during a state of relaxation when, dozing

before his fireplace, he seemed to see snakelike atoms dancing in

the fire,       l-hen   one of the snalces fowned a ring by grasping its orm

tail, the idea of the benzene ring was conceived in a flash of
                                                               in-
sight. -^     This image of a snake (or dragon) biting its      oim.    tail is
called the uroboros and dates from at least as early as the
                                                            third
century B.C.      (l^ and    His Symbols , p. 26).

       Naturally the role of the unconscious must alw^s be seen in

proper relation to the activity of consciousness in these
                                                          cases.                        Had
Kelcule     not already spent great amounts of time and energy consciously

thinJdng about the problem of the structure of benzene, the
                                                            situation
                                                h^




  of an Insightful archetypal
                              constellation could not have occurred.
  M>reover, there t;as a great deal of
                                       effort necessary after the fire-
  place episode before the structure of
                                        benzene ims finally worked out.
  Ifoti-rithstanding the          well-documented and critical role of the uncon-

  scious then, it should not be thought
                                        that scientific theories e:dLst
 prefoimed in the collective unconscious.

          Ife   might    v;ell   iMtate Kant at this point and ask          hoir tliis   appar-
 ent confoimity betijeen ^/mbols from the collective
                                                     unconscious and
 scientific theories is possible,                    ^breover, it needs to be made clear

 W]rhy   scientific ideas derived from the archetypes
                                                      are held to be
 genuine discoveries and advances, TAereas
                                           sindlarly derived meta-
 phcrsical ideas are restricted to a sphere
                                            of only subjective validity.
         3h the case of science then, the
                                          archetypal constellation some-
 times proves to be instrumental in
                                    bringing about a progressive
 theoretical ad^rance for science when the
                                           image from the unconscious
is assimilated in            tems of the already         e:d.sting   bo^   of kno^Tledge.
llanjr   oHier ideas from          tfie   same source are never put to scientific

use because they do not happen to be
                                     compatible ilth the progress of
science.

         Dius   vri.th   scientific theories, archetypes are sometimes
                                                                       an im-
portant influence tdthin the context of discoveiy.
                                                                       Regardless of the
origin of a scientific hypothesis, hoirever,
                                             in order for it to become
acceptable to the scientific community, it
                                           must be validated in terms
of criteria of scientific methodology.                   Ihese criteria of accepta-

bility involve relating the theoretical
                                        terns of the I^ypothesis to
obsenrational statements in such a way as
                                          to constitute an empiirl-
cal3y derived decision procedure which
                                                        xnH   indicate what obsenrational
 states of affairs irill count for or against the
                                                  hypothesis.
      l-ath   metaphysical theories based on archetypal experience,

 on the other hand, the relationship   beti.'een   the theoiy and observa-
 tions is not specified in such a way as to foim the
                                                     basis for an
 objective decision procedure which could be used to adjudicate
                                                                con-
 flicting aetaplTysical claims,

      Ibreovcr, the archetypal images are alvrays the
                                                      partial result of
 the individual traits of the embocjyLng consciousness,
                                                        with aspects of
 personal histoiy and cultural baclcground being always
                                                        associated x/ith
 their appearance.    Ihus the personal factor can not be eliminated
                                                                     in
order to arrive at an objectively valid metaphysical
                                                     statement.            In
addition to the inevitable contamination of the
                                                personal factor, the
archetypes can be said to be unavoidably anthropoimorphic.
                                                                  As the
product of human evolution, they mirror man
                                            and are man.        Although
the archetjijes represent man's relationship
                                             to the world, it is only
from the historically conditioned human standpoint
                                                   reflecting       hoiT

the universe affects man.

     There is for Jung, nonetheless, a possibility of
                                                      evaluating the
pragmatic value of the metaphysical ideas considered
                                                     from the stand-
point of their ability to further and enhance human
                                                    e:d.stence.       Thus
veiy similar to lEetzsche, Jung would judge metaphysical
                                                         ideas on
their life-affinnLng quality, while maintaining
                                                that the final truth
of the ideas in teiros of which of them rdrror
                                               best the ultimate
structure of reality could not be decided,

     In Jung's vieir we must be careful to
                                           distinguish subjective,
p^chological truth from objective truth about the
                                                  ^eternal world.
Thus, although it is an error to see the
                                         archetypes as objectively
                                     h3



  true in the sense that they represent literal
                                                statements about objec-
  tive states of affairs, yet the archetypes have
                                                  a psychological
 validity and are p^hologically true in the sense
                                                  that it is possible
 to interpret them in a subjectively meaningful
                                                     w^.      The validity of
 the archetypes in teniis of applicability to
                                                  tlie   human situation must
 then be aclaiowledged even in absence of the
                                              possibility of a scientLfLc
 validation of statements based on them.      For exaugxLe, the existence of
 a God can not be either proved or disproved
                                             scientifical3y; yet the

 existence of an intez^ial God-image or its equivalent
                                                       must be acknov;-
 ledged as a psychologically real and effective event.

           Die gods cannot and must not die.    I said just
           no\ithat there seems to be something, a kind of
           superior power, in the human psyche, and tiiat
           if this is not the idea of God, then it is the
           "belly. " I wanted to express the fact that
                                                         one
           or other basic instinct, or coii^jlex of ideas,
           will invariably concentrate upon itself the
           greatest sum of psychic energy and thus force
           the ego into its seind.ce (Vol. VH,
                                                 p. 72),


                  ^e   Symbolic Mature of the Archetypes

     Ihe way in tAich Jung characterizes the
                                             distinctive psychologi-
cal validity of the archetypes is by emphasizing
                                                 the symbollo nature
of the archetypal iinases.     The archetypes are said to be "symbolic

foiTOulas" (Vol^ VI, p. 377).

     The symbol for Jung is to be shaiply distinguished
                                                        from the
semiotic function of signs.      Signs are representations of Imovjn

things.   Ihe trademark of a company, for example,
                                                   sirapOy represents

the company itself.      Syinbols, on the other hand, can   not be said to
be logically equivalent to their referents.
                                                 Bie symbol points be-
yound itself to an unknorm.
                                  hli




            Dius a i-rord or an image is sQonbolic \fhen it
            implies something more than its obvious and
            immediate meaning. It has a xd.der "uncon-
            scious" aspect that is never precisely defined
            or fuUy explained. ... As the mind e:xplores the
            symbol, it is led to ideas that lie beyond the
            grasp of reason  (^    and Itts Symbols, p. k),

       Symbols functixin as interconnecting linlcs betireen
                                                            the conscious
 and the collective unconscious, as they bring
                                               into consciousness in
 representable form the othertrf.se unlmotrable archetypes.
                                                               The sjiribols
 mediate the experience of the archetypes and
                                              because of the unavoid-
 able personal characteristics due to embodiment
                                                 in an individual con-
 sciousness are products of both the collective
                                                unconscious and con-
 sciousness.

      Biere is then in the symbol a synthesis of known
                                                       and unknoim
 and of real and uirreal.

           If it Trere only real, it xrould not be a
                                                     symbol,
           for it vjould then be a real phenomenon and hence
           un^ymbolic. . . . Jind if it vrere altogether unreal,
           it would be mere empty imagining, vjhich, being
           related to nothing real, would not be a symbol either
           (Vol. VI, p. 111).

           The Efymbol . . . unites the antithesis betireen
           real and unreal, because on the one hand it is
           a psychic reality (on account of its efficacy),
           while on the other it corresponds to no physical
           reality (Vol. VI, pages 128-129).

     %   a large extent then, what we add to the
                                                 picture of the
archetype hy calling the archetypal images
                                           symbols is an emphasis
on the living intensLly of the archetypes
                                          as they are experienced.
The archetypal images are not abstract
                                       intellectual concepts but
symbols which are not transparent to reason
                                            and the intellect.       Ibre-
over, these symbols have a certain aura of
                                           fascination.       They appeal
not on3y to the intellect as puzzles for the
                                             understanding but to the
                                                  h^




  emotions as           T-rell.    "They are as much feelings as thoughts             ..."
  (Vol.         vn,    p. 66),

            Biis characteristic quality of the               sgnnibol   to evoke emotion is

  teimed its numinositjr, the numen being the specific energy
                                                              of the
  arche-t^^s.

            lith the description of the nurainosity of the archetypes,
                                                                       the
  close relationship betireen archetypal images and religious
                                                              motifs
 becomes evident.                 For Jung accepts Rudolf Otto's characterization

 of religious experience as a "careful and scrupulous
                                                      obserration
 of    .    .   .    the nundnosum    ..."       (Vol. XE, p. 7).        "I-fe   might say, then,
 that the term 'religion' designates the attitude
                                                  peculiar to a con-
 sciousness which has been changed by experience of
                                                    the numinosum "
 (Vol.          n,   p. 8).

           iO-though originating through individual
                                                    experiences of the collec-
 tive unconscious, religion is, strictly speaking, a
                                                     phenomenon of
 collective consciousness.                Jlnd   since not all experiences of the

archetTpes result in their being assimilated in teiros of a
                                                            religious
frame of reference, another vrider designation is needed
                                                         to character-
ize the effect of the numinous quality of archetypes.
                                                                                  Thus the arche-

tTPes are said to be "sjjirittial" factors.

           In a sense spiritual and archetypal are aOiaost
                                                           equivalent and
interchangeable teims.                 For when   \re   have understood the transpersonal

nature of the archetypes,^ their aura of numinosity
                                                    and their ability
to generate images >jhich serve as the foundations
                                                   of culture, then
^76   have made definite the meaning of the spiritual.

           That keeps us from assertiiig this equivalence
                                                          of meaning, hwrever,
is the instinctual perspective.                   For the archetypes are said to be
                                  h6




  "patterns of instinctual behaviour" (Vol. IX-A,
                                                  p. hh).       Aid it is the
 instinctual aspect of man which seems to stand in sharpest
                                                            contrast
 to xAat we M±sh to designate as spiritual.

      However, Jung points to Christian prejudice as the
                                                         origin of the
 apparent antithesis between spirit and nature.

            • • . vezy remarkable opposition of spirit
                                                        and
           nature.   Bren though spirit is regarded as
           essentially alive and enlivening, one cannot
           really- feel nature as unspiritual and dead.
           Vfe must therefore be dealing
                                         here with the
           (Christian) postulate of a spirit whose life
           is so vastly superior to the life of nature
           that in comparison \r±th it the latter is no
           better than death (Vol. IX-A, p. 210).

      A more in-depth perspective, then, reveals the
                                                     paradoxical re-
lation between spirit and instinct.     For   th^   seem to be siirllar pro-
cesses of pgychic energy which are distinguidied
                                                 by the application
of this energy into diametricalOy contrasting
                                              modes.

     Ibreover, it is in the description of the relation
                                                        between the
spiritual and instinctual that Jung's psychological
                                                    viewpoint is in
sharpest contrast to that of Preud.     For Jung does not conceive all

psychic energy as being instinctual energy as does
                                                   Freud.        He uses
the teim for p^jrchic enei^gy, libido, in a way i*ich
                                                      does not isiply
its equivalence i-dth instinctual energy.     Ohere is then for Jung
no need of a concept of sublimation in lAich
                                             Instinctual energy
must be siphoned off for cultural purposes.     Any diversion of the
flwr of libido from its natural Instinctual
                                            channels in Jung's view
leads only to neurotic maladjustment.
                                         H6;revBr, there is more   p^hic
energy available for the human being than
                                          is utilized hy the natural
Instinctual processes.   This e-^ess   p^hic   energy can then be used
for other than instinctual purposes, and
                                            w might    say that this e:ocess
                                           hi




  energy represents a degree of freedom for nan
                                                to pursue cultural
  activities for their      om     sake.    The ^pibolic images    fi^   the collec-
  tive unconscious then serve as "transfoimers"
                                                of energy in the sense
 that the archetypes represent inherent patterns
                                                 for this energy floi/
  (Vol. V, p. 232).

         Since the spiritual uses of        pcsjrchic   energy are the result of the
 influence of the archetypes v/hich are
                                        themselves the product of
 evolution, it becomes evident that the
                                        development of the spirit
 in man is his characteristic pattern of
                                         behavior.

                5i feallty of course the world-spuming
                                                         passion
                of the 'spirit" is just as natural as
                                                       the
                marriage-flight of insects (Vol. V, p.
                                                        396),
                 Bie spiritual appears in the psyche
                                                     also as an
                instinct, indeed as a real passion, a "consoming
                fire  ....     It is not derived from a^y other
                instinct ... but is a principle sj^
                                                       generis.
                a specific and necessaiy fomi of instinctual
                povier (Vol. VUI, p. ^8).



                         Archetypes and Ihstlncta

     3h order to      fuUy understand       the meaning of the tenii "spiidtual"

then, a further clarification of the
                                     archetype-instinct relation is
necessaiy.       For we need to grasp how the spiritual
                                                        if to be of the
same type of rtuff as the instincts and
                                        yet seendngOy different from
and even opposed to them.

     A look at animals other than man helps
                                            to gain an insight into
what Jung has in mind in this regard.
                                       For ±a the exa«?>lBs of patterns
of behavior in animals,      >;e   see clearly the unity which in man
                                                                      becomes
a tension of opposdtes betvreen spirit
                                       and instinct,
     A   fc?y   MOTd "pattern" is   th^     the link which enables us to
connect the behavior of animals \dth
                                     the archelypes and instincts in
                                    hQ




   man. For the Surtlnctual behavior
                                      of animals is not to be
                                                              understood
  as just a blind Impulsion to
                                action. Rather, for each
                                                          instinctual
  act there is present a total
                                pattern vhich Includes a sort of
                                                                 Image
  of the Instinctual situation.


             ^IZ f!i4^/!''*' ^"°^amorphous instincts, as
                                  "^^^ *h« pattern of
              ?S^SfJJ^°*
              its ^tuation. ^ffAlways it fulfils an image,
             ^d   the Ijnage has fixed qualities.
                                                     Ihe in-
              stinct of the leaf -cutting ant
                                               fulfils the Image
             ^^P^i^i'^'*^^^!^"**^'          transport, and^
             Sfi       J.!?*"^^"^^^^    ^^i- If any one of
             these conditions   is lacldng, the instinct does
             not faction, because it cannot
                                                exist with-
             out its total pattem, without
                                              its image.
             Such an image is an a priori
                                            type.    It is
             inborn an the ant prior to any
                                              activity, for
             there can be no activity at all
                                               unless an
             instinct of corresponding pattern
                                                  initiates
             and makes it possible (Vol. Vni,
                                                  p. 201).
      Wie inrtlnctual acts of animals
                                      then seem to be unified by a
 pattem which     liK^ludes a sort of intuitive
                                                recognition of the goal
 of the instinctual acts as
                            well as the ptyslological
                                                      mechanisms
 which supply the necessaiy energy.

      Of course. In the case of
                                animals, our use of "image" must
be metaphoricalj but it is
                            Jung's point that this regulating
                                                              prin-
ciple Of the Instinct, the
                            factor which especially    m
                                                       the Insects
makes the operation of instinctual
                                    behavior amazin^y precise and
selective rather than haphazard,
                                  can be recognized.
     ae    organizing factor of the instinct
                                             together with its
specific   enei^ make up a unified pattem of
                                             behavior for    animals.
In man, on the ottier hand, the
                                representations of this foi«al factor
of instinct can come into awareness
                                     as actual images. Bms,
                                                               whereas
In aniinals the archetypes and
                               the instincts exist in a fused,
                                                                undiffer-
entiated state; in man, with the
                                  foi^ation of consciousness, they
                                       h9




 become separable and distinct.

           Th the hxnnan realm then the archetypes become -Uie forms which

 r^ulate the instincts,          Ibreover, the archetypal Images are said

 to represent the meaning of the instincts and to be "the unconscious

 images of the instincts themselves" (Vol, EC-A, p, kh)»          The arche-

 •tgrpes   thus act as guiding factors for the release of instinctual

 energy in appropriate ways characteristic of man as a species.

       But lAat are these human instincts?         Jung recognizes five types

of instinctual factors for man:          "hunger, sexuality, activity,

reflection and creativity" (Vol. VOU, p. 118).           He conceded that

any attesapt to enumerate the human instincts is at least a matter

of controvert.        "Hie   principle reason for this confusion as to what

constitutes an instinct in man is the complication of the psycho-

logical factor.       For the criterion of what to count as psychic is

the ability of the functioning of the will to modiiy the otherwise

automatic and compulsive Instincts.         It would seem evident then

that the reason we can not decide on what to count as purely instinc-

tual in man is due to the fact that instincts are alwajrs in part

Influenced by the psyche.         Thus Jang says that the instincts per

se are ectopsychic and serve the function only of a stlimilus,

whereas the detemlning factor for human behavior is always the

result of an interaction between the ectopsychic instinct
                                                          and the
psychic situation of the moment (Vol,        vm,   p. 11^).

      This mutual interaction between psyche and instinct in
                                                             man has
then the result of making the Instinctual element ambiguous.
                                                                      For,

on the one hand, all psychic processes seem to be founded on an

instinctual base, wiiereas, on the other hand, psychic processes
                                   ^0




  also influence the working of the instincts.
                                                      "...     The instincts
  are a condition of   p^hic   activity, while at the sane time p^chic

  processes seem to condition the instincts"
                                             (Vol.       H,   p. 330),
       Thus the twofold nature of instinct becomes
                                                   most evident in
 human behavior where for each instinctual action
                                                  we have to take
 into account both the aspect of "c^ynamism
                                            and coiapulsion"       as well
 as that of "specific meaning and intention"
                                             (Vol. I, p. 287).           For
 each instinctual action then we can pose
                                          the question as to its
 meaning,

       Ihe archet3Tjal Images are these
                                        psychic factors i*ich provide
 the meaning for the instincts.    Th^   are the necessaiy fonns of
 instinctual behavior for man.    The sense of spying that something

 represents the meaning of an instinct for
                                           man is thus clarified by
 an understanding of this process of
                                     "p^hization, " the assimilation
of the physiological stimulus to a
                                   preexistent psychic pattern (Vol.
Vm,    p. 11^).

      3h the animals which have no   p^he   there is nevertheless pre-
sent a unified pattern of behavior.      The instinctual acts are the

ways in which the animal realizes its inherent
                                               nature, its possi-
bilities of becoming what it can be.     The appropriate fulfiljnent

of the instinctual natui-e of an animal is
                                           its way of realizing its
nreaning.

      If we say then that the archetypes
                                         in man are the images of
the Instincts and represent their
                                  meaning,    ,re   are eagAasizing this
continuity with the lower animals.
                                     Ifen also has his characteristic

patterns of beha:vior, and the
                               arehetypes act as the patterning fac-
tors for these human Instincts,
                                  mi   the f^ilfilment of the instincts
                                  51




In nan then also lead to an unfoldnent of his
                                              inherent human nature?
      The answer to this question must of
                                          course deal with the factor
of the   p^he.     Wiat is only dimly prefigured in anijnals
                                                             becomes in
man with the developgnent of consciousness his
                                               particularly human
way of being.     For a human being to realize its nature
                                                          then iniplies
the dervelopjnent of consciousness.

     Ihis development is like an instinct in
                                             the sense that it comes
into being conditioned by the archetypal
                                         patterns.     However, its
nature is to exist as a factor which can
                                         operate as a will and hence
control and regulate the "other"
                                 instincts.     The nature of con-
sciousness contains then the possibility
                                         of being able to act
against nature.

           It is recognized that man living
                                             in the state of
          nature is in no sense merely "natural"
                                                      like an
          fflilmal, but sees, believes,
                                        fears, worships things
          wiiose meaning is not at all
                                        discoverable from the
          conditions of his natural environment.
                                                        Iheir
          underlying meaning leads us in fact far
                                                       away
          from all that is natural, obvious, and
                                                     easily
          intelligible, and quite often contrasts most
          shajTxIy ^rlth the natural instincts,
                                                  tfe have
          only to think of all those gruesome rites
                                                          and
          customs against which every natural feeling
          rises in revolt, or of all those beliefs
                                                         and
          ideas which stand in insuperable contradiction
          to the evidence of the facts. All this
                                                       drives
          us to the assumption that the spiritual
                                                      prLn-
         ciple (xdiatever that mi^t be) asserts
                                                     itself
         against the merely natui^ conditions
                                                   with in-
         credible strength. One can say that this
                                                          too
         is "natural," and that both have their
                                                     origin
         in one and the same "nature." I do not
                                                      in
         the Ifiast doubt tliis origin, but must
                                                   point
         out that this "natural" southing
                                              consists
         of a conflict beti/een ttro principles,
                                                   to
         which you can give this or that name
                                                 according
         to taste, and that this opposition
                                               is the
         Kqaression, and perhaps also the basis,
                                                      of
         the tension >re call psychic energy
                                               (Vol. Vni,
                                  $2




      Bras the fact that arche-t^Tpes seem to enter the human picture

 on two levels— as patterns of instinctual behavior and as spiritual

 factors—is due to the fact that one of the innate human patterns,

 the tendency to develop consciousness, can act againsrt the other

lotTer drives   and become a channel of psgrchic energy in its ovm

right independently of the instincts.      Bierefore the archetypes

seem to have two paradoxically opposite qualities:       "
                                                             .   ,   ,   The
archetype is partly a spiritual factor, and partly like a hidden

meaning immanent in the instincts      ..."   (Vol.   Vin, 222),         Only
in man then is there this potential split between his natural ten-

dencies and the realization of his human-most potentiality of being,

     This split, which is the same as that bettireen the conscious and

xmconscions, is a state of necessajy tension since the development of

aw-areness and the giving in to the \mconsciousness of instinctual

motivations tend to irork against each other and to a large extent

they are mutually exclusive activities.      However, Jung's psychological

viewpoint as a v/hole can be understood as the attempt to show            hovr

this necessaiy tension between conscious and unconscious and between

spirit and instinct need not necessarily be a conflict.          For the
integrated personality is one which     leams to live with a balance
bettreen these forces of tension rather than excluding one for
                                                               the
sake of the other.

         But if T-re can reconcile ourselves to the mys-
         terious truth that the spirit is the life of
         tlie body seen from within, and the bocty the out-
         v/ard manifestation of the life of the spirit—
                                    —
         the two being really one then we can understand
         why the striving to transcend the present level
         of consciousness through acceptance of tlie un-
         conscious must give the body its due, and why
         recognition of the body cannot tolerate a philos-
         opl-QT that denies it in tlie name of the spirit
                                                          (Vol.           X, p.   9^),
                                            ^3




                                          Notes



 Clough.
            1
                 This dream was provided by a student and friend,
                                                                     '6
                                                                  George

            2
          Bie fact that Kant had a strong influence on the
                                                               develop-
 ment of Jung's ideas is amply evidenced by the mai^
                                                         explicit re-
 ferences to Kant scattered throughout Jung's wrks.
                                                          Moreover,
 when Jung talks of the philosophers t*o had been linportant to
                                                                    his
 intellectual development, to again find him acknowledging'
                                                                the
 influence of Kant:    "Ihe philosophical influence that has pre-
 vailed in iny education dates frem ELato, Kant, Schopenhauer,
 Si, V. Hartraann, and Ittetzsche.   Biese names at least character-
 ize    w
        main studies in philosophy." C.G. Jung, Letters. Vol. I
1906-1950, Vol.          H
                     19^0-1961, edited by Geiiiard Mler and JSniela
 Jaffe (Princeton:   Princeton Tfeiversity Press, 1973), Letters.
Vol. n, pages 500-501, letter to Joseph F, Rychlak
                                                        dated 27
April 1959. Hereafter cited as Letters Vol. I or
                                                     Vol. II,
          ]h his autobiography Jiing describes an interest
                                                             in Kantian
philosophy which \iaa part of a "philosophical development"
                                                                which
  extended from        w
                    seventeenth year until toII into the period of
n^ medical studies." C.G. Jung, ffemories. Dreams.
                                                       P^flections
Ufeif York:   Random House, I96I), p. 70. Hereafter cited as
^fei°°^es, Breams. Bteflections . The extent of
                                                 that interest is
revealed when Jimg relates that while a medical
                                                    student "the
clinical semesters that folloTred kept me so bu^ that
My time remained for my forays into outlying fields. scarcely
                                                            I was
able to study Kant only on Sundays" ( Mamories. lireams
                                               —^        .  Reflec-
tions. p. 101).                                          '




        3       Jolande Jacobi,     ^mplex/Archetype/Symbol in the   Psycholot
of   Of Of      Jung. (Princeton:     Princeton University Press7T97i'), p.     f   ^.

                                    ggogoaz^oS
CmL XttcS^:                                       Natural Science (B.gle:«,od

     5
               transpersonal nature of the archetype, v?e mean to
  4,
refer X ^J^^
      to the fact that archetypal experience is not completely
                                                                ex-
planable by reference to the individual's past experience or
                                                              develop-
ment.
                                CHAPTER 3
                     THBORT OP ARCHEPTPESi   PART   U

                     The Origin of the Archetypea


       3he next aspect of the archel^ypal theory
                                                 lAich      ire   must tal« up
 for discussion is the question of the
                                       origin of the archeigrpes:            Ihere
 do the archelgrpes cone from?

       One way of approachins this   pvdblm is by considering the rela-             -

 tLonship befereen archel^ypes and
                                   mythological motifs.          For since norths
 and fairytales are one of the most
                                    characteristic         w^s    in which
 archeigrpes manifest themselves,
                                  if we can discover hot; norths origi-
 nate, then perhaps this vdll shed
                                   light on the question of the
 origin of the archetypes J

      ^hological motifs then are characteristic
                                                archetypal images
so that the archel^npes are
                            sometimes designated as '%thologems"
                                                                 by
Jung.

      The inrthological feature of
                                   archetypal manifestation can be seen
to fit in Td.th what was previously
                                    said about the archetypal images

being ^jrmbols and having a religious
                                      or spiritual significance in
that a mrfch is a phenomenon of collective
                                           consciousness.  It is the
end product of a conscious elaboration
                                        of the oilginal unconscious
content, ^Ad.ch often includes the
                                   efforts of many generations of

stoiyfcellers.   ^h this way the numinous quality
                                                  of the nythologem,
the immediate impact of the living
                                   intensity of     tlie   unconscious
                                          5^




 revelation, is lessened, and the genuine s^tabollc nature of the
                                                                  arche-
 types is expressed in a diminished degree.               "The so-called religious

 statement is still numinous, a qualily T*ich the n^rth has
                                                            alreatfy lost

 to a great extent" (Vol, XI, p. 301),

         Since the religious expression of the archetypes can
                                                              also suffer
 the sane fate as Berths and cease to become "living" symbols,
                                                               it would
 seem that Jung's distinction between the religious and
                                                                     tlie   inytholog-

Ical in terms of numinosity is not realOy adequate.               Ih addition, there

are exan^xLes from primitive cultures where the ncrthological and
                                                                  re-
ligious coincide,      "A tribe's in/thology is its living religion                     .   "
                                                                                ,   ,


 (Vol.    K-A, p. 1^),    Tihen   then does a religious statement cease to

be religious and becomes ncrthological?           Ifees   Jung mean that when a

religious dogma loses crediblli-ty it becomes a ncrth?

         Ibreover, there seems to be at least in ordinaiy usage an im-

plied difference in content irith the iicrthologlcal involving
                                                               move
primitive types of thought and being more concerned             vri.th   naturalistic
phenomena than the religious.            Religions then would seem to be more

sophisticated i^'pes of mjrthologies.

     At any rate, it is clear that Jung is not particularly
                                                            concerned
id.th establlslilng   strict criteria of usage which would keep the teiros

distinct as is evidenced by the follo^^dng:

             • . • ncrths of a religious natua^e can be inter-
             preted as a sort of mental therapy for the suffer-
             ings and anxieties of mankind in general ...
             (I-fan and las SK/mbols. p. 68).


             I was driven to ask Herself in all seriousness:
             "Vhat is the north you are living?"          ...
                                                        So, in
             the most natural way, I took it upon ncrself to
                                     ;




             get to knavT "my" myth, and I regarded this as
             the task of tasks, for—so I told inyself —how
             could I, when treating n^r patients, maloe due
                                      56




              alloxrance for the personal factor, for
                                                       n^y
              personal equation, \M.ch is yet so necessary
              for a IcnOTxledge of the other person, if I was
              unconscious of it? I simp3y had to laioir T*at
              unconscious or preconscious rcrfch was fomdng
              me, from what rhizome I sprang (Vol. V, pa^os
              xjcLv-xxv),

       In speaking about his personal north as
                                               in the above, it is
 evident that Berths are often used as vehicles
                                                of the most j^ymbolic
 and numinous manifestations of the unconscious.
                                                        Thus Jung's use
 of the   tem   "ncrth"   deviates somewhat from the ordinaiy usage.
                                                                           Some-
 times he means north to refer to the symbolic
                                               archetj-pal ijnages

 themselves, and at other tiines he uses rayUt
                                               in the conventional >ray
 to indicate    tlie   cultural product as an aspect of the collective

 consciousness.

      Hius both norths and religious (spiritual)
                                                 statements2          can be
 original symbolic expressions of the collective
                                                 unconscious.

                ... esoteric teaching. Ohis last is a typical
             means of expression for the transmission of collec-
             tive contents originalOy derived from the mcon-
             scious.
                -Another vrell-kno;m expression of the
                                                        archetypes
             is myth and fairytale (Vol. IX-A,
                                                 p. 5).

      In attributing a positive function to
                                            norths even in the case

of modem man, it is evident that Jung
                                      does not see        nortlis   as a
sort of primitive inferior science, or
                                       sdjnply as a crude foiin of

prescientific explanaUon.         This is because of the symbolic nature

of norths.   For if to understand that northological
                                                     statements are

                                        are actuaUy psychological ^
not really about the external world but

statements, then we are less apt to criticize
                                              the norths for their
variance with current scientific knoi^ledge.
                                                  !Ihus norths   have a
psychological validity and accurately depict
                                             the nature of the
                                       ^7




  human situation.

          The inability of primitive and other
                                               unsophisticated peoples to
  distinguish between the psychological and the
                                                objective sense of
  truth frequently leads then to the phenomenon
                                                of projection in
 Tihich an unconscious content is perceived
                                            as belonging to an object

 and being a property of the object.               Borough the agency of pro-

 jection natural phenomena take on qualities
                                             stemming from the
 collective unconscious so that        "   .   .   .   the T^iwle of aorthology
 could be taken as a sort of projection of
                                           the collective uncon-
 scious" (Yol.    Vni,   p. 152).

         In spite of this confusion about inner
                                                and outer observed in
 mrthological thinking, Jung asserts that
                                          ncrthology should not be
 understood as an attempt to formulate a
                                         type of scientific ex-
 planation.

             Biere can be no doubt that science and
             philosophy have gram from this matrix, but
             that primitives thinlc up such things merely
             frora a need for explanation, as a sort of
             physical or astronomical theory, seems to
             me highly improbable (Vol, VIII, p.
                                                  153),
        It would seem rather that the anthropomorphism
                                                       seen in ncrth-
ology, the projection of human qualities
                                         onto natural phenomena,

is an attempt to grasp the meaning of nature
                                             in human terms.                  It
is then the symbolic meaning of natural
                                        phenomena which captures
tloe   iiiterest of the myth-mabers.       If x^ look at alchei^, for exam-

ple, only as a sort of proto-chemistiy,
                                        this can not explain how
the interest in it continued in; spite
                                       of the failure to produce the
desired objective results over periods
                                       of hundreds of years. ^                    ihe
alchemist is of course taken in to an
                                      extent by his o^m projections;
but Jung points out that the hubris of
                                       assuming that our scientific
                                              ^8




 world    vie-./   is thus superior to one founded on
                                                      mrthological projec
 tix>ns   is not justified, since if the
                                         unsophisticated ndnd anthropo-
 inorphizes the world, we harre in the
                                       present era "nechanicomorphized"^
 it   TTith the    result that the embolic quality of our
                                                          existence is im-
 poverished,        life   anist   then avoid the mistake of trying to see
                                                                           rcrthology
 as an aUerapt at explanation in objective
                                           tenas when its erqxLanations
 are sjoiibolic in nature.             ?^


       Ifow   since the arclielgrpal psjrche expresses
                                                       itself in the language
 of north, it irould seem as if the
                                    sorthological interpretation of na-
 ture had been someliow Imprinted on
                                     the             p^he    so that these archaic
images reappear in           modem     man.
                                 \h look then to a description of this

process of how the nc^hological image
                                        arises in response to the pl^-
sical process in order to gain what
                                      apparently is the essential clue
to the question of the origin of
                                  the              archetiypes.

       Keeping in mind the previous discussion
                                               of the nature of myths,
it is clear that the relationship
                                  betcreen the jd^rsical process and

images of ncrthological motifs is not
                                      understood by Jung as being one
of siB^iLe representation. Vhen he
                                    says then that the archet3T>al

image is not to be understood as an allegoiy
                                             of the physical pro-
cess, he means that the objective content
                                          of representation is ex-
perienced symbolically and hence takes on
                                          psychic aspects due to
projection.

               It is not the world as we know
                                               it that speaks
              out of hxs unconscious, but the vnkncrm
                                                        world
              of the p^che, of which to knot/ that
                                                     it mirrors
              our en^rical irorld onOy in part, and
                                                      that, for
              the most part, it moulds this
                                              empirical world
              in accord^e ^dth its ora psychic
                                                   assumptions.
              JJie archetype does not
                                      proceed from physical
              ;?f   ,' ^* describes how tiie pj^he ercperiences
              the pliysical fact, and in so doing the psyche
                                   59




           oi'ten behaves so autocratically that it denies
           tangible reality or makes statements that fly
           in the face of it (Vol. IX-A, p. 1%),

      Hius original archetypal (ncrthological) images are
                                                          posttilated

 as being the resultant of an interaction between a physical
                                                             process
 and the primitive psyxihe, irdth the physical process being
                                                             Interpreted
 in terms of a psychic fantasy content.     Ibreover, it is the subjective

 part, the fantasies which arise concomitant vrith the
                                                       physical pro-
cess, that are the foiroative elements for the
                                               n^rthological motif.

          I'hat we can safely say about northical images
                                                         is
          that the physical process imprinted itself on
          the psyche in this fantastic, distorted form
          and was preserved there, so that the uncon-
          scious still reproduces similar images today
          (Vol. Vni, p. 1^3).

          It is not storms, not thunder and lightning,
          not rain and cloud that remain as images in
          the pjgrche, but the fantasies caused by the
          effects they arouse (Vol. VIII, pages l^U-l^^).

     Still to be explained, however, is the process of pgjrchic
                                                                im-
printing through which an original inythological image becomes
                                                               an

enduring aspect of the collective unconscious, which can then pro-

duce images of similar   fom   even to the present day.     VJhen   ue read
Jung on this point, there seems to be an evident appeal
                                                        to a theoiy

involving inheritance of acquired characteristics.        For although

Jung is careful to make clear that it is the disposition
                                                         to foiro
ijnages rather than the images themselves   which are inherited, yet
this inherited disposition is held to be a sort of
                                                   condensation of
the repeated experiences resulting from typical human
                                                      situations.

         These archetypes, whose innermost nature is in-
         accessible to experience, are the precipitate
         of the psychic functioning of the whole ances-
         tral line; the accumulated experiences of
         organic life in general, a million times re-
         peated, and condensed into types.  In these
                                                     "     —
                                      60




              archetypes, therefore, all experiences
                                                        are re-
              presented irhich have happened on this planet
              since prLneval ttoes (Vol. VI,
                                              p. 1;00).

         The repetition of these
                               laical human experiences leaves a sort
  of function trace in the psyche
                                  which then can act to produce ana-
 logous rc^ological djnages in succeeding
                                          generations.           Tttixs   the
 archetypes are described as "mnentic deposits.

              From, the scientific, causal
                                             standpoint the pri-
              mordial image can be conceived as a mneraic
                                                              deposit,
              an iij?)rint or engram (Seraon), tjhich has
                                                          arisen
              through the condensation of countless
                                                        processes
              of a similar kind. In this respect it
                                                         is a
              precipitate and, therefore, a typical basic
                                                               fonn,
              ?£ ^^^^^ ever-recurring psychic experiences
              (Vol, VI, p. hlO),

        This reference to the influence of
                                           Richard Semon seems to clar-
 ify what Jung had in mind as a mechanism
                                          by ^fh±ch archetypes itdght
be inherited.       For the exjwsition of Semon' s theoiy
                                                          in his book
 Bie   Ihme reveals    a sort of theory of racial meraoiy
                                                          which tries to
integrate the factors of memoiy, habit
                                       and inheritance under one
theoretical principle and which appeals
                                        e:<plicitly to the idea of
the inheritance of acquired
                            characteristics.^ For ercample:

            ... the engraphic effects of stimulation are
            not restricted to the irritable substance
                                                       of
            the individual, but that the offspring
                                                    of that
            andivxdual may jnanifest corresponding
                                                   ^graphic
                                                   —*'
            modxfications. "                            ^


       Hbi/ever,   Jung's mention of Semon and use of
                                                      his terwlnology does
not constitute a complete endorsement of
                                         his theory.           3h particular,
Jung is sensitive to the chicken and
                                     egg dilerama in relation to the
question of the origin of the arfchetypes.
                                                For the archetypes can
not only be seen as the product of past
                                        experiences but can also be
seen as themselves conditioners of
                                   e:q,erience.          In^ad   of seeking an
                                         61




  explanation of t^ere the archetypes           corae flxjm   b7 saying that they are
  the result of the influence of physical
                                          processes on the pgyche then,
  there is the alternative of conceiving
                                         the archetypes as part of the
  inherent nature of the psyche itself,

                nie fact that the sun or the noon or
                                                       the metero-
                logical processes appear, at the veiy
                                                        least, in
                allegorized form points to an Independent
                                                              colla-
                boration of the psyche, which in that case
                                                               can-
                not be merely a product or sterotype of
                                                           environ-
                mental conditions. Prom whence wuld
                                                        it drat/
                the capacity to adopt a standpoint
                                                    outside sense
                ^eption? ... In view of such questions
                i^eaon's naturalistic and causalistic
                                                       engram
               theoiy no longer suffices, tfe are
                                                    forced to
               assume that the given structure of the
                                                         brain
               does not oire its peculiar nature
                                                  merely to
               the Influence of surrounding conditions,
                                                            but
               also and just as much to the peculiar
                                                        and auto-
               nomous quality of living matter, i.e.,
                                                         to a
               lat; inherent in life itself (Vol.
                                                   VI, p. 1^).

       Jimg in the course of his work abandoned
                                                Semen's theoiy of
 engrams and talk of mnemic deposits disappears
                                                from his later writings.
 Archetypes were then     siii5xly   said to be part of the inherited brain

 structure, thus leaving the mechanism of
                                          hereditary transmission
unspecified,

       Ittth   Jung's retreat from the position that
                                                     archetypes are
"deposits of the constantly repeated
                                     experiences of humanity" (Vol.
Vn,   p, 69), we see tl:at the stople correlations he
                                                      had pi^viously
dram   relating physical processes to the
                                          fonnation of rc^thological
images must also be reconsidered.
                                              Vhat must then be revised in the
theoiy of aythology is not the concept
                                        of projection and the vital
role it plays in nythological tliinldng
                                        but the implication that
Berths were once original contents
                                   of consciousness, that               th^   or-
iginate from the fantasizing of individual
                                           psyches,               mth   the aban-
donment of the engram theoiy, Jung is
                                      no longer certain he can
                                    62




 reconstruct the process by ijhich the objective
                                                 physical process and
 the interpretive ppyche Interact to      fom    i^yths.   He seems, on the
 whole, in his later work (as exjemplified in the
                                                  quotations lOTiediately
 belovr) to    have come to the conclusion that mythological motifs
                                                                    are
 not amenable to a simple naturalistic explanation, as if
                                                                  thery   were
 caused by physical processes.      Rather the subjective part of the

 process, the inherent laws of psychic apprehension, is novr
                                                             thought
 to be the essential determining factor.

         Thus even the question of havT archetypes (n^thologems)
                                                                 origi-
 nate is not seen by Jung as being a legitimate question since
                                                               it im-
 plies the need for a special explanation of how the archetypes
                                                                came
 to be in the psyche, ;*ereas Jung       nm   sees the archetypes as devel-

 oping along id.th the psyche as part of its inherent
                                                      pattern of func-
tioning,

               Qiipiricany considered, however, the archetype
              did not ever come into existence as a phenomenon
              of organic life, but entered into the picture
              iri.th life itself (Vol. XT,
                                           p. m?, note 2).

            Biese images are "primordial" ijnages in so far
            as they are peculiar to whole species, and if
            th^ ever "originated" their origin must have
            coincided at least \i±th the beginning of the
            species.  They are the "human quality" of the
            human being, the specifically human fona his
            activities take, Ihis specific fona is hered-
            itary and is alreacfy present in the genn-plasm
              (Vol, II-A, p, 78),

        The hope expressed earlier then that Jung's ideas
                                                          on the way
in which norths originate would prove to be the clue to solidng
                                                                the
riddle of the origin of the archetypes proves to be
                                                    unjustified, and
we are left >d.thout a definitive ansvrer to where the
                                                       archetypes come
from.    Jung is naturally quite happy to abandon questions of
                                                               ulti-
mate origin to the sphere of metaphysics:        "Vhether this psytihic
                                            63




  structure and its eleinents, the archetypes,
                                               ever 'originated' at            aU
  is a metaplysical question and therefore
                                           unanswerable" (Vol. IX-A,

  p.   Idj and     "...         it is impossible to say where the
                                                                  archetype comes
  from, because there is no Archimedean
                                        point outside the a priori con-
  ditions it represents" (Vol. IX-A,
                                     p. 69, note 27).8

        But peiliaps Jung should not be let off
                                                so easily.            For rather
 than postulating that the archetypes are
                                          sort of an ultlinate            p^hic
 fact for which no explanation in terms of
                                           more basic psychological
 theoiy is possible, it seems evident that,
                                            heuristicaOly at least,
 we must seek an answer to the question of
                                           how it is that the p^che
 structures experiences in tenns of the
                                        archetypes instead of other
 sljiipler   modes.      Perhaps, as Jung seems to think, the
                                                              archetypes will
 eventually prove to be an ultlanate
                                                 w^ry   for human consciousness,
 but from the scientific point of view
                                       this can not be assumed.


                  Archetypal 3mage and Archetype        Iter   Se
       The   claljtt   that the archetypes are ultimately
                                                          inaccessible must
be further examiixed.            For many difficult points in the
                                                                  articulation
of Jung's theory of archetypes seem
                                    to hinge on distinguishing be-
ttveen the unreachable archetype
                                           per se and the an^hetypal image.
Bie archetype per se was said to be
                                    not truly part of the psyche at
all but rather p^choid and to be
                                 incapable of consciousness.               As a
consequence it         TTas   said to be unobservable in principle.
                                                                      The essen-
tial question in this regard would seem
                                        to be how such claims as the

above can be justified Srom the
                                empirical point of view.
       But that nothing In principle would
                                           count as a direct observation
of an archetype is a result of
                               the total conceptual framework of
                                                                 the
archetypal theoiy, which as a whole
                                    is grounded en^jirically.             Ih this
                                          61i




 respect it irould seem not to differ significantly from other

 scientific theories,           ^breover, if from the behaviorist point of

view, the suggestion is made to do               ai-;ay   ^dth the horpothetical

construct of the archetype per se and instead speak only of arche-

typal images, the reply is that this move would mean that a theory

of archeig^jes is no longer possible.                For there must be postulated

an underlying common collective aspect to the p^ches of individuals

which will mate the archetypal manifestations more than personalistic

and idiosyncratic products.            I'Jiat   counts as evidentially conclusive

for the presence of archetypes then is just the appearance of con-

tents    iijhich   prove to constitute universal themes or motifs which can

be recognized in contexts T^hich transcend the individual's personal

sphere of reference.            Ibless the arche-types are to be reduced to the

merely personal       -ttien,   there must be postulated an archel^ype per se

•t*ich   will be the transpersonal organizing principle for the personal

and culturally determined archeiypal manifestation.

         It is better on the whole to think of the archeigrpe per se as

a principle or disposition rather than as an entity, i.e., something

which can be clearly distinguished as an individual thing.                    Thus

Jung says that the phenomenologlcal material does not justify ary-

thing other than the postiiLation of principles which act to form

distinct archetypal images, without it being possible to conclude

anything definite about the nature of the archetjlie per se.

             I'hen one carefully considers this accumulation
             of data, it begins to seem probable that an
             archeiype in its quiescent, unprotected state
             has no exactly determinable form but is in it-
             self an indefinite structure which can assume
             definite forms only in projection (Vol. TI-A,
             p. 70).
                                   65




      Moreover, this mcertainty about the nature of the
                                                        archetype per
 se extends even so far as to leave undetermined
                                                 the number of arche-

 types and the point of differentiation bet^^en one archetype
                                                              and
 another,

             Hnpirically spealdng, vre are dealing all the
             time idth "types," definite forms that can be
             named and distinguished. But as soon as you
             divest these l^rpes of the phenomenology pre-
             sented by the case material, and try to ex-
             amine them in relation to other archetypal forms,
             they branch out into such far-reaching ramifi-
             cations in the histoiy of symbols that one comes
             to the conclusion that the basic psychic ele-
             ments are infinitely varied and ever changing,
             so as utterly to defy our por/ers of imagination
             (Vol. IX-A, p. 70).

            Although heCilie investi^ato:!;^} is forced, for
            episfcemological reasons, to postulate an in-
            definite ntimber of distinct and separate arche-
            types, yet he is constantly overcome l^ doubt
            as to how far tliey are really distinguishable
            from one another. They overlap to such a de-
            gree and have such a capacity for combination
            that all atteittpts to isolate them conceptually
            must appear hopeless (Vol, XT, p. 288).

     3h considering the problem of the nature of the
                                                     archetJTe per
se, Kant's influence on Jung's vierfs must
                                           again be acknowledged.
For Jung accepts the Kantian distinction betvreen
                                                  the thing-in-itself
and that which appears.    In these teiros then the archetype per se

is held to be inaccessible on analogy ivith Kant's
                                                   noumenon, where-
as the arclietypal image is that which appears in the
                                                      phenomenal
realm.^

            Bie existence of a transcendental reality is
            indeed evident in itself    ....  That the world
            inside and outside ourselves rests on a trans-
            cendental bacltground is as certain as our ovm
            existence, but it is equally certain tliat the
            direct perception of the archetypal world inside
            us is Just as doubtfully correct as that of tlie
            physical outside us (Vol. XEV, p. 551).
                                           eG




                Vhen I say "atom" T am talking of
                                                   the model made of
                it J when I say "archetype" I am talking
                                                         of ideas
               corresponding to it, but never of the
                                                       thing-in-
               xtself , T*ich in both cases is a
                                                  transcendental
               ^stery. ... One must therefore assume
                                                          that
               the effective archetypal ideas,
                                                 including our
               model of the archetype, rests on
                                                  something actual
               even though unknovrable. Just as the
                                                     model of the
               atom rests on certain unknotrable
                                                  qualities of
               SJJ*®?   ^l!^^    !°^- '^* P* ^' letter to H.
               Haberlandt dated 23 J^jril 19^2).

         HbT/ever, it is unnecessaiy to
                                        follow Jung's Kantian           way of
 construing the archetype per se.               For rather than ii>5)licating the

 archetypal theory .^th a problematic
                                      phenomena/noumena distinction,
 vie   can interpret the archetype per se as
                                             an unobservable l^^pothe-
 tical construct.        Ohus, although Jung holds that
                                                        the archetype
 per se is an ultimate i^ysteiy, the
                                     aix:hetypal theoiy on3y requires

 that it be the unobservable and mostly
                                         unknom structuring prin-
 ciple responsible for the archetypal
                                                  image,

        ]h any case, our efforts to discover
                                             the nature of the archetype
directly are frustrated since the
                                  archetypal image always reflects
                                                                    the
personal histoiy of the consciousness
                                      in which it is embodied. Ihus
                                                                     when
ve attempt to abstract the
                           archetype itself frem its personal
                                                              and cul-
tural matrix, the result is that
                                 the distinctiveness of the
                                                            arehetype
^ranishes, and   v,e   can no longer say what it .rould
                                                        be like in itself.
But if the arehetype is then
                               essentially an "irrepresentable
                                                               fonn," the
question is hot. we are to distinguish
                                        collective archeiypal manifestations
fi-om merely personal contents
                                of consciousness.  It would seem that there
mst be definite phenomenological differences
                                                betaken the arehetypal
iiaages and other contents     if   .re   are to be Justified in speaking
                                                                          of the
e:d^ce       of a collective unconscious
                                         containing arehetypes.            For in the
absence of
             ^    common features xrhich the individual
                                                        arehetypes manifest in
                                      67




 every person,   xre inust   have general criteria for recognizing       \iha.t   con-
 stitutes an archetypal content.

      As previously mentioned in the exaniple of an archetypal dream,

 arche-liTpal images   characteristically have an alien. Impersonal char-

 acter so that they do not appear to be contents which Trere once con-

 scious and then forgotten or repressed.           But this does not mean that

 the contents attributed to the collective unconscious contain images

 which the dreamer can not recognize at all.           lather it seems that

 the strange and alien contents amount to fantastic rearrangements

 of items of e:<perience alrea^ knotm to the dreamer.             If one dreams

of God, for exaniple, the image may be conveyed as that of
                                                                      tlie   figure
of Supennan.     The archetypal images are for       tlie   most part then some-

thing familiar appearing in an unfamiliar context.              Thus ucrthological

motifs may appear in dreams but with          modem substitutes for the prin-
ciple characters.

           Vfe have on3y to disregard the dependence of
                                                         dream
           language on environment and substitute "eagle" for
           "aeroplane," "dragon" for "automobile" or "train,"
           "snalre^jite" for "injection," and so forth, in
           order to arrive at the more universal and more
           fundamental language of injrthology (Vol. XL, 289),

     It irould be perhaps advantageous to distinguish the objective

from the subjective aspects of the phenomenology of archeiqrpes.

Subjectively the archetypal appearance is characterized by its
                                                                             :^ym-

bolic qualities.       It has an aura of numinosity and seems to point

beyond itself to an unlmown.       From the third person point of        viet^,

however, the synibolic nature     of! tlie   archetype is less evident as      ire

have to do only with a content of consciousness tdiose origin
                                                              is
unlmotm, so that what may appear objectively to be a symbol
                                                            may
upon closer examination prove to be a sign i-dth a simple representational
                                          68




 explanation,

          3h order to verify the presence of an archetype then,
                                                                both the
 vleifs   of introspection and exfcraspection are necessaiy. ^0           The sym-

 bolic nature of the person's e:xperLence and his for the most
                                                               part
 absence of personal association to the material is taken into

 account along vdth        tlie   presence of the same theme or motif in mater-

 ial dravm from the histoiy of symbols.            The ability of these his-

 toidcal parallels to provide an explanation of the meaning of the

 otheniise unexjxLicable content is then the crucial factor justifying

the employment of the archetypal hcrpothesis,           Tihen   such a procedure

provides the most plausible explanation for the presence of
                                                            contents
of consciousness, ve can say that an arche-t^'pe is present.

         Rather than taking one particular image or dream in isolation,

hotrever, the determination of which contents are said
                                                       to be arche-

tjrpal    is best arrived at Td.th an examination of a serf.es of dreams

or other similar experiences.            In this way the margin of error in-

volved in any introspective evaluation is lessened.              Then   ire   are also

able to see how the alleged archetjype functions in more than
                                                              one con-
text.     Prom   tlie   objective point of viet^, it is not so much how the

supposed archetype appears as lAat it does and how it functions
                                                                that
is crucial for deciding about the presence of archetypes.                This is

especially so since the archetypes often appear as images which are

themselves ordinaiy although the role they play in the dream as a

Tdiole is archetypal.        For example, the images of actual persons

knotm to the dreamer may function as archetypal images, H

     ^though there is thus no definite objective criteria
                                                          by which
one can identify archetjTpal images out of the context of
                                                          the function
                                      69




 they play in particiaar maiiifestations, Jung does give us an idea

 of the objective features ablch as a matter of fact are associated

 >d.th   the appearance of many   aaTche-tgrpes.

              An unfallible sign of collective images
              seems to be the appearance of the "cosmic"
              element, i.e., the images in the dream or
              fanta:^ are connected ;d.th cosmic qualities,
              such as temporal and spatial infinity, enor-
             mous speed and extension of movement, "astro-
             logical" associations, telluric, lunar, and
              solar analogies, changes in the proportions
             of the bo<^, etc. The obvious occurrence of
             nythological and religious motifs in a dream
             also points to the activity of the collective
             miconscious. The collective element is very
             often announced by peculiar ^nnptoms, as for
             example by dreams where the dreamer is flying
             through space like a comet, or feels that he
             is the eaorthf or the sun, or a star; or else
             is of immense size, or dwarfishly small; or
             that he is dead, is in a strange place, is a
             stranger to himself, confused, mad, etc. (Vol.
             VII, p. 160).

         Ch the whole, the fantastic nature of the archetypal imagery

often bears an alanning similarity to or even identity with the

symptoms of schizophrenia.        But the schizophrenic, although he has

gained an access to the collective unconscious, has been figurative-

3y spealdng sirallowed up by it, so that he has lost the ability to

function as an ego and relate in a practical       iray   to the objective

world,     3h a sense he is unable to -wake from his symbolic fantasies,

so that they are more ^Togtoms of psychic brealcdovm than        th^   are
numinous symbols which can be meaningfully integrated into the total

pattern of his life.

             The difference betireen archetypes and the dis-
             sociated products of ischizophrenia is that the
             former are entities endoired id.th personality
             and chained vriLth meaning, whereas the latter are
             only fragments with vestiges of meaning—in
             reality, they are products of disintegration
             (Vol, Vni, p. 122),
                                    70




         The phenomenology of the archetypal
                                             manifestation is often of
 immediate therapeutic relevance as the contents
                                                 of the unconscious
 take on dark and menacing aspects when
                                        the point of view which they

 represent is not being acknowledged by the
                                            conscious ndnd.
             The guise in which these figures appear
                                                      depends
             on the attitude of the conscious mind: if
                                                         it is
             negative tov/ard the unconscious, the animals
                                                            win
             be frightening; if positive, they appear as
                                                           the
              helpful anijnals" of faiiytale and legend (Vol.
             V, p. 181),

      nh the foiTO in which the archetypes
                                           appear is thus influenced
 by the attitude of the conscious mind, it would
                                                 seem that the man-
 ifestation of the archetypes are not random and
                                                 due to chance but
 that their appearance is conditioned by certain
                                                 necessaiy circum-
 stances in the individual.    Ibreover, an understanding of these

conditions should shed light on the nature of
                                              the relationship
between the collective and personal aspects
                                            of the p^che.         For
by calling the collective unconscious the
                                          impersonal and objective
portion of the psyche, the integral part
                                         this aspect of the uncon-
scious   pl^s   in the life of the individual is not
                                                     given adequate
consideration.     In this regard we find then that
                                                    the archetypes
behave in an analogous fashion to other
                                        contents of the unconscious
in the sense that their appearance functions
                                             in a compensatory
fashion to consciousness.     That is, the unconscious supplies con-

tents which compensate the conscious attitude
                                              by representing fea-
tures of the person's total situation which
                                            are overlooked, re-

pressed or undervalued by the conscious
                                        personality.    The appearance
of the archetype then usually indicates the
                                            need for a collective
compensation.    I^at this means is that the true nature
                                                         of the per-
son's situation corresponds to a universal
                                           and typical human pattern.
                                       71




 so that ijhat it is   -ttiat   is missing from the person's conscious

 attitude is an understanding of the broader human perspective t^hich

 an appreciation of the basic patterns of human existence would give.

           The archei^ypal stnictiure of the imconscious
           corresponds to the average run of events. The
           changes that maor befall a man are not infiniteHy
           variable; they are variations of certain -typical
           occurrences iMch are limited in number, l*en
           therefore a distressful situation arises, the
           corresponding archetype idll be constellated in
           the unconscious (Vol, V, p, 29k),

       One instructive example to make clearer the meaning of collec-

tive compensation can be drawn from Jung's Trork on the UFO pheno-

menon.   After e3:±ensLve research lasting a decade, Jung concluded

that the UFO phenomenon represented a sort of           rwdem   north   in ijhich
the Arche-lgrpe of the Self, an archetype expressing "order, deliver-

ance, salvation and wholeness" (Vol. X, p. 328), was being
                                                           projected
into the heavens,      iilthough tmable to reach a definite conclusion

about the physical reality of the reported objects, Jung makes a

convincing case for the activation of       -ttie   Self archetype as a com-

pensation for the ominous world situation follovring Ifcrld             Vfer   II in

vMch   nuclear annihilation seemed possible at any moment,

           Tife have here a golden opportunity of
                                                  ^eing howr
           a legend is formed, and hotir in a difficult and
           dark time for humanity a miraculous tale grows
           up of an atteB5)ted intervention by e:ctra-terrestial
           "heavenly" porters , , . (Vol. X, pages 322-323).

     Bie ArchetTpe of the Self then functions to direct attention

id-thin to the possibility of the realization of an inner center of

order and personal unity.        WLthlthe vrorld threatened xd.th destruction,

the Self can provide an inweird source of meaning and unity.

     Archelypal manifestations are thus the compensatoiy response of
                                       72



 the unconscious to typical human situations, with
                                                   the response being

 a representation of an inherent pattern of human
                                                  functioning.             Jn
 this   i^ray   the archetype supplies the insight of a universal
                                                                  perspec-
 tive to vdiat are universally e:cperienced problems.l2
                                                                tms   enables
 the individual then to grasp the meaning of his situation
                                                           in its
 more than personal aspect.         If actual persons appear in archetypal

 guise in dreams, for example,       >re   can see that the activation of some

 universal human pattern is complicating the personal
                                                      interrelationship.
 If a knovm girl appears as the archetype of
                                             the         anim   then, she also
 represents a vehicle of ^pibolic projection.'' -3


                     The Archetypes as Autonomous Factors

        In our investigation of the conditions
                                               under which the archetypes
come into consciousness, we have emphasized
                                            the similarity of behav-
ior of archetypes to other contents of consciousness
                                                     in that their
appearance is the result of the overall corapensatoiy
                                                      influence of
the unconscious.         In tlais regard it must also be pointed out that

the archetypes behave in a similar fashion to the complexes
                                                            of the
personal unconscious, i.e., they are autonomous factors.
                                                                   Bius,

although archetypes as a rule arise in response to
                                                   the needs of the
individual, the end result of their activation mgy be
                                                      that the arche-
type subjugates or even possesses the person.

     The archetypes are then not only objects of
                                                 consciousness btit
also subjects lAich can be described as having
                                               Intentionalities which
may oppose that of the ego personality,

                piey are spontaneous phenomena which are not
                                                              subject
                to our will, and we are therefore jiistified
                                                             in
                ascribing to them a certain autonomy. They
                                                             are to
                be regarded not onily as objects but as subjects
                with laifs of their mm. From the point of viet;
                                     73




              of consciousness, we can, of course, describe
              them as objects, and even explain them up to
              a point, in the same measure as "we can describe
             and e35)lain a living human being. But then
             \je have to disregard their autonomy.
                                                      If that
             is conisidered, \je &re coa:g»lled to treat them
             as subjects} in other wi'dsyW have to ad^
             that they possess spontaneity and purposiveness,
             or a kind of consciousness and free ;dll. life
             observe their behaviour and consider their state-
             ments. This dual standpoint, which vb are forced
             to adopt towards eveiy relatively independent or-
             ganism, naturally has" a dual result. On tlie
             one hand it tells me xvhat I do to the object,
             and on the other hand what it does (possibly
             to me) (Vol. XL, p. 362).          ^         -^


      In describing the archetypes as autonomous factors,
                                                          Jung

wants to hold to the distinction betireen the complexes as
                                                           contents
 of the personal unconscious and the archetypes of a
                                                     collective un-
conscious.    For the vrord "complex" is used primarily to refer
                                                                 to
the autonomous contents of personal origin, to those
                                                     contents which
develop ontogenetically.    The archetype, on the other hand, is in-

herited and thus seems impersonal in the sense that it
                                                       can not be
explained in the terns of the person's own life hisboiy,
                                                            Naturally,
this clear separation bettreen the personal and
                                                collective aspects
of the unconscious is in reality always more or
                                                less an interrelation.
For the complexes appear to have an archetypal
                                               nucleus and the arche-
types are always manifested in images made up out of
                                                     combinations
dravm fi^>m the individual's store of experience.
                                                    Ifevertheless, it is
stni possible in practise to discriminate   bettreen those contents of

conscixjusness which owe their origin primarily to the
                                                       individual and
his experience from those i*ich are impersonal and which
                                 I




                                                         point beyond
the individual.

     The archetype behaves like a complex then in that
                                                       it is a locus
of thoughts, feelings and images which function in
                                                   a unified     iray   as
                                         7h




 a sort of personality.           Rather than Indicating that the archelgrpes

 are actually entities outside man, hovrever, the personification which

 the archetypal images manifest are typical of autonomous contents which

 e:d.st   in the unconscious ^d.thout being integrated \Ath the conscious

 personality.         The less acknowledgement and understanding an unconscious

 element is accorded then, the more it tends to function independently

 of the conscious personality and even assume the characteristics of
                                                                     a
 personality itself.         Md   since the archetypes are symbolic, numinous

factors \Th±ch do not originate from one's personal experience, the

ability to integrate than into one's personality has definite limita-

tions.      Uiey are, in fact, xd.der than the individualj they have a

universal collective meaning which the individual can only partici-

pate in but can not hope to completely assimilate.               Ohere is often the

real danger that the archetypes          vriJLl   even assimilate the ego person-

ality.      "It is perfectly possible, psychologically, for the uncon-

scious or an archetjrpe to take complete possession of a man and to

detennine his fate doim to the smallest detail" (Vol. XE,
                                                          p. k09),

ELausible exaniples of this phenomenon are to be seen in            -ttie   lives
of Christ and Hitler.

     "Hie   archetypes seem to have a dual nature, being potentialities

for both evil as well as good.          Thus what to one person proves to be

a healing experience giving meaning to life, may prove to another

less stable consciousness to be a source of evil, disorientation or

madness.

     Anong the most common archetypes \Aich show a distinct personality

are the    shadot-j   archetype and the anina and aniimxs.      The shadow is a

representation of the personal unconscious as a whole and usually
                                              7^



 embodies the compensating values to those held by
                                                   the conscious per-

 sonality.     Thus the shadoi: often represents one's dark side,
                                                                  idiose

 aspects of oneself which e:dLst but which one does
                                                    not acknowledge
 or identify idth.            nh dreams it    may appear as a dark figure of an
 Arab or Megro of the same sex as the dreamer. ^U

         The anima archetype appears in men and is his
                                                       primordial image
 of woman.     It represents the man's biological expectation
                                                              of women
 but also is a symbol of a man's feminine possibilities,
                                                         his counter-
 sexual tendencies.           The e:!periences of one's mother and other
                                                                         actual
women are a third contributing factor to the fonn of
                                                     the archetype.
 Die anima often appears in dreams as a strange or
                                                   unlmorm >7oman.
 The animus archetype, the analogous image of the
                                                  masculine which
occurs in    vraraen,   may appear as a series of strange men.^^

        The personification of the above archetypes is often
                                                             of such a
distinct character that dialogues of significant therapeutic
                                                             value can
be carried on betireen the ego and the shadow or
                                                 anima/animus in the
conscious state.         Biis form of communication with the unconscious,

popularized by the method of Gestalt Iherapy, tos
                                                  enthusiastically
recommended by Jung (Vol. VTI, p. 201),

        In addition to the archelypes mentioned above,
                                                       there are many
other archetypes which appear in personified
                                             foiro notably the Cld

va.se   Ibn, the Great lather, the Earth Ifother, the
                                                      Divine Child and
the Archetype of the Self.             HoTrever, any atteD5)t to give an exhaus-

tive list of the archetypes would be a largely
                                               futile exercise since
«ie archetypes tend to combine Td.th each other
                                                and interchange qua-
lities making it difficult to decide where one archetype
                                                         stops and
another begins.         For   exaii?>le,   qualities of the shadoix archetype may
                                          76




be prominent in an archetypal image of the anima or aniMis.

        One archetype may also appear in various distinct forms, thus

raising the question whether four or five distirict archetypes should

be said to be pre sient or merely four or             fives   forms of a single type.

There      i-rould   then seem to be no decision procedure for determining the

exact boundaries of an individual archetype.                  For what is to count

as a typical situation and thus indicate the presence of an arche-

ignpe   can not be decided a priori, so that for instance                 iie   can not

determine on the basis of general considerations that there must be

so many archetypes,          And from the phenonienological point of view,

the appearance of distinct types of archetypal images does not per-

mit us to conclude anything definite about how many archetypes per

se there may be.          Therefore, it   vrcrald   seem evident that the complete

cataloguing of the archel^'pes thereby determining their exact number

is an irresolvable matter and an unreasonable expectation of the

archetypal theory,

        3h addition to the personified foims mentioned above, there are

many archetypes which do not appear in personal form.                     For exariple,

the   -'irche-l^rpe   of the Self may be manifested as a stone, diamond,

floT-rer   or as a four-sided figure,          Aiimals, plants and natural ob-

jects such as the viind, a lake or a mountain may also figure into

archetypal images.          There is in fact no determinate condition re-

gulating what form an archetype must assume.                  Tliis   is not to   s^,
hovrever, that there are not definite conditions an image must

satisfy in order to count as archelgrpal.              But these conditions de-

pend more on the function of the image in the overall context of

the manifestation than they do on the specific form.
                                            77




         Irath   regard to the queistion of personification, a paradoxical

 situation seems to exist since Jung says tliat all autonomous contents

 of the imconscious are personified,              "iill   autonomous psychic factors

have the character of personalHy                 ..."     (Vol. X, p. k2).   On the

other hand, the archetypes, which presumably are all more or less

capable of autonomous function in the unconscious, do not all appear

in the foim of persons.          It   would seem clear then that personification

is being used in a general sense to mean ascription of traits of per-

sonality to an entity rather than in^jlying that vrhat is personified

must appear as a distinct personality or in the form of a person.


                         Archefanaes and 97nchronicity

        In our discussion of the phenomenology of the archetypes, dreams

have been emphasized as a characteristic state of consciousness in

^jhich the archetypes come into awareness.                Fantasies and visions are

other altered states of consciousness in which archetypes frequently ap-

pear.         But in addition to these modes of manifesting themselves,

Jung states that the archetypes may also affect nonpsychic physical

processes.         This effect of the archetypes is described by Jung's

theory of synchronicity.         la ^synchronistic events then, there is a

meaningful correspondence between a physical event and a psychic con-

tent    id.th    the possibility of a causal connection beti-reen the        ti-ro


having been ruled out.         These events are the often recorded meaning-

ful coincidences TThich seem to defy undersrtanding in terms of either

causality or chance.                    i




        fsa   exaniple Jimg describes from his therapeutic        work serves to

illustrate these ideas.
                                           78




                A young \Toman I was treatiiag had, at a critical
                inament, a dream in Trfiich she was given a golden
                scarab, lihile she was telling me this dream I
                sat with nor back to the closed windox/.   Siddealy
                 I heard a noise behind me, liks a gentle tapping.
                I turned round and savr a flying insect knocking
                against the vrindovr-pane flrora outside. I opened
                the window and caught the creature in the air
                as it fie;; in.   It was the nearest analogy to
                a golden scarab that one finds in our latitudes,
                a scarabaeid beetle, the common rose-chafer
                ( Cetonia aurata ), which contrary to its usual

                habits had evidently felt an urge to get into
                a dark room at this partic;xlar moment (Vol.
                VIII, p. U38).

        Biere   i-rould   seem to be no plausibility of atten^jting a causal

explanation here, although chance seems a possible rational explana-

tion.    Other examples of synchronistic events, hovrever, seem to

eliminate the possibility of the meaningful coincidence being the

result of the chance intersection of random events.                 Ihe best

illustration of ^ynchronicity            vrtiere   chance is ruled out occurs in

experiments atteanpfcing to verity the phenomenon of extrasensory

perception, ESP.           Ohese tests using card guessing techniques are

sometimes structured so that the subject tries to guess the se-

quence of a deck of cards before they are shuffled by a randomizing

machine.    As the subject is guessing the sequence of a future order

of the cards, this of course also elbninates the possibility that

the order of      tlie    cards can have a causal effect on the mental state

of the subject,           Bie overall results of this type of e3qperiment re-

vealed a probability of reproducing the same results by chance as

1:U00,000 (Vol.       vm,     p. h33).     In another experiment one person

guessed all tirenty-five cards in the deck correctly after they had

been shuffled. Indicating a probability of 1:298,023,223,876,9^3,12^

(Vol.   vni,     p. i;33).
                                      79




         nh the ESP tests the meaningfld coincidence is between a con-

 tent of consciousness, the person's idea of what cards will appear,

 and the actual order of the cards.         The archetj^pal theory comes into

play then as Jung says that an archetype is manifesting itself
                                                               syn-
chronously in both a psychic content and a physical process.              The

tenn "synchronous" is used instead of simultaneous in the formulation

of the synchronistic hypothesis to indicate that the meaningful coin-

cidence between the p^jnchic and physical events need not occur at

exactly the same time.      Ttxe   physical event can be slightly before

or after the psychic content.

       In tlie ESP examples, it is the archetype of magical effect, the

expectation that a miraculous event can occur, which seems to be at

vrork.""^    Evidence for this is the fact that the results of the ex-

periments are positively correlated with the emotional state of the

subject, so that an enthusiastic, hopeful subject can score well

above chance probability at the beginning of the experimentsj and

then his score will move toward the chance probability as the novelty

of the experiments lessen, or if he becomes bored or depressed (Vol,

VIII, p. k3k).

      The archets'pal influence is clearly seen in the first example

given.      Bie woman patient was at a crisis point in her analysis due

to a too narrow rationalistic vieti idiich did not leave her sufficiently

open to the possibility of change which could result from taking ser-

iously the irrationally prodticed contents of the unconscious.             The

meaningful coincidence was then the tuitiing point in this regard and

produced the needed change in attitude        alloTriing tlie   analysis to pro-

gress to a successful conclusion.          The scarab motif, noreover, is a
                                             80




    classic ^yrtbol of rebirth (Vol. VHI,
                                            p. k39) so that it would seem

    that the patient's situation of
                                     iinpasse had conrtellated the arche-

    type of rebirth and renewal.

             Jung postulates that an archetypal
                                                ordering principle is at irork
    in these instances of ^chronicity bringing
                                               about a situation in
    wMch     an outer event and a psycMc content
                                                 are expressions of the
    same meaning.     Ohe arche-types in these cases seem
                                                          to be localized
    as much in matter and in the environment as
                                                they are in the psyches
    of individuals,

                 5he psychoid archetype has a tendency
                                                         to behave
                 as though it \iere not localized in one
                                                          person
                 but T-rere active in the whole environment
                                                            (Vol.
                 X, pages lt^-li52).


                 ... the archetypes are not found exclusively
                xn the p^jTchic sphere, but can occur
                                                       just as
                much in circumstances that are not
                                                     psychic
                 (equivalence of an outv^ard physical process
                x-Tith a p^cliic one) (Vol. VIII,
                                                  p. 5l^).
            In using the designation    "p^hoid" for the archetypes, it
seems that Jung x^anted to ijapOy that
                                       the archetypes could be mani-
fested in nonpsychic ways, specificaUy
                                       influencing matter.                           Ihis
UB6 of "psychoid" does not have the same
                                         iittpUcations as when the

instiiictsaresaidtobep^choid.''^                  lii   the case of the Instincts,
the psychoid label describes a sort of
                                       interface region betireen
the     p^he     and the physiological processes.           "
                                                                            tem
                                                                .   .   .         'psychoid'
.   .   .   meant to distinguish a categozy of events
                                                      from merely vitaHstic
phenomena on the one hand and from specifically
                                                psychic processes on
the other" (Vol.       Vm,   p. 177).    |
                                             But the archetype -h^th its            p^hoid
nature, forms the bridge to matter
                                   in general" (Vol. VIII, p. 216). 3he
psychoid archetype therefore seems to be
                                         "quasi-p^hic " in the special
                                     81




 sense that it may be independent of the body.

          Sjmchronicity postxilates a meaning which is a
          priori in relation to human consciousness and
          apparently exists outside man. , , , the possi-
          bility that synchronicity is not only a psycho-
          physical phenomenon but might also occur -without
          the participation of the human psyche , , .
          (Vol. VIII, pages 501-^02, note 71).

          It may well be a prejudice to restrict the
          pEjyche to being "inside the body" (Vol. XIV,
          p. 300).

     The phenomena which Jung describes in his theory of ^ynchro-

niciiy undoubtedly exist and his efforts to take account of these

events in his overall theory of the psyche seems a worthvrtiile and

needed endeavor.     However, as   ire   have previously stated, the notion

that there can be a pgyche independent of a bo(fy and archetypes

which persist outside of man is a postulate which can not be un-

problematically integrated in a consistent way with Jung's theory

of archetypes as a   irfiole.   Perhaps the ESP phenomena and the other

events associated with gynchronicity will eventually lead to a         neij

scientific model of the universe.          But as this major revolution in

the basic theories of science has yet to come about, the best plan

for trying to gain a coherent understanding of the idea of the arche-

type is, as we have previously argued, to parenthesize the postula-

tion of archetypes existing outside man and to regard this idea as

one possible theoretical extension of the archeig^sal notion which

has yet to be successfully integrated into the overall theoiy.

     Ibreover, the interpretational approach we have used in trying

to grasp the meaning of Jung's archetypes has not had to assume that

archeiypes exist outside of man^          The overall success of this approach

in making the archeigrpes comprehensible is perhaps a matter to be
                                            82




 left to the judgment of the reader.             However, In taking into account

 the full panaroma of Jung's utterances on the archetypes,
                                                           it has
 been necessaiy only twice to mention this possibility as a way
                                                                of
understanding the archetypal theory.

        So far as the assertion that the arche-types have a pi^rchoid

characteristic is considered then, this may perhaps best be ren-

dered to mean that the archetypes manifest themselves in a pi^ychic

way but seem to be more than pgychic or not only psychic.              Vhat this

quali-ty   may eventually prove to be would seem part of the puzzle of

the nature of the arehelype per se.              But this way of conceiving the

p^jrchoid characteristic of the archetypes need not imply that they

exist outside of or independently of man.

        3h any event, the concept of the archetype is not logically

tied to the notion of synchronicity.             Althoi^h ^ynchronicity may

well require something like an archetypal hypothesis to make it

intelligible, the reverse is certainly not the case.^*^


                      Archetypes and Temporality

        One final topic which must be taken up before our eaqxssition of

the archeiypal theory is complete is the aspect of the changes in

archetypes through tine.        Ttro   distinct questions seem to be involved.

!Ih   the first place, are there emergent archetypes, that is, do new

archetypes come into being in response to the changing situation of

man?     Secondly, how can we account for the changes that arehe-types
                                        1




manifest through    tijne as,   for example, the changes that the God

archetype undergoes when the Jehovah of the Old Testament is ex-

perienced as the Christian Trinity and Devil?
                                       83




         It seems evident that an answer
                                         to our first question              must hinge
  on our idea of the origin of the
                                   archetypes.            As   t^I     be remembered,
  it was concluded in this regard that
                                       the archetypes are inherited
 in a similar fashion to other biological
                                          siructures.                  If we take
 changes in archelypes as being strictly
                                         analogous to the way that
 the bo(fy changes through evolution,        vie   would expect that the chance
 of Dew archelypes coming into being
                                     through the evolutionaiy process

 constitutes a very    lov;   probability.    For the evolutionaiy process
 \Torks in   an accumulatoiy fashion in the sense that the
                                                           origins of
 new structures occurs, as a rule, as an addition
                                                  to the pattern of
 the existing genotype.       Highly evolved creatures then tend to be

 more complex organisms.       Ifereover, as a structure becomes highly

 evolved, there is less probability of major
                                             changes occurring in
 it since the chance that single mutations in
                                              the genotype will
lead to an improvement in the overall
                                      structure compatible with
the rest of the existing genotype is veiy
                                          small.               Ife   would not
expect then the appearance of human beings
                                           with new basic struc-
tures for the body, a third eye or an
                                      extra limb.               These occurrences
T«>uld be    monstrosities rather than improvements to be
                                                          passed on to
the next generation.      Analogously, the origin of       nev;      archetypes
through evolution    wuld     seem unlikely, especially in the light
                                                                     of
the basic structuring function that the
                                        archetypes are held to play
in the p^che.      The archetypes are the phylogenetically
                                                           old aspects
of the   p^che and hence those parts least liable to be
                                                        changed                  to
the overall benefit of the organism.

     A contemporary man is thus genetically
                                            very similar to what man
was like ten thousand years ago, and no
                                        radical changes in the overall
                                          8h




 pattern of inherited human behavior are to be
                                               e^rpected, at least not

 for the next     fei-7   willenia.    Moreover, ^ihat would a neiT typical human

 situation be like corresponding to i/hich a new
                                                 archetype could arise?
 It TOuld seem clear that any changes in
                                         the basic human situation would

 only be variations of situations which have
                                             existed coteraporously vdth
 the emergence of man as a species.

        If from phylogenetic considerations           >7e   then reject the practical
 possibility of the formation of new archetypes through
                                                        the evolution-
 ary process, the observed changes in archetypal
                                                 manifestation through
time must be escplained fixjm the ontogenetic viei^point,
                                                          as the result
of cultural and individual development.               Ihe changes in archetypal

manifestation do not thereby indicate a change in the archetype
                                                                it-
self.    By comparison       vre   might consider the human brain which genet-

ically is basically         tlie   same structure as it was thousands of years

ago at the dawn of civilization.               Modem man's degree of conscious-
ness and his overall conception of reantj-- is, however,
                                                         far differ-
ent today than it was then, as we see reflected
                                                in the development
of culture.      The   cnrial importance of the ontogenetic influence in
giving shape and content to the archetypal disposition
                                                       must then
not be underestimated, as the basic patterning
                                               influence of the
archetype itself can take on a seemingly limitless
                                                   variety of forms.
     Although there can be no nevr archetypes, there can
                                                         be new sym-
bols and   nevx ncrfchs.    The UFO phenomenon is a particularly instruc-

tive exaniple in this regard.

            It is characteristic of our time that the
            archetype, in contrast to its previous mani-
            festations, should now take the form of an
            object, a technological construction, in order
            to avoid the odiousness of mythological per-
            sonification (Vol. X, p. 328).
             It is then the interaction between the conscious
                                                              and uncon-
  scious aspects of the             psijrche   that accounts for the changes in arche-

 types across tine.                For vdth the development of consciousness

 through the agency of culture, the archetjTal images undergo a

 gradual transformation.               This is, moreover, what would be expected

 if the archetypes are to function as compensatory agents for the

 conscious attitude.




^•i^.-.-,
fulfilled.
              ^ ^^ become apparent as we pi'oceed, this hope trfll not be
               It is on3y in Jung's earlier writing that
                                                            he attenipts to
explain how archetypes originate through ideas about the
                                                               origins of
^jrths.   HoTxever, due to the fact that clung 's vier^s on
                                                            this matter
become implicated xdth ideas about the Inlieritance of
                                                            acquired
characteristics, this earlier vievr merits full discussion,
         2
         -Qi the above >re have not distinguished
+1,                                               the spiritual from
the r^igious, as in the previous discussion of the
                                                       spiritual when
the latter te«i referred to the archetypal manifestation
                                                            and
"religious" to tiie product of collective consciousness.
                                                            Jung does
not alvrays use these tenns in a consistent way, although
                                                            from the
contejct it is usually clear whether he is referring
                                                     to the indi^d.-
dual or the collective manifestation.

         3
         However, it is ea:^ to fall into the opposite error
 _                                                           of seeing
alcheuy solely as a philosophico-religious enterprise
                                                       and thus fail
to appreciate the luiportant role which alchemical
                                                   work has played in
the history of chemisti^-. Jung, in his work ^rith
                                                   the psychological
^jnificance of alchemical symbols, is particularly
                                                     open to this
l^^       y.^ failing
alchen^y while
                       overemphasized the p^/chological aspect of
               J'^^^^ to  give due credit to the naturalisSc and
practical aspects of the art.


n—r..,   ^® ^™' "aechanicomorphize"
         ,
                                        is taken from Joseph F.
                        Science f^
T"^' 45^°^?^b^
Houghton  mruji 196317 p. 57.                    ^
                                        Itersonalitv Theory (Bbston:
                                        is also possiflTtb taS the
opposite approachii^bo anthropamorphisnjj and assign
                                                      non-human char-
acteristics to human organisms.     Some psychologists feel that
the behaviorist does this when he 'mechanicomorphizes'                                     "
                                                           man . . .
             Richard Semon, ^ISL >^eme                    York:
                                                 (Nei-;           JfeicJHllan, 1921), p.   n.
              Ibid.   ,   p. 12.
                                   86



         7
                 transition apparently occurred SQmetijne
                                                          bettreen 192^
 and 193^
         o
                               by Saying in effect that the question of
      nr^Jt J?
  the origin  of ?J^**^\*5^*
                  the archetypes is not a useful one to
                                                         ask, Jung is
 attenipting to avoid the stl^^na of the doctrine
                                                    of inheritance of
 acquired characteristics. For from the
                                            Lainarcldan point of viet^.
 it makes saise to ask hmr the archetypes come
                                                   to be in the psyche
 and to postulate possible enrironraental causative
                                                       conditions.   ia.th
 hxs VTithdra/al from implicit support of the
                                                lamarcldan position.
 Jung sees no point to raising the question,
                                                 Hbirever, asking abJut
 ttie origin of archetypes need not
                                      imp^y a LamarcIdLan answer. One
 ad.^t legitiraate3y idsh to knotf ^Aether archetypes
                                                        have a natural,
 biological origin or nonnatural origin as result of
                                                         intervention
 ^   ^irf-tual agencies.    Jung speculates about the possibility of
 the latter alternative in the folloidng:
                The question is nothing less than this: Does
               the pgychic in general—ttie soul or spirit or
               the unconscious—originate in us, or is the
               p^jrche, in the early stages of conscious
                                                           evolu-
               tion, actuaUy outside us in the fom of ar-
               bitrary powers xd.th intentions of their aim, and
               does it gradually take its pl^ce within us in the
               course of psychic development? . . . Biis whole
               idea strikes us as dangerously paradoxical, but,
               at bottom, it is not altogether inconceivable
               (Vol. X, pages 69-70),
     9
+«
        ^e application of the Kantian phenomena/noumena distinction
to +V,
   the problem of archetype per se versus archetypal
                                                      image is not
unproblematic. For the appeal to the archetype
                                                 per se as the prin-
''Sif*i^P°"^^-'-® £°^ *^® archetypal image would seem to imply the
attribution of qualities to the thing-in-itself,
                                                  i.e., thS^tte iltter
was real and had certain effects. Ohus, if
                                            to take the archetype
per se as strictly analogous to the thing-in-itself,
                                                      we end up
attributing properties to that which from Kant's
                                                  viewpoint we are
not supposed to be able to attribute anything
                                              at all. See Eavrard
Casey s article "Towards An Archetypal Imagination"
                                                     in Spring. 197li,

      10
+« ^+
   it T„       ^V?^*?®      y°^ "extraspection" in the sense ascribed
to     by^*T
           Joseph F. Jjrchlak in A Hiilosoohv of Science
                                                         for Personality
The^ssr, page 2?:    "If a theorist^5kgr^e^ri[^5Stivglb
or fjame of reference, he defines his abstractions
                                                              rspecSro
                                                      from liis vantage
          ^ ^^'^'"' ""^Sardless of the point of vier^ of the objectof
rtui^."^


 u A
             ^^5^3
                 portion of a dream of Jung's, for example, the
shadoi7 archetype ^^ars as "Or. Y. and his son." Iforeovir, the
l^L^-" J^f^^^^^""^      ^^^° P^^'^  ^ archeti'pal role in the dream.
                the relationship Jung had .dth his real
Smho?^^^f
qoribolic   ^J° acts as a guide
          father
                                                         fatherf^s
                                 to the nysteries of the unconscious.
                                  87




                  It started with my paying a visit to my long-
              deceased father. He was living in the countiy—
              I did not knoxjr where.    I sa;r a house in the
              style of the eighteenth centuiy, veiy rooiny,
              with several rather large outbuildings, , .
                                                               ,
              i'^ father guarded these
                                          as custodian.
                  He was, as I soon discovered, not only the
              custodian but also a distinguished scholar
             in his o-tm right—which he had never been in
             his lifetime,      I met him in his stu^, and,
             oddly enough, Dr, T.-w;rho was about ay age—
             and his son, both psychiatrists, were also
             present,     I do not laiow whether I had asted
             a question or vrfiether my father wanted to
             ejqiain something of his own accord, but in
             any case he fetched a big BLble doim from a
             shelf, a heavy folio volume like the I^rian
             Bible in toy libraiy,     Bie Bible ray father
             held JTSLS bound in shiny fishsldn. He opened
             it at the C)ld Testament— I guessed that he
             turned to the Bentateuch—and began inter-
            preting a certain passage. He did this so
             s-^riLftly and so leamedOy that I could not
            follow him, I noted on3y that what he said
            betrayed a vast amount of variegated knowledge,
            the significance of which I dimly apprehended
            but could not properly judge or grasp, I saw
            that Qp, Y, understood notliing at aU, and
            his son began to laugh. They thought that
             W   father was going off the deep end and what
            he said was simply senile prattle, . , ,
                 The tvro psychiatrists represented a limited
            medical point of view which, of cotirse, also
            infects me as a physician. They represent
            my shadow—first and second editions of the
            shadow, father and son ( l^famories. Dreams.
            Reflections, pages 217-21571
       12
          Si talkijig in this way about the insight of
                                                        a universal per-
spective, there xs a temptation to speak in
                                               tems of the "id-sdom"
of the-unconsciou^. ]h regard to collective
                                                compensation then,
lie must be careful to avoid the
                                   misunderstanding that this tiT)^ of
language iiaplies that the unconscious is a sort of
                                                      higher con-
sciousness xrfiich purposiveHy guides the personality
                                                       to its destina-
                 sort of "guidance" which the unconscious
4   ?:  *L^^
is that which results from the Tjorldngs of a
                                                            provides
                                                natural process which
Itself has no end in view. Jung makes tliis
                                               point in a discussion
concerning compensation 1^ the unconscious.
              Yet it would, in my view, be wrong to siq)pose
                                                              that in
              such cases the unconscious is worldng to a
                                                           deliberate
              and concerted plan and is striving to realize
                                                              certain
              definite ends. I have found nothing to support
                                                                this
              assumption.   The driving force, so far as it is
                       possible for us to grasp it, seems to be in
                       essence only an urge tovrards self-realization.
                       If it TOre a laatter of some general
                                                            teleologi-
                       cal plan, then all Individuals who enjoy
                                                                 a sur-
                       plus of unconsciousness would necessarily be
                       driven towards higher consciousness by an
                       irresistible urge (Vol. VXE, p. l8U).
             13    ^
          "le anima xs in part man's inner image of iraman.
     ^ ,,
 for further
                                                                           See pa^e 7^
             characterization of the anima archetype.

          Piis generalization is prijnarfJy based on the dream material
 of caucasiais. Do the shadotjs of Lfegroes and other
                                                      racial groups then
 appear as figures with white sldn? !Ib vsy knowledge
                                                      this quesUon
 has not been resolved through empirical studies.
            1^
         ^though the content of all the archetypes is conditioned
 w
 ^^
      4.V    ^
       individual's personal experience, the shadot; and
                                                         the anima/
anlms^differ from the otlier archetypes in the fact
                                                     that their
content is more directly relatable to the person's
                                                    personal situa-
tion than the other archetypes. In tems of
                                             the analogy of depth
tnen, these archetypes occupy a position
                                         intemediate betvreen con-
scioumess and the personal unconscious and the other
                                                       aspects of
zae collective unconsciousness.


 (Ife.;   Iorkf^]£?a,'^i7l);       ^.^^"^^'^^^
                                  has been ruled
                                                        ^ ^ML           Sgstisjr

^    na^.^.H^^^T^^S^i?'^                out, the question might
                     i^««nce" of the archetype can then be mide
                                                                               ^rell
J^+^n?°''
intelligible.  *^-i!
                        It irould seem that some sort of laiOike
                                                                 ordering
principle must be postulated not involving a cause
                                                     and effect
relationship beti^een the objective event and the
                                                  correlated internal
state of expectancy, llaldng clear hoi7 the archetype
                                                       is supposed to
fimction as this ordering principle is one of the
                                                   major conceptual
ambiguities which must be resolved in order to maloe
                                                      synchronicity
into a viable explanatoiy hypothesis.
            17
                  Compare use of psychoid as discussed on page   1 3,



          ^^°f  ^^® position taken here is that a rational recon-
-x   x^
struction  of the archetypal theory is not corardtted to the
                                                               task of
a rational reconstruction of synchronicitj-, to m21 not
                                                           attempt a
critical assessment of synchronicity in this stu(^.
                                                        Ih
cany out that task, several crucial questions would haveorder     to
                                                              to be
conadered. In addition to the problem of making
                                                    archetsTal
 influence" intelligible, additional clarification
                                                     is needed as
how the crucial distinction betvreen coincidence and
                                                      meaningful
coincidence can be made operationally sound.
                                                Questions csa also
be raised as to the validity of Rhine's
                                         statistical procedures
and results. See C.E.M. Hansel's ESP (Ifevr York:
                                                    Scrilbner, 1966).
                               CHAPTER k
    CRITICISI4S OF TIIE ARCHETYPAL THEORY:       GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS



                        Pt'elimlnary Remarks


      The exposition of Jung's concept of the archetype having now

been completed, it is the objective of the second half of this           sbuic^

 to consider criticisms of the theoiy.        To an extent we have anticipated

this task in the first half.    For in order to rationally reconstruct

 Jung's concept of the archetype, it has proved necessary
                                                          on occasion
to distinguish betvreen essential aspects of the idea and
                                                          other aspects
which although linked by Jong on occasion        vrLth   discussion of arche-

types would, if e:cplored in teims of their full implications,
                                                               lead
to a situation of either obvious inconsistency or hopeless
                                                           obscuritsr

and confusion concerning \That is meant to be inqjlied ty the concept

of an archetj'pe.

     As the chief case in point,     vre   have interprerted the archetypes

naturalistical3y in the sense that it was assumed that they occur as

a natural phenomenon of man rather than as subsistent entities with

an ontological locus outside of man.         Closely related to this natur-

alistic stance on the origin and ontological nature of the
                                                           archetype
was the position taken asserting the psyche's necessary
                                                        dependence
on the brain.   la addition, in terms of our project of reconstruction,

it \ms found necessary to emphasize the logical
                                                Independence of the
idea of archetypes from the hypothesis of ^ynchronlcity.
                                                                   The assump-
tion of an extrap^ychlc locus for the archetype vrhich was
                                                           entailed l^


                                89
                                        90




  ^chronicity, a locus "in matter," was considered
                                                   to be an imnecessaiy
  complication to an already cumbersome theory
                                               and to be, moreover, an
  addition which is ijicompatible idth other
                                             aspects of the archetypal
  theory as     \ie   have reconstructed it,

           Che could, of course, postulate archetypal
                                                      entities which are
  responsible for the phenomena of ^ynchronicity and
                                                                vrtiich     subsist in-
  dependently of man vjithout having to assume that
                                                    they were there-
 fore supernatural agencies.          This supernatural agency l^ypothesis is

 then only one of several conceivable types of
                                               nonnaturalistic inter-
 pretations.     ">
                      Hoirever, this assumption of extrapsychic
                                                                subsistence,
 even if it need not invoke the supernatural,
                                              still has the effect of
 naldng the archetypes into occult entities,
                                             that is, entities which
 have veiy little in common with man as
                                        he is understood ±n terms of
 standard scientific knm/ledge.^

          3h addition to the questions related
                                               to the naturalistic inter-
pretation of the archelypes, we have also
                                          previously discussed the in-
fluence of Kantian epistemology on Jung's
                                          archetypes (pages 3^ and
                                                                   38).
Biis topic TTill be further treated in the
                                           third section of this chapter.
          The question of evolution theory and
                                               its possible consequences
for the plausibility of the archetypal concept,
                                                foreshadoired on page ^9
will be examined further in the last section of
                                                Chapter               7.

          The last of Jung's   rims   previously critiqued concerns the ques-

tion of racial differences (page 26               Following VJbrld
                                             ).                      Ifer   H,     Jung
appears to have retreated from the ijiiplications
                                                  for racial differences
lAlch he drei/ flx>m the idea of the collective
                                                unconscious,                 ^le
claiffl   that different racial groups have a
                                              distinctly different collec-
tive unconscious is at ary rate not
                                    emphasized by Jung in his writings
                                       91




  aner   librld >far   U,   although the quotes in support of such a
                                                                     view
  presented on page 26, from Vol. VTI,      ^re   not retracted by Jimg in
 the "thorough revision" to i^hich he
                                      subjected the book in the fifth
 edition in 19h2 (Vol. VII, p. 7),

      lath objections from the scientific
                                          perspective and evaluation
 of the archetypal concept as a scientific
                                           theoiy having been i^served
 for later discussion (Chapters
                                5,6,7), what remaining criticisms must

 then be considered?        This question is rendered problematic l^ the
                                                                         vast
 panorama of different types of critical attacks
                                                 vjhich have been directed

 against Jung's viei^s.       The project of presenting conclusive counter-

 arguments against each individual dissenting
                                              author could conceivably
 engage one's efforts for several years.        But such a volume and variety
 of critical literature is not itself a
                                        reliable indication of the
inherent wealmess of Jung's conceptions nor
                                            even of the result of his
violation of beliefs and presuppositions of
                                            vested professional in-
terest so much as it is an iiidication of the
                                              obscurity of his method
of presentation, which in its magnificant
                                          rhetorical style manages
through its all-encompassing, cosmic scope
                                           to have something to offend,

confound or confuse just about everyone.
                                                There is also, of course,
a veiy large and rapidly groidng literature
                                            from Jungian enthusiasts.
But as the xrork of even the most immediate
                                            Jungian disciples (indivi-

duals such as Ttoiele Jaffe, Jolande Jacobi and
                                                liichael Fordham)      offer
supposedly authoritative accounts of Jung's vlei^s
                                                   xAich differ      vriLdely

in interpretational approach and emphasis at crucial
                                                     points,^^ one begins

to ironder if periiaps there is in fact a
                                          problem in that through a com-
bination of intuitive overdeteiTOination^ and
                                              lack of precision in for-
mulating and liMting his basic constructs,
                                           Jung has tried to e:cplain
                                          92




  too much   tor   his archetypal theoiy through the use of
                                                            conceptual cate-
  gories lAich are      sijiiply   too vague and too s^/eeping in scope.

        Jung's work certaijily offers ample
                                            justification for this type of
 comment, but rather than being the result
                                           of laziness or lack of
 attention, such openness and indeteirdnateness
                                                in regard to his theoret-
 ical constructs was rather the product of
                                           a conscious methodology.
 In Chapter 6 to Tdll have occasion to
                                       examine this methodology and

 consider in v*at measure it is adequate for
                                             the tasks which it pur-
 ports to accomplish.         Ohe point to be made here, hoover, in
                                                                    regard
 to criticisms of Jung is that the aiiibiguity
                                               and openness to different
 possible interpretations characteristic of Jung's
                                                   foiwulations gives
 the unEympathetic critic an abundance of
                                          possible avenues of attack.
 Jung is particularly vulnerable when passages
                                               are criticized out of

 their proper context or id-thout regard to V7hat
                                                  is said in other wriLt-
ings.   For it is fi^equeiitly necessaiy to read
                                                 Jung's explanation of a
theoretical point in several different ^^tlngs
                                               in order to gain a
complete understanding of what he is saying
                                            in light of the overall
development of his ideas.           Jung thus offers more than the usual diffi-

culties for the reader, and as a consequence
                                             a significant amount of
Jungian criticism is grounded in misunderstanding
                                                  of Jung's basic
ideas. 6


     1* vjill be content here viith        ttra   examples of this type of criticism.
Hather than being ijistances of simple errors,
                                               they are more aptly des-
cribed as "a misture of distortion and
                                       misunderstanding, which is ob-

viouaLy motivated by ill will. "7

     The first sample comes from the pen of
                                            Philip Rieff .            ih the passage
beloi/ this unfortunately influential critic
                                             slides from a discussion of
                                      93




  the role of   fante^ in mediating the e^^jerience of the a«:hetypes to

 two subsequent passages on the
                                 same page T*ere it is apparent that
                                                                       he
 is equating "iUusion" and "archetype."

 the archetypes are Illusions, it
                                            though I^eff       wfeel that

                                   should not be supposed, as he teplies,
 that this in any way approximates
                                    Jung's meaning of the teim.    It would
 seem that Rieff wants the reader to
                                      think that because ai^hetypal images
 can be produced through a type of
                                    fantasy activity (Jung calls it ac-
 tive imagination) archetypes are then
                                       merely "forms of fanta^"^ in
 the sense of being a system of
                                illusions,

                Ihat exactly is this "creative impulse"
                                                          which
            Jung sets up as the highest activity of
                                                      man?
            On first glance, one would think it is
                                                     merely
           a nei-; term for artj but actually Jung implies
           something much more general, public as well
                                                           as
           private, Tihat Jung means by fantasy is,
                                                       in a
           word: illusion. , , . I^re than ever
                                                    before,
           then, both the high cidture and the
                                                 individual
           sense of well-being depended, for their
                                                      veiy
           e:!astence, on erotic illusions.   If old illus-
           ions no longer functioned satisfactorily,
                                                        then
          they must be replaced by "something nei/,"
                                                         Junr
          dedicated his life to the pwjduction
                                                  of something
          new xn the, way of saving illusions,      ...       ^
               Jung despised the fundamental
                                              "unspirLtuality"
          implied by Freud's suspicious treatment
                                                      of the
          dynamics of the unconscious. Ju^ there,
                                                        in
          the unconscious, are those superior
                                                 illusions
          that would compensate manldnd for the
                                                   barren
          interdicts of Christianity and the almost
                                                          „
          equally barren interdicts of psychoanalysis.^

     Our second sample of misconceived
                                       criticism comes f3nom Edward
dLover, whose book Freud
                           ^ ^^m^ is the fortunately as yet unsur-
passed nadir of anti-Jimgian literature.        Ihe following statements

reveal that he fails to appreciate even so
                                           basic an idea as the
importance of the unconscious         Jung's
                                iii            p^hology.   Glover is
apparently unairare of the distinction Jimg
                                            draws between collective

conscixjusness and the collective unconscious
                                              and thus deduces the
                                        9h




  absurdity that Jung is actually proposing
                                            a brand of conscious psy-
  chology,

                 Ifow in so far as Jung is
                                             convinced of the over-
                 T^ihelMng Ifflportance of the Collective
                                                          Thconscious
                  (and it must be remembered that although
                                                              he
                  appears to be sincerely convinced of this,
                                                                he
                 also adduces considerations vrhich if
                                                        correct
                 would reduce its in^jortance to the level
                                                              of
                 purely conscious forces and factors)
                 Indeed it is hard for any Fb^eudian xrho
                                                          ....
                                                           takes
                 the trouble to immerse his mind in
                                                      Jungian
                 pqyxjhology to avoid the honrid suspicion
                                                             that
                 Jung is nothing more or less than a
                                                       pre-Preudian
                 who having at first let himself be carried
                                                                in
                 the stream of Freudian thought has ever
                                                            since
                 striven to make his peace vri.th conscious
                                                             psx'-
                 chology, '^

          But by thus dismissing fi-om further
                                               discussion extant criticisms
 based on misunderstandings of what Jung's
                                           archetypal theoiy implies:,
 xre   must not then also exclude certain gysbematically
                                                         biased cri-
 tiques.        Biese criticisms are based not so much on
                                                          a misundersband-
ii3g   of   Tjhat   Jung says as on the failure to see how
                                                           Jung's arche-
types can be made corgsrehensible ^d.thin
                                          the scope of a particular
conceptual framevrork for understanding
                                        human experience."             Con-
sequently these criticisms recur as a
                                      type or species of criticism
^rfiich   adherents of a given intellectual
                                            persuasion       t^caliy    raise
against Jung i^ regard to the archetypes.
                                                  (!Ihe   examples to be dis-
cussed beloi; are from p^hoanalysis
                                    and Judeo -Christian theology.)
        T*iat   is at stake then in the consideration
                                                      of such systematic
critiques is the intelligibility of the
                                        archetypal hypothesis fi-om
the perspective of a given image of
                                    man.         Criticism from such a
point of vlei7 could readily be mderstood
                                          as having begged the
questions at issue.        Hoirever, this consideration is
                                                           not a sufficient
reason to disregard the criticisms discussed
                                             belovr.          For in addition
                                               9^



   to helping us imderstand the point of
                                                      tv/o coiamon   types of criticism,
   lie   must consider vAether the phenomena for which
                                                       the archetypes pur-
   port to provide an explanatory framwrork can
                                                not be accounted for in
   less cumbersome ways.             Berhaps from the perspective of these other

  iinages of man, archetypes can be
                                                sham to be no longer necessary.
   At any rate, a discussion of such
                                     criticism vrill better enable us
  in gaining a critical viev/point on Jung's
                                             image of man. 1


                                         FgAihoanalTtic Critic-! sm
          If   yje   consider then the characteristic criticism
                                                                of J^udians
  to the archetype concept, this is
                                    usually a claim to the effect that
  all unconscious contents can be accounted
                                            for in tenns of an indivi-
  dual's personal history ^rithout the
                                       need for an hypothesis of a
  collective unconscious.             According to this line of argument, the

  latter should then be elijtiinated in favor
                                              of a more parsimonious ex-
  planation couched in ijidividual developmental
                                                 terms.                 As a case in
 point dLover argues as follows:

                ... but at the very least we must examine the em-
                biyonic stages of individual development
                                                          to see
                i^hether they could not account
                                                satisfactorLOy for
                those mental contents that led Jung to
                                                        develop
                his theory of the collective or racial
                                                        unconscious. 13

                .    .   .   n^ iSmgian archetypes are capable        of ade-

                JtosbJl^.IaiiL    alaa   JMc aa long jTShSrSff^n^
                                                                ^
                exBlored toe eariai joms of individual
                                                         thSkliT
                Hie      :^di^
                             and universalit^r of the, collg3H^
                ^kkES     is undeTilEnrSyii^^""^                       ^^
      A second representative instance
                                       of Freudian systematic cidti-
cian is taten from Nandor Pbdor's
                                  PVeud, Jm^Q, and Occultism. Ih the
passage cited belmr he gives exai^^les
                                       of dreams which from the Jungian
point of view vrould provide good
                                  paradigm cases of aix^hetypal images.
                                                9S




  He concludes that these ijnages can
                                      be adequateOy understood in teiros

  of Freudian personal psychology vrLthout
                                           the need for a concept of a

 collective unconscious of archel^ypes,

           ^e chief point of interest, hoirever, is
           vjhether the concept of tlie Old Vase r-3an
                                                       and
           the archet^Tpe of transformation inalce any novel
           contribution to the interpretation of the dream.
           They do not, liiconscious guidance and subli-
           mation cover "toe situation just as i^ell. Bie
           spiritual elaaent is a beautiful unconscious
           fantasy, Bie Jungian contribution is onOy
           verbal—but it is stimulating and anpeals
           to tlie imagination, 5       '




           >fes then the Carpenter of his
                                            dream an arche-
           type of the Self or just a personification
                                                         of
           the integrating dirlve? It malces no difference
           whichever vray you look at it,""*^

                 Qrchetype of the^ Shadow or neurosis.               It
           malces no difference.   The meaning is the same.
           ^
           the
               The Jiingian approach yields nothing
                 Freudian does not imply. 17
                                                    that

      nh considering the force of this
                                       tj-pe of objection, it is im-

portant to note that what is at issue is
                                         not the existence of the
phenomena for which the archetypal theoiy
                                          is to provide an explana-
tory frameiTOrk so much as how these phenomena
                                               are to be interpreted.
The British psychoanallyst Mthor^r Storr
                                         admits for example that:
"It is not difficult to prove the existence
                                            of an inner world of
highly irrational images    ,   ,   ,       ,   "18 and "the existence
                                                                       of the
mythological substratum to human experience is
                                               recognized by
analysts of entirely different theoretical
                                           orientations, fi.e.,
different from Jung^ though they would use
                                           another nomenclature, "19
     vathough Fodor and OLover argue that
                                          Freud's psychology can
account for the images alleged to be
                                     archei^ypal trtthout need for

any theoretical adjusteent of basic
                                    Freudian theoxy, another school
                                      97




 of psrjnchoana3jtical thought has deroloped a
                                               concept of "internal
 objects" to account for the type of phenomena at
                                                  issue.        This
 neo-ft-eudian school is composed of followers of
                                                  Ifelanie laein.

 Accordiig to the laeinian viei7 then, the iinages \ih±ch
                                                          Jung would

 call archetypes are the result of a process of
                                                introjection in which
 items of experience in the child's immediate environment
                                                          such as the

 mother's breast are internalized and become incorporated
                                                          into the
 child's ego as internal objects.

      Si the passage cited beloi;, we see an example of
                                                        how this ex-
 planatory device of introjection of internal objects
                                                      attempts to         '




 account for the allegedly archetypal images vrithin
                                                     the context of
an essentially Freudian psychology which explains
                                                  unconscious images
in terms of individual development.

             Si reali-ty parents and child possess limited
                                                            povrer
             or goodness and badness, vjisdora and foolishness.
             Bie cliild's phanta^ makes gods and demons and all
             those unearthly creatures of them tAich folklore
             and inythology, religious legends and artistic crea-
             tion present to us in sublimated, and the imagina-
             tion of the insane in more misublimated, fonn.
             Ibreover, the child places his self-created figures
             Inside his am body and treats them as live en-
             tities alien to himself and beyond his control. "20

     Ttie   proper Jimgian reply to this line of criticism \d21 appeal

to evidence that the images said to be archetypal have collective

features which rule out an interpretation solely in terras of in-

dividual development.       The reaaining in stqjport of the collective

nature of such features will consist of a demonstration of the

correspondence of the images \T±ih symbols in the histoiy of
                                                             culture
which are unknorm to the individtial previous to his experience
                                                                of
the images.    IJius   the spontaneous appearance of the same symbols in
                                                  98




  cultures vridely separated            3ji   space and time x/ill be seen as necessita-

  ting a concept of the collective unconscious.

            The soundness of such reasoning is naturally open
                                                              to question
  in various ways.          In the case of the individual vrho experiences

  allegedly archelgrpal images, how is the absence of previous
                                                               cultural
  Influence estabOlshed, for example? >breover, vrould not
                                                           a theory of
 cultural diffusion better account for the appearance of
                                                         the same
 J^pibols in different cultures?

           Baw&ver, the sort of systematic attack on the
                                                         archetypal theoiy
 VTith Tihich      we are concerned here is not so much interested in
                                                                      directly
 inipugning the evidence for a collective
                                          unconscious as it is to tiy
 to    sho:-/   how its ovm Ijiterpretative frame^rork makes the
                                                                 allegedly arche-
 typal phenomena Intelligible ^d.thout the need for
                                                    a concept of a
 collective unconscious.          Vfe    vjill    then reserve an examination of the

 evidence given in support of the collective unconscious
                                                         for a later
chapter.          For it is our task in the present section to indicate
                                                                        the
manner in which the Freudians and KLeinians see the
                                                    Jungian inter-
pretation of the phenomena at issue as not mereily false or
                                                            unsuppor-
tabO^ by the evidence given but as violating basic
                                                   assumptions they
appear to hold about the nature of man.

          The sort of assumption on which the tension
                                                      bettreen the Jungian

and Freudian Images of man seems to turn involves
                                                  the issue of des-
cription of human experience in terms of "spiritual"
                                                     predicates.
As    T.-iill   perhaps be remembered from previous discussion
                                                               (page h^),
V7e   were unable to grasp t-Aat          -Jung   means by the spiritual until   vre

had contrasted the spiritual and the Instinctual.
                                                                   The spiritual was
that     vrfiich alloi7s   the energies of man to be employed in other than
                                          99




   instinctual activities.        !Ihe   enrphasis
                                          of the Jungian image of man is
  thus on the existence of a source
                                     of creative ^pibolic activity
                                                                   which
  may manifest itself in artistic,
                                    religious and even scientific
                                                                              ws,
  but which can not be understood
                                  merely as an outgrorrth of instlnctuality

 interpreted in a narrot;, physiological
                                         sense.
         Bjr   contrast, what might be characterized
                                                     as a Freudian image
 of man seeks to explain all aspects
                                     of human activity in terns of

 the development of the individual's
                                     instinctuaLity.           This   tlie   attempt
 is made to give the so-caUed spiritual
                                        aspects of man a reductive
 biological interpretation,        ^ce      it is difficult to see   hoi;   creative
 symbolic activity relates directly to the
                                           biological needs of the in-
 dividual, from this perspective it is
                                       then easy to believe that the
 symbolic manifestations must be either
                                        infantile phenomena or delus-
 ions.    Thus Storr states:

               As will be perceived, I am
                                           putting fort/ard suggestions
               as to possible norths which can be
                                                  variously SKrded
               exther as paranoid delusions or as
                                                   religious beliefs.
               'rr,! :i,\ ^  ^y^^ KLeinians and Freudians would ar-
               gue that religxous beliefs are as
                                                  unnecessary as de-



                P^choanalysts consider that the inner world
                                                                and
               xts ojnages are infantile phenomena,
                                                     admittedlr
               po'^rerful deteiminants of a man's
                                                  idea of the ex-
               ternal world, and therefore of his
                                                    behavior, but
               actually a hindrance in adaptation to
                                                       reality,
               ae mythological level of the psyche is, in this
               viei7, a misconstruction which
                                               ought to be out-
               groim or overcome if a person is to
                                                     be properly
               orientated toward people in an adult
                                                      way, and
               toT/ard the external world as it
                                                 actually is. ^2
     Diis      w   of understanding as instinctual
                                                   perversities that which
from the Jungian perspective
                              constitutes man's human-^ost
                                                           potentialities
for being seems to lead to an
                               Incomplete and nondescriptive image
                                                                   of
the human situation.  Ohe suspicion that there
                                                has been an effort to
                                      100




  KqxLain away a vitally important aspect of
                                             experience through a bio-
  logical reductionlsm is reinforced
                                     by the often enotionally worded
  attacks on Jung.      If the archetypes irere really
                                                       only infantile phe-
 nomena or delusions, then one wonders if
                                          they would elict such emo-
 tional counterattacks.       As a case in point GLover states
                                                               that             "...
 he   Dunga proceeds    to invest   hman    ideas and iioages irLth an atmosphere
 politely described as nysticism, but which
                                            the less polite observer
 vjould   call an atmosphere of religiosity."^^

          vath such differing ways of looking at
                                                 the human condition as
 that represented in the writings of Preud
                                           and Jung,            >re   can not
 attempt here to provide conclusive arguments
                                              in favor of Jung's
 vietTs versus those of JVeud.      Such a task would       cawy us beyond      the
 purpose of    tMs   study.   3h so far as ^^hat   >re   say here about Jung
 and his theory of archetypes proves
                                     to b© intelligible and to offer
a genuine gain in understanding the
                                    human situation, this may perfiaps
count against a Freudian perspective if
                                        a comparison :7ith Fmid's ideas
fans to provide      an equally satisfactoiy explanation.
                                                        But beyond ;Aat
we have said about the archetypes, no effort
                                             vrLLl be made to conclusive]y

validate the inrportance of a spiritual
                                        dimension to erqjerience.                Such
a question can not be resolved only through
                                            argumentation but must be
settled as the course of time proves the relative
                                                  merits of the Freud-
ian or Jungian images of man.^U

      In any case, it seems evident that the claim
                                                   that the archetypal
theoiy must be rejected on grounds of parsimour
                                                can not be upheld.
For although it is readiJy admitted that
                                         Jung's archetypal theozy is
a more cumbersome theoretical device
                                     than Freudian explanation in tenns
of individual development, in contrast to
                                          Freud, Jung's idea of
                                    101




 archetj^es reflects the characteristic quality of the phenomena
                                                                 it
 seeks to explain.     To charge Jung rath violation of parstoony is

 thus beside the point until another theoiy can provide
                                                        a simpler
 er^planation while at the sane time being able to adequately
                                                              charac-
 terize the phenomena.

      Jung' s view has an obvious advantage over Freud
                                                       in that in dis-
 pensing vdth the idea that dreams and other unconscious
                                                         products are
 systematically distorted by the unconscious, Jung can have his
                                                                theoret-
 ical explanations of the Images in close agreement Td.th the
                                                              phenomeno-
logical content.     The actual content of the images must then for Jung

be taken seriously, not as mere disguishes for sexuality.

     A passage from Fodor serves to illustrate this point.            Ife   once
had a dream involving a coal mine and under the influence of
                                                             having
read Jung attempted a Junglan type of explanation in
                                                     terms of the
archetype of transfoimation.^^      His interpretation along these lines

pi^jceeds in part:

            Coal preeminently stands for transformation—of
            vegetable life (and imprisoned sunshine) into
            stone. Ibreover, coal is something valuable;
            it is called black diamond, not quite without
            reason, as both coal and diamond are made of
            carbon. • . , Treasure is undoubted3y referred
            to and, if it is in the mine or if it is to be
            mined, it has been ndned from the unconscious. ^6

Then in an attempt to discount the ijnportance of this
                                                       interpretation
he remarks:    "It is interesting to note that, under the influence

of Jung, I comjxLetely ignored the obvious uterine element in
                                                              the
coal mine   ....     "27   The interpretation of the coal mine as uterus

does not have much phenomenologlcal plausibility; that is,
                                                                \je    fail to
see on what grounds the interpretations of the coal mine
                                                         as representing
a uterus can be adequately defended.      If a coal mine is a uterus, then
                                    102




  any enclosed space could on basis of this
                                            reasoning be a uterus and
  any elongated object a penis.

        % comparison id.th   the rb?eudian inteipretation, the KLeinian

 theoretical model can talce the phenomenology
                                               of the iinages success-
 fulily into account.   HOT/ever, its explanatory device of the
                                                                intro-
 jection of internal objects lacks credibility.
                                                       2he internal objects

 thesis seems to be, moreover, a sort of ad
                                            hoc addition to the Freudian
 theoiy, an atteng^t to save at any cost the
                                             perspective of explanation
 in terms of individual development.

        Perhaps someday a theozy ^dll succeed in accounting
                                                            for what Jung
 cans   archetjrpes idthout the necessity of a concept
                                                       of collective un-
 conscious and yet Td.thout explaining airay the phenomena.
                                                                Ho^rever,

 there is no good reason to believe that the
                                             Freudian or KLeinian
approach is in fact such an account.


                        Theological Criticism

     The second type of ^steraatic criticism
                                             we idll discuss comes
from the theological point of     viet/.   Rather than opposing the arche-
typal theory idth an alternative psychological
                                               interpretation of
events as was the case Tdth the I^eudian and
                                             laeinian approaches,
the tiieologians are concerned id.th the issue of
                                                  psychologism.      !Ihey

object to Jung's theory of archetypes then
                                           since, in their understand-
ing, Jung's theoiy attempts an illegitimate
                                            psychological reduction
of the transcendental concerns of religion.       Th regard to the psycho-

logical interpretation of religious assertions.
                                                Father Josef
Cioldbrunner thus remarks that:     "In the language of science this

thinking of Jung's must be called psychologisra, the
                                                     levelling dorm
                                    103




 of supra-psychic realities to the level of purely psychic reality. "^^

        It is then not so much the theory of the archei^qje itself to

 iMch   the theologians object, as it is Jung's use of the theoiy to

 understand and es^lain religious experience in a psychological way

 which attempts to be metaphysically neutral      Trf.th   respect to such
 issues as the e:d.stence of God.

      The Jexd.sh theologian Ikrtln Buber voices this type of
                                                              criticism
of Jung.    He feels that Jung's psychological treatment of God in tenas

of a God arche-l^rpe has the effect of maldng God into an entity which

has reality only within the psyche,        Ihus he accuses Jung of over-

stepping the legitimate scientific bounds of psychology and indulging

in a type of psychologically based theology.

            In short, although the nenj p^rchology protests that
            it is "no world-view- but a science, " it no longer
            contents itself xd-th the role of an interpreter
            of religion.   It proclaims the new religion, the
            only one which can still be true, the religion of
            pure psychic iimnanence,^

           Jung does not e:cBrcise such a restraint when he
           ejcplains that God cannot e3d.st independent of men.
           For, once again, if this is a statement about an
           archetype called God, then the emphatic assurance
           that it is a psychic factor is certainly unnecessary
           (l^lhat else coiiLd it be?) But if it is a state-
           ment abotrt some ertra-psychical Being which
           corresponds to this psychic factor, namely the
           statement that no such Being e:d.sts, then ve have
           here, instead of the indicated restraint, an
           illict overstepping of boundaries. -^°

     The validity of Buber 's criticism must be evaluated in the face

of what Jung has to say about God.        Jung distinguishes God-as-he-is-

Kcperienced, the psychic God-image or God archetype, from a possible

God entity transcending possible psychic e:cperience to which the

God-image could correspond.    Ih terms of his scientific methodological
                                lOh




 ideal of avoiding undecidable metaphysical claims, Jung's
                                                           assertions
 about God are then to be restidcted to psychological statements about

 the Ood-lmage.

           PsychologicaUy, however, Cbd is the name for a
           comple:: of ideas grouped round a poirerful feel-
           ing; the feeling-tone is -what really gives the
           complex its characteristic efficacy  ...   (Vol.
           V, p.  85).

           Hie idea of God is an absolutely necessary psy-
           chological function of an irrational nature, which
           has nothing whatever to do i/ith the question of
           God's existence. The human intellect can never
           ansi/er this question, still less give any proof
           of God. Jbreover such proof is superfluous, for
          the idea of an all-poijrerful divine Being is pre-
          sent everywhere, unconsciously if not consciousOLy,
          because it is an archetype. There is in the
          psjTJhe some superior power, and if it is not
          consciously a god, it is the "belly" at least,
          in 3t» Paul's words. . . , Our intellect has
          long laioiim that we can foiro no proper idea of
          God, much less picture to ourselves in what
          manner he really e:d.sts, if at all. The
          ejcistence of God is once and for all an un-
          ansiTerable question (Vol, VII, p. 71),

     Ihat Jung says above about God seems relatively unproblematic.

Hoirever, Jung frequently uses his God-ijaage construct in ^rays
                                                                 which
imply that it has the same meaning as the ordinary traditional re-

ligious usage of "God."

           "Absolute" means "cut off," "detached." To assert
          that God is absolute amounts to placing him out-
          side all connection \T±th manldnd. Ifen cannot
          affect him, or he man. Such a God would be of
          no consequence at all. , , . this urge to re-
          gard God as "jabsolute" derives solely from the
          fear that God might become "psychological."
          This T-rould naturally be dangeroTxs. An absolute
          God, on the other hand, does not concern us in
          the least, whereas a Vpsychological" God would
          be real (Vol. VII, p. |235, note 6).

     Yet Jung is not agnostic and affirms his personal view that

there is something to which the psychological God-djnage corresponds.
                                    10^




             Biis is certainly not to: say that what to caOl
             the unconscious is identical v/ith God or is set
             up in his place. It is simply the medium from
             which religious e3cperience seems to flow (Vol. X.
                                                              ^
             p. 293).

                For me "God" is on the one hand a ncrsteiy
             that cannot be unveiled      ....
                On the other hand "God" is a verbal image,
             a predicate or ncrthologem founded on arche-
             typal premises . . . ( Letters. Vol. U, pages
             25U-25^, letter to Pastor Jakob Anstutz dated
             23 Ifey 1955).

     From these different perspectives from which Jung
                                                       talks about
 "God" we can begin to understand why his vietrs
                                                 attract theological
criticism.     For Jung believes that he can restrict himself
                                                              to the
"facts" of religious experience and that id.thout
                                                  comnrLttlng himself

to any metaphysical assertions arrive at certain
                                                 valid engdrical
statements about God-as-he-is-experienced.       But since these assertions

will be based on a cross-cultural comparison of religious
                                                          symbology,
they may come into conflict with the dogma of a specific
                                                         religion
where the archetypally based religious experiences
                                                   have undergone
a prolonged period of interpretation.

     Thus Jung, says that the doctrine of the privatio
                                                            boni and its
Implication:    "
                    Ctoe bonum a Deo, omne malus ab homine" is
                                                               not suppor-
table by existing archetypal evidence.

             ... I have felt compelled to contest the
         validity of the privatio boni so far as the
         empirical realm is concerned. ...
             Criticism can be applied only to psychic
         phenomena, i.e., to ideas and concepts, and
         not to metaphysical entities. These can only
         be confronted with other metaphysical entities.
         Hence my criticism is valid only within the
         ^'"P^J^cal realm. ... It seems to me, hoover,
         that the e:d. sting empirical material, at least
         so far as I am acqu^ted witti it, permits of
         no definite conclusion as to the archetypsil
         background of the privatio boni. Subject to
                                106




           correction, I would say that clear-cut moral
           distinctions are the most recent acquisitions
           of civnized man (Vol. U, pages 305-306).

      For the most part, ho^rever, Jung feels that his
                                                       enpirical for-
 mulations leave the door open for at least theoretical
                                                        congiatability
 vdth metaphysical religious statements based on faith.    Since these

 metajAiysical statements such as the assertion that a God
                                                           exists who
 transcends the p^che are supported hy faith rather
                                                    than by exper-
 iences, they can not be either empirical3y validated
                                                      or disproved.
 For even the numinous experience of the God
                                             archetype reveals only
 that a certain psycliicalOy conditioned factor
                                                exists.

      Bius Jung's reply to theological criticism is
                                                    that he is
making empirical statements about the God archetype
                                                    rather than
uttering metaphysical truths.    He is not talking theologicalOy but

scientifically.

           You evidently did not knot; that episbemologicaUy
           I take rui/- iand on Kant, wliich means that an
          assertion doesn't posit its object. So when I
          say "God" I am speaking exclusively of asser-
          tions that don't posit their object. About
          God himself I have asserted nothing, because
          according to my premise nothing ^riiatever can
          be asserted about God himself. Jill such asser-
          tions refer to the p^chology of the God-image.
          Their validity is therefore never metaphysical
          but only psychological. All my assertions,
          reflections, discoveries, jetc, have not the
          remotest connection with theology but are,
          as I have said, only statements about psy-
          chological facts ( letters. Vol. I, p.
                                                     Z9U,
          letter to Josef Goldbrunnejr dated 8 Februarv


     In spite of all Jung's protests of innocence,
                                                   the theologians
have nonetheless good reason to be upset ^dlii
                                               Jung's archetypal
treatment of religion.   It is not that Jung has explained atray

religion by reducing it to psychology—his psychological
                                                        treatment
                                 107




 maintains the authentic ejdstence of nundnous experience
                                                          which
 transcends reference to the personal ego to an indeterminable

 extent.   Rather the difficulty is that the Jungian image of
                                                              man
 with its archetypal understanding of the spirit is in
                                                       real con-

 flict with a traditional religious     fvlet-rpoint   based on faith.

      Thus although Jung is attempting to approach religious con-

cerns from a strictly empirical point of view and is not advo-

cating that his vieirs be interpreteci in a religious way, it is

hard to avoid perceiving the manifest incompatibility vrith a

traditional religious viev;point.      For if one holds Jung's theoty

of archetypes to be true, then traditional religious
                                                     understanding
can only claim to be a relative and limited interpretation.

     In a letter Jung once admitted this point:

           If the Christian truth is not supreme
                                           _^      and solely
           valid, then it believBS it has lost it raison'
           d'etre and, if I may express ray htmible opinion,
           it would have lost it. It xroxHd instantly have
           to turn into a sort of philosophical i^yncretism.
           I think that this is a most serious point Letters.
                                                       (
           Vol. I, pages 269-270, letter to ¥.E, Hocking
           dated 5 Ifey 1939).

     Jung's claim then is that all experience which could count
                                                                as
supporting a religious understanding, since it must be a psychic

experience, falls irithin the damadu of his theoiy.          The religious

interpretation of this experience is thus always open to question

and to possible p^chological critique.

           ... I approach these problems in a way that has
           often been charged td-th "psychologisra. " If "psy-
           chology" xrere meant, I should indeed be flattered,
           for vjy aim as a psychologist is to dismiss ;d.th-
           out mercy the metaphysical' claims of all esoteric
           teachings. ... Let the convinced Christian
           believe, by all means, for that is the duty he
           has taken upon himself j but whoever is not a
                                108




           Christian has forfeited the charLsraa of faith,
           (Perhaps he was cursed from birth vdth not
                                                         being
           able to believe, but merely to ]mm.
                                                 ) ...
           cannot grasp anything metaphysically, one can
                                                          One
           on3y do so psychologically. Therefore I
                                                      strip things
           of their metaphysical tiralppings in order to
                                                          make
           them objects of psychology (Vol. XEII,
                                                    p. k9).

           The fact that I am content vjith what can
                                                       be ex-
           perienced psychically, and reject the meta-
           physical, does not amount, as any intelligent
           person can see, to a gesture of scepticism
                                                         or
           agnosticism aiTied at faith and trust in higher
           poirers, but means approxiinately the
                                                 same as
          what Kant meant I'/hen he called the thing-in-
          itself a "merely negative borderline concept.
           Svery statement about the transcendental
                                                      is to
          be avoided because it is only a laughable
                                                        pre-
          suii5)tion on the part of a human
                                             mind unconscious
          of Its limitations.    Therefore, when God or the
          Tao xs named an Ijiipulse of the soul, or
                                                     a psychic
          state, something has been said about the
                                                      knowable
          only, but nothing about the unloioi/able,
                                                     about
          which nothing can be determined (Vol. xril,
                                                          p. 51|).

      3uch a position, although technically
                                            leaving open a loophole
for religious faith, has the practical effect
                                              of destroying any
ground for belief in the extrapsychological truth
                                                  of such faith,
i.e., a truth that would be more than just valid
                                                 relative to a
particular psychology.   Unless one is motivated hy an arbitrary

will to believe, the choice of one religious
                                             interpretation of
archetypal experience over another or over
                                           an atheistic interpre-
tation must be on the basis of pragmatic
                                         reasoning, i.e., one finds
it helpful and congenial to one's
                                  personaliigr.

     Ii)reover, there is some real question
                                            to vjhat extent Jung is
successful in mai^tadjiing his discourse
                                         about reUgious concerns on
a solely empirical psychological level.
                                          Bie appropriation of the
emotionally loaded word "God" to mean
                                      the p^hological God-image
opens him up to the criticism that he is
                                         indulging in theological
                                          109




  discourse.       In his   Jm^   ^ds, and ?bdem        Ibn, Moreno complains then

  that "Jung, the philosopher-psychologist,
                                            interprets man's ideas
  of God within the framework of his ovm ideas of
                                                  God."^''               Iforks

  such as Aisifer to Job leave         tlie   Impression that what is being ex-

 pressed is more a personal religious testament than
                                                     an objective
 psychological discussion.

           The claim that Jung's theory of archetypes
                                                      constitutes a psy-
 chologistic treatment of religion              is then justified in the sense

 that his theoiy offers a psychological frama/ork
                                                  for understanding
 id.th    which a traditional religious framework can
                                                      be made compatible
 only by assuming the subservient role of an
                                             undecidable metaphysical
 interpretation based on the archet^jpal "facts."

          The question remains, hoirever, to what
                                                  extent this "psychologism"
is the basis for a valid criticism of the
                                          archetypal theoiy.                  For the
fact that ps^-chologism can be established
                                           does not necessarily mean
that something is      i-rrong irtth   the theoiy.     It   would seem clear that
p^/chologism is an objection only to a misuse or
                                                 misapplication of
the archetypal theoiy rather than to the theoiy
                                                itself.                 If, for ex-

aiiiple,    the claim is made that the psychological perspective
                                                                 is the
onOy valid way to understand a religious,
                                          philosophical or aesthetic
work or event, then there exists the manifest
                                              possibility of an illegit-
iJtiate    reductionism.    Freud's p^chologistic understanding of religion

and art in teims of sublimation of sexuality
                                             seems an example of this
pernicious "nothing but"32 psychologirtic
                                          application of a theoiy.
         But surely there is a legitlinate
                                           psychological element in re-
ligion,, art and philosophy which can be
                                         discussed id.thout the Im-
plication that these disciplines are nothing
                                             but confused psychology.
                                      110




  Jung's application of the archetypal theory
                                              beyond psychology to
 these other areas is for the most part sensitive to
                                                     this problem.
 But of course ercaniples can be found where Jung is
                                                     guilty of failing
 to appreciate a work In its ovm teims because of his
                                                      at-rareness of

 the psychological element.      He seems to arbitrarily dismiss the

 philosophies of Hegel and Heidegger in this manner:

            . . . Hegel, who in ny very incompetent opinion
           is not even a proper philosopher but a misfired
           psychologist. His in^ssible language, which
           he shares with his blood-brother Heidegger,
           denotes that his philosoply is a highly ration-
           alized and lavishly decorated confession of his
           unconscious ( letters. Vol. I, p. 5oi, letter to
           Joseph F. I^hlak dated 27 iipril 1959).

      Ibreover, it can be readily seen       hor-x   it is Jvaig^s Kantian
 strategy which brings him into direct conflict with
                                                     the theologians.
 Jung will give a psychological treatment of
                                             the phenomena and leave
the theologians and metaphysicians with the
                                            impossible task of

talldng about noumena.    But   vre   need not follow Jimg on this point?

the archetypal theory can be made intelLigible
                                               ;d.thout the need for

a Kantian distinction betireen phenomena and
                                             noumena.            In this vray
much of the theological criticism loses its force.
                                                               For there is no
longer the necessity for the misleading en5)hasis
                                                  on the merely phe-
nomenal nature of the God-image we erqjerience.^-^

     But on the other hand, with the abandonment
                                                 of this Kantian
distinction, the question about the locus of the
                                                 archetypes re-
appears.   Are archetypes on3y psychic entities or is
                                                      the psyche
mereily one place in vjhich they manifest
                                          themselves. 3U
     Our argument for an understanding of
                                          the archetypal theory in
terms of the foriner alter^iative, which     vre   ha^e con^rued as a natura-
listic interpretation, can now be shora to
                                           have the advantage of
                                  Ill




  helping to separate the scientific     aiais   of such a theoiy from un-
  necessary metaphysical and theological
                                         complications.              For Jung was
  perhaps misguided in believing that Kant's
                                             doctrines woidd perserve
  the scientific character of his theoiy
                                         and prevent metapl^^sical and

 theological discourse in its name.       It is not clear that Kant suc-

 ceeded in preventing the claims of science and
                                                religion from becom-
 ing competing systems of explanation, and, in        ar^r   case,   Jmg   in fact
 fails to Strictly adhere to Kant and sometimes
                                                indtdges in discourse
 which is of dubious scientific justification
                                              (Mswer to Job).               Ifone-

 theless, it is in the spirit of Jung's theory to
                                                  tiy to interpret
 it in such a way that the scientific import of the
                                                    theory is not
 hopelessly implicated vdth nonscientific discourse.




«„+,  n
natural
          ^ example of a nonnaturalistic account not involving
         agencies could be dravm from the work of Carlos
                                                                  suTDer-
                                                           Castaneda!
 Jn Journey to Ibcfclan (New York: Sjmon and Schuster, 1972), for ex-
aii^le,^he purports to describe entities called
                                                 allies which have
intentionality and i*ich "reside" in natural locations
                                                          such as
springs.   Such an entity, if it existed, would not be
                                                        a super-
natural agency since it is partly on the basis of
                                                    such entities
that the workmgs of nature are described
                                            and understood, according
to the vrorld vxeij of sorcery which Castaneda
                                               describes. On the
other hand, tiying to interpret the archetjrpes
                                                 as allies would not
be a naturalistic interpretation either since
                                                it involves appeal to
a radically nonstandard understanding of natural
                                                   processes.   Our
usage of the tern "naturalistic" then involves
                                                 at least prima facie
                     ^andard (i.e., scientifically anlightened, common
!^!ISS^''^*L."^J^
sense) understandings of nature.
     2
        -As the interpretation of Jung's
                                          archetypes as supernatural
agencies is not attributed to any particular author in
                                                         the follo^djif'.
It should be mentioned that this line of interpretation
                                                          of Jung is
one which is veiy popular ^ri.th university students and
                                                         others v*o
are eager to embrace doctrines which from their point
                                                        of vietj re-
present sensationalistic alternatives to a scientific
                                                        world view.
          Jrnig's social and political vims have been
                                                      the subject of
irf-despread misunderstanding due in no small
                                                   measure to Jung's notor-
ious ineptness in public affairs,       la order   not to add to such
                                    112




 ndsunderstandings, it should be made clear that
                                                 in no sense does
 Jung's life or work offer any evidence that
                                             he was a bigot or
 advocated racial supremacy. Our critical
                                           statements on this matter
 are intended merely to argue that in fact
                                           the concept of the collec-
 tive unconscious is not relevant to arguments
                                               concerning racial
 differences. For an unbiased account of Jung's
                                                 social-political
               unfortunate adventures in public affairs see i\niela
 T"^^^.^!^^^
 Jaffels tol me Ufe and Vfork of C,G. Jung (Ifew
                                                  York: Harper and
 Row, 1971).

             comparison of discussion of the concept of the archetype
                           ^
            -l^


 in Aniela Jaffe' s book        I^^to of Jfeaning (New York:     Penguin B^ks,
                   Jacobi's The Pgychology of C.G. Jung (New Haven:
 tI-^^'J"^^
 Iftuversity Press, 1962), and IB.chael Fordham's
                                                                            Tale
                                                       The Ob.jective Psyche
  (london: Houtledge and Ifegan Paul, 19^8)
                                                 offerlrtTat at first sirht
 seem to be incompatible accounts. Fordham looks
                                                         at the archetypes
 from ascientific perspective, while Jaffe
                                                  emphasizes the role of
 archetypes in mediating authentic religious, ircrstic and
                                                                  paranormal
 experiences.    Jacobi, on the other hand, by literalizing
                                                                   Jung's often
metaphorical language through the use of
                                                simplistic and misleading
 diagrams, creates her own unique account of
                                                   what is involved in
 Jung's model of the p^che.
          However, this is not to say that these books
                                                              grossly mis-
represent Jung's views.      Together with a reading of the Greeted
I^rte, they help in gaining a fuller
                                           appreciation of the many facets
 Lr^      ^ ^^?^^*   ^^ individuals who each read one of these books
without reading Jung in the original would
                                                  in all probability end
up with ^Tidely differing ideas of what Jung means
                                                          by the arche-
^es. An interesting passage from the Letters, although              not men-
tioning names, must be quoted as relevant here:
                                                         "There have been
so many pupils of mine who have fabricated
                                                 every sort of rubbish
from vrhat they took over from me" ( Letters. Vol. I,
                                                            p. 5l8 '
letter to Jurg Plerz dated 13 Januaiy 19l(9).

        Jung's analytical inclinations and abilities at
                                                         times fail
to keep pace with the flood of insights and
                                             ideas from tlie unconscious.
His expositions frequently become so involved id-th
                                                    lengthy examples
and parenthetical elaborations that the main
                                              thread of discussion is
lost. Vol. V of the Collected Vforks, Symbols of.
                                                  Transfonnation. is
a good example of this overdetemLnation of
                                            content at the expense
                                                               ^
of fOITO.
        "OverdeteiTdnation" is a word introduced by Freud to
                                                              mean
the fusing together of different elements in the
                                                  unconscious to
produce single images ;7ith compound meanings.
                                               55ee Jung.
                                                       ^' Vol. Ill '
pages 62-63.


K« 4^       ^° "°* ^t^ *° Imply here that the secondary work should
        ^i in
be ignored     an effort to understand .Jung. In the course
                                                             of a^si-
tion of Jung's work, instructive and
                                      thought-provoldng errors arV
sometimes made. A case in point occurs in
                                             Tbreno's Jung. Gods and
Ibto ^fen (Notre Dame, Indiana: IMversity      of Notri^e-ffsS^
1970) where       m
                the course of a discussion of the relationship
                                                                between
                                     113




 archetypes and norths he reaches the folloi^diig
                                                      conclusion:
                In spite of Jung's explanation, the relation
                of ncrth and archeigrpes is not yet clear. It
                is the nyfch which foms the archetype, and at
                the same time, it is the arche-type which pro-
                duces mythical ideas.    Is it a vicious cycle?
                Not likely, because for Jung, the sub.jective
                fantasies of myths are the causes of arche
               t^^es. [Italics mine      But once the archetype
                                      .J
               is formed, it is endot/ed Td.th a kind of
               readiness to arouse the sam n^ythical ideas
               vxhich were the cause of its foimation, a
               familiar psychological process, ffeibits and
               dispositions are formed in the same way;
               repetition of acts forms the habit, but
               once the habit exists it is inclined to
               produce the very acts that were the cause
               of its e:d.stence (Ibreno, p. 19),
          By thus clearly spelling out one possible
                                                         interpretation of
irtiat Jung intends as the relationship
                                           beti-jeen archetype and myth,
we are directed to its implausibility as an account
                                                           of Jung's viei^
211 regard to its consistency vd.th his
                                          i^ritings on the subject as a
vmole
      7
          Gerhard Adler, Letter to the editor. Horizon,
                                                        19 (I9h9), p. h9i,
     p

Tr.r^y.y.r.^^   SfS^     ^^f^>  MlSIEll of the Iherapeutic (New York:   Harper
lorchbooks,     1963),   p. lil, where this temtinology is used.

     9
       ^^^•f?
guage of
                ^^^' "^'^'' "^'s Confession: Psychology as a lan-
          Faith," Ehcounter. 22 Tl961i), p. Ii9.
     10 _
         B±rard GLover, "Freud or .Tung," Horizon. 18 (I9l;8),
                                                               p. 2k3.
     11
         As Mght be expected, what :re have called criticisms
                                                               based
on misunderstanding could also conceivably be fitted
                                                       into this second
categoiy of systematic aUy biased critiques, iSlthough
                                                         it is not clear
what ideological motives Rieff may have, GELover is
                                                     obviously a Freud-
ian defending the faith. But as many of Dover's
                                                    criticisms can not
be understood solely in terns of a l<Veudian interpretation
                                                             of the
pEfychological phenomena, they have no value for determining
                                                              whether
an alternative hypothesis can account for the objects
                                                        of Jungian
theoretical interest. Thus some but not all of Clover'
                                                         s objections
to Jung's ideas can be relegated to the first categoiy.
         But it should be made clear that our categorization
                                                              of criti-
cisms is not intended to be a definitive guide for
                                                     identifying in-
competent critiques. It is rather intended as an
                                                   e:q>lanation of why
some extant criticians are discussed and others
                                                 passed over in silence.
     ^^ Q"e could conceivably critize Jung's
^                                             archetypal hypothesis
from other standpoints than those mentioned here.
                                                    One could viell
image a behayiorist critique, for ejcaraple. Ibwever,
                                                      an exandnation
of such a critique would not shed much light
                                              on archetypal theory.
                                                           11h



                                ^'^^d be one drawn from the standpoint of
  i'^!?i"^*^i^^!Vff^°^
                                  ^though the phenomenologi^s a^id e:ds-
  Sn?S:?t2?f^      ..''^^^Sf
  tentialists do not for the
                                                     •
                               most part address themselvls to Jung's
  S^*      ?^
              *Jf
                   c°llfctive mconscious, it night xTell be thought
                    ^^^*
                       to frame their ideas idthout appeal to
                                                               a concept
 IrL^^ll
 of an unconscious vrould constitute a
                                          strong implicit repudiation of
                                        ^
                           ^°^ thinloers as ISisserl, Heidegger. Sartre
  "^M^fl"^*- ''°"^'
 S?houf?ha^S
 TTitdiout
                              "^'^^
                                    f
                                    f
           the need for an unconscious,
 back xnto thexr vieus xdLth functionalHy
                                                               ^^
                                             ^^^°^i^^ humanlJp^riSr
                                          have in actuality smuggled it
                                             equivalent concepts. For
 example, in Heidegger's vork the concepts

 mco^Lci^sf
                                               of "horison" plus "throim-
                 ""^ ^^^*i°^^^^ equivalent to what
                                                           meiSs l^                 ^             ST
           13

 1950), pf*]?!^
                                  ^°''^'''    ^^^^^       ~ "^^ (london:        George   men    and   lind.n,


          ^^
                ZMd.,            p. 38.
          15
 Books,     imf             "^
                                 !°177'      ^^^^^ "^^^          ^^     Qg-g^ltism (Hew York:   IMverSity

       16
                aid.,            p. 180.

       ^^ Ibid
               ., p. 182.
       11
                ^^^°^ ^°^*                   ^«^^«       JmP   (Net/   York:   ^e   Viking Press, 1973),
 p. 38.
      19
                Ibid.   ,        p. 37,
      20
              Heimann, "Some Notes on the Psycho-analytic
T 4.   .I^^%
Introjected Objects," British Journal of IfeScal
                                                          Concept of
                                                 Schology? 2Ph?),QV
p.   m.
      21
                Storr, p. 39.

                Ibid.   ,        p. 68.
      23
                                  "^^'''^ °''   ^^^' Applied Jungian Psychology," Horizon
19 (19U9^°S5.'
      21;      ^
            ^^^^"^ misunderstanding it must be made clear that in saying
+>,o+
that +V,.

?f„^f
is
      i±e

   not +?^''f^°^y^^                   ^
         question of the value of a spiritual ddinension

       that the oinportance of such a dimension cannot
                                                           to exTeriSf
                           *^^^h argumentation, the point being made
                                                         be argued for
                   the final justification of an iinage of man based
S.1ii%S\*^Ji
the belief in the value of such a dimension                           upon
                                              will be ho;/ well it enables
us to understand and effectively deal with
                                             the human situation intoe
long run. Ih cor^jaring the relative merits
                                              of Freudian and Jungian
images of man then, v/e do not at this time
                                             in histoiy have suf^cient
per^ctive on what sort of consequences follow from
                                                        these ways of
i^s^^H
has proved ?f  >,^  ?'^%'"      ^^^          ^^
           to be clearly superior to that of the
                                                   other.
                                                                ^      ^^
                                              *^^* *h« ^°^h of one vlevr
                                  11^




      2^    M           U-.
                     aE£hg22es Of transformation. They are not per-
 .,^n=i4+4«o*   LI              si^^^ions, places, ways and meaS,
 Zft^S. \?\Fr^
 that ^pibolize the kind of transformation
                                           in question" (Vol. IX-A

      26
           Fodor, p. 176.
      27
           M^',    p. 177.
      28
         -^ose^^^ldbrunner, Dhdivlduation (Ifotre Dane,
     ^x„ of                                             Indiana:
                                                        -^oiana.      Uni-
                                                                      uni
 versity    Notre Dane Press, l^^E), p. 172.
      29
 pages 83-8^!^
                  ^^''' ^^^^^^
                                 ~—     ^^^' ^°''^*   ^^^^^   ^ ^''   196^),

      ^° Ibid., pages
                      135-136.

           lioreno, p. Ill,
      32
        The editors of Jung's letters. Gerhaixi MLer and
 ^                                                            Aiiela Jaffe,
give the follot.jing ejiplanation of this cotnmDn2y used
                                                         ej^jression of
Jung's:
             A term frequently used by Jung to denote the
             cortmon habit of explaining sometlrLng unloioxm
            by reducing it to something apparently loioim
            and thereby devaluing it. It is borroired
            from Vailiam James, PpaCTiatism (1907),
                                                       p. l6:
             "Ihat is higher is e:.-plained
                                            by what is loirer
            and treated for ever as a case of 'nothing
            but'—nothing but sometliing else of a quite
            inferior sort" ( letters. Vol. I, p. 1)^2, note
                                                               1 ).

       33
              the Kantian point of vieii, it might be objected
K«n+i=r,  w"*
Kantian Interpretation
                                                                that a
                        of the archetypes is still possible even if
we do not Identify the archetype per se i^lth
                                               the thing-in-itself
For it is possible to think of both the
                                          archetypal image and the
archetype per se as part of the phenomenal
                                             realm and as distinct
irom the noumenal archetypal referent. In
                                             keeping T/ith the in-
tent of Jung's line of reasoning on this
                                           matter, ire could then
state that vrhat is said about the C!od archetype
                                                  does not neces-
sarily implicate us i-dth claims about God as
                                               noumena.
       3U ^
f-innr.^  ^"^?^ '^^es Hillman's "Ihy Archetypal Psychology," Sprinp
U970;, p. 216, xjhere he opts for the latter alternative.
                                         CHAPTER 5
                      JTOIG   Al© THE SCIENTIFIC ATTITUDE: PART I




                              The Relevance of the Question


         In the previous chapter in the course
                                               of considering various
 types of criticism of Jung's idea of
                                      airihetypes, we discussed the

 problem of p^chologism:              the claim that Jung was illegitijnately

 reducing religion and metaphysics to
                                      psychology.               ]h the present

 chapter we must consider the opposite
                                       problem:               the claim that Jung
 is making psychology into religion and
                                        metaphysics.                From this fact
 that Jung is attacked both fi-om the theological
                                                  and metaphysical
 perspective as well as from the scientific point
                                                  of vievx, one might
be tempted to conclude that Jung has hopelessly
                                                confused the tra-
tional distinctions beti^een these areas of inquiiy
                                                    and produced a
type of discipline which fails to be either good
                                                 philosophy, religion,
or good science.

        But as we have urged in the previous chapter
                                                     that Jung's theory
should not be implicated id.th theological
                                           and metaphysical claims,
so in the present and subsequent chapters
                                          we must consider the scien-
tific status of the archetypes.               Ihis question is the most crucial

one for our naturalistic reconstruction
                                        of the archetypal theoiy.
For if       Tie   are to establish successfully that there
                                                            is a continuity
beti-reen     ordinaiy natural phenomena and the phenomena
                                                           of archetypes,
then   vre    must   shoir   how the archetype construct can be compatible
                                                                           in


                                        116
                                         117




 prfjiciple Tdth a scientific understanding.
                                                              If on the other hand, it
 can be shoxm that Jung appeals to a frametrork of
                                                   understanding of a
 radical]y different nature         ^riLth   different principles of explanation

 from what constitutes at least a            irrLniinal3y    acceptable scientific
 ^andard, then in light of the scientific claims Jung
                                                      makes for his
 archetypes, 1     vre   would have to conclude that the idea of archetypes

 is not only nonscientific but perniciously
                                            pseudoscientific, decep-
 tively claiming the authority of scientific
                                             method.

      But   ire   do not mean to imply that for any of Jung's ideas
                                                                    to be
 meaningful, they must be shorn to be genuinely
                                                scientific.                     Certainly
 such works as Answer to Job are meaningful
                                            and Insightful though most
 probably not science.         Jung was too complete an individual to have

been only a scientist, and his xndtings often
                                              reflect his extrascientific
vieifs and interests.         But the fact that Jung at times exceeds the

legitimate boundaries of scientific inquiiy as in Job
                                                      is all the more
reason to assess the scientific status of the archetype.
                                                                              For the
many facets of Jung's personality—philosopher, therapist,
                                                          "spec-
ulating heretic" (Vol. XT, p. 307), scienti^-invite
                                                    the unsympa-
thetic and shortsighted critic to dismiss Jung's
                                                                 viei-rs   carte blanche
as hopelessly unscientific or "jcrstic."              j\nd   since to underhand our

task in this stady to be, at least in part, an attengjt
                                                        to show why
the archetypes merit serious scientific study
                                              and consideration, we
must then address ourselves to the questions centerijig
                                                        around the
putative scientific status of archetypes.


                            The Charge; of    %-sticifan
     The firfft problem to be tackled in treating
                                                  the various                   que^ions
related to the scientific validity of archetypes
                                                 is the issue of
                                       118




  ncrsticisra.   For if Jiing's vier/s are mjrstical then
                                                          certainly they can
  not be scientific.     To simply dismiss Jung's ;7ri tings as
                                                                norstical
  is, of course, an extremely unfair and
                                         prejudical attitude to talce
  toward his vrork.    HoiTOver, the uncertain relationship betvreen
                                                                       n^s-
 ticisra and Jung's views gives the critic
                                           a chance to impugn Jung's

 ideas by JJitimating that they constitute a
                                             ncrstical rather than a

 scientific body of statements.        Thus in an article entitled "The

 IJrstical and Scientific Aspects of the
                                         Psychoanalytic Theories of
 Freud, Adler and Jung," Bdirard Burchard
                                          states:

             But it is only in Jung Qn contrast to
                                                    Freud and
             MlerJ that ire find a conscious and deliberate re-
             pudiation of rationality and empirical science
             and a lush proliferation of concepts which
                                                        are
             indistinguishable in fonn and intention from
             those of Christian and Oriental reli^^ious mys-
             tics. "^

      Though not actually using the peo'orative label
                                                      "ncrsticism,

Rieff criticizes Jung in a similar vein stating
                                                that Jung's views
are based on revelation rather than scientific
                                               method.

               There is no arguing id.th revelation.   Jung's
            was a personal language of faith, revelatory,
            and therefore beyond danger of being invalidated
            by argument or contrary experience. ...
               iigainst the democracy of the scientific
                                                         in-
            tellect, he represents the aristocracy of
                                                        emo-
            tional profunditj'-.^

            Because it offers no criteria of validity,
                                                        other
            than the therapeutic e>q)erience of conviction,
            Jungian theory amounts at once to a private
            religion and an anti-science.'^

      It would seem that in relation to
                                        the quertion of i^ysticisra, there
exists a confusion of various issues.
                                             For it is unclear exactly what
the charge of rcrsticism amounts to or
                                   |
                                       what the word "rorsticism" is
supposed to signify other than "unscientific."^
                                                Ibreover, the accusa-
tion that Jung is a myrstic would seem to
                                          be the most polemical and
                                              119




 extreme form of criticism of various sorts that
                                                 Jung is unscientific.

 But lAereas some critics such as Rieff refrain from
                                                     using the loaded
 word        V^icism, "     the substance of their criticism seems to amount

 to the similar claim to that of calling Jung a nystic
                                                       in that they
 allege that Jimg is involved in paradigmaticalOy unscientific
                                                               en-
 deavors.           The mildly worded srtatement below        by PWedman and Goldstein
 seems to be of this nature:

                    Jungian pj^ychology, viith its emphasis on the archaic
                    and its tendency to passive preoccupation with ssrn-
                    bolic content, stands in strong contrast to the
                    rationalism and determinism characteristic of
                    Ifestem thought in general and modem science in
                    particular."

             Tn order to untangle the confusion of issues
                                                          centering around the
allegedly unscientific nature of Jung's work then,
                                                   to vdll employ the
strategy of considering various plausible reasons which,
                                                         in light of
a knovrledge of Jung's work, would lead one to
                                               question its genuine
scientific status.            Hather than further discussing extant criticisms

then, TO >dll proceed ;d.th a consideration of scientifically
                                                              proble-
matic aspects of Jung ' s work.


                              I^Srsticism CJiaracterized

         W.T. Stace in his I^sticism and Philosophy
                                                    argues that genuinely
inystical experience can be divided into two basic types.                      A so-called
extroverted mystical e3cperience is to be distinguished from
                                                             an intro-
verted one.           3h the extroverted ezqp&Aence there is a         "   .   .   .   unif^^lng
vision, expressed abstractly by the formula 'All is
                                              i




                                                    One.' The One

is   .   .    .   perceived through   .   .   j   the multiplicity of objects, "^ Thus the

extroverted itystic perceives a oneness of all things which
                                                            is distin-
guishable from the individual things themselves.                   The introverted
                                          120




 rcrstic on the other hand experiences a
                                         oneness              in a consciousness
 othend.se devoid of all ideational content.                "The Unitary Con-

 sciousness, from TThich all the multiplicity of
                                                 sensuous or conceptual
 or other empirical content has been excluded,
                                               so that there remains

 only a void and empty unity. "^

      In addition to the experience of oneness, Stace
                                                      lists other
 characteristics shared ty both types of irysticisra:                    "Sense of ob-

 jectivity or reality; feeling of blessedness, job,
                                                    happiness, satis-
 faction, etc.j feeling that what is apprehended is ho^3r,
                                                           or sacred
 or divine; parado:d.cality; alleged l^ nystics to                                                      "^0
                                                   be ineffable                       .    .    .   .




                                   Is Jung a    %stic ?
     NoTiT   if   vre   characterize someone as a nystic,          ^.m   could mean that
this person adhers to nystical beliefs.               Ifovrever,    it would seem that
a plausible case could be made for the claim that
                                                  a true nysfcic must
come by his nysticism first hand, i.e., that he
                                                must be a person                           xvho

has himself had nystical experience.               But as in any case        vre   vTill   con-
sider later the influence of nystical in?itings on Jung's
                                                          viei^s,                         ire

must pause here to consider whetlier there is any evidence
                                                           that Jung
had personal nystical experiences.

     In this regard         iie   discover that although Jung in his autobio-

graphy reports several instances of paranoiroal p^yxihic
                                                         experiences
and in one case an out-of-bo^ e^qjerience, plus maiy visions
                                                             and
instances of hearing voices or conversing \Tith spirits,^ ^
                                                            there do
not seem to have been any genuine cases of nystical
                                                    experience.                            Ifere-

over, in deciding about the nature of Jung's
                                             altered states of con-
sciousness, it is important to note that the visions
                                                     and voices which
                                  121




 Jung describes do not qualify as genuine mystical
                                                   states.          Stace
 points out that visions and voices are not    reaUy   i^ysbical phenomena.

           Not only is this the opinion of most competent
           scholars, but it has also been the opinion which
           the great Ji^rstics themselves have generally held,^^

           The main point is that the most typical as irell
                                                            as
           the most ingjortant type of nystical experience is
           nonsensuous, whereas visions and voices have the
           character of sensuous imagery. The introv«rtive
           kind of mystical states are, according to all
           the accounts we have of them, entirely devoid of
           all imageiy.'-'

     On the basis of the negative evidence then, we might
                                                          feel jus-
tified ±n concluding that Jung had no genuine myfftical
                                                        e:q)eriences.

For in viet7 of the disclosure of the types of unusual
                                                       experiences
lAich Jung does reveal in his autobiography, it would
                                                      be reasonable
to expect a description of a mystical state had
                                                there been one to
report.

     Jbreover, at least in regard to the introverted
                                                     ncrstical state,

there is also the fact that Jung argues against
                                                its possibility, i.e.,
in teims of the first characteristic, he says
                                              the experience of a
oneness in a consciousness devoid of all thought,
                                                  imageiy and sen-
sation is impossible.

              "As io2S.as Smjjjata"'^ is cognized bv a
                                                       sub.ject
          it remains object. " But when the subject enters
           ^^W^'^^ and becomes identical idth it, the subject
          itself is Srajrata, namely void. Aid when the void
          is really void, there is not even a cognizing sub-
          ject in it. The subject has vanished and there
          cajmot be a consciousness of this fact, because
          there is nothing left any more. Ihere can also
                                                               be
          no msraoiy of it, because there was nothing.
              I want to knovr what there is to be knotm,
                                                         ...
                                                           but
          I don«t want to malce assumptions about things of
          which I know that one cannot know them. Thus
                                                            it
          is absolutely impossible to know xdiat I T-rould
                                                            ex-
          perience when that "I" which could experience
          didn't e:d.st any more. One calls this a con-
          tradictio iji adjecto. To
                                        122




             experience Sunyata is therefore an impossible ex-
             perience by definition, as I explained above, and
             it is also impossible to experience consciousness
             in a field of vrhich I know nothing ( Letters. Vol,
             I, p. 263, letter to ¥.Y. Evans-Ifentz dated
                                                           9
             Februaiy 1939).

      It would seem that Jung's comment that the introvert
                                                           nystical
 experience is "impossible       bry   definition" needs qualification.           For
 although   176   can argue ^dth the    ncrsfcic   about the meaning of his ex-

 perience and     hoT7   it should be con^rued,      \-je   are less open to question

 that he had an e:<perience.       Ihus Jung is opposed to one of the ways

 in tiMch uystics most commoaly characterize their experience,
                                                               the
 characterization of it as a oneness in a consciousness devoid of

all multiplicity.         For in terms of Jung's oim framerork of under-

 standing, what happens in the mystical experience is that there is

a loireidjxg of the threshold of consciousness              trfiich   allows an ex-

perience of the unconscious.

            It is psychologically correct to say that "At-one-
            ment" is attained by idthdrawal from the world of
            consciousness. In the stratosphere of the un-
            conscious there a2?e no more thimderstoiros, be-
            cause nothing is differentiated enough to pro-
            duce tensions and conflicts (Vol. XL, pases
            Ii98-li99).

            Now if consciousness is emptied as far as possi-
            ble of its contents, they >jill fall into a state
            of unconsciousness, at least for the time being,
             in Zen, this displacement usually results from
            the energy being Tdthdraim from conscious con-
            tents and transferred either to the conception
            of "emptiness" or to the Kban. As both of these
            musrt be static, the succession of images is
            abolished and vjith it the energy x^hich maintains
            the kinetics of consciousness. IJie energy thus
            saved goes over to the unconscious and reinforces
            its natural charge to bur^fcing point (Vol, XI,
            p. 551).

     Since Jung understands the mystical experience as analogous to

other more familiar types of experience of the unconscious (e.g.
                                                         .


                                         123




  dreams or visions), he then irants to
                                        say that the feeling that the
  bounds of the ego have been dissolved
                                        and that the experient has
  become merged viith the oneness he e.^cperiences
                                                   can not be T/hat it
  seems to be.   For since all experience of the
                                                 unconscious is possi-
 ble onl^r through its relation to the ego, the
                                                r^zstical experience
                                "5
 must also involve the ego. 1

            If the Vidians would call sublime psychic
                                                      experience
             psyche" or something equivalent to it, I would
           agree vdth them, but to call it consciousness
           cannot be substantiated by any evidence. If
           the highest psychic condition is 3anyata« then
           it cannot be consciousness, because conscious-
           ness is by definition the relation between the
           subject and a representation. One is conscious
           o^ something. As long as you are conscious
                                                         of
           .^unyata it is not amyata. because there
                                                      is
           still a subject that is conscious of something
           (letters. Vol. I, pages 2k9-2^0, letter to
           ivTiT^vans-'Wfentz dated 8 December I938
                                                    )


      As Jung understands the mystical
                                       experience then, it involves
 only a relativizing of the ego perspective of
                                               consciousness rather
than a complete elimination of it.

      In addition, Jung's standpoint also
                                          amounts to a denial of the
acrstic's claim that his experience is of
                                          sometldng outside himself,
that it is of something objectively real.      It is not a direct ex-

perience of the essence of reality that the
                                            nestle enjoys           hvct   only
an insight into the unknorm depths of himself.
                                                    Of course from the

psychological point of view, Jung is trying to
                                               restrict himself to
the phenomena and avoid metaphysical assertions.
                                                         Ho^^ever, the force

of Jung's objections to the mystic's way of
                                            construing his experience
as seen in the above quotations seems to be
                                     |
                                            the argument that the
p^hologlcal interpretation of rysticism in      teiros       analogous to other
more common experiences of the unconscious
                                           is at least consistent Td.th
                                          12)(




 p^Tchological common sense, whereas the i^ystic s
                                                   characterisation
                                                             •




 of it is not.

          Vfe   can conclude then that not only is Jung not a i^ystic
                                                                      by
 virtue of personal e:q)erience but that, in addition,
                                                       his treatment
 of ncrstical ejqserience is a psychologistic one
                                                  e:cpressed in terms

 Tjhich    conflict vjith the ncrstic's aim      iray   of construing the exper-

 ience.         It Ttdght then seem difficult to understand Jung's
                                                                   mystic
 reputation except on the basis of an unjustified
                                                  prejudice.               The
fact is, hoi-jever, that although Jung disputes some
                                                     of the claims
the E^rstic malces for his e:cperience on psjnchological
                                                         grounds, he
nonetheless considers the rcrstic e:q5erience as having
                                                        considerable
valTxe and significance.

      This is not really surprising since Jung understands
                                                           rnys-

ticism as an ezrperience of the unconscious.               Consequently the value
of the mystical e:xperience is due to the positive effects
                                                           of the
e:5>ansion of consciousness which a direct insight into
                                                        the un-
conscious makes possible.         The ei^jerience affords an opportunity

to realize the limitations of the perspective of ego consciousness

and thus helps to bring about the process of individuation,
                                                            the goal
of >jhich is an integration of the conscious and unconscious
                                                             aspects
of the personality.

                The occurrence of satori''^ is interpreted and
                formulated as a break-throu£>h by a conscious-
                ness limited by the ego-foim, into the non-
                ego-like self (Vol, XT, p. ^3).

                So far as 1-festem inysticism is concerned,
                                                            its
                texts are full of instructions as to how man
                can and must release himself from the "I-ness"
                of his consciousness, so that through knowledge
                                      ;




                of his oxm nature he may rise above it and
                attain the inner (godlike) man (Vol. XT, p.
                                                              ^$),
                                            12^




              Satori corresponds in the Christian sphere to
              an ezqperlence of religious transfonnation (Vol.
              XT, p.     ^7).
         In relation to the question of the charge that Jung is a
                                                                  ncrstic

 then, although we can ascertain vrith reasonable certaln-ty that
                                                                  Jung

 had no personal norstic ezq^xnAences and outline the essential differ-

 ences   bettireen   his way of interpreting the e::perience versus the          ws-
 tic fraraeirork of understanding, there is still some ambiguity about

Tihether Jung ascribed to any mystical beliefs.                For despite the

 differences heti^een the way in which inystical e^cperience was char-

acterized and T7hat Jung says about the e:cperience of the archetypes,

there is nonetheless some degree of overlap.                 For e^cample, what we

have said about the numinosity of archelypal e^^ierience (Chapter
                                                                  2)

agrees well idth the          ircr^tic   characteristic of "feeling that what is

apprehended is holy, or sacred or divine,"

     Concerning the mystical quality of "alleged ineff ability, "
                                                                  it
is difficult to mate comparisons.                 For it is not clear what sense it

makes to talk about degrees or kinds of ineffability.                 In any case,

the irystical ineffability is related to the quality of paradoxicality

in that parado:d.cal descriptions vrhich violate basic laws of logic

seem appropriate for its description.                Ihis way of talldng about the

mystic experience is then another way of stating the inability of

language and logic to adequately express the ine3q>ressible.

            The language iMch he finds himself compelled
            to use is, when at its best, the literal truth
            about his eicperience, but it is contradLctoiy.
            "fliis is the root of his feeling; of embarrass-
            ment     TrLth   languageP"

     But even though Jung does not follow the irystic in an explicit

appeal to the transcendental domain of the ineffable, it might
                                                               well
                                   126




  be arsued that there is,
                           nonetheless, some siMlarity beti;een
                                                                the
   description of a i,^,rtical e:.perience
                                            as ineffable and the ascription
   of numinosity to characterize
                                    archetypal e^erLence. !lhe point
                                                                         needs
   to be made, then, that although
                                      presumably all allegedljr ineffable
  experience T.ould be numinous, i.e.,
                                          charged Td.th a great deal of
  emotional energy, Jung does not
                                      clato the numinous e:cperience of
  archetypes is ineffable,     in this regard ue need to
                                                           e.:amlne what
  Jung says about the paradoxical
                                     and also consider to T/hat degree
  the Hidetemmate nature of
                                 symbols, i.e., the fact that they
                                                                      refer
 beyond themselves to an indeterrdnable
                                             e.d;ent, constitutes a kind

 of ineffability.    (See the section entitled Can
                                                       There Be a Science
 of Archetypes?) But .;e will have
                                       occasion to examine these questions
 in a later section. For the present,
                                           it is sufficient to remark
 that there is a certain family
                                resemblance betireen iiorsticism in
 the strict sense and some of the
                                  things Jung says about the arche-
 types.   HbT/ever, there seems to be
                                      no point in talking in terms
of a ireak or loose definition of
                                  r^rsticism, for the claim that

 Jung is quasi-iicr^ical must, in
                                  any case, be examined on the basis
of the individual reasons for
                              such a contention and to the
                                                           under-
standing of the several relevant
                                 questions involved, the quasi-ticrstical
label contributes nothing.    Ifcreover,   since Jung does not understand
                                                                          the
archetypes from a it^^stical point of
                                      view but rather understands i^s-
ticism in terms of the collective
                                    unconscious, the remaining crucial
question to be resolved is thus not
                                    whether Jung is a n^rstic In any
nai^ginal sense, but Tvhether what he
                                      is doing v/ith the   archei^al
theoxy is paradigmatically unscientific,
                                         i.e., opposed in principle
to the scientific attitude.
                                        127




                        Jun;;'s Attitude Tanavd Science

  Introduction

         Postponijig for the present the
                                         questions relating to rationality
 uhich   xie   left unresolved in the last section,    ire   turn   noir   to the
  issue of Jung's attitude toward science.
                                                   The relevant issue in this

 regard is the ex-tent to which Jung's
                                       empiricism is nonscientific in
 attitude, that is, the degree to which Jung
                                             holds vievrs incompatible
 Tdth an attitude necessary for science.

      Ihe objection could well be raised
                                         at this point that this

 question is an ad homLnem type of consideration.
                                                             For regardless of
 what beliefs an iirvestigator holds concerning
                                                the nature of the
 scientific endeavor, the issue of whether
                                           his theories constitute
 good science must in any case be resolved
                                           in tenns of what the
 theories can do in relation to acceptable
                                           scientific standards.
      In Jung's particular case, horrever,
                                           there are good reasons for
looking into the question of his scientific
                                            attitudes and beliefs.
 (Ihe problem of acceptable scientific
                                       standards is the subject of a
future chapter.     )   One reason is that we need to understand
                                                                 the rela-
tionship Jung sees betireen the idea of archetypes
                                                   and the domain of
science.       Is archetypology, the sj^stematic
                                                 stucfy of archetypes, to

be understood as one branch of science, or
                                           is science merely one
manifestation of archetypes?!^          Tn the latter case, the question of

validity of archetypal theoiy could not be decided
                                                   solely in terms
of scientific validity.       Vfe   need then to understand how Jung inter-

prets science in relation to his archetypes.

     A second reason for investigating
                                       Jung's scientific attitudes
is to get clear about the empiricistic
                                       claims he makes for his theory.
                                   128




  m   other uords, on nhat grounds
                                      does Jung claoB that the
                                                               study of
  archetypes is scientific.     Ohis question is particularly
                                                               crucial in
  Viet, of the fact that the
                              demarcation bet.^een Jung-s allegedly
                                                                      scien-
  tific statements and his
                             extrascientific statements is at
                                                                ttoes ve^
  difficult to make. It is, of
                                   course, a separate question
                                                               whether
  Jung does What he claims
                            to be doing, but it is
                                                     nonetheless relevant
 to the question of scientific
                                  validity to see whether what he
                                                                    says
 he is  t^g    to do T-nth the archetypes
                                            .dll in principle qx,alify as
 scientific.   (This question .dll be examined
                                                  in the section on meth-
 odology.

 Archetvpol o/o- as I-^.hos^^

      3h regard to the question of
                                   hoi. Jong sees the
                                                      archetypes in
relation to science as a whole,
                                it may v;ell seem that we have
                                                               posed
an artifical question in asking
                                whether the stuc^ of archetypes
                                                                 is
to be considered as a branch
                              of science rather than
                                                       science being
subsumed under archetypology.
                                And to a certain extent this
                                                               question
does pose a false dichotonor.
                               For Jung both defends the
                                                           scientific
nature of the archetype, its
                              compatibility ,.ith a contemporaxy
scientific understanding, while
                                also stating that science
                                                          is one
modern instance of the attempt
                               to integrate the essentially
                                                            mytho-
logical archetypes into
                        acceptable cultural forms.

                      ^^ °"® °^ ^^^ J"^ expressions of
          ^S°^°??!:
          psychic life, operates

          ^                      with ideas which in their
               are derived from archetypal
                                           st^ctuSs SS?
          «ms generate a somex^hat more abstract
          Wth,^ Psychology therefore translates kind of
          archaac ^ech of i^jrth into            the
                                      a modem rorthologem-
                      course, recognized as such--T^ch
             Jt^,°^
          Tvol^'S!!:   ri?'""'     °' '''   ^   "^°'^"^^"

    Edward Bilnger expresses this
                                  same point in a succint
                                                          manner:
                                    129




                         ' *°/?^ction  properly, me ncthological
                ?on+=r
                container must be acceptable to the
                                                    conscious
                personalxtj-, including the critical
                                                     intellect.
                . . . Jmg considers Iiis oim psychological theories
                as an atteii^t to provide a new
                                                ^^^hologjr or vessel
                for the archetypes wiiich will be
                                                  acceptable to the
                modem scientiTic mind.^^
           But the understanding of science
                                            as a       modem enactment of a
  noHih   is a speculative rather than a
                                         scientific statement.          This
  attitude toiiard the logos is, then, necessarily
                                                   part of the          i^j/thos.

  And thus we can see why ex-pressing     ir?yfchos   and logos as an eitlier/or
 is misleading (the study of archetypes
                                        as science versus science

 as a type of archetypal phenomenon).         For of course the logos must

 not attempt to usuip the function of the
                                          mrthos,            whereas the   iicrthos

 Tihile    always assuming a bixjader perspective
                                                  than the logos must not
 confuse itself irith the logos.

          However, the point of framing the
                                            question about archetj^pology
 versus science is that the confusion
                                      of the rcrthological vnLth the

 scientific is just the sort of problem
                                        that Jung is confronted idth
 and just the sort of error he is
                                  accused of maJdng.            For Jung pur-
ports to     stu^ scientifically about j^hs and to          do so phenomenolog-
icalDy, i.e., taldng into account the
                                      phenomena in their totaHty.
Md   in this regard there always exists the
                                            temptation and the danger
of losing the critical point of vie:/ about
                                            archetj'pes and instead

proclaojning a new metaphysical doctrine of
                                            truth.            To avoid this
problem and thus to succeed in keeping the
                                           scientific statements
about arche-b^-pes distinct from metaphysical
                                              interpretations of
archetypal events, Jung clings to the ideal
                                            of empiricism. ^^
     This is not to say that Jimg is
                                     uninterested in possible meta-
physical implications of archetj-pes.
                                           Naturally he has his personal
                                            130




 metaphysical      viws and from       the clinical point of view, he encourages

 the individual to develop a functional philosophy of life based
                                                                 in
 part on the individual's experience of the archetypes.                   But Jung

 atteimts to distinguish the scientific level of discourse
                                                           about
 archetypes from the level of personal metaphysical
                                                    interpretation.
 iO-though it would be an exaggeration to say that Jung
                                                        al^rays succeeds

 in sharply distinguishing these levels of discourse—all too
                                                             often
 he talces the distinction for granted, thus leading to
                                                        many confusions-
 the point to be made is that Jung sees the distinction as a necessaiy

one if there is to be a science rather than just a philosophy or

metaphysics of archetypes,

          Tiien Jung says   as above that psychology is part of the           modem
myfcli,    this is then a statement on           tlie   personal level of discourse,

i.e., part of      hcr.j   Jung the individual understands the metaphysical

significance of archetypes.            But the fact that Jung is motivated to

value scientific endeavor         frcsii    the point of vleir of his personal

metaphysical perspective should not lead us to conclude that Jung

is merely paying lip service to science or attempting to                          off
                                                                          pa'.m

his ideas by coating them         ',ri.th   a scientific veneer.      For in working
\T±th   an ideal of empiricism, he is attempting to gain a critical

knoTjrledge   of the archetypes, one which can inthstand the rigorous
                                            23
demands of scientific Imowledge.

Science and the Individual

        Ihus Jung understands his work in part as an attempt to gain
                                                                     a
scientific understanding of archetypes.                   But even though Jung sees

himself as a scientist, this          is!   not to say that in aspiring to em-

piricism Jung views science as the only valid path to knowledge or
                                          131




 truth.   For Jung's aim is      al--7ays       to provide a legitlTiate scientific

 treatment of the irrational phenomena of the unconscious
                                                          while at
 the sane time maintaining a position as metaphysically
                                                        neutral as
 possible wliich Tdll allow the metaphysical and
                                                 the ncrthological
 their otm domain of validitj-.           As    ^.Te   saw in Chapter h, Jung as a

 matter of fact is unable to carry completely
                                              through this essentially
 Kantian program and at tdjnes gets involved
                                             in psychologisfcic reasoning
 incompatible   '.d.th   the claims of religion and metaphysics.            But, although
in this regard, Jung's attempt to rely ttpon a
                                               phenomena/noumena dis-
tinction is open to criticism, it seems nonetheless
                                                    clear that T/hat
 Jung is striving for is a separation of scientific
                                                    and metaphysical-
religious types of discourse about archetypes as far
                                                     as this is possi-
ble.

       This separation, moreover, does not entail for
                                                      Jung the supre-
macy of either type of discourse but oaly its validity
                                                       vdthin the
IteLts of its aim sphere of application.                   Thus we find some cases

iihere Jung defends the practical          and tlierapeutic value of a meta-

pl;ysical -religious outlook against an attempt
                                                to               elminate it en-
tirely in favor of a world       viet-;   dominated by the findings of science
and other places where Jung defends the
                                        necessity of a metaphysically
neutral approach for science.

           Ho science will ever replace «crth,
                                                  and a n^h
           cannot be made out of any science. For it
                                                          is
           not that "God" is a m^h, but that inyfch is
                                                          the
           revelation of a divine life in man. It is not
           \Te who invent myth, rather
                                          it speaks to us as
           a \-brd of God ( l-femories. Breams. Reflections,
                                                             p. 3kO),

          Tiiere is, however, a strong empirical
                                                  reason why
          we should cultivate thoughts that can never
                                                        be
          proved.    It is that they are knovm to be useful.
          I^Ian positively needs
                                 general ideas and convictions
                                    132




               that Tdll give meaning to his life and enable him
               to find a place for himself in the universe ( Man
               and liLs 9yinbols, p. 76).

               r^ subjective attitude is that I hold every religious
               position in high esteem but draw an inexorable
               dividing line betireen the content of belief and
               the requirements of science ( Letters. Vol. I, p,
               125, letter to Paul llaag dated 12 June 1933 )«

              As a scientist I have to guard against believing
              that I am in possession of a final truth ( Letters,
              Vol. I, p. 3k6. letter to 11. Irminger dated 22
              September 19UU).

         As our exposition of Jung's   vims     of science has progressed up

to this point, it may seem relatively unproblematic.           For to summarize
Trtiat   we have said thus far in this regard:       Jung sees his   mm      work as
part of the contemporary attempt to develop a scientific
                                                         understanding
of the world which is not, however, to be understood as a substitute

for the religious and metaphysical needs of man.          If this    iTere   the
full story of Jung's scientific attitude, it would be cause for little

further comment.      Such viei^s on the nature and limits of science might

well be shared by many conten^xjrary scientists.         However, the problem

is that Jung is doing science about the metaphysical and religious

needs of man, and not entirely in an objective detached manner either.

For Jung not only studies religion and rstaphysics, he advocates them.

         This close interrelation beti-reen the scientific level of dis-

course and the level of personal meaningful interpretation is in
                                                                 part
a direct result of Jung's therapeutic involvements.          Jung, then, is

sensitive to the practical -therapeutic as well as the strictOy theoret-

ical scientific aspects of his work.      In order to malce Jung's views

on the nature of science intelligible then, we need to understand

the basis for the particular tensions     \ie   find in Jung's v/ritings
                                   133




  between what he sees as theoretical
                                       scientific knowledge on the one
  hand versus personal therapeutically
                                        revelant understanding on the
  other.

       On this account what is necessaiy
                                         is to shoi/ how on the one
 hand when one goes from the scientific
                                        perspective of theoretical
 ImoTTledge about archetypes to the
                                    therapeutic perspective, one in
 effect malres a move not only from theoretical
                                                to practical knowledge
 but also from the scientific to the religious
                                               and philosophical.          Qn
 the other hand t^ need to determine to
                                        what extent Jung understands
 the tension between the two levels of discourse
                                                 about archetypes as
 due to an incommensurability between theory
                                             and practise, betT^een
 scientific versus therapeutic aims, and to
                                            what extent Jung is trying
 to argue for an idiographic versus
                                    nomothetic type of distinction
 within the realm of theoretical knowledge         ^'^
                                           itself.
      Not/   if we address ourselves to what Jung sees
                                                       as an incommen-
 surability in principle betxreen his scientific
                                                 theory and the prac-
tical work of therapy, it is not at all
                                        clear why this sort of in-
commensurable relationship must exist.        For after all, it would seem
that scientific knowledge about psychological
                                              matters would prove in
the long run to be therapeutic,     tfe   can easily imagine paradigm cases
of "unscientific" therapy such as a
                                    witchdoctor treating a case of
hysteria by trying to cast out the demon
                                         responsible.        Even if the
ijitchdoctor succeeds and produces a cure, our
                                               scientific mentality
assumes that suggestion or some isuch mechanism
                                                must be at work for
which there exists a scientific explanation
                                            which if knovm would
prove eventually to be therapeutically valuable.
                                                       Prom the scientific
point of vieT7 then, we assume that there are
                                              discoverable principles
                                  131;




 at work in human psychology which if we
                                         knew them would greatly de-
 crease the gap between our theoretical
                                        knowledge and what can be

 accomplished in tenns of practical applications
                                                 to therapy.      From
 this point of vievx, it is steply the
                                       immaturity of science which
 leads to an incommensurability between
                                        theory and practise.
      But this is not the sort of
                                  incommensurability between theoiy
and practise that Jung principally has
                                       in mind.     For parenthesizing
for the moment idlographic considerations
                                          in terms of applicability
of a theoretical knoi-rledge for
                                 understanding the individual, it     mu^
be emphasized that Jung sees theoretical
                                         scientific knowledge as
necessary but never sufficient for accomplishing
                                                 the work of psycho-
therapy.    For it is characteristic of Jung's view
                                                    of therapy that it
is necessary for the therapist to enable the
                                             patient to reorganize
his philosophical and religious vieTTJolnt.
                                              therefore, for Jung it is

not that science is rejected in doing therapy
                                              but that objective
scientific knowledge about psychology must be
                                              complemented   vrf.th   a
subjectively meaningful reorientation of world view.^^

           The intellect is the soverign of the
                                                 scientific
           realm. But it is another matter lihen science
           steps over into the realm of its practical
                                                       appli-
           cation. The intellect, which was formerly
                                                       king,
           IS now merely a minister—a scientifically,
                                                        refined
           instrument it is true, but still only a toolj
                                                          no
           longer an end in itself, but merely a
                                                  precondition
           (Vol. VI, p. 57).

           . . . sooner or later it was bound to become clear
           that one cannot treat the psyche without
                                                     touching
           on man and life as a whole, including the
                                                      ultimate
           and deepest issues, any more than one can
                                                      treat
           the sick body vrithout regard to the totality
                                                         of
           its functions . . . (Vol. XVI, p. 76).

           I can hardly draw a veil over the fact
                                                    that we p^-
           chotherapists ought really to be philosophers or
           pliilosophic doctors— or rather that vre already
                                                            are
                                  13^




              ^* ' '^.'   f  °°^^ ^^° °3^ i* religion in statu
              nascendi, for in the vast confusion that
                                                         reims""
              at the roots of life there is no line
                                                      of division
              betireen philosopl^r and religion (Vol.
                                                      WL, p. 79).
                  The most healing, and pscrchologicaUy
                                                         the most
              necessaiy, experiences are a "treasure
                                                       hard to
              attain, and its acquisition demands
                      '

                                                     something
              out of the common from the common man.
                 As ire hnow, this something out of
                                                     the common
              proves, in practical work vrith the patient,
                                                            to
              be an innrasion \rj archetypal contents (Vol.
              an:, p. 82).

      The statement that Jung sees
                                   scientific knowledge and psycho-

 therap7 as incommensurable irrespective of
                                            the state of the complete-
ness of scientific Imox^ledge amounts then
                                           to a reiteration of the
prervlous claim that Jung believes
                                   that science can not ser^re as a
substitute for the religious and
                                 metaphysical needs of man in teims
of which the Jungian therapy is primarily
                                          oriented.
     VJien   Jung talks about what he calls
                                            psychological truth then,
he is emphasizing this subjective
                                  aspect of the therapeutic process
for which the term scientific is not
                                     appropriate precisely because
of the philosophical and/or religious
                                      nature of the questions involved.
P^hological truth is that which as a matter of
                                               fact proves to be
meaningful to the individual.

                Considered from the standpoint of realism,
             the symbol is not of course an external
                                                     truth,
             but it is p^chologically true  ....
                Psychological truth by no means excludes
             metaphysical truth . . , (Vol. V, p. 231).

             Is there, as a matter of fact, any
                                                better truth
             about the ultimate things than the one that
             helps you to live (Vol. n, p. lo^),

         Vhen an idea is so old and so generally
                                                  believed,
         it must be true in some waj', by
                                          which I mean that
         it IS psychologically true (Vol. V,
                                                  p. 7).
    nh his    ]^   and ^hetype,, Edward Bdinger
                                                furnishes an illuminating
                                   136




 exaiople of essentially irhat Jung has in mind   by emphasizing the sub-
 jective nature of psychological truth.

                 These are abstract, objective meanings conveyed
              by signs. Ifovrever, there is another kind of mean-
              ing, namely subjective, living meaning which does
              not refer to abstract Imouledge but rather to a
              psychological state which can affirm life. It is
              this sense of the word we use xxhen vre describe a
              deeply moving e^cperience as something meaningftil.
              .  .   * It is the failure to separate these two
             different usages of the word "meaning" which
             leads one to ask the unansrrerable question,
              '".fliat is the meaning of life?"
                                                 The question
             cannot be answered in this form because it con-
             fuses objective, abstract meaning iiith subjective,
             living meaning.      If vre rephrase the question to
             make it more subjective and ask, "Ihat is the
             meaning of njjr life, " it then begins to have the
             possibility of an ansirer. . . .
                   •'Vho am I?"  The latter question is clearly a
             subjective one. An adequate ansiver can come only
             from Td-thin. Thus ire can say: Ifeaning is found
             in subjectivity.'^"

      This example from Bdinger amply shows the subjective
                                                           and essen-
tially philosophical emphasis in Jungian therapy.      But this subjective

therapeutic emphasis should not mislead us into overlooking
                                                            the
possibility of a valid scientific level of understanding.
                                                               Jung, for

example, does attack the question of the meaning of life
                                                         in general.
His ansirer in terms of a theoiy of individuation purports
                                                           to be an
objectiveljr valid account of the p^'chology of the
                                                    various aspects
leading to a fulfilment of the personality and
                                               self-realization,
     Ife   must be careful to distinguish then between the subjective

psychologically true statements and scientifically valid
                                                         statements
about psychological truth.     Vhereas in the first case we have lAat

is found by the individual to be subjectively
                                              meaningful, in the
second case we have generalized statements concerning
                                                      what has as a
matter of fact been found to be meaningful.
                                        137




            I'hen psychology spealcs, for
                                          instance, of the motif
            of the virgin birth, it is onOy concerned
                                                        idth the
            ±act that there is such an idea, but it
                                                      is not
            concerned \rith the question whether such
                                                       an idea
            xs true or false in any other sense.
                                                    The idea is
            p^hologicalily true inasmuch as it e3d.sts (Vol,
             aI, p. 6),

       But whereas from the scientific theoretical
                                                   point of           vlei-x,

  psychological truth is the object of study-,
                                               in the actual thera-
  peutic situation. He are no longer on a meta
                                               -level of psychological
  truth, so to speak, but on the object-level
                                              working director ^vith
  the patient's   "iicrth,"   i.e., his life-outlook.
                                                 Ibreover, it is just
  when the scientist-therapist moves from
                                          the objective scientific
  level of discourse about the unconscious
                                           to the level of personal

  psychological truth that Jung emphasizes
                                           the importance of taking
  what prove to be essentially idiographic
                                           considerations into accoijnt.
  Ih the practical therapuetic
                               situation,         vre   must, in Jung's view, be
  prepared to set aside our theoretical
                                        p^chological knorrledge to
 a large extent so that       ire   can gain an understanding of the individual

 who may deviate from the scientific ideal
                                           case to a greater or lesser
 degree,

           Iheories in p^chology are the veiy devil.
                                                        It is
           true that we need certain points of view
                                                     for their
           orienting and heuristic value; but they
                                                   should
           always be regarded as mere auxUiaiy
                                                concepts that
           can be laid aside at any time (Vol. XVTI,
                                                      p. 7).

           He {the therapist] should remember
                                                  that the patient
           xs there to be treated and not to verify
                                                        a theoiy.
                        natter, there is no single theoiy in the
            v''-,*^^'!^
           whole field of practical psychology
                                                   that cannot
           on occasion prove basically wong
                                                 (Vol. XVI, p. n^).

     Thus Jung likes to emphasize that
                                       science is nomothetic in nature
being concerned >dth the lawlike
                                 behavior of classes of particulars,
t^hereas in therapy it is just the
                                   idiographic particularities of the
                                    138




individual Trhich need to be understood.
                                                Instead of a nomothetic /idio-
graphic terminology, Jung tallcs in tenns
                                          of knonledge versus under-
standing,

            Erojjr theory of comple?: psiyichic
                                                processes presupposes a
            tmifoiTi human pE^rchology, jusrfc as
                                                  scientific theories
                                                                  in
            general presuppose that nature is fundamentally
                                                            one and
            the same (Vol, VI, p, ^90),

             Ifence it is not the universal and
                                                   the regular that
             characterize the individual, but rather the
                                                               unique.
             ... At the same time man, as member of a species,
             can and must be described as a statistical
                                                              unit;
             otherT.ri.se nothing general could be
                                                     said about him.
             .  .  . This  results in a universally valid anthro-
            pology or p^chology, as the case may be,
                                                            Tri.th an
            abstract pictui'e of man as a average unit from
            which all individual features have 'been removed.
            But it is precisely these features which
                                                           are of
            paramount ijiiportance for understanding man.
            I can onZy approach the task of
                                                               ...
                                                understanding
            \n.th a free and open mind, triiereas
                                                    Icnovaedge of
            man, or insight into human character
                                                       presupposes
            all sorts of knoiaedge about mankind
                                                       in general
            (Vol,   X,   p, 250),

             Md if the p^chologist happens to be a doctor
         who wants not only to classify his
                                              patient scien-
         txlically but also to understand him as
                                                    a human
         being, he is threatened T-dth a conflict
                                                    of duties
         between the tiro diametrically opposed
                                                 and rautuaUy
         exclusive attitues of Imoixledge on the
                                                   one hand
         and understanding on the other. This
                                                 conflict
         cannot be solved by an either/or but
                                                only by a
         kind of tivO-v;ay thinking: doing one thing
                                                        irhile
        not losing sight of the other.
            In Viet/ of the fact that, in principle,
                                                        the
        positive advantages of knoirledP^e work
                                                 specifically
        to the disadvantage of understanding,
                                                 the judge-
        ment resulting therefrom is likely to be
                                                     some-
        thing of a paradox. Judged scientificalily,
                                                          the
        individual is nothing but a unit which
                                                  repeats
        itself ad infinitum and could just as irell
                                                        be
        designated Tri.th a letter of the alphabet.
                                                        For
        laiderstanding, on the other hand, it is
                                                   jujrfc
        the imique individual human being Tvho,
                                                  when stripped
        or all those confoiroities and regularities
                                                       so dear
        to the heart of the scientist, is
                                            the supi-eme and
        only real object of investigation
                                            (Vol. X, p. 251).

  Thus, we can see how Jung emphasizes
                                       the different aims of science
                                       139




  and of therap/ on    ti.-o   accounts.   As already discussed, Jimg under-

  stands theoretical pqjrchology and his type of
                                                 therapy as finaTIy
  leading to different types of understanding:
                                                        theoretical pqrchology
 to objective scientific l<noi:ledge and therapy
                                                 to subdective!!^- mean-
 ingful self-knowledge.         On the other hand i;hen Jung contrasts
                                                                           Imo;-;-

 ledge and understanding, this emphasizes
                                          i/hat he sees as the limita-

 tions of a general scientific Imouledge in
                                            its application to the
 particular individual.

         But whereas if therapy eventually leads
                                                 to a subjectively mean-
 ingful "psychological truth," we can readiOy
                                              .agree that the therapist
 is in^rolved in an enterprise vdth the
                                        individual patient for which the
 tern scientific is not entirely appropriate^
                                              it is less clear that
 the mere particularity of the individual
                                          malcEs his understanding some-

thing beyond the range of science.           Ih his discussion of knorrledge and

understanding, Jimg seems to overlook the
                                          possibility of          ai^jr   idio-
graphic scientific methods27 and seems on the
                                              whole to understand
science in too narrow a way as only a study
                                            of universale.
        Th fairness to Jung, hoirever, the essential
    .
                                                     point of the dis-
tinction betT/een Imowledge and understanding is to
                                                    avoid the thera-
peutic attitude of seeing the patient only
                                           as a scientific problem.
Ibreover, the validity of this point would
                                           seem to hold independentHy
of the question of nomothetic versus
                                     idiographic scientific methods.
For Jung's "understanding" is not so
                                     much a question of seeing to what
degree the individual's behavior confoms
                                          to lawlike scientific ex-
pectations or is idio^cratic but rather
                                        of establishing the right
therapeutic relationship \r±th the patient.

        But at any rate, it is evident that
                                            what Jung is saying about
                                    HiO"



  the incommensurability betxreen the theoretical
                                                  and practical aspects
  of psyichology can often seem to be simply
                                             the adoption of an anti-
  scientific attitude as in this example:

            Yet this is still "psychology" although no
                                                        longer
            science J it is psychology in the idder meaning
            of the word, a psychological activity of a
            creative nature, in which creative fantasy is
            given prior place (Vol. VI, p. ^7). 20

      Jung is open here to   ttie   criticism of giving the false impression
 of holding to a dichotomous division
                                      betireen theoretical and practical

 psychology, irhereas, in reality, there is in
                                               fact a close interdepen-
 dence and interrelation beti/een the      tiro   aspects of his psychology.
 For the distinctive aspects of Jung's
                                       therapy are a direct product
 of his theoretical understanding (compare
                                           Jung's emphasis on the
 practical religious and metapliysical needs
                                             of man irith Freud' s)j and,
 on the other hand, Jung's psychological
                                          system is to a large e:ctent
the end result of his exi)eriences in worldng
                                              id-th patients.

     Ik can conclude then that there is a
                                          real basis for distinguish-
ing a scientific level of discourse about archetypes
                                                     from a level of
personal meaningful interpretation.        However, im must be    ai-rare   of
the danger of understanding this distinction
                                             between the          ttro   levels
of discourse as a dichotoncr between theoretical
                                                 and practical knor^-
ledge about archetypes ajnplying that what is
                                              learned in theoiy does
not have real application to the practical
                                           therapeutic needs of the
individual, that therapy goes on completely
                                            independently of theoreti-
cal knowledge.   Qn the other hand, to abandon the
                                                   distinction altogether
is tantamount to giving up the ^ientific
                                         perspective of objectivity
.rithout which the study of archetypes
                                       can easily degenerate into pseudo-
science Td.th metapliysical and religious
                                          overtones.
                                             Ilil




                                           Notes

          1
              Psa   example of these claims is the follovdng:
                       Nobody has ever shorn me in hoir far ra^r method
                       has not been scientific. One was satisfied
                       vath shouting "unscientific." Uider these
                       circumstances I do malae the claim of being
                       "scientific" because I do exactly i:hat you
                       describe as the "scientific method." I
                       observe, I classify, I establisli relations
                       and sequences befcreen the observed data, and
                       I even shoi; the possibility of prediction
                       (letters. Vol. U, p. 567. letter to E.A.
                       Bennet dated 23 June i960).
      2
              Bd'rard Burchard,      "Ifystical and Scientific inspects of the
 P^hoanaOytic Theories of Freud,                    .Adler,    and Jung," American
 ifournal of        Py/chotheraw .   ll;   (i960), p. 306.

         IH^eff, "C.Q. .lung's Confession:   Psychology as a Lan-
 guage of Faith," Ehcounter. 22 (1961;),
                                          p. k7.
      h
              M.eff , Triumph of the Therapeutic                   p. llU.

         QSrsticalO "The denotation of this neologism in the polemical
n^+«  +
literature of the social sciences, lAere it is employed
                                                            as a term of
abuse, is obscure.   It seems to mean, rougli2y, "unscientific."
Joseph Campbell, "Bios and J^hos," in

International IMversities Press, 19^),
                                         Psvchoanalvsn .^
edited by George G. laibur and Tferner I hensterberger and Culture
                                                          (mr
                                                              p.   331.
                                                                               ^^
        I^ul Friedman and Jacob Goldstein, "Some Comments
                                                          on the
Psychology of C.G. Jung," Ps^^xhoanalvtic Quarterly.
                                                     33                      (19610, p. I96.
     7
   4
      j..^?^®°^® "^Sh^ ^'^^ object at this point that in regard to the
 scientific nature of the archetypes, the question of vrhether
                                                                   Junr
himself is n^stical is not relevant. For if Tze can
                                                        shovx horx the
archetypal theoiy is scientifically viable, then the
                                                         question whether
Jung is^himself rcrstical t/ill not matter. HoiTever,
                                                        the importance of
the TK-oblem of inysticisra is that questions of the
                                                      rationality of the
archetj-pal theoiy are brought into focus through
                                                     a discussion of this
issue.   Our strategy is thus to work totrards a clarification
                                                                   of the
problem of rationality by first discussing the
                                                   question of Junr's
ncrsticism.  The investigation of the latter question is
                                                            then a way
to see what is at stake in the issue of rationality
                                                        by first discussing
the limiting case of arationalitj^, i.e.,
                                            ncrsticism.
                                                  11;2




                   Hovrever, the examination of
                                                the question o^ June's               itrrs-

   n^i?l"^"?r ^?^""*        *^^ j^^ ^^ ^ ^-e to InS^uceThe
                  rationality of the archetypal theoiy. For
   ?r^+^;-*^^
   xs attemptxng a justification of                         ?f Jw
                                    archetyp^  theoiy from the noSt
     '^^^of'^stical insight, then the scientific
  ;f                                                TigSicScfS
  the archetypal theoiy would be tmdemined,
                                   *^
                                              and ire
                        seriously the question of its scientific
                                                                 °^
                                                                           J^ h^^
  t?ST?^r^^°'' *c
  ^SmXicance.    See also page 127 .rhere there is
                                                    a continuaSon of
  thxs lone of reasoning attempting to shor;
                                             the rc^ev^ice of dis-
  cussion of Jung's scientific vieirs to
                                         the question of the scien-
  tific status of the archetypal theoiy.


  Idppd^cottJ'l96?);'p?ir^                       — ^°^°^           ^''^'   ^-^'    ''^'


             ^    Ibid.   ,   p.    no.
             ^°   aid.,       p. 79.
         11
                        out-of-body experience see Ifemories.
       oDo        ^r^                               -         Qreams. Reflections
  P
  Ifemories, ?L^'^i^^°^
  IftJ^:.
                            ^'^'^ paranonnal psychic Sii^n^l=^l|p^
             Dreams, Reflections, pages 137

 l?9'Sd%^''ViS?^^  °^P^^ "'''
                                             and 1^5.     tells o-         W
                                                                  Fo'r'viSs'S'p^ges
               °' '^"^ ^°^^^^                                    ^=    -^^^^   - Paso"^
 191   oTthT;ut;biSr1S^!
         12
                  Sfcace, p. U7.

         ^^ Ibid.,
                   p.              i;9.



 the   i^^^l'^T's^J^'^S^T. ^^,^r                                                  ^^^ ^"
         15
                        feeling of loss of individualitj^ and
 +1,   rv-        ^^,                                         bein*' mereed i^th
 S'tSV;Ji'-
 of
                          °''^?           ^^"^ "^^^^^
    the experience of an empty consciousness,
                                                         e:q>erience
                                                 uouirbe^^onsL^^nce
                                              if it irere posSbS? ?or




can    ^\^^Zil Tl^^^^^lrTfi^l^U^ ^^^'                                                         ''

                 ctace, pages 3Cl;-305,




to the   «* o. ai![LrttSSr\ ^iS;                                       S^.fla./SerS'^"'
                                   li;3




 arche-typology is a genuine arche-typal topograpliy, a
                                                        mapping of the
 piomary togoi of the iraaginal realm." Casey references
                                                            Durand's
 "Efq)loration of the Snaginal," in Sprin/T« 1971,
                                                    p. 91.
          Jung does not use the term "archetypology, " but it
                                                               seems to
 be appropriately descriptive of the irork of some irriters
                                                             who approach
 tne archetypes from a pliilosophical as opposed to a
                                                        scientific point
 of viei7. Casey's r.rticle is, moreover, a good example of
                                                              the arche-
 typology as li^rfchos perspective as discussed under the next
                                                                heading.
       19
           nh using the terms "ncrthos" and "logos" below, \re do
                                                                   not mean
 to refer to the work of any particular philosoplier \±o may have
                                                                       used
 tliem.   The distinction can easily be attacted by citing e:caiiiples
 Trfiich are not easily classified as either
                                              r^y-bhos or logos.  However,
 in our use of this distinction, ire are presuming only that there
 ejdsts a discemable difference in degree beti-reen what
                                                             passes for
 the ideal of exact Imowledge, the logos, and metaphysical specula-
 tions of the widest scope, the myfchos,
       20
            Ifolfgang Giegrich in an illuminating article criticizes
 ^ch   Ife'.jmann's  Origin of the Ilistonr of Consciousness (Hew York:
Pantheon Books, 1955) for confusing science and mrthology
                                                                and doing
 ^culative   ircrthology while giving the appearance of an
                                                             empirical
study,   nonetheless, he appreciates Ifeumann's work on its Otsi
                                                                    terms.
In the folio vdng passage, similar to Jung's
                                                view, he e:q)resses the
tnought that there is a sense in which the logos is
                                                         grounded in the
nythos since logos can aliTays be interpreted as an
                                                         ermression of
the n^ythcs.
              Something (some "factor") obviously keeps us
              from the truly psychological orientation and
              malces ovr thinldng unpsychological hy maldng
              us vrtsh for, or even need, empirical verifica-
              tion, scientific truth, and systematizations.
              This "factor" is our containment in the
              Great Ibther/Here-ricrbh, t/hose nature it is to
              create the (mythic J) fantasy of the possibility
              of heorically breaking out of ircrfcl^ into "fact, "
              "truth," "science" (ifolfgang Giegrich, "Qntoreny=
              Fhylogeny?" Sprinpc. 197U, p. 118^.
     21
        Eiirard Bdinger, "The Collective liiconscious as
                                                         Manifested
in P^nchosis," American Journal of Psychotheratr;-. 9
                                                      (1955), p. 625.
     22
         In order that the reader not thinic tliat ire have been per-

^*^*i^
out
          ^ ^"^'^     "^   ^
                          *^® foregoing discussion, it must be pointed
    that some i/riters viho take their inspiration essentially from
Jung's Trork have not attempted to folloTr Jung in his
                                                         empirical,
scientific approach to the archetypes. For e:cample, in
                                                            the folloif-
xng passage Haomi Golderiberg characterizes the work of
                                                           x*at she
calls a third generation of Jungians who go beyond
                                                       strict adherence
to Jung's vierxs and develop their o^m approach to
                                                      the archetypes.
m  this regard Jaraes KLLlman is. the dominant figure.
                 Snaginal life becomes primary i/hile natural
                 science and biology become Txorldng areas of
                                           Mdi




                Imaginal life. This leads to an
                                                        "ijnaginal
                reduction" aimed at shordng the
                                                      fantasies
                belund^scientific or scholarly erroiricisra.
                 Facts" and "empirical" proof are
                                                         no longer
                ^yoked to validate psyche or psychology.
                i«ientifxc tenns are by no means the
                                                            ulti-
               mate stopping places. ...
                   "^'0.1 ways of speaking
                                             of archetypes are
               translations from one metaphor to
                                                        another.
               _j^en a sober opei-ational
                                            definition in the
               language of science or logic is no
                                                          less
               metaphorical than an ijnage irhich
                                                       presents
               the archetypes as root ideas,
                                                   psj^chic organs,
               figures of ncrth, typical stj^es of
                                                          Kdstence!
               or dominant fantasies that
                                               govern conscious-
              ness (Quoted from James Ilillman,
                                                        Revisioninf^"
              Psycholop^ (Hew York: Harper and R^j,

              ^,*^J^H-
                           ™^
              After Jung," Spring. 1975, v,
                                                   213).
                                                              197^)
                                 Goldenberg, ".Archetypal Theo^

         ^ch an approach has the disadvantage         of maldng loiOTrledfre
 of archetypes incommensurable
                                  lath standarTscientific knSiT-
ledge    mthe sense that what is said about
                                                  archety^s ifthen
                               '^"^"^^^ altogether.^en though
i? m^ ITt^'f'y'^''''^'^'
                                      ^'^^ll-^ ^^^li shed scientific
ledS're^s^
xeoge            S^L^I??
       rests on an           ^"^
                                      Tl
                    irrational basis and is the end result
                                                                        kna.-
                                                                   of the
worlang out of a ir^h, it is nonetheless
                                                uirdse to ^Se up the
Ideal of rationality as embodied
                                     in the methods of scSnce Ihi.,
se^s an i^ view to be particularly
                                        relevant in ?egSf?o ;rch^'
^Ut^lt,.^^''              f
numnosity of the archet^Q^s
                                 ^Ser   of bei^g overwhelmed bj^^he
                           r^"^ necessitates
                                                 a critical attitude
            ^"°°^^^th Jung's view of the importance of
2J a balance
Ing   h.S      between conscious and unconscious.                           S?kn-
                                                           Ihe ratSml^


ScSSr Stono^.'"'
                          ^^°"—-'            ^t     Tdthout losing its oxm par-



^£Mr^^
^retetT^nf     ?;     ^   ^°^
bul*SSr°L't^^\1^:/^,^^^^^^^
                                       ^^?St-?in\\%^i.?L^^^^
                                '"^^^ *°    maintain that the scientific inter-
                                                                     - -^^      -pp--"
be discarded or     Sdonef            ^^          scientific perspective must not


          Mequate substantiation for this claim
^
the   section on methodology in the nex-t          viill be Presented
                                                            cresPn+^H in
                                                                      ir,
                                          chapter.

                       ""^"'^   '^"™' "^         ^"^^   '^'^ "^   ^^^ich
acterizeftJS:'"'^                                                          I^chlak char-
               Noraothetic study essentially
                                             prestmes that a
               theoretical abstraction can be made
                                                    which has
               general applicability for several
                                                  members of
               a given class (i.e. distribution).
                                                    Idio-
               graphic stuc^, on the other hand,
                                                  emphasizes
               the uniqueness of personality
                                              manifestation
               (I^hlalc, p. 2k   J.
                                                                     )




                                   11^5




       u ' for ?®^ ^®
              T             *^^° distinct issues involved in
  4.V.
  the basxs                                                    discussing
                  the tension bettreen a scientific level of
                                                                discourse
  about archetypes versus a personal therapeutic
                                                       level. The issue
  of^an incoimnensurability in principle betireen
                                                      theory and practise
  and the issue of nomothetic versus idiographic
                                                       methods for under-
  SSSSn-^\^'^'^'^x?-         ^ "^
  distinguish beti/een these trro questions but     ^2
                                         ^^^°^ ^=^6^^'       does not really
                                                   equates nomothetic idth
 the therapeutic and extrascientific. Ife
                                                intent to shoiT how Jung's
 distinction betiveen the tiro levels of discourse
                                                        is defensible on
 dn^nn?'?^+   /!?^  l^f    ^'''^^'   ^^^^
 do not intend to fuUy explore the question
                                           ^^^°^^      *^^ ^°°"d issue, T/e
                                                   of the relative merits
 of nomothetic versus idiographic methods
                                               for stwfying the individual.
 However, it can be reasonably maintained
                                               that an idiographic scien-
           *" "-^ possible outside the conbe^ of therapry. Thus, although
 S;2'' T
 ^^J^ T^           about the value of an idiographic appS^ach to
 dividual mal^s sense i.dthin the therapeutic                        the in-
                                                   context, Jung fails to
 +?S^°^J'..?°r.*^®.^^°^^P^°        approach  does not have to be iden-
              the aajns
 ISZ^ as a legitimateof scientific
 fended
                            practical psychology but can also be de-
                                        method in its om right.




                              ^rche^
Books'    m^/ZlT'^^''* %£ Hid                   (Baltimore:    Penguin

     27
                   ^ ?^        ^
                              idiographic scientific method
     nf
sort ofSr^'L^^'^
            recommended
          stucty-


S^L^h't^r'^^^^^.'" ^"T
of
alxty. Bersonal3i2L
                      ^
                        by Gordon mport who suggests, for
                          ^^" ^^°S^^P^^ ^d lx^?atu?J the
   such toigs as the in-depth stucfy of
                       Social aicots^
                                                                  S
                                        individual cases of persS^-
                                                                   is the
                                                                   example


                                                   Beacon PrSs,?960),
                                                                             '




          It seems that
                      in this regard ije have a discrepancy beti;een
what Jung says and what he actually does.
                                            For the in^SpLltu^
of individual cases is in fact charactei-istic
                                               of his work. The
massive volume S^nbols 21 'Pransfomation (Vol.
                                                 V) is prijnarSy
an extended commentary centered around
                                        the material of one
schizophrenic individual.  (The person was not a patient of Jung.
     28
                      iscpoted   somst,tot out of cont&cb.
of +h.   JUiLS^''^                                            The reminder
                              CHAPTER 6
              JUNG AND THE SCIEtJTinc ATTITUDE:
                                                PART II



                Can There Be A Science of Archet.yyv^s?


       Other questions relating to Jung's
                                          vlerrs on science must wait

 until the section on methodology ^^here
                                         we t^II examine Jung's reasons
 for claiMng that his work on
                                archetypes is scientific. Ih regard to

 T*at ;re just discussed in the last chapter,
                                              it would seem that ,re have
 not yet fully resolved the question
                                      posed at the beginning of that
 chapter, the question of whether Jung
                                        holds vie,7S incompatible T.ri.th
 an attitude necessaiy for science.
                                          So far as this question is
                                                                     con-
cerned, our strategy has been to
                                  argue for a distinction hei^reen two
levels of discourse; one appropriate
                                       for scientific statements about
archetypes and one appropriate for
                                    abatements on a personal, subjective
level of meaning involving iji many
                                    cases metaphysical and/or religious

interpretations of archelgrpal experience.
                                                  Bie distinction then is
essentially one between the facts of
                                     archetypal          e^rience versus the
attitude one takes towards these facts,
                                             vrtiat   we should do about them.
     It was pointed out, moreover,
                                   that the frequent shifts in Jung's
.rark betvreen the levels of
                             discourse,   which Jung understands in tenns
of theoretical versus practical
                                :kno,aedge, is due to his professional

involvement on both levels as scienti^
                                       and therapist.           Thus someti^s
he tallcs about his scientific views,
                                      and at other times he gives us
practical, therapeutic advice or
                                  relates his personal, subjective
understanding of the metaphysical and
                                      religious iinpHcations of the


                              Mi6
                                      111?




   archetypes,

          Hoi^ever, the critic tdll perhaps Td.sh to
                                                     point out that Jung
  can not be so easily saved from scientific
                                             criticism.        For even if
 TO can distinguish a scientific level of
                                          discourse from a level of
 personally meaningful interpretation, questions
                                                 can sbill be raised
 conceiTdiig the justification of what
                                       is advocated for therapjr.       For
 we    vjish   our theoretical knowledge to rule out
                                                     some therapeutic prac-
 tises as unscientific even if to admit
                                        that scientific knov.ledge is
 not itself sufficient for therapeutic
                                       success as determined by the
 individual's gain in self-kno-^ledge and
                                          self-realization.
         Horrever, our distinction betireen the
                                                levels of discourse is not
 intended to have the result of immediateny
                                            resolving the questions
 of scientific validity of Jung's vie^rs on
                                            the archetypes.       Rather the
 len^hy discussion on this matter is intended to clear
                                                       the        u^   for
 a proper consideration of this problem by shoidng
                                                   hmx arguments from
the scientific point of view need not be
                                         concerned idth eveiything
Jung says about the archetypes.         Specifically, the question of the

scientific validity of the archetypal theoiy
                                             is not prejudiced by
what    Jmg     says about what attitude to should take
                                                        torrards archetypes.
                                                                               "•




Only iThen we have come to an understanding
                                            of the Grange mixture of
statements in Jung's work by means of the
                                          distinction betTOen the
levels of discourse, then, can we genuinely
                                            appreciate the possibility
that Jung's repeated pleas to be understood
                                            as an empiricist must be
given careful consideration.

       Ohere still remain ample grounds for
                                            withholding the sanction of
a scientific label to Jung's theoiy of archetypes
                                                  which to have yet to
consider.       But keeping what has been said about Jung's
                                                            views on the
                                                                                   )s




                                      Ili8




 natirre of science in mind, hopefully       ire   can     nm   examine these remain-

 ing questions irith some insight into the reasons for Jung's
                                                              unscientific
 reputation.         (A summary of our conclusions as to the extent to
                                                                       which
 tliis   reputations is deserved :rfll appear in the next chapter along

 ijith our       conclusions concerning attitudes necessaiy for science.

         T'fe   proceed now to redeem a promise made on an earlier page
                                                                        to
 consider questions of rationality in relation to the
                                                      archetypal theoiy.
 For recalling the context of the discussion in
                                                that section,               ire    T^re
 considering the question of whether Jung was a ncrstic.
                                                                       .Although   ire

 concluded that Jung did not qualify as a UQrstic
                                                  either on the grounds
 of experience or because he held n^ystical beliefs,
                                                     this conclusion
ims reached on the basis of a rather exact characterization
                                                            ot rays-
ticisra.        \k have still to consider ^Aether Jung is advocating
                                                                     views
resembling or analogous to nysticisni.        !Ihese       questions have to do TTith

the rationality of the archetypal theoiy.           I-fe   understand the problem

of whether Jung's vierrs are analogous to mystical vierrs
                                                          as equivalent
then to the problem of v/hether the archetypal theory is
                                                         scientific in

the loose sense of satisfying requirements of rationality.
                                                                          Only when
we have worted our way to a clear vie?/ of this question
                                                         Tdll              vre    be in
position to properly assess the problem of whether Jung
                                                        holds viei^
incompatible irLth an attitude necessaiy for science.
                                                                    3h addition, the

extent to which Jung's therapy is justifiable on grounds
                                                         of rationality
is at stake.        For if Jung's theoretical views can be shorn to
                                                                    be irra-
tional, then we could hardly eapect the therapeutic
                                                    attitude based on
such theoretical views to be justified.^

     This question of requirements of rationalitj' comes to
                                                            focus in
li^ht of the apparent similarity between the qualities of
                                                          ineffability
                                    Mi9




  and paradoxicality which are said
                                    to characterize r^rstical experience
  and what Jung says about the
                               paradoxical nature of an^hetypal e:q»r-
  ience and its symbolic character
                                   which "is never precisely defined
  or    mayexplained"    (^   ^m^ 9mS22ls, p. )4). Hov^ever, parenthe-
  sizing the problematic of this
                                 sdMlarity for the time being (it
 will be discussed at the end of
                                 this section), we can arrive at
 this same question of requirements
                                    of rationality ftxjm other consid-
 erations.     For in light of the apparent
                                            difficulty in maintaining
 an objective, theoretical level of
                                    discourse about archetypes, evi-
 denced by the fact of the mixture of
                                      theoretical statements about
 archetypes and statements of an
                                 interpretational character concerning
 hmr we should relate to archetypal
                                    experience that    .:e   find in Jung's
 ^^tings, we might    .;ell ask:   Is a science of archetypes
                                                              possible at
 all?  Rerhaps in light of the tremendous
                                          emotion-evoking quality of
 numlnosity characteristic of the
                                  subject matter, the effort to
                                                                defend
 the rtudy of archetjTes as
                            genuinely scientific is an idealistic
                                                                  fan-
ta^.      One of Jung-s follormrs,
                                   Gerhard   MLer, seems to be of this
opinion as expressed in the following
                                      passage;
             Jung himself fought against
                                         the reproach of beinr
            a philosopher or metaphysican or
                                               even a wstic.
              iSiT
            that he J
                       ^^^^    *his critician because he felt
                     had elevated his approach to the
                                                        status
            ^;„^'^°fu''''?i   ^S P^^haps,
            caught in the idealisation
                                            also, he was stUl
                                        of the scientist's
              ^f^   ^P^^^Jfd by natural science, so rampant
            1^ the first half of the centmy. Biere are ?ast
            philosophical, metaphysical, and even
                                                    inysti^al
            aspects and implications in Jung's
                                                 scientific
            research and results   ....   3

        E^en Jung himself had moments of
                                         skepticism and doubt con-
ceding whether irrational phenomena
                                    lite archetypes .^re proper
subject matter for science.
                                     150




                3hdeed, I am persuaded that, in view
                                                       of the tre-
                inendous irrationalitjr and individuality
                                                          of  dreams.
                It may be altogether outside the bounds
                                                           of possi-
                bility to construct a popular theoiy. T-hy
                                                              should
                Tre believe that everything
                                             i/ithout exception is
                a fit subject for science? ... It
                                                       might be
                better to look upon dreams as being
                                                       more in the
                nature of irorlcs of art instead of
                                                     mere obse^-
                163-1610
                         ^^     ^°'' *^° ^i^^ist (Vol. XTIl/pages



         Of course, scientific is a
                                    characteristic of a method of study
 rather than a subject matter per se.
                                              But in this regard   T-re   w)uld
 naturally expect that some subjects
                                     lend themselves more easily to
 the methods of science than do
                                others.            p^hology is one
                                               Certainly
 of the most difficult subject matters to
                                          study in a rigorous scientific
 way.    Moreover, i-dthin   p^hology itself    Jung's interests can be eas-
 ily identified as subjects which are
                                      at least at the veiy frontier of

 scientific endeavor, subjects which have
                                          either just begun to attract
 scientific attention or else have been
                                        given no previous scientific
consideration at all.        Such subjects as astrology, alchencr,
                                                                   UFO's,
I Ching, and ESP are among Jung's
                                  professional Interests in addition
to inve^dgations into the delusional
                                      ^sterns of the insane and the
world^.:ide literature of HBrsticism,
                                           i^hology, and religions of all
sorts.      might even chance a stTeeplng
          Vfe
                                          generalization and say that
 Jung's chief area of Investigation
                                    was the irrational in all of its
multlfona manifestations, ^though
                                      such a generalization perhaps
stands in need of some qualification,
                                        it is ea^ to see ho^r as an
approximate truth this fact of Jung's
                                        professional interest in the
occult and the irrational could lead
                                      to the conclusion that there
is a simllanty between the subject
                                     matter and its investigator.
Jung addresses this problem in the
                                   following passage:
                                     151




               ff you call me an occultist
                                            because I am seriously in-
              ;vestigating relif^ous, ncrtholocdcal.
                                                      fbUdoristie ^and
               philosopliical fantasies inmodem ir.H^-n^^»^T^^n^ •^-
              ancient tercts, then you are bound to
                                                      diagnose Prettd
              as a issj^ pervert, since he is doing
                                                       lifedse^with
               seroial fantasies, and the
                                          psychologically inclined
              cnrainologist must neisds be a gaol-bird.
                                                                  It
              is not^ responsibility that aichenor
                                                       is occult
              and ystical, and I an jusfc as guilty
                                                       of the imrs-
              txcal delusions of the insane or the
                                                     peculiar
              creeds of manldnd ( Letters, Vol. H,
                                                     p. 186.
              letter to Calvin S. Hall dated 6 October
                                                          1951;).

       though       this sort of identification betiTeen
                                                         a subject matter
 and its investigator is easily
                                e.xposed as an error if taken as
                                                                 a
 necessaiy or universal type of
                                relationship, it nonetheless contains
 an element of truth .dth respect
                                  to some individuals. For ^m wonder
 if there is not, as a matter of fact,
                                       some relationship betireen Freud's

 professional preoccupation Td.th sex
                                      and his otm sercual problems, be-
 te^een his theoiy of the Oedipus
                                  complex and the facts of his oim

 family histoiy.      As an analogous case, Jung had
                                                     an abundance of first
hand experiences idth the irrational
                                     i7hich     i^as   the source for at least
part of the motivation for his researches
                                          as he confesses below:

            I was particularOy satisfied with
                                               the fact that
            you clearly understand that I am not a
                                                    ncrstic but
            an empiricist. It is true hoirever
                                                that a vivid
            interest in religion and religous truth
                                                     has
            guided iht: research ( Letters. Vol. I,
                                                    p. 237
            letter to Norbert DreiTitt dated 2$
                                                  September   1937).
     I'Jien TTe   consider then the fact of Jung's
                                                   interest in the irrational
in regard to the question of the
                                  possibility in principle of a science
of archetypes, we can conclude on
                                   the one hand that the irrationality
of a subject matter should not
                               disqualify it as legitimate suba'ect
matter fbr scientific study, si^e
                                   a scientific statement about the
irrational need not itself be an
                                 irrational statement. But, on the
other hand, we must acknowledge
                                certain practical problems for
                                            1^2




  scientific rtudy T-Mch arise due to
                                      the irrational nature of arche-
  types.      Tn this regard a    mjor      practical problem seems to be the diffi-
 culty of maintaining a suitable scientific
                                             attitude of objectivity and
 detachment. This is reflected in the
                                        problem of the ttro levels of dis-
 course asTTe saw hoTT Jung frequently
                                       shifts from an objective scientific
 level of discourse to a subjective,
                                      personal levBl or therapeutic level.
  Ihis problem is also exemplified
                                   in the ve:y close relationship that
 exists     beti-reen   Jung's life and     wk.
                                         For it seems to be the case that
  archetypal experience does not produce
                                          only objective scientific know-
 ledge but also a personal involvement.
                                           One does not only assimilate the
 archetypes to one's scientific
                                 understanding, but in a sense one's
 overall outlook becomes modified by
                                      the archetypes. One not only
                                                                     gains
 a scientific concept of the
                              irrational, there is, at least in
                                                                 the ideal
 case, a coming to terms T/ith the
                                   irrational forces inside oneself.
      P^ the        therapeutic perspective then Jung can
                                                          be seen to advocate
the necessity for direct involvement
                                     ,nth the irrational forces exper-
ienced in the unconscious. Particularly
                                         in regard to this perspective,
we need to detentdne the theoretical
                                     justification for what Jung says
about the irrational.         Bius   vre   need to   knot-;   whether .*at Jung says
about the irrational can itself be
                                   justified by rational means.                      3h
this respect it is essential to
                                understand what theoretical claijns
Jung is tiyijig to defend in relation
                                      to the irrational.                   In par-
ticular we need to faiow what Jung
                                   understands by this                 terra.

        find then that Jung closely associates
     I-fe
                                               the irrational idth
unconscious processes, whereas for
                                   Ixbn rationaHty is a correlate
                                                                  of
consciousness.
                                     153




            ITo natter, hm beautiful
                                     and perfect man ma^r believe
            his reason to be, he can always be certain
                                                         that it
            xs only one of the possible nental functions,
                                                            and
            cavers on3y that one side of the phenomenal
                                                          vorld
            which corresponds to. it. But the irrational,
                                                            that
            which is not agreeable to reason, rings it
                                                         about
            on all sides, ilnd the irrational is Ulcewise
                                                            a
            p^hological function—in a word, it is the collec-
            tive unconscious^ whereas the rational is
                                                       essentially
            tied to the conscious mind (Vol. i/TI,
                                                   p. 71).
      To a large erfcent, then, the
                                    statements which Jung nalces about the
 UMts   of reason and the intellect for
                                        comprehending the totality of
 experience can be seen to be the result
                                         of his        vier-r   that conscious-
 ness has a necessarily incomplete
                                   comprehension of the totality of
 the unconscious.

      There are several related reasons that
                                             Jung gives for the loirita-
tions of consciousness to fully comprehend
                                           the unconscious.              The first
has to do idth the fact that loiowledge of the
                                               unconscious necessarily
is the product of its interaction TnLth
                                        consciousness.            Since conscious-
ness always mediates the erqjerience of the
                                            unconscious, Jung argues
that there is a sense in which we never
                                        Imovr the unconscious itself

but only as it interax:ts idth the more or less
                                                interferring medium
of consciousness.

          Between the conscious and unconscious
                                                  there is a
          kmd  of 'Uncertainty relationship," because
                                                      the ob-
          server is inseparable from the observed
                                                    and always
          disturbs it by tlie act of observation
                                                  (Vol. IX-B,           p. 226).
     Tn the concluding chapter of     L^ and   I^s   STiiibols. II.L.   von Franz
elaborates this same argument.

         ^ohnoiT content that comes up from the
                                 I
                                                unconscious
         ^.^^"^t   ^J-^^
                          ^^^'^ °^*"^^
         ^ated into the conscious          ^
                                          ^®^S  partly ihte-
                                    mind of the observer.
              dream contents (if noticed at all)
          Ihren
                                                   are in that
         \i^ semi-conscious. J\nd each
                                        enlargement of the
         observer's consciousness caused by dream
                                                    inter-
         pretation has again an iinraeasurable
                                               repercussion
         and influence on the unconscious.^'
                                        1^1




      As   ire   havB previously remarked on other occasions, Jung
                                                                   likes
 to think about the archetype per se in terms of Kant's
                                                        concept of
 the thing-in-itself.           Ihus, he fi^equently makes the move from assei-ting

 that there exists an uncertainty relationship bettreen
                                                        conscious and
 unconscious to the statement that the ultlinate nature of
                                                           the archetype
 per se is unlmotrable in principle as a thing-in-itself,

             nh Ilysterium Coniunctionis iter psychology was at
            last given its place in reality and established
            upon its historical foundations, , , , jQie mo-
            ment I touched bottom, I reached the bounds of
            scientific understanding, the transcendental,
            the nature of the archetype per se, concerning
            vrhich no further scientific statements
                                                       can be
            made ( Ifemories. Eireams. Inflections p. 221).

     A third reason for asserting the limitations of
                                                     consciousness to
completely comprehend the unconscious is derived
                                                 from the consideration
that, as a matter of fact, consciousness is
                                            limited and finite in
potential capacity, vjhereas the unconscious, although
                                                       not infinite,
contains a much larger relative store of content.            Since consciousness

is only possible through a restriction of attention,
                                                     this narrower
scope of consciousness means then that consciousness
                                                     cannot be atrare
of all aspects of the unconscious.            Although this line of reasoning

strictly shorrs that consciousness is         liMted only at any one tine
to what it can be     ai-xare   of , it is Jung's claim that the overall po-

tential capacity for consciousness is limited, and
                                                   that thus our
attempts to make our actions and endeavors conipletely
                                                       articulate and
transparent to consciousness ^dll alirays fail, and
                                                    the unconscious in
all its manifestations can never be completely
                                               assimilated to a con-
scious awareness,

           « . , even the most matter-of-fact contents
                                                       of
           consciousness have a penumbra of uncertainty about
                                    15?




             them.  Even the most carefully defined philosopM-
             cal or mathematical concept, which Tre
                                                    are sure
             does not contain more than we have put
                                                     into it
             is nevertheless more than we asstime (Ikn
                                                       and liis
             ^t>ols, p. 29),

             Since we do not know everything, practically
                                                               every
             experience, fact, or object contains something
                                                                 un-
             knom. Ifence, if to speak of the totality of an
             e:>5)erience, the \-iovd "totality" can refer
                                                           only
             to the conscious part of it (Vol. XL,
                                                       p. la).

      The fact that the unconscious is never
                                             completely assimilated
 to consciousness means then that for Jung
                                           human Kdstence always
 consists to a large e:ctent of essentially
                                            irrational aspects and
 that consciousness and rationality are alxTays
                                                circumscribed by
 the irrational and vmconscious.

           . • . the rational is counterbalanced by
                                                     the
           irrational, and irhat is planned and purposed
           by what is (Vol. IX-A, p. 9U).

           Biat is, I do not believe that reason
                                                    can be
           the supreme law of human behaviour,
                                                  if only
           because e^qperience shows that in decisive
           moments behaviour is precisel;^'- Mt guided
           by reason but rather by overpor-zering
                                                   un-
           conscious impulses ( Letters. Vol. I,
                                                   p.
           402, letter to Pastor H. Ifegmann dated
           12 December 19li5).

              have on the contrary good grounds for
           I'fe

           supposing that . . . QjJ?e and fat^ axe
           irrational, or rather that in the last
           resort they are grounded beyond human
           reason (Vol. VU, p, h9)»

     But from the fact that Jung holds
                                       that human erf.stence and reason
do not mirror each other perfectly can
                                       to then conclude that at least
certain aspects of experience    li.e   beyond the grasp of reason alto-
gether?   Jung apparently thinks Ithat this in
                                               fact is the case.       For
he says that "there is a certairi
                                  incommensurability beti^een the      ^s-
tery of existence and human understanding"
                                           (Vol. XII, p. 212),

     Of course, it is just the
                               archetypes of the collective unconscious
                                          1?6




  that Jung has in      irrijid   as regards this "mystery.

               ^  these TTOrds Preud was expressing his
               that the unconscious still
                                                        conviction
                                         harboured many things
             that wiglit lend themselves to "occult"
                                                       interpre-
             tation, as is in fact the case.    Ohese "archaic
             vestiges" or archetypal foms grounded
                                                      on the
             instxncts and giving expression to them,
                                                         have
             a numinous quality that sometimes
                                                 arouses fear.
             Ihey are ineradicable for they
                                             represent the
             Ultimate foundations of the psyche
                                                  itself.
             Bigir cannot be grasped intellectually,
                                                      and when
             one has destroyed one manifestation
                                                   of them,
             they reappeai' in altered form (Italics
                                                      mineO
             (Vol. X, p. 272).

      nh order to understand Jung's
                                    position on the irrational then,
 we need to get clear about precisely what
                                           he means by "incommen-

 surability" and "cannot be grasped intellectually."
                                                               Although it
 may seem that in this regard what Jung says
                                             about the archetypes
 is veiy similar to mystical utterances,
                                         there is one sense in which
what he means is vexy mundane.            For in pointing to an incommensura-
bility   bett-reen   archetypal experience and the understanding,
                                                                  part of
what Jung wants to emphasize is the
                                    particular quality of the lived
experience of archeiypes which is not
                                      adequately captured by concepts.
     Harever, many e^^^eriences of an
                                      emotional nature have in common
idth archetypes this feature of relative
                                         ineffability, i.e., the fea-
ture of the relative inadequacy of
                                   concepts to e:5>ress their lived
quality.    The particular emotive quality of
                                              a beautiful sunset, for
example, is best e:cpressed by a poem or
                                         a painting rather than hy a
concept.    Because of the numinosity of the
                                             archetypes then, a concept
of archeiypes does not adequately convey
                                         th^ir essential nature as
experienced.

     Hbi^ver, considerations about the
                                       relationship between the exper-
ience of archetypes and the formulation
                                        of a theoretical understanding
                                      1^7




  are not particularly crucial
                               in regard to the question of the
                                                                ra-
  tionality of archetypal theoiy.           For Jung does not maintain that
                                                                            an
  intuitive knoirledge of archetypes based
                                           on their iinniediate e^^perience

 is the only sort of understanding of
                                      them possible.           Rather he main-
 tains on the whole that intuition
                                   is not sufficient for intellectual
 knoi/ledge.

                 The safe basis of real intellectual
                                                       Imowledge
                 and moral understanding gets lost
                                                     if one is
                 content vri.th the vague satisfaction of
                                                          having
                 understood by "hunch." One can
                                                   explain and
                 loiow only if one has reduced
                                                intuitions to
                 an exact knowledge of facts and
                                                   their logical
                 connections (Lfan and ig.s Symbols,
                                                     p. 82).

         On the other hand Jung frequently
                                           points out the inadequacy of
 an intellectual understanding as a
                                    substitute for the experience of

confronting the unconscious and the
                                    archetypes in a therapeutic con-
text.

                 It IS precisely our e:cperiences
                                                  in psychology
                 which demonstrate as plainly as could
                                                        be ^-dshed
                 that the intellectual "grasp" of a
                                                     p^chological
                 fact produces no more than a concept
                                                       of it, and
                 that a concept is no more than a name,
                                                         a flatus
                 vocis (Vol. IX-B, p. 32).                 -
        I'fe   can understand then that from the
                                                 therapeutic perspective it
is just the emotive qualities of
                                  archetypes and the particular pro-
blems of value and purpose in
                              relation to the individual's life
                                                                  as
brought into focus by archetypal
                                 e^jperience that are of utmost im-

portance.  Ihus much Of what Jung has to
                                          say against reason must be
understood in a therapeutic context.
                                       In this respect it is a
                                                               misuse
of reason rather than reason
                             itself which is the object of
                                                            vilification.
                ...    a relativation of rationalism is
                                                        needed, but
                ?M„^/    ^ ^^?      °^ '^^^°"' ^o^ *he reasonable
                thing for us xs to turn to the
                                                inner man and his
                S^     2fuf ^^Si^
                iaigen Bohler dated 8
                                       ^°1- ^* p. ^Q6, letter to
                                      Januaiy 1956).
                                  158




             The great difficxaty seems to consiErt in the fact
             that on the one hand ire nust defend the sanity
             and logic of the huinan rdnd, and on tlie other
             hand \m have to accept and to irelcome the exis-
             tence of illogical and irrational factors trans-
             cending our coEQjrehension ( Letters. Vol, IT,
                                                            p,
             53, letter to Father Victor Ihite dated 9 April
             1952).

        It would seem evident then that if aXL Jung has in mind by his

 "cannot be grasped by the intellect" is to emphasize the practical

therapeutic aspects of vrorking iTith the archel^Tpes on an experiential

level that the question of rationality need not be considered as a

serious problem,     Hoijever, in addition to the practical problems of

assimilating archetypes into one's experience on a personal basis,

Jung apparently feels that the archel^'pes also pose particular pro-

blems for theoretical understanding,         Tliis   point is well exemplified

in regard to the symbolic manifestations of archetypes.

             To the scientific rdnd, such phenomena as ^ym-
             bolic ideas are a nuisance because they cannot
             be formulated in a way that is satisf actoiy to
             intellect and logic (Vbn and     m^
                                              SK/mbols. p, 80),

            It  symbol has a i7±dev "unconscious" aspect
            that is never precisely defined or fully ex-
            plained. Ilor can one hope to define or ex-
            plain it. As the mind e:q)lores the ^^nnbol,
            it is led to ideas that lie beyond the grasp
            of reason (rfen and ffi^s Symbols, p. U).

        This metaphorical way of talldng about what lies beyond the grasp

of reason can be made clearer as    -VTell   as more plausible if instead of

talldng about what can not be grasped or understood,          vre   say that arche-

typal eicperience can not be completely rationalized,          That is, the

archetypal phenomena have a sort of cognitive autonomy which eludes

atter^ts to completely reduce it to an unambiguous rational foiroula-

tion.    An exao^jle using the familiar phenomena of dreams helps clarify
                                           159




 this point*

          Then   TTO   tiy to rationally understand a dream then,       tre   attenpt
 an interpretatibn which translates the pictographic
                                                     images of the
 dream into words.          Tfe    encounter difficulties, hoTiever, because the

 dream images frequentljr fail to confoiro to rational
                                                       expectations of
 order and logic.          Ibreover, even T-dth the most in-depth interpretation,

 \re   somehow feel that something is lost in the transition from
                                                                  the
 dream images to words.             Si addition to the emotive content which is

 difficult to convey in xrords, it seems that the dream has its aim

way of cognitive e:q)ression which an interpretation does not com-

pletely capture.           The dream linages then repx-esent a certain gestalt

of meaning which often resists translation into a linear sequence
                                                                  of
ideas.

         Ibreover, lihen     rre   say that a dream or other manifestation of

the unconscious can not be rationalized, what we previously
                                                            dis-
cussed in terms of the inability of consciousness to
                                                     completely
assimilate the unconscious must be               bome in   mind.   Excepting Jung's
appeal to the Kantian doctrine of the thing-in-itself
                                                      then, the ar-
guments TO mentioned there are additional reasons in
                                                     support of this
vietr.


         Our way of talldng in teiros of the inability of the
                                                              unconscious
to be completely rationalized might seem to amount to
                                                      the claim that
a complete conscious reduction of unconscious experiences
                                                          is unadvisable.
And the objection could be raised at this point that if
                                                        this is what
our claim amounts to, then it is not so much relevant
                                                      to the question
of theoretical Imowledge as to the problem of how best
                                                       to deal xdth

unconscious experience in a therapeutically beneficial way.
                                                                              Prom
                                            160




  the theoretical perspective, it Trould
                                         seem that it is jusfc our task
  to try to make unconscious e:q)erience
                                         intelligibile, i.e., to ration-
  alize it.

         Hoifever,   in spite of Jung's unfortunate uay of
                                                           expressing hdm-
  self in teims of ,rhat lies beyond
                                     the grasp of reason, Tvhat he has
 in ralnd does apply to the theoretical
                                                       loioi-aedge   of archetypes,     (itod,
 of course, it also has practical
                                  therapeutic implications.)                      For it
 is his contention that to must make our
                                         theoretical statements about
 the archetypes reflect the actijal nature
                                           of the phenomena.                     That   ire

 need to avoid in the problem of rationalizing
                                               the unconscious then
 is the reading in of more order and logic
                                           than is really there.                        If
 vie   think of dreams in tenns of their being only
                                                    infonnational static
 or noise in the braiji, for example, an
                                         explanation satisfactory to
 the rational need to account for such
                                       disturbing phenomena in a
theoretically elegant way,          ,re   not only fail to benefit frem them

in a practical       ixay,   but to also miss the distinguishing
                                                                 feature
of the phenomena itself, the fact that
                                       its cognitive content con-
stitutes a meaningful message             Trtiich   can be shorm to compensate the
conscious attitude.          Thus Jung .rants to argue that a
                                                              conscious re-
duction of unconscious experiences is
                                      inadvisable not only in terms
of the practical situation of the
                                  individual dreamer but also frem
the standpoint of scientific methodology.

        The problematic of the rational
                                        reduction of unconscious processes
must also be kept in mind when to tiy to
                                         understand Jung's attitude
tovrard the paradoxical.         Tn regard to the paradoxical then,
                                                                    to often
find Jung associatiJig the paradoxical
                                       and the metaphysical.                    For he
says that metaphysical assertions can
                                      only be adequately foimulated
                                                                          -




                                       161




 in an antinomial way.

                Eroiy metaphysical judgment is necessarily antinomial,
                since it transcends eacperience and must therefore be
                complemented by its counterposition ( Letters. Vol, II
                p. 25I;, letter Pastor Jakob Anstutz dated 23 Ifey 195^),

          Hius, when we state a metaphysical truth in a paradoxical way,

 T-re   express what Jung sees as its quality of unknoirability,

               Paradox is a characteristic of tlie ftiostic
               iTTitings,  It does more justice to the unloiowable
               than clarity can dc^ for uniformity of meaning
               robs the raystery of its darlmess and sets it up
               as something that is knoxm (Vol. XC, p, 275),

               Paradox is a characteristic of all transcendental
               situations because it alone gives adequate ex-
               pression to their indescribable nature (Vol. K-B, p. 70),

          This use of paradoxical then linlcs the paradoxical xd-th a meta-

physical way of interpreting archetypal experience,          Ilh   this regard
there is a real similarity irith the way in which ncrstical
                                                            experience
is commonly interpreted.          But irrespective of Jung' s Kantian views

on the appropriateness of an antinomial expression for the
                                                           metaphysi-
cal, it seems that there is no problem trith rationality
                                                         here since to
say that archetypal experience is frequently described in
                                                          paradoxical
tenns is itself not a paradoxica] statement.

          Hoirever, Jung also   means not only that the ascription of paradox-

ical qizalities to archetypal experience applies to the interpretation

of the experience in metaphysical terms but also that it applies
                                                                 to
a metaphysically neutral description.         But in the latter regard when

\re     say that archetypal experience is paradoxical, this amounts to a

restatement of the considerations about the problem of rational reduc-

tion of archetypal experience.         For rather than as assertion that the

experience cannot be described eiscept by contradictory predicates.
                                             162




 this Treak sense of paradoxical implies onHy
                                              that you can not pxn
 doi-m   the experience and nalce it unambiguous j i.e.,
                                                         it is open to
 different interpretations.               This use of paradoxical is then not

 an assertion that the eiqperience transcends
                                              logic altogether (the
 n^rstical sense of parado:dcal), but onOy that
                                                it is veiy ambiguous.
 For example, the frequent archetypal symbol of
                                                the snalce conibines
 both negative and positive qualities.                    "Hence it is an e:ccellent

 ^JTiibol   for the      tiro   aspects of the unconscious:             its cold and ruthless

 instinctuality, and its Sophia quality or natural                       Tdsdoiii,   which is
 eribodied in the archetypes" (Vol.                 "CTII, p.   333),

         Ibreover, this ambiguity of the manifestations of the
                                                               unconscious
reflects for Jung the tension beti^en the conscious
                                                    and the unconscious
attitudes.            The symbols from the unconscious change their
                                                                    form then
in response to the conscious attitude (see page
                                                70).                          The symbols
are a reflection of this c^Tnamic relationship
                                               between conscious and
unconscious and thus often represent a ^oithesis of
                                                    oppo sites.
               And since the ssjiribol derives as much from
                                                            the con-
               scious as from the unconscious, it is able to
               unite them both, reconciling their conceptual
               polarity through its foim and their emotional
               polarity through its mondnosity (Vol. IX-B,
                                                              p. I80).

      Ihat can         ire   say then about the rationality of Jung's
                                                                      treatment
of the archetypes?              2h the first place it is obvious that Jung's

sage statements about the untaioTrable are not
                                               satisfactory; i.e.,                         i-re


want to     loiOT-r   on iihat grounds he can talk meaningfully- of what
                                                                         is un-
knovrable.       This sort of tallc seems to imply a transhuman
                                                                perspective
from ifhlch the relationship            beti-reen   our trays of knouing and the world

can be detenidned.              However, as has been pointed out on other
                                                                          occasions,
there is no necessity to follow Jung's I^tian
                                              line in order to
                                              163




 rationaUy reconstruct the archetypal theoiy.                     Md   T*en t^ no longer
 think of the archetype per se as a thing-in-itself,
                                                     many of Jung's
 least rational sounding statements need no longer
                                                   concern us.
         But if   ire   disregard Jung's Kantian viei/s on the unlmovable,
                                                                           what
 Jung    s^s   about the irrational seems to be both reasonable
                                                                and de-
 fensible on empirical grounds.                If there is a genuine similarity here

 between inysticism and Jung's views, it is that both
                                                      concur in the
 discoveiy of genuine irrational aspects of e:{perience.
                                                                           Hoirever,

 Tijhereas   the nystic says that       vre    have to accept this irrational given

 and abandon efforts to understand it rationally, it is
                                                        always Jung's
position that         vre   must try to assijnilate the irrational with our ra-

tional understanding as best we can.                  JSnd   although Jung's view that

the rationality of consciousness as a matter of fact
                                                     cannot completely
assimilate and rationalize the unconscious may seem at
                                                       first sight
to be the veiy repudiation of the methodology of
                                                 science, it is Jung's
claim that far from deserting science his
                                          phenonenological method of
approach to the archetypes provides the key for a
                                                  valid objective
understanding of them.            \k need to examine this phenomenological

method then in order to see irhether it in fact
                                                qualifies as a valid
and adequate scientific methodology.


                                 Jung's IfethoHnln prw

        ]h discussing the topic of Jimg's methodology,
                                                       it is important
to understand what substantive issues are at
                                             stalce.                   3h the first
place then,    i-re   are atteiiipting to get clear about the grounds
                                                                      for
Jung's claim that his study of archetypes is a
                                               scientific enterprise.
This question, moreover, must be considered in
                                               the context of the
discussion of the last section           T.^here    the problem of the rationality
                                                 161;




  Of the archetypal theoiy was taloen up.                          There it was emphasized that

  although scientific statements about the irrational need
                                                           not them-
  selves be irrational, there are nonetheless special
                                                      problems involved
  iJi    £rtudylng archetypes which         fi«ora      the theoretical perspective we

  described by talldjig of the difficulty of accomplishing
                                                           a rational
 reduction of archetypal experience, i.e., the need
                                                    to allow for a

 certain inherent ambiguity i^ the phenomena in order
                                                      to characterize
 them properly.            Ife   need then to discover what actual consequences

 for the study of archetypes these considerations
                                                  of the problem of
 the rational reduction produce.

          If   ire   inquiore    how Jung understands what he is doing,             ire   discover
 then that he asserts that his psychological views fall
                                                        id.thin the

 domain of natural science, although science \r±th certain special

 limitations.           "ihaOytical psychology is fundamentally a natural

 science, but it is subject far more than any other science
                                                            to the

personal bias of the observer"                   (   l^femories,   Breams, Reflections     p.

200).

          The problem of subjectivity enters into psychology then
                                                                  at the
theoretical level.                Jung likes to enphasize that this is due to the

fact that in psychology to have no e:rf;rapsychological
                                                        point of                           vie;-:

from which to view the phenomena since all observations
                                                        are themselves
p^chological processes.                 "...          in contra^ to a^y other scientific

theory, the object of psychological e:cplanation
                                                 is consubstantial
;,d.th   the subject:            one psychological process has to e:cplain another"

(Vol. VI, p. i^k).                           I




         l^reover, this difficulty ^cLth objectivity is, as
                                                            previously-

discussed, especially relevant trlth regard to the observation
                                                               of
                                          16^




 unconscious processes.      "•   .   .   .   this uncontroUable reactive effect

 of the observing subject on the unconscious limits the
                                                        objective
 character of the latter 's reality and lends it at the same time
                                                                  a

 certain subjectivity'" (Vol. .VUI, p. 229, note 130).

         For Jung this dilemna of subjectivity in p^chology necessitates

 tlie   toleration of a plurality of vievjpoints.            Vh must realize, then,

 that a psychological theory ndrvors            tlie   psychology of its foimulator.

 "The assumption that only one psychology exists or only               cgie   fundamental

 psychological principle is an intolerable tyranny, a pseudo-scientifLc

prejudice of the common man" (Vol, VI, p. hi).

        This point of the plurality of theories in psychology is developed

in the context of Jung's theoiy of types.                 He sometimes argues, there-

fore, that the necessity of considering a plurality of theories
                                                                must
be taken to the ejctent of admitting one "true" theoiy for
                                                           each type.

             I believe that other equally "true" explanations
             of the psycliic process can still be put fon-7ard,
             just as many in fact as there are types (Vol. VI, p. k93)»

             For, besides his otm theoiy, he would have to
             regard seven other theories of the same process
             as equally true, or, if that is saying too much,
             at least grant a second theory a value equal to
             his cam (Vol. VI, pages h90-h9l).

             I am quite convinced that a natural process which
             is very largely independent of htmian psychology,
             and can therefore be viewed only as an object,
             can have but one true explanation. But I am
             equally convinced that the explanation of a
             camplezt psychic process vrhich cannot be ob-
             jectively registered by any apparatus must
             necessarily be only the one which that sub-
             jective process itself produces (Vol. VI, p. k9l).

        In addition to the problem: of the typological bias of an inves-

tigator making a truth claim in psychology, Jung also states
                                                             that we
must be prepared to see these truth claims as relative rather
                                                              than
                                       166




  absolute since due to the polaristic nature
                                              of the          p^he   (conscious
 and unconscious attitudes do not coincide),
                                             to         mu^   be prepared to
 admit the reverse of our claim as also valid.

                 Because p^jnchology basically depends upon
                                                             balanced
                 opposities, no Judgment can be considered to be
                 final in trhich its reversibility has not been
                 taloen into account ( llan and His Symbols
                                                            p. 'k7),

                 . « . T-re must observe the rule that a p^yxshological
                    .



                 proposition can only lay claim to significance if
                 the obverse of its meaning can also be accepted
                 as true (Vol. WI, p, 115).

       rioi'7   if the above considerations are the sorts of things
                                                                    Jung

 has in mind as a way of reraeding the special problems
                                                        with subjec-
 tivity in psychology, we might well wonder if the
                                                   solutions are
 not as problematic as the difficulties for which
                                                  they are to be
 remedies.       However, Jung's statements about the relativity of
                                                                    truth
in pgychology and the necessity for admitting
                                              the validity of a
plurality of theories remain more or less theoretical
                                                      methodological
ideals for Jung rather than actual practises
                                             he observes.
       Bi any case these sorts of considerations are
                                                     actually more re-
levant to problems of practical applications of
                                                theoretical reason-
ing in   theraw than they are problems of theory itself.          For example,
in doing therapy Jung emphasizes that the therapist
                                                    must never put
the desire for tlieoretical confimation of his
                                               pet theoiy above the
need   to understand the patient as an individual.
                                                           Ibreover, it is
just in therapy that the potential conflict of
                                               personalities as a
result of differing personality types is most Ireenly
                                                      relevant.            Then,
the need to consider questions from the standpoint
                                                   of both the con-
scious and unconscious attitudes comes to
                                          focus        mo^    clearly in
regard to the working out of the individual's
                                              personal problems.
                                     167




       To generalize, as Jung
                              sometimes does on these points,
                                                              from what
  is useful in therapor to what
                                  is necessaiy for a theoretical
                                                                 psycho-
  logical understanding in general
                                      is at best a questionable move.
                                                                        It
  is alvrays open to us, hoi/ever,
                                    to accept the p^chological
                                                                facts of
  subjectivity that Jung points to
                                      >dthout dra.dng the same conclusions
 for theoretical understanding
                                   in p^hology. That is, ue can
                                                                   admit
 that there is a real problem i/ith
                                       subjectivity vdthout having to
 concede that truth claims in
                                 p^chology can onOy be considered valid
 relative to individual personalities.'''

      But we may consider the queiErtion of
                                            subjectivity in psychology
as a generalization of the problem
                                   of the rational induction of arche-
typal e>:perience. 3h regard to
                                que^ions of methodology then, if .re
can satisfactoil2y detennine the
                                  allegedily scientific method
                                                               ty which
Jung studies archetypes, vre need
                                  then not be unduly concerned if
                                                                   some
of the things that Jung says
                              about psychological methodology
                                                               in general
seem to be problematic,

     Ife discover, then, that Jung recommends
                                              a phenomenological tech-
nique for the scientific ^uc^
                                of archetypes. Here it is
                                                           essential
to understand what he means by
                                phenomenology. The tem connotes
for him a theoretically unbiased
                                  observation of phenomena. It is
clear, moreover, that the Plreudian
                                    technique of dream interpretation
(see page 101       is the sort of unphenomenological
                )
                                                      theory-biased con-
strual of unconscious phenomena to
                                   which Jung is opposed.

           Ifevertheless, it cannot be
                                         maintained that the
           phenomenological point of viet; has
                                                 made much
           headt^ay.  theory ^ill plays far too
                                                   great a
                          °£_t'eaJig included in phenomenology
           ^^f      S ?f
           as It should.   Even Preud, whose empirical
                                                         atti-
           tude xs beyond doubt, coupled
                                            his theoiy as a
           S£e aua non vdth his method, as if psychic
                                     168




                 phenomena had to be vie^red in a certain light
                 in order to mean something (Vol. IX-A,
                                                         p. ^),
                Here the interpretation must guard
                                                     against
                making xise of any other vieiTpoints than those
                manifestly given hy the content itself. If
                someone dreams of a lion, the correct inter-
                pretation can only lie in tlie direction of
                the lion . . . (Vol. XTH, p. 88).

          mat   this phenomenological method entails for Jung
                                                              becomes more
 evident in the folloTjing where in response to
                                                a challenge that his

 stu<fy   of archetypes is not grounded on a scientific
                                                        method, Jung
 states what is his understanding of that method.

                I can entirely subscribe to your
                                                 statement
                "as (the scientific method's) tool is the
                                                             ....
                objective observation of phenomena.    Bien comes
                the classification of the phenomena and lastly
                the deriving of mutual relations and sequences
                between the observed data, thereby maldng it
                possible to predict future occurrences, which,
                in taira, must be tested ty observation and
                experiment, " if, I must add, the e:cperitnent is
                possible , . . ( letters. Vol. n,
                                                   p. 567,
                letter to E.A. Bennet dated 23 June i960).

      As may be expected, Jung's method of
                                           studying the archetypes
does not employ an experimental technique.

             Every science is descriptive at the
                                                   point where
             xt can no longer proceed ej^ieriraentally, vdthout
             on that account ceasing to be scientific (Vol.
                IX-A, p. 55).

            Analytical psychology differs from esqjerimental
            psychology in that it does not attempt to isolate
            individual functions (sense functions, emotional
            phenomena, thought-processes, etc.) and then
            subject them to experijnental conditions for
            puiposes of investigation. It is far ii»re
            concerned Td.th the total manifestation of
            the p^che as a natural phenomenon— a highly
            complex structure , .    (Vol. XVII, pages 91-92).
                                      |.




     Jung justifies his nonexperimental method
                                               of study by pointing
out that as a medical psychologist he has to
                                             investigate the phenomena
as they appear in his patients without being
                                             able to institute
                                    169




 controls and manipulate variables.        In Ifeslow's terms Jung's psy-

 chology is problem-centered rather than method-centered.^

                  • • . academic pi^ychology , , , prefers to avoid
              conQDlex situations by asking ever simpler questions,
              which it can do vrith impunity. It has full freedom
           in the choise of questions it \d21 put to Nature.
               I'fedical psychology, on the other hand, is very
           far from being in this more or less enviable
           position. IJevQ the object puts the question and
           not the experimenter. Bie analyst is confronted
           \rith facts which are not of his choosing and
           which he probabOy never would choose if he were
           a free agent (Vol, X, p. 272).

          The difference between this and all earlier
          psychologies is that analytical psychology does
          not hesitate to taclde even the most difficult
          and coii5)licated processes, iinother difference
          lies in our method of procedure.    ... Our
          laboratory is the world. Our tests are con-
          cerned xriLth the actual, day-to-day happenings
          of himan life, and the test-subjects are our
          patients, relatives, friends, and, last but
          not least, ourselves (Vol. ]{VII, p. 92).

     But if it is clear that the primary context of discovery
                                                              for the

archetypes is the clinical situation, it must not then be
                                                          concluded
that this is also the only context of validation.               For when Jung uses

the tenn phenomenological for his method of study, this should
                                                               not be
understood to mean that it is entirely dependent upon introspective

techniques.     Ihe other term "empirical" that Jung employs for his

method of study is then in some respects more descriptive.

     Jung thus emphasizes the necessity of supplementing the findings

derived from work   vrith   patients by examining the manifestations of

archetypes in a cross-cultural     contercfc.   For   irfien   the same sorts of

phenomena as appear in the clinical situation can be seen
                                                          as exemplified
in the art, literature, rcrthology and religion of many
                                                        different cul-
tures, this gives the archetypes an erctraclinical and
                                                       publicably
                                        170




 observable dimension.          Jung then likes to conipare his method of
                                                                          study
 of archetypes to that of comparative anatoncr.
                                                        "i-^   scientific metho-
 dology is nothing out of the ordinary, it
                                           proceeds exactly like

 comparative    anatoi^jr,    on3y it describes and compares psychic figures"

 (   letters y Vol. I, p. 360, letter to Pastor Ilaz
                                                     Prischlmecht dated
 7 iipril 19k^).

             The psychologist must depend therefore in the
             highest degree upon historical and literary
             parallels if he ijishes to eroclude at least
             the crudest errors in judgment ( Ifemories,
             Dreams, reflections, p. 200).

             STmbolisra has today assuned the proportions of
             a science and can no longer make do vdth more
             or less fanciful se:aial interpretations. SLse-
             where I have attempted to put symbolism on
             the only possible scientific foundation, namely
             that of comparative research (Vol. WII,
                                                       p. IO6),

        In our discussion of Jung's scientific
                                               methodology, one chief
question remains to be explored.          This question has to do xjith what

Jung sees as the appropriate method of characterizing
                                                      archetypes.
For if we understand that the phenomenological
                                               method tries to pro-
duce an accurate description of the archetj-pal
                                                phenomena which is as
theoretically unbiased as possible, it seems evident
                                                     Jung takes this
to imply that his descriptions of the archetypes
                                                 must mirror the
phenomena described     iji   the sense that they are themselves aiabiguous

descriptions,

             I don't know whether I ought to be glad that
            desperate attempts to do justice to the reality
                                                                 w
            of the psyche are accounted "ingenious
                                                    ambiguity".
            At least it aclmowledges ncr efforts to reflect,
            as best I can, the "ingenious ambiguity" of
            the^psjTche. . . . The language I speak must be
            ambiguous, must have two meanings, in order to
            do justice to the dual aspect of our
                                                  psychic
            nature. I strive quite consciously and
                                        171




                  deliberately for ambiguity of expression, because
                  it is superior to unequivocalness and reflects
                  the nature of life (letters . Vol. II, pages 69-70,
                  letter to R.J, Ztri T'ferbloi^slsy dated 17 June 19^2),

          Ife   must, hcnrever, di^binguish here betireen two senses of
                                                                        ambiguous
 description.         Qn the one hand, there are empiricaiay acc\trate descrip-

 tions of ambiguity, and on the other hand, there are ambiguous
                                                                des-
 criptions of ambiguous phenomena.

      But if Jung is all too often guilty of the latter
                                                        type of am-
 biguity, this should not prejudice our attitude toward the
                                                            genuine
 problem posed by the rational reduction.           For irrespective of Jung's

 individual style of description of archetypes, a plausible
                                                            case can
 still be made for the necessity of having our descriptions
                                                            of the
 archetypes take into account their Inherent ainbiguity.




      1
          In distinguishing betvreen the facts of archetypes
                                                                versus the
 attxtude one talces tw^ard them, this has the effect of
                                                             distinguishing
 the theoretical claims frem therapeutic considerations on the
                                                                     one
 hand and frem philosophical interpretations of archetypal
                                                                experience
 on the other. Thus, it is misleading to say that in
                                                           separating facts
 frem attitudes in terms of the ttro levels of discourse ire
                                                                have in
 effect separated scientific from extrascientific claims about
                                                                     arche-
 types. For what Jung says about horr to deal irf.th archetypes
                                                                   from the
 therapeutic point of viev; is open to scientific critique and
                                                                   needs
 scientific justification. Often, hoxjever, Jung can be
                                                             seen to gen-
 eralize frem therapeutic experience and to relate his views
                                                                  on vrhat
is^beneficial for man in general. In this way a great
                                                             deal of philoso-
phcr does jm fact appear in Jung's i,rritings.    Ih spite of Jung's avowed
disloke for the label of philosopher, it is tlms still
                                                            very evident
tnat he is the son of a preacher.

J4 -^^
          ^® dirtinguishing betireen the two levels of discourse as a
distinction  beti/een scientific statements about arehetypes
                                                                 versus
personal meaningful interpretation is of course Jung's
                                                             distinction.
It should be apparent that V7e have changed
                                               tlie meaning of the dis-
tinction slightly so that it nm distinguishes facts
                                                          of archetypal
e^erience frem attitudes one t^iloes toiTards the experience.
attitudes can mean one's o;m attitude, the personal                But
                                                         meaningful
interpretation, or it can refer to i^at attitude is
                                                         recommended frem
a_toerapeutic point of view. As a therapist Jung
                                                       is naturally qua-
lilted to recommend appropriate attitudes. But irtien
                                                          he does so, there
                                  172




 IS then the tendency to get involved Td.th philosophical
                                                            statements.
         men we argue for a separate consideration then of what Jung
 says about the facts of archetypal experience versus ;jhat
                                                              attitudes
 he advocates \Te take toward them, this hopefully T-jill
                                                          pave the way
 for an objective consideration of the archetypes irrespective
                                                                  of
 our attitude toward Jung's philosophizing,
         Ibreover, by means of the distinction betiTeen the tiro levels
 of discourse, we also save ourselves from having to specify the
                                                                    re-
 lationship betireen the effectiveness of therapy and the truth of a
 theoretical vieiTpoint. This is not to say that they are not inti-
 mately related, but only that it is veiy difficult to deteniiine what
 causes success or failure in therapy,
         2
        or course, it is possible that Jung's theory could be im-
peccably scientific wliile his therapeutic vie;jpoint ms open to ob-
vious criticisms. For a sound pi^chological theoiy does not auto-
matical3y lead to an effective therapeutic technique. Although in
the context of this study ire can not enter further into discussion
of Jung's ideas on therapy, it is our view that Jungian therapy
                                                                  on
the whole proves to be practicallly effective as iiell as theoreticallv
 sound,
      3
        Gerhard MLer, "Analytical Psychology and the Principle of
oomplementarxty, in ^ii. -Analytic Process ; Aims, Analysis. Training.
edited by Joseph B. Vheeli/right (Ifew York: G,P, Putnam's Sons,
                                                                 1971),'
p. 120.

         ^'^ ^* ^°^ Franz, "Conclusion: Science and the Ifticonscious,"
   r,
in Jfen^and ps Symbols, edited by C.G. Jimg (New York: Dell,
.


                                                                196k),
pages 3o2-3o3.

          The point of the inability of the conscious mind to completely
assimilate the unconscious ttUI be considered later in this section
Trfiere we will say that the unconscious can not
                                                 be completely rationa-
lized. That discussion T/ill be a continuation of the sorb of
                                                                reason-
ing presented here, Ife defer presentation of that discussion for
                                                                    the
sake of preserving the continuity of our argument.

         Jung's -i^Tpology works trilth tiro attitude tjTes called extrovert
and introvert vjhich indicate the overall orientation of the
                                                                  individual
vrith regard to objective or subject processes
                                                    respectively. There are
also four function types: intuition, tliinldng, feeling and
                                                                   sensation.
Together ^dth the attitude types tliis yields then eight basic
                                                                    types of
personality: an eictroverted intuitive, thinldng, feeling and sensing
type and an introverted intuitive, thinldng, feeling, and sensing
                                                                        type.
     7
         Si fairness to Jimg it must be pointed out Jimg is
     ...                                                    usually
sensitive to a distinction between theoretical and
                                                    practical knot/ledge
as outlined in the section on science and the
                                               individual, Horrever, as
KaeE^Oified  m  the passages cited here, Jimg sometimes is guilty of
                                                                      not
distfnguisliing between the practical requirements for
                                                       applying a theoir
in therapy and requirements for the acceptance of
                                                   a theoretical claim.
                                 173




          J. \' ^-^
                        psj^chologists Tjho choose to uork as best
 4.U ijiiporfcant
tath
     '                                                               they can
                  problems (problem-centering) rather than
                                                              restrictinjj
themselves to doing only that ^Aich th^ can do
                                                     elegantly TTitli the
techniques alrea^ available (method-centering)."
                                                       ia,raham K. Fasloxr,
The I-sycholo^ of .Science (Ife^ York: Harper
                                                  and Ibn, 1966), p. 16.
                                    CMPTER        7
            THE STUDY OF AKCIffiTTPES AS A
                                           SCIEMTIFIC DISCIELnfE



                                 Introduction


        In the previous tiro chapters we
                                         have considered the question of
 whether Jung holds viet/s incompatible
                                        lath those necessaiy for science
 and also looked at the basis upon which
                                         he claims that his study of

 archet^Tjes is scientific.       From these discussions what can be con-

 cluded concerning Jung's scientific
                                     vier/s?

       In   ttie   first instance, it must be remarked
                                                       that Jung's lutings
 do not     confom   to any expectations    vie       may have had concerning what
constitutes ideal scientific >;riting.
                                                       I-breover, this is due prin-

cipally to the fact that the works
                                    are not unifonnly scientific in
character.  Ih this regard we have
                                    suggested that by separating the
theoretical claiins Jung makes for the
                                       archetypes from statements
where Jung discusses attitudes toward
                                      archetypal expei-ience, we could
e:camiiie   the question of scientific status
                                              independent^^ of both what
Jung says about the archetypes from
                                    a therapeutic perspective and
from philosophical and religious
                                 implications which also appear in
Jung's work.        But if such a distinction is
                                                 successful in isolating
the question of scientific ^atus,
                                  this is not to sgy that we have
then purified the theoiy or arrived
                                    at its meaningful core, as if to
iJnp]y that Jung should have
                             done        this himself at the very beginning.
Such an attitude only confuses
                               the logic of reconstruction and
                                                               the


                                  171;
                                      17^



 process of discoveiy.         For if we admit that the ertrascientific

 aspects of Jung's personality in fact dominate
                                                his >nltings as a
 whole, this is not in the end to the
                                      disadvantage of scientific             Iaio;f-

 ledge.   For it is onOy through the wholeness of
                                                  Jung's personality
 that we have such a theory which       ire   can then examine in terms of

 scientific criteria, that is to say, it is only
                                                 through Jung's in-
 terest in and involvement Td.th the irrational
                                                aspects of e^cperience,
 both as an individual and a therapist.

      In regard to Jung's scientific views then, our arguments so
                                                                  far
 have endeavored to    sho;^   that Jung did in fact attempt to construct

 a theoiy compatible idth scientific understanding.
                                                             Considering the
 highly irrational nature of the phenomena which are
                                                     the objects of
 such a theoiy, success in such an enterprise
                                              would most certainly
entitle Jung to be regarded as a truly great
                                             scientific pioneer and

investigator.

     But did Jung in fact succeed in formulating
                                                 a theoiy which can be
construed as a genuine scientific one?
                                                 Ihstead of attempting to dis-

cuss necessaiy and sufficient criteria of
                                          what is scientific in general,
our approach to this question has been to
                                          e:camine possible reasons on

the basis of which the scientific label could
                                              be vrlthheld from Jung's
theory.   Rather than attempting to show that Jung's
                                                     theoiy is scientific
because of its similarity to paradigmatic models
                                                 of science such as
physics and chemistiy, we have atteuqjted to estabU.sh
                                                       that Jung's theory
is not unscientific.     This sort of approach allows for a liberal under-

standing of >jhat constitutes a scientific theoiy.
                                                           For rather than es-
tablishing a priori standards of \fhat science must
                                                    be, we instead ex-

amine the putative scientific theoiy in regard
                                               to what it can in fact
                                      176




  acconplish toward a rigorous understanding
                                             of its subject matter.

         But the sort of considerations we
                                           have discussed in regard to
  shoidng that Jung's theoiy is not
                                    unscientific do not suffice to
 establish the scientific status of the
                                        theoiy.         For if we have
 successfully shoim, for example, that the
                                           theoiy can be understood
 as a rational theoiy and that religious
                                         and philosophical utterances
 often associated vrith it are not a necessary
                                               part of the theoiy itself,
 these are, for the most part, special
                                       problems of the archetypal theoiy.
 The resolution of these problems is then
                                          necessaiy but not sufficient
 to   shov^   that the archetypal theory is not unscientific.
                                                                There are
 other considerations which must be Kcamined
                                             before the scientific
 critic idll rest content.        For to still need to discuss the problem

 of falsiflability.        Jh addition we need to show what sorts of
                                                                     pre-
dictions the theoiy can make and what e^qilanations
                                                    resxat from it.
        Ifi.th   the examination of these remaining questions,
                                                               the basis upon
which we trill advocate scientific status for
                                              the archetypal theoiy
Trill   not be so liberal a basis as to admit other
                                                    disciplines such as
astrology and numerology from which we
                                       would vrish to vrithhold the
scientific label.        For these questions still to be discussed
                                                                   are the
sorts of questions which any discipline
                                        must be capable of anstjering
in a satisfactory way if it is to be included
                                              in the domain of science.


                               Falsifiability

        A preliminaiy topic which must be
                                          discussed in confronting the
issue of falsifiability is the problem of
                                          specil^dng the basis on
which ^m claim that an archetype is present.
                                                    The question at stake

here is brought into focus by the difficulties
                                               encountered by the
                                        177



  non-Juncian in detenrdning what observational
                                                ^ates of affairs count
  as evidence for the presence of an
                                     archetype.

               Bie existence and working of the
                                                 Jungian arche-
              types seems more difficult to deiaon^trate
                                                          opera-
              tionally: one can define objectively
                                                      particular
              stujiulus features or combinations of
                                                     these, and
              can say whether or not they are present?
                                                         but
              the Jungian archetypes have no clearly
                                                       defined essential
              features by which their presence may
                                                    be un-
              equivocany established, and so mai^ specific
              features are included as possible
                                                 manifestations
              of one or another archetype that
                                                it is always
              possible to claim one is present,

      Ibreover, Jungians themselves, sometimes
                                               make statements which
 seem to indicate that they see
                                archetypes in everything.  The follow-
 ing statement from Jacobi thus indicates
                                          an attitude insensitive to
 the problem of falsifiability:

             fnd sijice all p^hic life is absolutely grounded
             m  archetypes, and since i-re can spealc not
                                                          only
             of archetypes, but equally well of
                                                  archetypal
             situations, e^gjeriences, actions, feelings,
             insights, etc., any hidebound liMtation
                                                         of the
             concept would only detract fi-om its
                                                    richness
             of meaning and implication. ^

Ih order then to shm: that claims
                                  involving archetypes can not be

made compatible idth all possible
                                  observational states of affairs,
we must clearly indicate the observational
                                           basis for presence of
archetypes.

     A clue to   hoi;   we can go about meeting this
                                                     difficulty is provided
by reflections on the problem of
                                 individuation of ai^rhetypes.         This is
the problem of   hcnr   to tell one archetype from another.
                                                                This problem
is one manifestation of what     :.;e   have called the problem of the
                                                                       rational
reduction.    For it seems that the archetypal
                                               phenomena do not readily
lend themselves to classification
                                  into unambiguous types.
                                        178




                 These unconscious nuclei are the
                                                   archetypes and
                 they can, up to a point, be classified
                                                         and enumerated
                 through special images—the northologems—but
                                                               they
                 have a tendency to, as it vrere, dissolve
                                                           into each
                 other so that they seem at one time to be
                                                            numerous
                 and at others to be a single entity.^

          Vhen   \ie   speak of a problem of rational reduction,
                                                                 this is to
 iJidicate that the ambiguity is inherent
                                          to the phenomena rather than

 being a result of the inadequacy of the classificational
                                                          criteria.
 ]h this regard it is helpful to consider the
                                              analogous preblem of
 individuating species or other biological groups such
                                                       as phyla.
 Tihen   TO consider then on what basis it is decided
                                                      that in this
 instance you have         Uo   species whereas in another instance only

 one, we do not expect frem our taxanomist a
                                             definite decision pro-
 cedure which can be applied in all problematic
                                                cases.          Rather the
 classification of species turns in the end not
                                                so much on a priori
criteria of species as on the reasonable
                                         judgment of the professional
taxonomist, subject to its acceptance by
                                         the professional taxonandc
community.

         The poijit of this analogy is to indicate
                                                   that iihen dealing with
naturally occurring complex phenomena precise
                                              operational definitions
can not be expected in regard to the
                                     classification of the basic en-
tities.     Bius there are no simple answers to the
                                                    question of where
to draw the line beti-reen one archetype and
                                             another.         But although it
is unreasonable to expect a definitive decision
                                                procedure for dis-
tinguishing archetypes, nonetheless discriminations
                                                    can be carried
out by the experienced Jungian practioner,
                                           although on analogy with
biological speciation this will not eliMnate
                                             the element of conven-
tionality and thus professional controversy
                                            concerning the specification
of specific archetypes.^
                                              179




      If   ;re   consider   ttien   the more general problem of the recognition

 of archeiypes in regard to the difficultjr of the non-Jungian
                                                               in
 deciding -That to call an archelgrpe, the sort of ansner          ire   give is

 one couched in terms of lack of experience Tzith the theoiy.

             To understand the peculiar pheaomena of the arche-
                  one needs a lot of practical experience, f.i,
             -t^-pe
             the numinous quality, so indispensable to the
             recognition of an archetype, is an indefinable
             imponderable like the expression of the human
             eye, vrhich is indubitable yet indescribable
             (Letters. Vol, II, p. h90, letter to Stephen
             I.   -Abrams dated     5   Iferch 19B9),

 Bat of course the claim that difficulties ^dth the
                                                    empirical inter-
pretation of the theory are due to lack of knowledge of the theoiy

or lack of expeirience in applying it in specific cases
                                                        can easily

be construed as a possible defense against all critician of the

theoiy.    For to say that only the person e:cperienced         vrlth    applica-
tion of the theory really knonrs lAether or not it applies in ai^

specific case seeras to Txork against the possibility of there being

criticisms of the theory from standpoints which do not            alreadj--   assume it.

            In order to understand Jung, it has been said,
            one must experience          Ms
                                     findings at first hand—
           his -rork must be "at least partially lived
           through and validated existentialOy, befoi^ it
           can be throughly grasped on a conscious level"
            Dra Rrogoff , Jung's Fs7/cholog,r and Its Social
           ileaninf? (London: Pujutledge and Kegan Paul,
           1953), p. ix^ Prom the academic side, by
           contrast, comes the ai^ument that a consider-
           able amount of direct contact is likely to
           diminish objectivity. This, of course, is
           the old dilemma often set forth for depth
           p^chology in general—either one remains
           outside and therefore insufficiently ac-
           quainted ^Jith the facts, or one moves in-
           side and is cured of the desire to
           criticize. 5                   ;




     Itowever, although the practical difficulties
                                                           i-rith ImoT-zing hot-?

to apply the theory do seem in fact to lead to a situation
                                                           in which
                                           180




  oiOy experts ±n the theoiy can
                                 detennine                 hoi;   it applies in a specific
  case, this does not have the consequence
                                           of making the theoiy un-
  falslfiable or   ijtimune    from the possibility of criticism.
                                                                                  In order
  to demonstrate this point, it        Tdn        be necessary to recapitulate

  the observational grounds for
                                asserting the presence of archetj^es.

       Pficalling the discussion of this
                                         topic from Chapter 3, it was
  stated that the chief difficulty          ixx   establisl^g the presence of
 archetypes   ms   the fact that although the archetjije
                                                         was postulated
 to be part of the collective
                              unconscious, the form of its manifes-
 tation in the individual always reflected
                                           the cultural and personal
 experiences of the individual.            The problem of identifying the pre-

 sense of archetypes then is one of
                                    distinguishing the personal and

 collective contents.         Ibreover, irhat      i:as   distinctive of the collec-
 tive, archetypal contents iras, on the one hand,
                                                  their sjonbolic and
numinisfcic qualities, and, on the other
                                         hand, their alien character,

i.e., the fact that they appear in consciousness
                                                 T-dthout the indivi-

dual being able to account for then solely
                                           on                     tlie   basis of his pre-
vious, personal experience.          But these are introspective and subjec-

tive features and if the claiin that
                                     there are archetj^es just rested
on these types of claims, the critic
                                     ivould be justified in pointing

out the difficulties of establishing
                                     validation of introspective
reports.    This difficulty would be accentuated
                                                 by the fact that
the reports are usually made by
                                patients in Jungian therapy.                        Ilorr-

ever, in addition to the subjective
                                    introspective reports of arche-
typal e.^rience, Jung points         to!   the presence of the same motifs in
the nytJiology, religion, art and literature
                                             of widely divergent
cultures.   A loiowledge of cross-cultural ^^bology
                                                    is then brought
                                                              "



                                       181




  to bear on the symbolic
                          manifestations in the individual.             The
  clal.-u   is that these cultural parallels
                                             help to ercplain the meaning
  and diiplications of particular
                                  ^Tnbolic manifestations in the indi-
  vidual in .rays .Aich can not be
                                   satisfactorily accounted for solely

  lorappeal to the person's individual
                                       development or previous exper-
  iences.     M
              example of how this method is used to
                                                    elucidate the
  meaning of      ^bols    by appeal to cultural parallels helps
                                                                 clarify
  this point.

                   I can remember many cases of
                                                     people trho have
               consulted me because they xrere baffled
                                                             by their
               aim dreams or by their cliildren's.
                                                          They were
               at a complete loss to understand
                                                      the temis of
               the dreams. The reason iras that
                                                      the dreams
               contained images that they could not
                                                           relate to
               anything that they could remember or
                                                           would have
              passed on to their children, . .

              u   /Ji^^        recall the case of a'professor who
              had had a sudden vision and thought
                                                         he was in-
              sane.    He came to see me in a state of
                                                             complete
              panic.     I simp]y took a ItOO-year-old
                                                          book from
              tne shelf and showed h±a an old
                                                    woodcut depicting
              hxs very vxsxon.       "There's no reason for ySu
              to belxeve that you're insane," I
                                                       said to him.
                ihey laieT-7 about your vision 1|00
                                                     years ago.
              Ihei-^upon he sat doim entirely
                                                  deflated, but
              once more normal (I^and ^s
                                                 9ymbols, p. 58).
        It should be evident then where
                                        the difficulty is encountered
in ImoTdng     hoi.   to apply the theory.   For if the non-Jimgian has access
to the same data as the Jungian
                                practioner, he could easily be shoim
that the mministic symbolic images
                                    >ri.th cross-cultural
                                                          parallels
existed and that in this sense       the^ were   archetypes; but he .«>uld
be at a loss to say which archei^Tes
                                        he had been shoim or what was
their full meaning. Ih order to
                                    deal with the later problems and
employ the theory in a meaningful
                                     way, it Is thus necessaiy to
                                                                   gain
a worldng Knowledge of cross-cultural
                                         ^ymbologies.  Ihis tdll entail,
for ezcample, a toor-rledge of
                               the motifs of world^-dde ncrthologies
                                                                     and
                                          182




  religions.     From the standpoint of its empirical
                                                      basis then, it is
  ea^     to understand uhy the archetypal theoiy
                                                  is ft-equently not given
  Mich seidous consideration.           For the archetypal steptic frequently

  lacks either extensive experience vrith
                                          unconscious phenomena or else
  is unacquainted      i/itli   the sort of cross-cultural parallels
                                                                     :;hich

  Jungians claim as validation for the theoiy.

         But although confirmation of the archetypal
                                                     theoiy vrould entail
 a great deal of erudition, the validational
                                             basis of the theory, the
 cross-cultural parallels, are nonetheless part of
                                                   the public domain.
 Ibreover, these de facto considerations concerning
                                                    the practical
 difficulty of gaining a working Imowledge of the
                                                  employment of the
 theoiy do not mean that the validity of the theoiy
                                                    can not be evaluated
 by.the non-Jungian.            For although to understand   ho-j   the theory   i-rorks

 IJi   a practical way involves specialised loiowledge,
                                                        the theoiy claims
certain states of affairs which can be checked
                                               independently of a
detailed Imowledge of the manifestations of
                                            individual archetypes.
        For example, the theoiy claims that archetypal
                                                       manifestations
can be demonstrated in all races and
                                     civilizations of men ^/ithout
exception,     llhat   then will count as shotting that archetypes
                                                                   are
not present in a group of men?            In this regard the ideal test case

wuld     be a tribe which has not had previous
                                               cultural contact with
other human groups.         Biis is to guard against the possibility of

the group having talccn over symbols threugh
                                             contact id.th other cul-
tures.     To gather evidence against the archetypal
                                                     theory, we have
to show that the group has no indigenous
                                         religious or nythological
symbols.     This would in effect involve shovang that
                                                       the group had
no indigenous religious or itcrthological
                                          beliefs.
                                         183




        Other consequsnces which follcyj from the archetypal theoiy
                                                                    in-
 clude the postuiation of biological parallels to the archeiypes in

 lotrer organians.       For since the archetypes are assumed to arise

 through the course of evolution,          th^     must be prefigured in the other

 animals.    Ibreover, due to the close relationship uhich is postulated

 bettieen the archetypes and the instincts, this is an
                                                       especially critical
 point since   \ie   vrould ercpect   whatever instinctual aspects there are in

man to have homologies in the animal kingdom. (See page
                                                        U7.)                     If the

 efforts of the ethological school of animal behavior to
                                                         demonstrate
the existence of innate patterns of behavior can be shoim to
                                                             be
misguided, this trill count against the archetypal theoiy.                    Tims
in order to    ma2<5e   the archetypal theoiy viable, it must be shotm

that either ethology or some similar             tjrpe    of theory is valid.

        A tliird consequence wliich follows from the archetypal theory

is the assertion that archetj'pes idll be manifested in altered states

of consciousness,"        Although this seems to be a very vague claim,

what it rules out is the situation             iriiere archel^irpes   appear only in

patients undergoing Jungian therapy or in individuals who have read

Jung,    In this regard erqierimental results can be brought to bear

for or against the theoiy.            If experimental techniques designed to

produce altered      ^ates of consciousness uniformly do not produce ar^
sort of subject reports which describe phenomena
                                                 similar to the
Jungian description of archetypal experience, then this
                                                        vdll be
damning evidence against the theoiy,              Ibreover, it must be emphasized

here that the reports of subjects can not
                                          be uniformly interpreted

as archetypal.       Electrical stimulation of           tlie   brains of epileptics,
for ercample, tend to produce dream-like
                                         states, but they are easily
                                     I81t




 identified hy the subjects as being for the most part
                                                       memories of
 previous experiences,"^

      Ihese three e^camples indicate x/hat sort of evidence               rjOTild   count
 againsrt the theoiy, and thus       what sorts of states of affairs are in-

 compatible TTith it.^


                                  Explanation

      iO-though   i-re   can not enter here into all aspects of the question

 of archetypal explanation, 5* one principle problem            Td.th   explanation

in the archelg^al theory is that it does not seem possible in prin-

ciple to predict tjhen an arche-t^fpe ijill be manifested nor what its

appearance Trfll be liloe except idthin broad outlines.

             As has been stressed in this book, there are
             no lairs governing the specific form in ijhich
             an archetj'pe might appear, !Ihere are only
             "tendencies" . , , that, again, enable us
             to s^ only that such-and-such is likely to
             happen in certain psychological situations. ^

     Hoirever,    it is not reasonable to e:cpect       lai;s   depicting the re-

lationship betireen the arche-type per se and the archelypal image.

For the questions of when an archeiype appears and what its manifes-

tation vrtll be like are answered in terms of the interaction                 bett<reen

the innate archetype per se and the environment.                The archetypal

Image is then always a product of these         tv7o   factors interactirig with

each other in a djoiamic way,

     Biis often leads to a rtate of affairs in which we explain a

situation by appeal to the archetypal theory which              ire   could not have

predicted.    For example, Jung attergjted to explain the phenomenon of

Jlational Socialism on the basis of the activation of specific arche-

                                 1
types in the German people.           However, previous to the rise of Hitler
                                     18^




  and shortly thereafter Jung was imcertaln of
                                                       vrhat   outcome would ensue
  flm     the possession of the Gennan people by these
                                                       archetypes.
           In regard to explanation then, the
                                              archetypal theoiy is more like
  evolution theoiy than Ifevrtonian mechanics.        For prediction on the basis
  of the principles of evolution, such as
                                          the prediction that the fittest
 populations of organisms vdll survive, is always
                                                  subject to environ-
 mental circumstances which are subject to unforseeable
                                                        changes.                     For
 example, txhat species survives might be due as
                                                 a matter of fact to some
 environmental accident, such as location relative
                                                   to the eruption of
 a volcano, which has no relation to the organisms'
                                                    adaptation to the
                 12
 envxronment.          Bius the coui-se of evolution can not be predicted

 ;ri.th   certainty, although this does not mean that the theoiy
                                                                 of evolution
 is not e:5)lanatoiy.

          Oh the archetypal theoiy on the other hand,
                                                      what is unforseeable
that prohibits reliable prediction of the outcome
                                                  of behavior of
individuals or groups due to the activation of
                                               archetypes is exactly
how a     nm   archetypal manifestation irill intei^late        Td.th   the existing
cultural matrix.        For example, we can explain the appeal
                                                               of the cult
of Guru laharaj Ji, a teenage Indian who
                                         is celebrated as the messiali
by the Qlvine light ISlssion in the Ifeited
                                            States, on the basis of the

projection of the Archetype of the QLvine Child. ""^
                                                               T.^en xre   attempt
to determine why this particular archetype is
                                              manifested in this
particular     fom    at this particular   t±m   in histoiy, the anstrers we
give in teims of the loss of numinosity of
                                           the traditional re-
ligious symbols and the consequent appeal
                                          of symbolic fonns from a
non-TfesteiTi culture    which are different enough to seem        neir    and alive,
yet sijullar enough to the old symbols to be
                                             easily assimilated to the
                                             186




  existing culture.          Horrever, due to the uniqueness and
                                                                 comple:d.ty of
  the factors i/hich are involved in any
                                         pai-ticular time in histo:cy,

 this ejqjlanation of the appearance of a                neir   manifestation of the
 -Archetype of the Divine Child is not
                                       sufficient for us to make

 law-like generalisations from             TrirLch   ^^ could then e:cpect e:cact

 predictions.

         If   T'xe   consider the situation in the individual
                                                              rather than talk-
 ing from a cultural perspective, the
                                      uncertainty^ t^ich prohibits

 our    loiOTTing    exactly when an archetype trill appear and
                                                                what its
 manifestation trill be        lilce    is again due to the indeterminancy of

 the relationship beti/een the innate archetype
                                                per se and environment.
 For the appearance of archetypes is conditioned
                                                 ly one's overall
 knoijledge and eiqjeriencej^

        Ibreover, trhereas from the cultural perspective
                                                         the difficulty
vjith   predicting archetypal manifestations is primarily
                                                          due to the
complexity and uniqueness of the relevant factors
                                                  (here archetypal

theoiy shares the same problems             vriLth   historical ejqilanation and pre-
diction), TTith regard to the individual there
                                               is the additional fac-
tor of an ethical issue.               For in order to be able to separate
                                                                           the var-
iables at tfork in determinijig           hot;   environment conditions the appearance
of archetypes in the individual,             tre   trould need to perform an isolation

experiment on a human being lasting several        ""^
                                            years.
        In addition to the ethical problems
                                            tdth the isolation experi-
ment, another reason         trliich   compHcates the problems        td.th   determining
the appearance and manifestation of
                                    archetypes is the effect of the
conscious attitude.          For the degree to which the individual
                                                                    trorks
t^th the archetypes and attempts to
                                    understand their relationship to
                                       187




 his personality effects      hovj   and when   thej--   appear to the individual.

 Ibreover, it is evident that Jung's irork in attenipting to trace
                                                                   this
 relationship betvreen the phenomenology- of archetypes and the develop-

 ment of personality as encompassed by his theoiy of individuation
                                                                   is
 veiy much pioneer work and that much additional study on this matter

 still needs to be done,

      mth     regard to e:cplanation and prediction ijith the archetypal

 theory then,   ire   must conclude that two principle factors prohibit

the theoiy from being able to accomplish feats of explanation and

prediction similar to those of the physical sciences.                Qn the one

hand, it is evident that the archetypal theory is an
                                                     iinmature theory

in the sense that its full empirical implications have yet to be

worked out.     Ibreover, in many respects the theoretical foundations

of the theoiy are still far from adequate. 1^ To mention one
                                                             e:cample,

the relationship xrhich Jung has in mind bet^treen archetypes and in-

stincts needs to be more precisely specified.                It has been one of

the goals of this study to attempt to make some progress in the

direction of clarif^ring foundational questions, but it must be con-

fessed that a great deal of further vrork in this direction needs to

be done before to could e:cpect its acceptance and widescale ectployment

in such obviously applicable areas as anthropology.

     But, on the other hand, if we admit that the theory is
                                                            an immature
theory, this is not to say that the theory is not scientifically

viable or that its methods are inadequate for what they
                                                        attempt to
accomplish.     For the complex nature of the subject matter imposes

certain definite limitations on T;hat        vre   could ej^ject from even a

foundationally impeccable archetypal theorjr whose empirical
                                                             implications
                                           188




 had been throueh^jr trorked out.            EspeciaUy   id.th   regard to e^^planation
 and prediction then,          ire   can hardly e:qpect perfect knOTrledge in prin-

 ciple from an archetypal theoiy.



                                         Evidence

      The archetypal image is postidated to be the
                                                   end result of the
 interaction betireen the innate archetype per se
                                                  and the environment.
 But from the discussion in the last section
                                             we              sat:   that the arche-
 t^al theory does        not attempt to specify precisely horr these two

 factors interrelate to produce the archetypal
                                               image.                 Thus, in the
 absence of   axjy   archetypal laws speciiying how these two factors
                                                                      inter-
 act to produce the archetypal images, the question
                                                    arises how the
innateness of the archetype per se is to be established.
                                                                          For if we
are not in fact able to separate these two factors
                                                   through some type
of Isolation e:5>erdment, it might xrell seem that the
                                                       claim that the
archetypes are innate rather than acquired as a result of
                                                          e3:perlences

in individual development would be on very weak ground.
                                                                         Ifcreover, if

we cannot sub^antiate the Innate nature of the archetype
                                                         per se,
then the theoiy as a whole vrill lack a credible basis.

     In this regard it is Instructive to consider in
                                                     general the sort
of evidence Jung gives in support of his theory.
                                                                 la particular   vre

need to examine      hoi-r   he attempts to establish that the archetypal
                                                                          images
are due to Innate factors.

     Jung argues then that the archetypal Images
                                                 are due to innate fac-
tors primarily on the basis of paradigm cases
                                              In which it can be rea-
sonably- ascertained that the persons involved
                                                          had had no previous ex-
posure to the sort of motifs that appear in the dreams
                                                       or visions.
                                             139




 iathough    ire     cannot from an ethical point of view isolate
                                                                  the human
 subject    fi-ora   the possibilitjr of cultural influences, in some
                                                                      actual
 cases it is nevertheless possible to determine that
                                                     the subject could
 not have learned of the motifs.               Naturally in   mo^   cases of alleged

 archetypal manifestation, this degree of control irill not
                                                            be possible.
 For when the individual reports that he can not trace
                                                       a specific image

 to something he has acquired through learning, he
                                                   may be either lying
 or mistaken.         In the latter case the possibility of
                                                                    ciyptomesia must
 always be kept in mind, i.e., the possibility
                                               that the person has

 forgotten what he had previously learned which now
                                                    appears as an alien
content of consciousness without apparent connection
                                                     with antecedent
experience, when in fact this connection has been
                                                  simply forgotten.
A third corrolicating factor is the element of
                                               suggestion, where in-
stead of the ojiages being spontaneously produced
                                                  their appearance is
due to the suggestive influence of the investigator.

     Ibreover, in order to e^fcablish that the content of
                                                          the dream or
vision is an archetype, in addition to establisliing that
                                                          it has not
been acquired through previous ejqjerience,            ire   must also shw; that it

has cultural parallels.         However, in this regard the sort of correla-

tion that   ire    need to establish betiTeen spontaneous products without

previous experiential antecedents and similar manifestations
                                                             in
cultural ^Tmbology is not one beti^een images but
                                                  rather one bet^reen
motifs.    Bjr   emphasizing   tlie   similarity betiTeen motifs rather than

symbols per se, we rule out the possibility that the
                                         |
                                                     similarity
bettreen symbols is due to chance or is a
                                          similarity viith no signifi-
cance.    For in order to establish that a qynibol is
                                                      a manifestation of
an archetypal motif, rather than simply comparing
                                                  the similarity of
                                              190




  isolated     ^bols,      tts   mist examine       hoi:   the syvibols function in relation
  to their context.

                It does not, of course, suffice
                                                  sintply to connect
                a dream about a snalce irith the noiiiological
                                                                occiir-
                rence of snakes, for uho is to guarantee
                                                            that the
               functional meaning of the snalos in the dream
                                                                 is
               the same as in the irorthological setting?
                                                             ]h
               order to draw a valid parallel, it is
                                                         necessaiy
               to knor; the functional meaning of the
                                                         individual
               ^jTtibol, and then to find out Txhether
                                                       the apparently
               parallel mj^thological symbol has a similar con-
               tex-t and therefore the same functional
                                                          meaning^
               (Vol, IX-A, p. 50),

      1!hus,   if   lie   can    shovr   that a given content is not due to previous

 learning and has the required cultui-al
                                         parallels, this is the sort
 of evidence that Jung gives in support
                                        of his theory of archetypes.

 I'breover, it is evident here that
                                    it is the first factor, the demon-
 stration that the spontaneous content has
                                           not been learned, that                        iri.ll

 be the most difficult aspect of the
                                     task of evidentially substantia-
ting the archetypes,

     A paradigm case to             irhich Jung refers       most often in the latter
regard involves the vision of a schizophrenic
                                              patient vihich Jung
noted in 1906.

             One day I found the patient standing at
                                                     the                    x^^indoTr,
          Tragging his head and blinking into the sun,
                                                            Ife
          told mo to do the same, for then I Tjould see
                                                            some-
          tlrnig very interesting.    Ihen I aslced him trhat
          he saw, he T7as astonished that I could see
                                                         no-
          thing, and said:    "SureHy you see the sun's penis—
          \rhen I move ror head to and fro, it moves
                                                       too, and
          that is vrhere the iriLnd comes from" (Vol. IX-A.
                                                               paces


     Jung, who at that time was not Tjell
                                          acquainted tdth the literature
of mythology, did not           knor-r   what to   malce   of the vision.     Hbrrever, four
years later in a text describing a rite
                                        of lUthras he discovered an
account which depicted the same motif.
                                       191




                 "Draw breath from the rays, draw in three
                                                              times
                 as strongily as you can and you TidU feel yourself
                 raised up and walking towards the height,
                                                              and
                you vrill seem to be in the middle of the
                                                             aerial
                 region. ... The path of the visible gods irin
                 appear through tlie disc of the sun, who is
                                                               God
                my father. likeirise the so-called tube, the
                origin of the ministering irind. For you
                                                            idll
                see hanging doim from the disc of the
                                                         sun
                 something that looks like a tube, ilnd
                                                          toiTards
                the regions vzestrrard it is as though
                                                        there
                were an infinite east >7ind. But if the
                                                           other
                Tond should prevail towards the regions of
                                                               the
                east, you xtUI in like manner see the
                                                         vision
                verring in that direction"' (quoted Albrecht
                ib.eterich. Sine Mlthrasliturprie. Leiozip.
                                              "-^     .
                                                          b, 1903.
                                                              7    ,
                p. 6) (Vol. IX-A, p.   £),
        Tlie   possibility of the patient having previously learned
                                                                    of this
archetj-pal motif, "the idea of a Tdnd-tube
                                            connected vrlth God or the
sun" (Vol. IX-A, p. 52), is largely nullified by
                                                           tlie   fact that the
passage wliich Jung cites as a parallel was only
                                                 published in 1903
which was after the patient had been committed.
                                                           Ibreover, other
incidences of this rare motif as depicted in medieval
                                                      paintings
xrere   not in   tlie   local gallery in Zurich where the patient had
                                                                      lived
his whole life (Vol, IX-A, p. ^2).

        Another ercmple cited by Jung in     Ifen   and lis Symbols involves
archetypal dream motifs reported by a
                                      ten-year-old girl.
               "The evil animal," a snakelike monster
                                                      vriLth mam-
               horns, kills and devours all other animals.
                                                              But
               God comes from the foxxc comers, being
                                                      in fact
               four separate gods, and gives rebirth to
                                                         all
               the dead animals.

               A^ small mouse is penetrated by
                                               vroiros, snakes,
               fishes, and human beings. Thus the mouse
                                                            becomes
               human. This portrays the four stages of the
               origin of mankind.

               A drop of water is seen, as it appears when
                                                            looked
               at through a microscope. The girl sees
                                                         that the
               drop is full of tree branches. This portrays
                                                               the
               origin of the world ( Ifan and His Symbols,
                                                             p. 59).
                                        192




  The first citation contains the motif
                                        of divine restitution,

  #okatastasis, as
  .                   trell as   the motif of a divine quaternity.             The
  second and third citations illustrate the
                                            cosmogonic             itorth   depicting
  the origin of the uorld and man         (Ijfen   and His Symbols, pages 6O-6I).

         The problem >/ith this sort of evidence
                                                 is that it has the charac-
 ter of a selected demon^ration of
                                   a lifted number of individual
 cases.    Ibreover, it is never possible >d.th
                                                absolute certainty to
 rule out the possibility of deception
                                       and/or ciyptomnesia, and Jung's
 word is just about all the basis
                                  to have for judging the reliability
 of his subjects and detemlning
                                their lack of previous exposure to
 symbols from ciatural sources.

        But ^/ithin the context of his method
                                              of investigation, x^hich is
 phenomenological rather than experimental,
                                            it is difficult to see hou
lie   could go beyond the sort of evidence Jung
                                                presents.             l€th this
l5Te of approach, the best       ire   could manage i/ould seem to be a larger

collection of siMlar paradigm cases.               In regard to numbers of cases,

Jung often says that he could easily
                                     multiply his examples but hesi-
tates to do so since each case requires
                                        lengthy discussion in order
to mate clear the context out of wliich
                                        the symbols are taten for                    com-
parison.

           Establishing such facts not on3y requires
                                                       lengthy
          and wearisome researches, but is also
                                                   an ungrateful
          subject for demonstration. As the
                                                symbols must
                       °^^ of their context, one has to launch
          ?n^h^«^"'
          lorth into exhaustive descriptions,
                                                 personal as
          vrell as symibological, and this
                                           is practically
          impossible in the frameiTork of a lecture
                                                      (Vol. IX-A, p. 50).
     In order to make clear what
                                   is meant by an archetypal nwtif then,
rather than givijig a sumtnaiy of its
                                      essential features, the best
approach is to give examples of the motif
                                          vdthin its various contexts
                                          193




 of manifestation.          This is illustrated Tvhen      ire   tiy to give a list of
 archelypes.          For vdthout actual examples of how these
                                                               archetypes func-
 tion in a given context, such a list produces only
                                                    a very superficial

 understanding of what an archetypal motif consists.
                                                                      Ibreover, in any
 case archetj'pal motifs are not easiOy divided
                                                into unambiguous discrete

 types.      These sorts of considerations then are reasons lAy
                                                                Jung adheres
 to a descriptive, phenomenological method of
                                              investigation ijhich yields
 evidence of an essential3y nonquantitative nature.

         IIoiTever,   the archetj^pal theoiy irould rest on a very suspect

empirical basis if the onJy evidence            \ie   had for the theory is the
 sorts of cases just discussed, which for the
                                              most part arise out of
the context of therapeutic work done by Jungians.
                                                                    Ih order for the

theory to be credible at all, it must be shaim
                                               to have consequences
which are manifested outside of the Jungian
                                            therapeutic context.
         In this regard    ;re   can appeal to the commonality of sr/mbolic mo-

tifs in cultures throughout the world           :ri.dely   separated in space and
tijue.    However, although this type of evidence is of
                                                        a extraclinical
and publicly observable nature, it has definite
                                                limitations so far as
constituting compelling evidence for the archetypal theoiy
                                                           is concerned.
For it is erven more difficult to establish the
                                                spontaneous origin of
symbolic motifs in cultures than it is in individuals,
                                                       since the
histoiy of and influences on the foraier are more
                                                  uncertain than for
an individual.         Ibreover, appeal to cross-cultural similarities
                                                                       will
not have much probative stren^h independently
                                              of the ability to demon-
strate the emergence of these same archetypal
                                              motifs in individuals.
     athough we might expect that, irrespective of the
                                                       difficulty of
substantiating the spontaneous origin of symbolic
                                                  motifs in various
                                   19li




  cultures, anthropological evidence
                                     would nonetheless prove to be
  veiy helpful in e^ablishing the
                                  credibility of the theory, this
  e^ctation is for the most part not      fulfilled.    For due to the
 difficult nature of the theoiy in
                                   its practical application, anthro-
 pologists tend either to accept the
                                     theoiy and to interpret their
 data from a Jungian perspective,
                                  or else reject the theoiy from an
 xmkna.ledgeable standpoint. In the
                                     latter case, it is difficult to
 deteiMne the degree to uhich their
                                    findings support the theoiy,
 since for the   mo^   part they are not sensitive to   .rhat   constitutes
 an archetype and are unaware of the
                                     diverse phenomenology of the
 various arehel^rpal motifs. ^ 7

      Due to the difficulties of
                                 evaluating the evidence for the arehe-
 typal theoiy independently of a Jungian
                                         framework of understanding,
 in the last chapter we suggested that
                                       reports from e^^rfments designed
 to dJiduce altered states of
                              consciousness be   ^udied in order to see
whether anything siMlar to descriptions
                                        of arehetypal motifs was
reported.   If none were reported, then
                                        this would be streng evidence
against the theoiy.     Qn the other hand, hor^ver, the
                                                        claim that there
 are such siMlar descriptions
                               which constitute confiiming
                                                             evidence
 for the archetypal theoiy is
                              rendered preblematic by the fact
                                                                 that
mny of the investigators are d^uenced
                                           by Jung's work and thus
readily assume his theoretical
                                vie.;point in interpreting their
                                                                  data.
Ibreover, in many of the ^udies
                                  involving drugs, the element of
                                                                    sugges-
tion was a relevant variable not
                                  controlled.   (Bbth of these considera-
tions apply to the Masters and
                                Houston stuc^r discussed below.
     But it is clear that this sort
                                     of researeh offers the
                                                            promise of
a solution to the problem of
                             e:ctending the validational
                                                         basis of the
                                      19^



  theory beyond the sort of evidence to uluch
                                              Jung originally appealed.

  For if no additional support for the theory
                                              is forfchcoming besides
 the sort of data for rrhich it ims oi-iginalOy
                                                designed to e:q)lain,
 then ue T;ould have to conclude that the
                                          theoiy is on              wak   grounds.
      Ife   vjill   thus proceed to discuss one     e:cainple   of such evidence
 from altered states of consciousness
                                      research.''^               This research as
 reported by R.K.I.. Ilasters and Jean Houston
                                               in Varieties            o_f   Psychedelic
 ^^^^"°^         involves T;ork viith the chemical substances LSD-25
             .
                                                                     and
 p^'ote and covers a period of more than
                                         fifteen years.               A total of
 206 subjects i/ere given the drugs.

      Bie investigators reported that the
                                          perception of the guides                 In.

 the e:cperiinent iras frequently distorted In
                                               such a way that            th^   were
apparently seen as archetypal figures.

             3h a fairly comraon distortion the guide
                                                      may be
             perceived by the subject as one or rore of a
             vaidety of archetypal figiu-es. For e:;2mple, a
             female guide may be seen as a goddess, as a
             priestess, or as the personification of Tri.sdom
             or truth or beauty.   Descriptions of some of
             these "archetypal" perceptions have included
             seeing the guide's featm^s as "gloiTing
                                                      vrLth a
             luminous pallor" and her gestures as beinp
             "cosmic," yet "classical. "20

     Ibreover, in the course of the ercpei-iments,
                                                   rrythological and
religious symbolic imageiy      -jas frequentlcjr   encountered.
             Jh the p^Tchedelic drug-state
                                           rcrthologies abound.
            The guxde often may feel that he
                                             is bearing
            latness to a multi-layered complex of
                                                  in/tholopical
            ^stems as they arise out of their latency in
            the mind of the subject, ^^

     Bie most frequently recurring
                                   irythic themes           ^re    summarized as
follows:

                          Child-IIero, I'yths of Creation, I^hs
            ^V'^ll °V'^^
            of  the Eteraal Itetum (Cycles of Ilatui-e), IRrths
            of Paradise and the Fall, Ifero I-^hs,
                                                     Goddess Ifyths,
                                            196




                I-^yths of nhcest and Parricide
                                                  (Cfedipus, Electra,
                etc.}, IJrths of Polarity (light and Darlmess,
                                                                   Order
                and Chaos), I-Tjrths of the /^di-ogyne (ihle -Female
                Synthesis J, I^^hs of the Sacred Quest. Prometheus-
                Faust lijrths (lyths of the Trickster). '2

       Heli['ious images of some Idnd vrere repoii^ed
                                                      in ninety-six
 percent of the 206 subjects.              These included images of religious

 figures:       Qirist, Buddha, saints, godOy figures, IfiJJlam
                                                                HLake-
 type figures (fifty-eight percent)? devils and demons
                                                       (forty-
 nine percent)} and engels (seven percent ).23

      Despite the factors of the influence of
                                              Jung's work and the pro-
 blem of suggestion, these results seem to
                                           con^itute convincing evi-
 dence for the archetypal theoiy.



                          Archetypes and Evolution Theorj

      In considering the scientific status of
                                              the archetypal theoiy,
 it has been      oui-   concern to demonstrate that the theory is
                                                                   compatible
in principle irith a contemporary scientific
                                             understanding, i.e., that
the theory can be construed as a viable scientific
                                                   one.                   In this re-
gard, it is essential to ecrtablish that the
                                             theozy is not logically
tied to an evolutix)naiy theory r/hich has been
                                                repudiated hy                modem
biologists, namely, one involving appeal to
                                            the inheritance of
acquired characteristics.

     As   vre   saxr   in Chapter 3 (page      6o   ),   there was one point in Jung's
career irhere he postulated that the archetypes
                                                xTere inherited by means

of such a mechanism and that archetj^pes
                                         were the deposits of repeated
e^cperiences (Vol.        VH,   p. 6?).    jllot^ver,    Jung retracted this viex. and
thereafter did not         atteii^^t   to e:cplain the evolutionaiy mechanism
                                                                              by
Tihich archetypes become         part of the innate structure of the
                                                                     psj-che
                                      197




  e.xept to say that the archetypes
                                    .rere inherited as part of
                                                               the struc-
  ture of the brain and hence
                              evolved as man evolved (Vol.
                                                            XL, p. H^p,
  note   2   and Vol. IX-A, p. 78).

         It is cleai'   hou the latter position can
                                                    be construed as in
  principle compatible .dth Daondnian
                                        mechanisms of evolutionary change.
  Ha^evor, although ue can see
                                ho., this sort of origin
                                                         of archetypes
  through evolution is possible
                                 in principle, we might still
                                                               question
  whether the iiiheritance of such
                                    dispositions to produce symbolic
  linages is plausible from the
                                standpoint of    modem evolutionary
  theoiy.     ]h other words, is there any
                                           reasoning from the biological
 pod^t of vieu which can support
                                 the hypothesis that such
                                                          dispositions
 are in fact inherited?

       Now although,re do not Imow what
                                         sort of genetic mechanisms
                                                                     might
be responsible for the
                         inheritance of such di.spositions,
                                                             this aspect
of ignorance does not count
                              against the archetypal theory
                                                              since the
genetic mechanisms .;hich are
                               responsible for mary aspects of
                                                                 the hu-
man being are as yet, to say
                               the leart, imperfect^,
                                                       understood. Ho,.-
ever, if it can be shorn
                           how a structure enables a
                                                     man to be better
adapted to the environment i^
                                such a manner as to produce
                                                             relative^,
inore proger;,.
              than another man lacldng the
                                             structure, then it is rea-
 sonable to suppose from the
                              standpoint of modern evolutionary
                                                                   theory
that whatever genes are responsible
                                      for the structure ..oil tend
                                                                      to
increase in the overall population
                                     of the species.   a.ot.-ing that

dispositions to produce symbolic
                                   Mages have probably been inherited
is then reducible to the
                          problem^ of shoidng the basis
                                                         in terms of irhich
it is reasonable to believe
                             that these dispositions did
                                                            in fact confer
a selective advantage on
                         those humans or predecessors
                                                         of humans who
                                     190




 happened to have the necessaiy genes to produce then.

      In.   this regard ue point to the fact that man is not a solitary

 species but evolved as a social andinal.        Ihus, it is not difficult

to see hoir the sui-vival of nan as a species has
                                                  been enhanced by
mechanisms which facilitate social cooperation such as the
                                                           develop-
ment of a shared ciature.        Ibreover, it is eagy to understand     haii

the religious or ncrthological heritage of a human society
                                                           gives it
unity and stability and      hoi; "the   integration of a social group,

its cohesion, is maintained by the direction of certain
                                                        sentiments
toT7ard a ^inbolic center,    "^^^



     If we admit that religious and mythological ^Tnbolic systems

have survival value in that they enhance social cooperation tjithin

the human community, the likelihood that dispositions tjhich tend to

produce symbolic manifestations xdJ.1 be selected for in the course

of evolution would seem to veiy great,         Fran the standpoint of

modem evolutionary       theoi-y, we can conclude from these considerations

that the inheritance of archetypes is something Trhich is very
                                                               lilcely
                    -^
to have occurred,
                                                             199




                                                         Notes

             1

 n,™^    i*h ^^®^' "P^f Sociopsycholosical Malysis of
                 4.
 Cigrent Mthropology.
                                                                                   Follcbales."
                                                                                     -^i-^i^s,
                                               1;   (1963), p. 2^6.

                      Jacobi, CoiTOle:c. Archetype. Symibol.
                                                             p. ^9,
            3
                      lUchael Pordham, Hew Dgvclotaisnts in ihalytical
 (london :              Pujutedge and Ifegan Vaxilimi), ^7
                                                            ^7.
                                                                                   "        ^
                                                                                  P^ircholoErvr
                                                                                    ^


            1;
             aspect of disanalogjr i-dth biological speciation
                      ''^
 r^^>,^««                                                      in the
 fr'^^^.J^^.J^fy^^-'^^^.^^^-types       is that vhereas it is reasonable
 to a,qpect that bxological species delineate
                                                distinct entities,
 nane^jr populations of similar
                                 organisms capable of interbreeding
 irlth each other, archetypes are
                                   better thought of as processes
 rather than as distinct entities. Ira
                                           Rrogoff
    ... in the final analysis it is incorrect tosuggests    then that
                                                     speak of arche-
 22££ ^s noTins, if ire are implcjdng by tliat each has a speciHT"
         SSSTSi^^tT^A" ^^ ^^f^.
 Sd Ifunan Destiny, p. 1^6.
 and                                                                  ^   S^ch^nicity.


 (IT..      Yor;^^Jo^'vaiy^?gfS'                              f6^P.   MP^      ^i^IE-tation


          ^.fTf^^''^^
    m^r,^ such
                           ^^^^ altered states of consciousness, im have
in
^r, inind
                 things as dream research, vrark id.th hypnosis,
                                                                  Kcneriments
iTxthp^rchedelic drugs, sensoiy deprivation e:q5eriinents,
                                                               and work
                                                                    uuxit idth
                                                                          i/iwi
electrical stimaation of the brain.
    .^ -..^^^
manifested
              '^° "°* ^^^ '^^
                            m                       ^^
                                    ^®^® ^^at arche-types can only be
                  altered states of consciousness. Presumably the
archetypes influence consciousness in all its states.
                                                             Hovrever,
analogously to other aspects of the unconscious, the
                                                           archetypes
are most noticeable when consciousness is
                                              interferred idth in
some way as under the influence of drugs or if
                                                    there is a relaxa-
tion of conscious attention as in hypnosis or dreams,
                  7
                            ^^   ^'         Sem-Jacobsen, Depth-SLec trograTihic Stimulation

foil ^)^^ —
                                      '^*
 ^   4.1.        T^
                                               ^^'^^°'' (Springfield, ILHnois.-^^riT.

                  8                                      i




          ^^*           not to say, of course, that there are no
^««-?M«
possible ad hoc *^^!.if
                 modifications which could save ttie theoiyfrom
contraiy evidence in these cases. For in
                                           addition to the fact
that ire must not underestimate the ingenuity
                                              of theorists, theories
^   not in any case sijnply overthroTm by single
traiy evidence. Iloirever, in the cases
                                                 incidences of con-
                                        cited, it is veiy difficult
to see what sort of ad hoc modifications
                                          could be invoted which
                                             200




  would not involve a radical revision
                                       of the theoiy itself.

  I^lcul2ygS Se'"t%e?L'JtirSi^      ?r°^^^^
                                             e.T,lanation.
     conc^g arohetySs^o not'^ol^ SSnfAf
 tions                                   '"^?%"^ ^"^-




 quertiln*'
                ^"^'       ''°^-   '^   "^   ™     ^°=-   ^   ^'^^ discussion        on this




 TV   J   tT^ ''^',""'?            ''^^''ologyof the Child ArchetTpe."
                                                                       to Vol




rA^P'-^s ^^-"<^-^^^^ s:o^^=s^,ssr«
               ^™\T
               have    ^°Pl®
                       a
                    dream of
                                         ''''°   ^"^ ^^ boolcs and never
                                                              "Cr
                                         anjrthing rerdniscent of   m- xj^l
                ^.^t.
                you
                         "*        "/^
                                  ^"^ *^^^*
                      have read, you get
                                                      "  you understand what
                                                   a frame
           ,
                                                  of mind or a
                ^oblematic outlook v.-hich you did not
                                                         have before,
                and that, of course, influences
                                                   your dreams
                (^iies^ ^01. II, p. 137, letter to a                     yZg
                                                              "'
                C-reel: girl dated lU 'Dctober
                                               19^4).

to an Iso'iatSf   ^oS^S"^ TS^'tS^S^'''' "^ "J*^ «'->




               np^seLf in enon^ous
                                   difficulties                b^'   fraSng Sn^ral
               fonnulations which az^ intended
                                                               Z e^Sl the
                                                201




                        Trtiole field of htnnan experience. I had to keep
                         to errperienceis that uere directlir accessible to
                                                                              me
                        and coiiipare then -.rlUi data dra:ni from the irhole
                        iiistoiy of the mind.     This gives rise to some
                        degree of inexactitude which ma]:es rny efforts
                        appeal' provisional.     It is perfect!-'- clear to
                        me that evei^-thing I do is pioneer ^rark vjiiich
                        has still to be folloired by a real laying
                        of foundations, but there are gratifjdng"
                        signs that others are beginning to make
                        forays into this territory ( letters. Vol, I,
                        p. 231, letter to Hiidolf Pannr.Tits dated
                        27 I larch 1937).
       17
         It might seen that these considerations indicate
                                                             that one must
assume the archet^^pal theoiy in order to be able to
                                                       see v/hat counts as
data 111 favor of it. Ilotrever, this difficultjr of
                                                     appraisiiig the evi-
dence for the ai-chet^rpal theoiy from a non-Jungian
                                                      perspective e-oen-
plxfies tne close interrelationshiTJ that e:dsts bet-zeen
                                                            theory and
evidence. Tliat is to say, the tlieoiy determines irhich
                                                          data ai-e re-
levant as evidence and ^rhat is relevant as evidence from
                                                             one theoret-
xcal perspective is irrelevant from another. The fact
                                                          that Jun^'
                                                                   "
employs a phenomenological method of djircstigation does
                                                           not of
course mean tliat he does not select what is relevant for
                                                             descrip-
tion from essentially theoretical considerations.
      18
        jathin the scope of this study, we cannot hope to e:camine all
relevant evidence. Ibreover, in light of the
                                                lengths discussion often
necessary to malce clear what is meant by the claim that
                                                           an arcliety^
has been e:q)erienced, ttb thought it better to
                                                discuss one e-cample dn
detail rather than simply mentioning several.
                                                  Other sources of evi-
dence involving irork :iith altered states of
                                              consciousness wJiich ire
will not discuss include the works of such authors
                                                      as the follotrijif"
                                                                       "
Carlos Castenada, Journey, to Scblan. Jolin liOy,
                                                   The Center of the
2Z£lone (Ilew York: Bantam Bo5!=s71^72), and itanT^ac!ay7T5^aifr-
Power (]Iei7 fork: Berkeley Publishing Corp.,
                                               1972).
      19
            ^»^.U        I   festers and Jean   Hou^on, The Varieties of Psycliedelic
Bqjenence      (U&.i         York:     Dell, 1966), p. §.
                                                                  "
                                                                         ^^       =^=^

      ^° aid.,
               p. 92.
      21
            Ibid ., p.         22lt,

      22
            Ibid.   ,   pages 22];-22^.
      ^^ Ibid.
                    ,   p. 26^.

                                ^"^^^^^     ^^™3II E2o2aii2a (Chicago   t   MLine Publishing
Co.   1966!™^'^3li;
     2^
      ^ Of course, the arche-^j^pal theoiy is not the
                                                      only possible ex-
planation of how religious and rtrfahological ^inbolic systems
                                                               come into
                                 202




        l*^".^^heP?jnt about the survival value of religions and
^^r
rytnologies IS adratted, this on2y entails the
                                               inhei-itance of       dis-
?hSl^°''''o!° ^^ffTdsh^^^^^^'^ ^2es rather than the full archetypal
theoiy.   C^e msht         to argue, for e:xariple, that an that Sas
necessaiy for such ^stenis to come into
                                            being is language Sd
imaginatxon.   Ilorrever, it irould seem that
                                               the archetyp2 theory
Tixth Its hypothesis of the Innate
                                                       f
                                      archetj'pesVoffers
dispositions to produce images which goes
                                                           theo^ of
                                              a long va^- toiTard e'c-
plao^     tne culturain;5r universal sJonilarity and
                                                      emotional a^al
of religious and mjrfchological motifs,
                                          whereas this additional
e.^lanatoiy ainport is lacldng ,i±th other ideas
                                                    of hw; symbolic
Ideas might have originated,                                j    ^^
                                                                     —




                                       REfEREMCES


 MLer, Gerhard.        Letter to the editor.                Horizon. 19 (I9h9), It^.


      ThT'Ar,
      :pie Ma3ytic
              n     ^^       Psychology and the Principle of Complementarity."
                        IVocess: ^Aojjis, Malvsis. Training; , mited
                     ••^^''^''^^S^*-   Jfe^^York:       G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1971,
                                                                                       by
      noSl
 mport,   Gordon. Personality and Social Bicounter.
      rress, I960.
                                         —                   ———
                                                    Boston: Beacon


 Buber, Martin. lihlipse of God.             Ifew   York:    Harper and Ibu, 1965.

^^^!f^'3^^-     "%sUcal and Scientific       Aspects of the Psycho-
   analytic Jheones of Preud,     MLer, and Jung." American Journal
      of Psychotherapy. 2h (I960), 2(39-307.                       ^^
Campbell, Bernard G.         1*2^      EzSlHtion. Chicago        :   Adline Publishing


Campbell     Joseph. "Bios and J&rthos. " Psychoanalysis
                                                         and Culture .
     ^ted      by George G. mbur and Uamer Muennterb^^i'e
                                                                               r.   Ifeu   York;
     intematxonal Adversities Press, 19^1, 329-3^3,

Casey, ^rard.       "Toixard an Archetypal Imagination." Spring.
                                                                 197li,


Castane^, Carlos. Journey to            Ibctlan. Net/ York:          Sdinon   and Schuster,


Dry, Avis.   Tt^ePsycholonr of Jm^: A Critical Ihtei-pretation.
                                                                New
     York:    John IJiley and Sons, 1961.^

Bdinger, jai-rard. "The Collective
                                    Unconscious as I.fenife^.ed in Psychosis
                                                                    ^"°^^'                         "
     iknerf£an. Jounial of Ps^^chotherapy. 9
                                             (1955), 62l;-629.

__      .    ^o     and ArchetvTje. Baltimore: Ifenguin Books,
                                                               1972.
Faraday, Arm.       Qpean Power . New York:
                                         ;


                                                       Dell, I966.


"^^'SmlS toSlT^B^f:                                   "^^^^      °' folktales."        Cu-^

^°^°\oSf57ir^^ ^^^
                                       and Occultian. New York:               IMversity



                                       203
                                          20ii




 Fordham, lachael. Ifew DeveloTments in y\nal^rbical
                                                     ^ychology.                               London-
      Pcoutledge and Ifegan Paul, 19^7.


 ——   --^'     M     <^.1ectlvB Vs^rche.         London:     Routledge and Kegan Paul,


 Franz, II.L. von.        "Conclusion: Science and the Thconscious. " Han and
      FH.S   9yinbols.     Edited by C.G, Jung. Hew York: Efell. 1968";                                ~
                                                                                    »     ^
      376-387.                                                                                *



 Friedman, Paul and Gold£rtein, Jacob. "Some Comments on the Psychology
      of C.G. Jung.'' Psychoanalytic Quaterlv. 33 (l96k),
                                                          191-22^,

 Giegrich, Tfolfgang. "Qntogeny-Hiylogeny? A Fundamental
                                                          Critique of
      lirich Ifeunann's Analytical Psychology." Spring. 197U, 110-129.

Glover, Edijard.         "Freud or Jung." Horizon. 18 (19U8), 22^-2^7.

                          or Jung,   I\pipl±ed   Jungian Psychology."               Horizon.
      To-/    i"^^?

        _.    Freud or Jung.         london:      George Allen and            Iftiirin,    1950.
Goldbrunner, Josef. Individuation.                 Ifotre Dame,       Indiana:            University
     of Notre Dame Press, 196U.

Goldenberg, Ilaomi,         "Archetypal Theoiy After Jung." Spring. 197^,


Hansel, C.E.M.       ESP:     A Scientific "Evaluation.            Her;     York:         Scribner.
                                                                                             xuiici,
     1966.

Heimann, Paula.  "Some Notes on the Psycho-analytic Concept of
                                                               Intro-
     jected Objects." British Journal of Medical Psychology. 22
                                                                                                   (191;^),


Hempel, Carl G.   RiilosoplTV of Natural Science.                   Qigle^rood Cliffs:
                                         ~"~
     Prentice -Hall, 1966.

Hilljnan, James.      "liiy   Archetypal Psychology.         "    Spring. 1970, 212-219,

Jacobi, Jolande. Gomplex/.lrchetyDe /Symbol in the Psychology of C.G.
     Jung,* Princeton: Princeton tiiiversity Press, 1971.

       _.    21je   Psychology of C.G. Jimg.         i^qit   Haven:         Yale Iftiiversity
     Press, 1962.

Jaffe, Aniela.      Ihe   I^h   of Ifeaning.       Nerr   York:    Penguin Books, 197^,


     ^ ^^"          iiJl ^-^e   aSl   ^ferk of. C.G.      Jung.    Ifer-r   York:         liarper and
                                                  205




                      ^'^^"^^^          ^^^^^     Heflecttons.         Ife-;    York:            Random House,
  '^'^'l96l.

                 .    Complete j:brks. Princeton;               Princeton University I¥ess.
          2.907,


                 •    Editor,      I^ and ms        Symbols.       New York:                    Itell,    I968,

                 letters. Edited bjr Gerhard Adler and .flniela
                                                                Jaffe.
          Princeton:  Princeton IhiTrersity Press, 1973,

 roohn,    T.H.  Strucl^^r^ o^ .Scientific Revolutionn. Second Edition.
          Uhxcago:  ihiversity of Chicago Press, 1970.

 lily, John.           The Center of the Cyiclone.              Ifew   York:           Bantam Books, 1972.
 lorenz, Kbnrad.  Byolution and Ifedification of Behpvin-n.                                          Chicago-
                                                                                                          ^
      University of Chicago Press, 195^.

                          ^''    21ie   PgZSholoSL of ^ience .                 ITeir   York:             Harper and
 ^'^^^"Sw'^l^r

 Masters, R.E.L. and Ifouston, Jean, gie Varieties of Psychede
                                                        n      lic vx
                                                           euB.u.c Ex-
      perience. New York: Etell, 196S~                                                  ,




Ibreno, Aitonio.  Jmig, Gods and ?fcdem Ian.                            Tfotre Dame,                Indiana:
     University of Ifotre Dame Press, I970.

^*^Soff, Ira. Jaugj STTichronlclty, and Human Dfestinv.
                                                                                                 Nei>r   York:
     Delta, 1973.                                                  .




^^^^*           "^'^'' Jung's Confession:   Psychology as a ^*«i&uage
        ?!^P* lihcounter.
      Faith."             22 il96k), k$-^0.
                                                            Language 01
                                                                      of


    _.               EdjfflEk   21 ihe Therapeutic.         New York:                  Harper Torchbooks,


I^nchlak,Joseph F, A Hiilosotahv of Science for Itersonalit
                                            ~               v
                                                            ^ Thee
     Boston: Houghton lafflin, 19^1                                                         [
                                                                                                             '•




Scriven, Ilchael.               "Birolution and Prediction in Evolutionary
                                                                           Theory."
     mi         and Ifeture.       Edited by Ronald timson. Ner-r York: Dell,
                                                                               1971,


^"'^^?^?'             ?«^"^«    Pepth-SLect^o<^np^^.^n Stimulation of the
                                                                          Human Brain
     and Behavaor.              Sprmglleld, niinois         :     Charles          GrThSiki7l96Sr~
Semon, Richard.           The^ Vkiem.      Herl   York:   I-5aciailan, 1921.

Stace,    17.   T.   Ifcgtlcian and Fhilbsoohv.           Ner-r   York:           J.B. Idppincott, i960.

Storr, Anthony .          C.G.    Juncr.   New York:      The Viking Press, 1973.
                                                                                   ,




                                 BIOGRAPHICAL SICETCH


        I-felter   Avoiy Slielbume was       bom   Jfarch 26,   19k6 in Bristol,
Virginia.      He attended the local high school,
                                                  graduating in 196h.
From 196k until I968 he was a student at the
                                             Ckjllege of I411iam

and Ilaiy in IBlliamsburg, Virginia.               In I968 he received the

Bachelor of Science degree in Biology.                ELans to attend the

Graduate School of the University of Florida trere
                                                   interrupted
by the Hilitaiy draft.            The author saw service in Vietnam from

Februaiy, 1969 until .Ipril, 1970.            I^on release from the Ara^ in

liiy,   1970, the author came to Gainesville, Florida where
                                                            he
started graduate school in Ehtonology in June,
                                               1970.                  Ih September

of that year, the author transferred from the
                                              College of %riculture
to the College of Arts and Sciences and
                                        began graduate work in
philosophy.        -The   Ilaster of Arts degree in Hiilosopl^r
                                                                uas axjarded
in   Iferch, 1973.        The author is not married.




                                       206
             ?"   ?*uf ^^P
          f^ acceptable
 rn«f«i.^ to
 conforms
                            ^®^ this stiufy and that in ncr opiMon it
                        standards of scholarly presentation Ind is
 fully adequate, in scope and quality,
                                       as a dissertation for the
 degree of Doctor of Philosophy.




                                 Marilyn
                                  larilyn Zweig,
                                          Zwiig, thaimai
                                 Assistant Professor of Hiilosophy



       certify that I have read this stvidy and that in
«« ^
conforms to acceptable standards of scholarly           w  opinion it
                                               presentation and is
fully adequate, in scope and quality, as a
                                            dissertation for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy,




                                Thomas P, Arcter
                                Assistant Professor of Philosophy



     I certify that I have read this
                                     stucfy and that in
conforms to acceptable standards of scholarly          w   opinion it
f^                                             presentation and is
      adequate, i^ scope and quality, as a dissertation
degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
                                                         for the




                                Richard P. Haynes
                                Associate Professor of Hiilosophy
 .««.»
         certxiy that I have read this study and that in
 confoiTOS to acceptable standards of scholarly          w
                                                presentation
                                                             opinion it
                                                            and is
 fulOy adequate, in scope and quality, as a
                                            dissertation for the
 degree of Doctor of Philosophy.




                                 Thomas W, Simon
                                 Assistant Professor of Philosophy



     I certify that I have read this study and that in
                                                         w
conforms to acceptable standards of scholarly presentation
                                                           opinion it
                                                            and is
fully adequate, in scope and quality, as a dissertation
                                                        for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy,




           dissertation was submitted to the CJraduate Faculty
         Tta.3
                                                               of the
Deparianent of Philosophy in the College of Arts
                                                 and Sciences and to
the Graduate Council, and was accepted as partial
                                                  fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Doctor of Hoilosopl^,

Jiine,   1976




                                Dean, Graduate School
