DANE RUDHYAR
AN ASTROLOGICAL
M AND ALA: THE CYCLE
OF TRANSFORMATIONS AND
ITS 360 SYMBOLIC PHASES
A reinterpretation of the Sabian symbols, presenting them as a contemporary American I CHING

ASTROLOGY

Some three decades ago, in an attempt to •
produce a series of symbols that would be
relevant to contemporary students of astrology,
Marc Edmund Jones and a clairvoyant friend
formulated the so-called Sabian symbols. Now
Dane Rudhyar has taken these symbols and
reinterpreted them to emphasize their character
as a cyclic and structured series which
formalizes and reveals the archetypal meaning
of 360 basic phases of human experience.
Rudhyar also demonstrates how the Sabian
symbols can be used for divination. Like Tarot
cards and the I Ching, they provide clues to the
best way to face anxieties, or suggest what
alternative courses of action might mean in one's
life. In the form of pictures that are easily
recognizable to people today, these symbols can
be said to constitute a contemporary, American
I Ching, a series of symbols that goes to the
very root of planetary significance for our
present era.
"Dane Rudhyar's Astrological Mandala is invaluable not only for the student of astrology but for
every person seriously interested in symbols as a
medium for achieving the kind of transformation
necessary to bring about the 'new age.' That this
book is primarily practical as well as informative
only underlines the real significance of this most
unusual gift from a man rare in any age."
—Jose A. Arguelles, Director, Shambhala-Tollan
Foundation, and author of The Transformative
Vision and Mandala.

51200>

9 780394"719924
ISBN

D - 3 ^ - ? m E - l

U.S. $12.00
Can. $16.95

Dane Rudhyar
AN ASTROLOGICAL
M A N D A L A TheCycle
of Transformations a n d
Its 3 6 0 Symbolic Phases
®

Vintage Books
A Division of Random House
New York

VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, May 1974
Copyright © 1973 by Dane Rudhyar
Allrightsreserved under International and Fan-American
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States
by Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously
in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited,
Toronto. Originally published by Random House, Inc.,

in 1973

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Rudhyar, Dane, 1895An astrological mandala.
1.
Astrology.
I.
Title.

[BF1708.1.R835 1974]
ISBN 0-394-71992-1

133*5

73-14736

Manufactured in the United States of America
B9

To SAM BERCHOLZ

in grateful appreciation
and friendship

D.R.

Contents

Introduction 3
PART ONE: THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES AS A
CLOSED SERIES OF ARCHETYPAL PHASES
L Symbols and the Cyclic Character of Human Experience g
2. The Sabian Symbols: Their Origin and Internal Structure 35
3. The Positive and Negative Approaches to Individual
Experience 35
PART TWO: A REFORMULATION IN DEPTH OF THE SABIAN
SYMBOLS
First Hémicycle: The Process of Individualization 49
Act I: Differentiation 49

SCENE ONE: DESIRE (ARIES 1-15*) 49
SCENE TWO: POTENCY (ARIES 16-30*) 62
SCENE THREE: SUBSTANTIATION (TAURUS l-lgfl 72

x CONTENTS
SCENE FOUR: CONFIRMATION (TAURUS 16-30*) 80
SCENE FIVE: DISCOVERY (GEMINI 1-15") 89
SCENE SIX: EXTERIORIZATION (GEMINI 16-30*) 100
Act II: Stabilization 110

SCENE SEVEN: DECISION (CANCER 1-15*) UO
SCENE EIGHT: CONSOLIDATION (CANCER 16-30*) 120
SCENE NINE: COMBUSTION (LEO 1-15*) 131
SCENE TEN: RELEASE (LEO 16-30*) 141
SCENE ELEVEN: CHARACTERIZATION (VIRGO 1-15*) 150
SCENE TWELVE: EDUCATION (VIRGO 16-30*) 160

Second Hemicycle: The Process of Collectivization 270
Act III: Group-Integration 170

SCENE THIRTEEN: TRANSFIGURATION (LIBRA I-15*) VfO
SCENE FOURTEEN: RECONSTRUCTION (LIBRA 16-30*) 182
SCENE FIFTEEN: COMMUNION (SCORPIO 1-15*) 1Q2
SCENE SIXTEEN: FAITH (SCORPIO 16-30*) 201
SCENE SEVENTEEN: ABSTRACTION (SAGITTARIUS 1-15") 210
SCENE EIGHTEEN: TRANSFERENCE (SAGITTARIUS 16-30*)
21Q

Act IV: Capitalization 229

SCENE NINETEEN: CRYSTALLIZATION (CAPRICORN 1-15*)
229

SCENE TWENTY: GROUP-PERFORMANCE (CAPRICORN 16-30*)
SCENE TWENTY-ONE: CONTRIBUTION (AQUARIUS 1-15*) 248
SCENE TWENTY-TWO: MANAGEMENT (AQUARIUS 16-30*) 258
SCENE TWENTY-THREE: FEDERATION (PISCES 1-15*) 268
SCENE TWENTY-FOUR: PERPETUATION (PISCES 16-30*) 278

CONTENTS xi

PART THREE: THE NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE
ZODIACAL SERIES
h Binary Relationships between Zodiacal Signs 291
2. The Cross and the Star 314
3. The Four Elements in Zodiacal Symbolism 328

PART FOUR: THE ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF
THE SYMBOLS
1* Why Modern Individuals Seek Answers from "Oracles** 341
2. How to Use the Sabian Symbols as Oracles 352
3. The Use of Degree Symbols in the Interpretation of a Birth Chart
361

4. The Symbolic Life 379
Appendix: An Exchange of Letters with Marc Edmund Jones 387

AN ASTROLOGICAL
M A N D A L A T h e Cycle
of Transformations a n d
KS360 Symbolic Phases

Introduction

®

AFTER I MET MARC EDMUND JONES IN LOS ANGELES IN 1930,

he was generous enough to mail me copies of the mimeo­
graphed courses on astrology he was then sending to the mem¬
bers of the Sabian Assembly which he had founded.*
"Symbolical Astrology" was written in 1931, and it listed and
interpreted symbols for each degree of the zodiac. I became
very much interested in these symbols which, for various rea­
sons that I will presently state, I found far superior to previously
published sets of degree symbols; and when urged by my friend
Alice Bailey, I decided to write my book The Astrology of Personality (summer 1934 to spring 1936) I asked Marc Jones for
permission to include in it a condensed version of the symbols
and their interpretations. This permission was readily granted.
While I saw the original index cards on which brief descrip­
tions of the symbols were written as received in 1925 through
the intermediary of Elsie Wheeler—under circumstances

•In order to answer questions which have occasionally been asked of me,
may I state that I never have been a member of the Sabian Assembly, nor have
I enrolled in any of Marc Jones's classes.

4 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

which I shall describe in Chapter 2 — I had not sufficiently stud­
ied and meditated upon these original descriptions to realize
how different they were from what was written in the mimeo­
graphed course, which came some six years later. Thus I was
content to follow the statements and interpretations of the
course. I had, however, to condense them; and I introduced
here and there remarks which had reference to depth psychol­
ogy, for in 19331 had become deeply interested in Carl Jung's
writing. I had first studied astrology in 1920, but at that time I
was mainly occupied with musical composition and the study of
Hindu philosophy and theosophy. It took the combination of
Marc Jones's approach and of Jung's psychology, and of various
personal changes and opportunities, to make me realize the
possibility of using astrology as a practical application of a cos­
mic, holistic and cyclic philosophy of existence.
As I came more and more to use the 360 Sabian symbols I
grew dissatisfied with many of their formulations and interpre­
tations, even though I was ever more amazed by the inner
structure of the entire series, especially considering the totally
aleatory manner in which the symbols were obtained. As a re­
sult I started to write a long series of articles, entitled The Wheel
of Significance, which were published serially in American Astrology magazine between October 1944 and December 1945.
In 1953 Marc Jones published his book The Sabian Symbols
in Astrology, in which he used the brief original descriptions of
the symbols obtained in 1925 in San Diego. He added to these
descriptions completely new and different interpretations
which were conditioned by his special social psychology and
abstract philosophy, and which pointed to a relationship be­
tween opposite zodiacal degrees. And in 1954 and 1955 American Astrology printed four articles I had written presenting
some new ideas about the symbols and particularly about the
possibility of making them serve a purpose similar to that which
people today seek to satisfy through the use of the symbols of
the I Ching.
I shall discuss the validity and the limits of such a use of the
Sabian symbols in the last chapter of this book. Part Two, the
largest section of this volume, is consecrated to a reformulation

INTRODUCTION 5
and complete reinterpretation of the entire series of symbols,
considered as a cyclic and structured series which formalizes
and reveals the archetypal meaning of 360 basic phases of hu­
man experience. Part One introduces the whole subject and
discusses the meaning of symbols when used in such a cyclic
frame of reference and in relation to a structured process of
growth in consciousness. Part Three discusses in greater detail
the different ways in which this factor of structured unfbldment
can be analyzed and the quite extraordinary results which can
be produced by such an analysis.
The book ends with considerations of the use to which this
series of Sabian symbols can be put for what might be called,
somewhat inaccurately, the purpose of "divination." The study
of what is involved in divinatory practices in itself could take up
an entire volume, especially as it challenges Western man's
concept of time. Here I can only touch upon a few basic points
and present a simple way in which the Sabian symbols can be
used to answer basic questions which baffle the ordinary con­
scious mind.
In Marc Jones's version of the symbolic series, particularly
in the book published in 1953, the fact that each symbol refers
to one degree of the zodiac has been emphasized. It should be
clear, however, that the concept of symbolization of a cyclic
series of basic individual experiences within the context of our
modern society is not to be limited to the study of the meaning
of zodiacal degrees. The concept includes, but also transcends,
astrology.
While this text is most likely to be used mainly by people
interested in astrology and desirous of discovering, as it were,
a "new dimension" of astrological interpretation, its validity
reaches beyond such a use. The symbols can be applied to any
cycle of experience that can be conveniently divided into 360
phases. For instance, it could be used to interpret the cycle of
precession of the equinoxes, if one were absolutely sure when
this cycle began. It can be used with reference to the cycle of
daily motion of the Mid Heaven and Ascendant. Nevertheless,
the cycle of the year—the tropical zodiac—is the most natural
field for its application.

6 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
It is hardly necessary to add that this book leaves many
things unsaid concerning both the theory of symbolic series and
the interpretation of each of the 360 symbols. But to extend the
size of the volume would have been impractical and would
defeat the essential purpose of my writing. I can only hope that
in these pages the attentive reader and user of the symbols will
find, distilled into significant statements and consciousnessexpanding vistas, much of the harvest of a long and complex life
span of experience in manyfieldsof creative and philosophical
activity—a life concerned with significance and understanding.
This is not a book for cursory reading, no more than is
Richard Wilhelm's translation of the texts and commentaries of
the I Ching. The material in it is to be used, to serve as a catalyst
to deepen thinking about individual experiences and their es­
sential meaning. It is a book about MEANING. And a life with­
out meaning is hardly worth living. The worth of an individual
indeed depends upon the meaning and the structural, archetyp­
al character with which he endows all his acts, and as well his
feelings and his thoughts.

Part O n e
THE INTERPRETATION
O F LIFE C Y C L E S
A S A C L O S E D SERIES
OF ARCHETYPAL PHASES

l. Symbols a n d the
Cyclic Character
or H u m a n Experience

®

THERE HAS PROBABLY BEEN NO TIME IN THE HISTORY OF
human civilization when the word symbol or its equivalent in
any language has been as much used or given so many varied
meanings as it is today. Some philosophers and psychologists
have coined new words in an attempt to make these meanings
more precise. The words "symbol" and "sign" have been differ­
entiated, and the distinction is useful provided no strict bounda­
ries are established between the two sets of meaning. Roughly
speaking, a sign is a deliberately shaped indication revealing
that certain conditions or circumstances are to be expected at
a certain place or time. For instance, road signs tell the motorist
that a dangerous turn or crossing lies ahead, or that certain
roads lead to specific placés. A sign, if precise and accurate, is
strictly factual. It is a conventional and socially understandable
way of presenting facts.
Facts, however, are strange entities, and different human '
beings respond to them differently according to their tempera­
ment, expectations, or emotional states. A "mere fact" can differ
considerably from an "expected fact." The rationalist and the

10 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
scientist may think they deal with mere facts, but these facts can
arouse many varied emotions. If they reach a collectivity of men
at special times their meaning can be magnified or distorted and
can radiate into many unforeseen directions. Einstein's formula»
e = mc , refers to a mere fact of the atomic realm, but after
Hiroshima it became far more than a sign or a factual indication
of the objective relationship of energy to mass. It stood as a
symbol of the possible fate which the Western scientific mind
and technology had foisted upon mankind, incorporating an
immense variety of direct or indirect consequences, a constella­
tion of emotions, such as pride, greed and fear. Indeed, a basic
question about the end value and moral implications of a certain
type of knowledge and of its unprotected and possibly prema­
ture dissemination became implied in the fact-defining equa­
tion. Einstein's objective discovery and the purely factual state­
ment of it has become an extremely potent symbol of the state
of existence which mankind has reached today—and it is a cru­
cial and potentially frightening as well as perhaps inspiring and
challenging state. As I stated in my recent book The Planetaria

zation of Consciousness*:

A fact is what it is particularly and exclusively as a fact; it can be
described and recorded in such a manner that, at least theoretically
speaking, its precise character is not open to doubt. We might also say
that "facts" belong to the category of rational entities: these entities
can be precisely defined inasmuch as the definition implies all that
they are not, i.e. the definition essentially excludes other conceptual
entities. On the other hand when one deals with a symbol one is in the
presence of something that goes beyond the rational and the factual,
something that is more than it is, because the symbol describes not
only what it appears to be rationally and objectively, but also the
relationship between a specific human need and the possibility of
satisfying this need.
A symbol is formulated when there is a human need for i t
It may be a strictly personal need. The psychological or pro­
phetic dreams of a particular person belong to this category;
they bring to the individual an intimation of a particular condi-

•Cf. Chapter IX, "Symbols and Values," p. 256.

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 11
tion of existence, be it physiological, psychological or social
They may suggest an answer to a problem, perhaps until then

but superficially understood. Likewise when a clairvoyant to
whom a client has come with an unsolved problem "sees" in
front of him or in his mind a symbolic shape or a scene with
several actors, this should theoretically be an answer to the
client's need, although the need may as yet be only subcon­
scious or half conscious. The symbol is "person-centered"
Similarly, for the humanistic astrologer, a birth chart is a
person-centered symbol.* That is to say, it carries a "message"
—the symbolic formulation of the individual's dharma. It suggests how he can best actualize the innate potentialities of his
particular and unique selfhood. It is a symbol, a mandala, or
logos, a word of power. Astrology, seen from this point of view,
is a language of symbols. Because it is a language, it implies a
process of unfoldment of an idea of feeling-response. A birth
chart is static, yet it can be "progressed" and related to the
continuing movements of the planets after birth ("transits"). In
the same sense, a true mandala is more than a static geometrical
figure; it suggests a process of unfoldment or, as Carl Jung might
have said, of "individuation."
The entire zodiac constitutes a mandala. There are time
mandalas as well as space mandalas. The cycle of transforma­
tions studied in this book is a time mandala. It has rhythm as well
as form. Any language, particularly any poem, also has rhythm
and form. The 360 Sabian symbols are words in a vast cosmic
poem whose meaning transcends the often banal images visual­
ized by the clairvoyant, f
All words are symbols. They answer the basic human need
of communication. At first they seem to have often been
onomatopoeia, i.e. vocal imitations of actually heard sounds,
sounds which the collective experience of the men of a tribe
associated with a particular animal or natural phenomenon. A

*Cf. My Humanistic Astrology series of booklets, particularly No. 1: "Astrology for New Minds."
fFor a thorough study of the mandala, the reader is referred to the
beautifully illustrated book Mandala (Shambala Publications, Berkeley, California, 1972) by José and Miriam Argiielles.

J

13 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
developed language is a collection of symbols; some of its words
go beyond merely representing entities, to expressing the char­
acter of the relationship between entities, or the quality of an
activity (past, present, or future) and often its biological polarity
or gender. Algebra is a symbolic language which answers the
need for precise yet abstract and universal statements of rela­
tionships; its formulas are actually more than mere statements
of fact, for they imply the existence of universal order and the
belief in permanent laws of nature and "constants."
All cultures depend on the use of symbols which are ac­
cepted more or less consciously by the total community. Cul­
tural institutions, and the arts and sciences of a fully developed
community, whemer/'primitive" or modern, constitute essen­
tially complex and systematized organizations of symbols which
structure the behavior, basic feelings and thinking of the human
beings belonging to this culture. As the culture develops, ma­
tures and decays, so do the symbols on which it rests and from
which its cohesive strength and vitality emerge.

SYMBOLS INTEGRATE THE SEPARATE EXPERIENCES OF A VAST

number of men. They take events from the realm of the fortui­
tous, the unprecedented, the unique and the incomprehensible
to the realm of "universals." The logical sequence of symbols
which one finds in all languages, in all scientific theories, in all
traditional art forms and in all religious rituals creates from the
seemingly chaotic, unpredictable and senseless facts of life pat­
terns of order and meaning. A thousand events or personal
situations come to be seen as mere variations on a central
theme. The symbol depicts for us this one significant theme.
And the theme is part of a coherent sequence of similar chal­
lenges, which acquire purpose through their interrelationship.
Expressed through symbols, life becomes condensed into a rela­
tively few interrelated units of experience. Each unit is a con­
centrate of the experiences of millions of people.
Today, we who have been molded by the Western tradition
usually think that there is for each of us an infinite variety of
possible experiences. What we experience is strictly our own;

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 13
every moment is new; no event is ever repeated. However,
while it is true that human experience is unlimited, the normal
experience of man is finite insofar as the number of characteristic and significant types of experiences is concerned. If a man
could be moving, regardless of physical obstacles, on the surface
of the globe along the equator, he could go on endlessly. His
motion would be "unlimited." Yet his experiences of conditions
and scenes along the route would be finite. After having com­
pleted a whole turn around the globe he would begin to encoun­
ter the same geographical features again. His experiences
would basically repeat themselves, even though he might respond to them differently at each new encounter. In the same
way, man's basic life experiences constitute a closed series. By
"basic" I mean typical and characteristic underneath surface
variations.
We find the same principle of repeated series of experiences
in relation to time. Time is cyclic. Everything that lives begins,
reaches a climax and ends—but only to begin again. The uni­
versal illustration of this is the cycle of the seasons in temperate
climates.
That there is a yearly cycle of the seasons does not mean,
however, that we can expect an exact and literal repetition of
actual events or facts each year. What recur are, for the living
plant, basic challenges of growth. Each spring the seeds of
wheat arcnew seeds, the weather differs somewhat, and other
facts may vary. But the overall, basic spring challenge for the
species of wheat is that there should be germination and
growth. The facts may vary, but the meaning remains, year
after year.
In other words, human experience is essentially cyclic and
it unfolds according to structural principles. However varied
men's experiences may appear to be, they nevertheless fall
within the limits of a series of what might also be called "arche­
typal" meanings. Such a series has a recurring character insofar
as its structure is concerned; it constitutes a whole of meanings.
But I cannot repeat enough that "structure" and "contents"
belong, as it were, to two different realms, even if these realms
interpenetrate at every point

14 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
I have discussed these ideas in The Planetarization of Consciousness, but they have to be restated briefly here because if
they are not understood and at least accepted as significant
hypotheses, the logical and philosophical foundation for the use
of cyclic series of symbols—as, for example, the I Ching and the
Sabian series—loses all solidity. Indeed, the whole of astrology
rests philosophically on the basic idea that it is possible to refer
all the essential functions implied in the existence of an organized field of activity, and especially of a living organism, to ten
variables represented by the ten "planets" of modern astrology
(including the Sun and Moon). Astrology also claims that the
twelve Houses constitute archetypal classes of experiences
necessary for the development of a mature individual person,
and that the twelve signs of the zodiac refer to twelve basic
modes of "energy," or archetypal qualities of being, which es­
sentially color any functional activity (i.e. planet) operating in
their fields. In these and related instances the basic idea is al­
ways that we are living in an ordered and structured universe
which constitutes a "cyclocosmic" whole, which is finite. All
structuredfieldsof activity are finite, yet the existential events
and the possibilities of interrelationships are indefinite—which
does not mean infinite!
We have been more or less accustomed to the idea that the
internal activities of any organism are limited and periodical.
We speak of the cycle of food metabolism, of blood circulation,
and in a broader sense of the cycle of activity of the endocrine
glands throughout a complete life cycle, from birth to death.
But we are usually unready to assume that the experiences of
the person as a whole are also limited and periodical; or, to put
it differently, to admit that there are only a certain number of
basic meanings to be gathered by a human being in his life­
time, and that these meanings can be seen in terms of structural
and cyclic sequence.
Again, this does not mean that a person cannot experience
a great variety of events. He may have many thoughts and
experiences. But to experience events is one thing; to release
from them vital and creative meanings is another. What counts,
spiritually speaking, is the harvest of meanings a person is able

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 15
to gather from these many and varied experiences. For this
reason a life crowded with events is not necessarily the richest
in meanings.
Hindu yogis claim that the number of breaths an individual
can take during a lifetime is limited and set; this might apply to
heartbeats as well. All natural organic functions are limited or
finite in their schedule of operation, but what sets the bounda­
ries is generic human nature. The amount of vitality wound up
in the germ cell is probably limited. An individual, however,
acting as an individual and having succeeded in becoming free

from collective patterns, may break through the circle of limita­
tions and tap a deeper source of life and consciousness; this
indeed is what true occultism is about.
Generically man is organically bounded; as a creative and
free individual, however, he can break through nature's "RingPass-Not" (to use an occult term) and become a functioning part
within a greater organism, thus becoming vitalized by the
power of this greater life. Generically speaking, collectively
speaking, culturally speaking, a person has a certain range of
meanings open to him for him to incorporate into his actual
experience. It is to this "range of meanings"—conditioned by
collective factors and controlled by the images of the collective
Unconscious of his race and culture—that the series of picture
symbols of the Chinese I Ching as well as the series of 360 Sabian
symbols refer.
Even though a normal cultured person meets all the facts
of experience that can possibly be crowded into the few decades
of life, only those experiences from which meaning has been
extracted count spiritually, and are remembered. These mean­
ings, finite in terms of their archetypal characteristics, consti­
tute an organic whole because they are creative products of the
person's total personality, which is an "organism" in the broader
sense of the term. In their sequence and unfoldment they dis­
play an organic and cyclic quality; and the structural factor in
this process of extraction of meanings from experience can be
derived from simple numerical principles, such as those of the
I Ching or the Sabain cycle of symbols.
In the Chinese system, the basic mathematical principle of

16 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
structuring is fundamentally dualistic. There are two life princi­
ples operating in and through all human experiences: Yang and
Yin—light and darkness, positive and negative, Day-force and
Night-force, masculine and feniinine, "essence" and "life,"
"Logos" and "Eros," etcetera. These two polarities, combined
in a three-fold and six-fold pattern of interaction (or at three and
six "levels" of being) produce the eight permutations repre­
sented by the trigrams of the I Ching, and the sixty-four hexa­
grams (8 = 2 3 , and 6 4 = 2*. The next increase, 2 " , would be

4096).

In the Sabian system, the cyclic structure is more complex:
it is founded upon a pattern derived from the relationship be­
tween the day and the year—periods which constitute the two
most basic factors in the structuring of human experience. It is
true that the year contains more than 360 days, , which means
that the earth rotates more than 360 times around its polar axis
during a complete revolution around its orbit; but an intriguing
feature common to all celestial periods is that they can never be
measured in whole numbers and no planetary cycle is an exact
multiple of another.
This means that one has to distinguish between archetypal
and existential cycles and relationships. Rationally we divide
the circle into 4 or 6, or 360 parts; but the facts of existence
present us with a little over 3 6 5 days of the year-cycle. The
360-degree zodiac is a formula of archetypal relationships; but
our human experience presents to our consciousness a slightly
larger sequence of days and nights. The 360-degree cycle refers
to the meaning of experience; the days-and-nights sequence to
the facts of experience.
We shall see how this 360-degree pattern subdivides itself
geometrically through a two-fold, three-fold,four-fold,five-fold
and six-fold rational segmentation. Such interior processes of
subdivision of the organic series of 360 degrees define various
patterns of relationships and subseries of degrees which, consid­
ered in their entirety, constitute the structure of a cycle of
meanings. No cyclic series of symbols can be considered significant which does not reveal some definite kind of internal structuring, however interesting and apt isolated symbols may be*

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 17
This is why, in my opinion, out of the few sets of 360 degree
symbols which have been recorded in Western astrology only
the Sabian symbols should be considered truly valid. Other sets
might reveal an equally significant internal structure if carefully
studied and reformulated, but I have not seen any work done
in that direction. The issue here reaches much deeper than a
superficial evaluation of this or that set of 360 symbols. It deals
with the difference between a holistic and an atomistic ap­
proach to human experience and to life or knowledge in gen­
eral.
When we deal with any cyclic series of factors or phases,
merely to consider the character, quality and value of the sym­
bolic representation of any one of these factors as a separate
entity without an essential (or structural) relationship to all the
others makes no sense to the holistic mind. Every phase no
doubt has a character of its own which can be described in one
way or another, but this character should be given some kind
of functional or "organic" meaning in terms of the cyclic proc­
ess as a whole. If one looks at the process of growth of an orga­
nism every phase of that process has a functional meaning in
relation to the preceding and succeeding phases. It does not
represent an isolated occurrence. In the same way, if one stud­
ies the 22 Tarot cards or the 6 4 symbols of the I Ching, one is
dealing with a succession of phases referring to a whole process;
the 12 signs of the tropical zodiac—which as a whole refer to the
annual cyclic relationship of the Earth to the Sun—likewise
have meaning according to their position in the complete cycle
of the year.
In my book The Pulse of Life (published in 1943, but origi­
nally written as a series of articles a few years earlier)* I stressed
the fact that every zodiacal sign represents a specific combina­
tion of two interacting and interdependent forces, the Dayforce and the Night-force (Yang and Yin). It is the relative inten­
sities of these two forces and their polarization which
determines fundamentally or structurally the dynamic nature
and function of each sign.

•Present edition: Shambala Publications, Berkeley, California, 1970.

18 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

1

The zodiac as a whole refers to a vitalistic process of trans­
formation of energy; but when we deal with the series of 360
degree symbols we see the relationship of the Earth to the Sun
operating at a different level. It is a level at which literally every
day-and-night period (every rotation of the globe) acquires a
symbolic and structural meaning. The twelve-fold zodiac deals
essentially with varying modalities of solar energy, as the waves
of this energy strike the Earth. It deals with life. The series of
3 6 0 degrees deals with meaning. It represents, I repeat, a finite
cyclic series of meanings which an individual may extract from
experiences related to these degrees and their symbols; while
he may, the individual surely does not need to discover, assimi­
late and consciously become aware of these meanings.
The potentiality of meaning depends basically on the stage
of development of mankind and especially of any particular
culture out of whose collective Unconscious (or archetypal
Mind) the symbols have emerged, becoming formed into im­
ages, scenes and words. The Chinese hexagrams and symbols
recorded in the I Ching were not based on degrees of the zodia­
cal cycle, since they took shape out of a simple, uncomplicated,
agricultural culture at the "vitalistic" stage of human society—
a stage basically related to the male-female polarities of the life
force. Yet the 6 4 symbols formulate profound meanings deeply
rooted in the universal experience of man when in close rela­
tionship to the energies of Earth-nature, and of his own generic
nature as well. The symbols use an imagery that is close to the
foundations of the natural life—and these foundations are still
very real and active in the immense majority of human beings.
* Today we live in a much more complex and highly in­
dividualistic society, and it is logical to find the need for a much
greater number of symbols. In the Sabain set some of these
symbols deal with rather trivial scenes depicting phases of
American life; others are far more fundamental in their philo­
sophical implications. Taken together they present a character­
istic motley picture of American society at the beginning of the
second quarter of the twentieth century. As our entire globe is
"Americanized" and technologized, it could be that these
Sabian symbols will have a long life. The formulations can be

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 19
altered, and Marc Jones himself has modified them greatly sev­
eral times. In this book I have kept the pictures as originally
recorded, but I have rephrased obscure statements and tried to
clarify the contents of the symbols through their relationship to
preceding and following images.
What is important is that the series of symbols should bring
order and meaning to what very often seems a chaotic and
confused sequence of life events, by revealing the meaning,
quality, direction and purpose of any puzzling situation which
the inquirer seems unable successfully to cope with by means
of rational judgments. Chaotic as events may be, one can never­
theless state that a person has the experiences he is entitled to,
or has asked for, consciously or not—and no others. Events
occur in relation to the process of actualization of his innate
potential of being, i.e. his individual self. Each basic event conditions the manner in which the person is to take a step ahead
in his structural development. Whether or not the individual
takes this step, and the quality of his advance—which can also
appear to be a temporary regression—depends on the meaning
he gives to the event. He may not be truly aware of giving it a
particular meaning, but in some manner his organism and/or
his ego responds as a result of past sociocultural and personal
conditioning.
Conflicts arise because various parts of the personality very
often give different value to events; especially in periods of
deep-seated cultural and social confusion when collectively ac­
cepted traditional values are breaking down, conflicts of meaning are frequently experienced. Values and meanings are al­
ways conditioned by certain "frames of reference." When old
sociocultural and religious-ethical frames of reference have be­
come unreliable and can no longer convincingly structure the
series of experiences and the responses of individuals, the urge
to discover some new frame of reference becomes urgently
necessary. And it is for this reason that today's disenchanted
adults and restless, disbelieving youth—once they thoroughly
weary of practices and groups which seek to "de-condition"
them by freeing them from binding patterns and old "hang­
ups," yet offer no convincing and secure foundation for a new

20 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
conception of order—are searching for some kind of "revela­
tion" with a superhuman and even superrational and supermental origin.
This is obviously the deepest reason for the present
popularity of astrology; for in the order of the cosmos the
uprooted consciousness hopes to find a solid frame of reference
from which new meanings—new to him—can be derived.
These new meanings in turn can provide him with the yearnedfor inner security.
In this sense, astrology constitutes a cosmic type of oracle,
at least insofar as it is person-centered, referring to the prob­
lems and the search for meaning of individual persons. The
"solar astrology" of popular magazines and newspaper columns
is oracular in that it is meant to convey to human beings, catego­
rized according to the twelve Sun signs, general value judg­
ments concerning the character of those responses to everyday
circumstances which would be most suited to their basic tem­
peraments. The position of the planets in zodiacal signs and
their mutual relationships are believed to establish such value
judgments. That is to say, the state of the solar system at any
time is said to provide an oracular message to human beings
according to their Sun-sign relationship to the solar system.
Obviously such an oracle can at best be very general, and
unless it is formulated in very abstract terms—which then are
susceptible of an infinite variety of interpretations—it can be
ludicrous and meaningless for the individual. On the other
hand, the oracular potentiality of astrology becomes precisely
focused in what is called "horary astrology," for there a particu­
lar individual at a precise moment demands the solution to a
particular problem. The pattern of the sky for that precise mo­
ment requires a very complex type of interpretation, but tradi­
tional rules are available to at least guide the interpretation.
We find the same type of situation whenever the I Ching
is asked for oracular pronouncements. The Sabian symbols can
serve the same function, even though so far the astrologers who
have made use of them have applied them almost exclusively to
giving a new dimension of meaning to the exact positions of the
planets and the angles in the charts erected for the birth mo-

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES SI
ment of an individual, or for some spectacular event
What is to be stressed, as we begin the study of the Sabian
symbols, is that their character should be considered at two
levels, one purely abstract, the other existential (i.e. the image
or scene depicted in the symbol). A degree symbol has archetyp­
al meaning because it is, let us say, the eleventh in a series of
360 symbols, and because the number 360 is the result of the
abstracted relationship between the daily axial rotation and the
yearly orbital revolution of the Earth. It has an existential mean­
ing because it carries a "revealed" pictorial symbol; in this case
The ruler of a nation (cf. p. 57).

, The revealed image could theoretically be dispensed with.
But how then would we interpret the meaning of the eleventh
phase in a cyclic process numbering 3 6 0 phases? Astrology
could help us by saying that the year's cyclic process archetypally begins at the spring equinox, and therefore that the elev­
enth phase of the process (Aries 11*) refers to the eleventh day
after the equinox. But one could hardly base a significant value
judgment dealing with either the position of Jupiter in a birth
chart or the answer to what could be expected of a new relation­
ship just entered into, on the assumed character of the eleventh
day of spring. One has to obtain a more definitive existential
situation or image from which the value judgment can be ex­
tracted, a situation or image truly full of potentiality of meaning.

But here again we have to return to the point that what is
"full potentiality of meaning" for the man of one culture may
not have this same character for a man of another culture. Many
of the Sabian symbols would have meant nothing whatsoever to
a Chinese of the early Dynasties. In the same way, some of the
symbols of the I Ching need to be given modernized interpreta­
tions to fit the search for meaning of an American faced with the
intricate and artificial problems of our complex families or
professional existence within chaotic cities.
The difficult question is why the symbols of the Sabian se­
ries should be significant. For the empirically minded person
this question would immediately be rephrased: Are they signifi­
cant? Do they really work?

22 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
We shall deal with these questions in the next chapter. But
i n closing this discussion it seems necessary to state that the
symbolic and holistic characterization of the 3 6 0 degrees of the
zodiac has nothing to do with the analytical and statistical at­
tempts, which a number of astrologers have been making for
some time, to relate at least some degrees of the zodiac to
specific bio-psychological characteristics or tendencies and to
particular faculties or diseases. In these attempts the analytical
and would-be scientific astrologer is not concerned with mean­
ing, but only with definite and standardized traits of human
nature, unusual or outstanding circumstances, or telluric
events. The entire procedure is existential and statistical, and
fundamentally it should not interest the individual person. Its
results can actually be most detrimental to the individual: for
instance, if in the degree characteristics of his Sun or Mars or
Ascendant he sees a degree of "suicide" or "insanity" or "con­
sumption" or one showing "homicidal tendencies" or even
"homosexuality."
It should be evident to any psychologically alert and intelli­
gent astrologer that such negative and, in several instances,
appalling characterizations might easily throw an insecure per­
sonality off balance. Making them available to the average per­
son surely has psychologically destructive potentialities. In fact,
such statistics should be altogether disregarded in any type of
person-centered astrology, for they cannot be taken as a basis
for an answer to any problem which an individual person may
seek to solve by way of astrology, including the fundamental
problems of "Who am
and "What am Iherefor?"Ifstatistics
seem to show that many people dying of tuberculosis have "ma­
lefic" planets, or even the Sun and Moon on a particular degree
of the zodiac, it does not indicate in any way that a person with
Mars, Saturn or the Ascendant on that degree will contract
tuberculosis. Perhaps 65 percent of the persons having such a
natai configuration can be said to have developed TB; but even
if this were so, it tells nothing to an individual with this configu­
ration, for he can just as well belong to the 35 percent who are
totally free from the disease.
The modern mind hypnotized by quantitative values and

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 23
statistics will claim that if a person knows about the 65 percent
possibility he will naturally be "more careful" to avoid causes of
the disease or be more alert to early symptoms. But actually this
is at best to be blind to the opposite and far more likely probabil­
ity—that the very fear of being marked for the illness will bring
it about.
Man should not seek tensely and self-protectively to avoid
or control events. Events do not happen to an individual person;
he happens to them. He meets them and imparts to them his
own meaning. It is only when an individual is placed in complex
situations involving unknowable factors—unknowable to his
normal perceptions and his rational mind—that he may, and
indeed should, seek to broaden his perspective by trying to see
the events or the prospects facing him sub specie aeternitatis,
that is, in their relationship to a cosmic whole of meaning. Carl
Jung would probably have said that in such a case an individual
mind opens itself to the vast collective Unconscious; I would call
it the One Mind of Humanity.
The mind of the human being whose process of individuali­
zation has been conditioned by the collective mentality and the
traditions of his culture should seek to forget such socioculturalethical factors and to reach a state of "planetary consciousness."
He will then come to realize that however baffling and un­
predictable his present situation may seem to his analytical and
rational mind—which is loaded with precedents, anticipations,
doubts and anxieties—this development is part of a universal
process. It is a very, very small phase in the evolution of man­
kind and of the planet Earth and the solar system; seen as a
phase within the frame of reference of the whole process, it
makes sense.

Symbols help man to do this—to make sense of his exist­
ence, to see each personal event as a focalized and particular­
ized manifestation of one phase of the whole cosmic process of
existence. He can see the most tragic event—tragic by ordinary
sociocultural standards—as a phase of growth. At the precise
moment when he asks a question from the oracle, the entire
universe comes down, as it were, to give him the necessary
answer. It is necessary because all truly constructive, creative or

24 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
redeeming acts are performed through the individual person
by a fbcalization of the whole universe. This is the "transper¬
sonal way" of which I have spoken for many years.* It is the way
of the symbolic life, which is not merely a life lived in "the
presence of God," but a life lived by the Divine within the
individual person as well as within the entire universe.
The mystic states: " I do not live. God lives me." But if this
is actually what takes place, he has become the Avatar of his
own Divinity, which is one with the divine Meaning of all ex­
istence.

•Modern Man's Conflicts (1945-46) and my previous articles in The Glass
Hive magazine (1930-31) on "The Philosophy of Operative Wholeness"; also
more recent volumes like The Planetarization of Consciousness.

2. T h e Sabian Symbols:
Their Origin a n d
Internal Structure

®

IT IS ESSENTIAL TO KNOW HOW THE SABIAN SYMBOLS WERE
obtained in order to understand the intrinsic validity of the
entire set, for it reveals a quite startling combination of random
selection and subsequent structural order. While the facts sur­
rounding the procedure followed in the visualization of the
symbols by a clairvoyant woman, Miss Elsie Wheeler, and their
recording by Marc Edmund Jones are not mentioned in the
book The Sabian Symbols in Astrology, they have been given
some publicity for many years and are indeed most relevant in
this study.*
I do not know the exact date on which the event occurred,
but it was in 1925 and the locale was the large park in the center
of San Diego, California. Miss Wheeler and Marc Jones were the
two actors, at least as far as physical realities are concerned.
During 1936 I visited Miss Wheeler twice at her home in San

•After writing this chapter I came across a published long letter by Marc
Edmund Jones in which he explains what led to the production of the Sabian
symbols, and describes the manner in which they were obtained. This letter
is reproduced in the Appendix (p. 387).

26 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
Diego. She was a lovely woman, crippled by arthritis and
confined to a wheelchair when I saw her. She was a clairvoyant
medium and had a remarkable ability to "see" symbols, a talent
which made it possible to help clients who came to see her. This
is true of many clairvoyants of this type, but she proved to have
the ability to a spectacular degree.
In the morning of a certain day, Marc Jones took Miss
Wheeler in his car to the San Diego park and stopped in a quiet
place. He had with him a pack of 360 small index cards; each
card was blank except for a very small, hardly visible marking
at the extreme top right corner indicating a zodiacal sign and
degree: for example, Aries 1, Aries 2, Aries 3 , etcetera. Marc
Jones then began to shuffle the cards thoroughly, and kept
shuffling them throughout the operation. He then took one card
at random, and without looking at the small marking, so that
neither he nor Miss Wheeler could know which zodiacal degree
was noted on it, asked her what she saw. Apparently a scene
flashed to her inner vision; she described it quickly and Marc
Jones made a brief pen notation of what she said. These nota­
tions are reproduced exactly in Marc Jones's book. I saw the
original pack of 360 cards in 1936 when I was working on the
chapter on Sabian symbols for my book The Astrology of Person*
ality.

Not only was the procedure entirely aleatory as far as the
normal consciousness of the two participants was concerned,
but the amazing thing is that the 3 6 0 symbols were obtained
, during a few hours in the morning, and a few hours during the
afternoon. I am not certain of the exact number of hours in­
volved, but even if it were four hours in the morning and four
in the afternoon, this would mean that on the average 4 5 sym­
bols were visualized per hour, or one every minute and a half.
What makes this whole production almost incredible is that
while it operated purely at random and at a fantastic speed, the
result was a series of symbols which, when carefully studied, are
shown to possess a definite and very complex internal structure.
Some kind of "consciousness" was undoubtedly at work; the
question is what type of consciousness—which is likely to mean
whose consciousness, that of an individual or a collectivity

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 27
of minds. Marc Jones has related it to the type of occult
Brotherhood which apparently existed in ancient Mesopotamia
(whence the name "Sabian" that he has used for the group of
students he has been directing and teaching (or nearly half a
century).
But whatever the exact manner in which the Sabian set of
symbols was produced, it is not enough merely to say that "they
work." What has to be clearly understood is the nature of their
validity and what is really implied in their existence and charac­
ter. One may speak of inspiration from some ancient Brother­
hood or the presence of an occult partner in the work, but it is
obvious that the scenes and images visualized by Elsie Wheeler
are entirely modern and, what is more, in many instances
strictly American in character. They contain references which
even a European, especially one living in 1925, would have some
difficulty understanding. They belong to the collective con­
sciousness of the average educated American.
Thus we have a significant antinomy: randomness versus
internal structure, and a purely American mentality (or men­
talities, i f we include that of Marc Jones) versus a postulated
archaic occult source of inspiration. Such a dualistic situation is
not unusual in occult or spiritual training, for there the extremes
meet and interact to produce a total transformation of the con­
sciousness. In this sense, the polarization of the highly intellec­
tual and abstract mind of Marc Jones, many of whose concepts
link him with the medieval scholastics, and of the mediumistic
middle-class mentality of Elsie Wheeler also implies a kind of
dialectical process. The occult and the commonplace are syn­
thesized in the symbols, which is another way of saying that they
should be understood at two levels: the archetypal-structural
and the existential, The symbolic images or scenes are existen­
tial and relatable to the mostly ordinary experience or dream
fantasy of the collective American consciousness; through the
commonplace and the collective, one may reach the archetypal
level at which a cyclic sequence of phases occurs, each phase
meant to actualize a specific quality of being and endowed with
a structural meaning because of its rank and function within the
cycle-as-a-whole, the Eon.

28 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
An eonic consciousness is a consciousness able to perceive,
at once and as a whole, a complete cycle of existence in which
each phase of the structural process is in its own place of destiny
(dharma) for the actualization of one of a great number of innate
potentialities. The Eon is the cycle-as-a-whole in terms of inte­
grating power and consciousness. The Eon of a particular hu­
man life extending from birth to death is, in terms of consciousness, the "Soul" of that person. Considered as a source of power
—as a rhythmic vibration or "tone" which keeps on unchanged
from the alpha to the omega states of the life cycle—the Eon is
what I have called the "self' of the individual person.
A set of symbols like the Sabian symbols, or the I Ching or
the Tarot, confronts us with the challenge of integrating the
archetypal and the existential through a symbolic image, scene
or statement in which these two realms are in a state of conflu­
ence and interpénétration. Ideally, therefore, the production of
a valid set of symbols should enact this interpénétration and
confluence; and it is just what the actors in the car in the San
Diego park—the two visible, and the invisible Presences—did.
In this sense, the performance was highly ritualistic. It focused
Meaning of an archetypal and cyclic character through polar­
ized contemporary minds.
There remains, however, the problem of interpretation of
the products of the ritualistic focusing. An ideal interpretation
should reveal the existence of all the factors implied in the
symbol and should formulate their implications in such a way
that they are susceptible of as general as possible applications to
situations encountered at our present stage of human evolution
and history. This is a nearly impossible task to perform, for there
are as many levels of possible interpretation as there are levels
at which the consciousness of human beings can operate, par­
ticularly today in our chaotic and individualistic society. One
can only try to present formulations which are inherently able
to branch into various byways of significance. The essential re­
quirement, however, is that the interpretation should include
the structural and the existential approaches.
The symbol has meaning because it is a complex interweav­
ing of factors, each of which is potentially significant as to its

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 29
revelatory purpose and function. The symbol is a whole of
meaning, yet this meaning is what it is only in relationship to the
meanings of all other images—particularly the preceding and
following, the opposing and the squaring symbols. The ap­
proach should be holistic, yet based on a keen analysis of all the
significant features within the symbol. Moreover, it ideally
should not be biased by a too-specialized philosophical, cultural
or social outlook. Above all, it should not be conditioned by an
emotional reaction or an ethical response to what is pictured.
As Marc Jones himself pointed out, there are in the Sabian
set quite a few ambiguous symbols. But if these symbols are
considered as phases of a cyclic process rather than as isolated

images—that is, when the possible interpretations are consid­
ered in the light of preceding and following phases in a charac­
teristic five-fold sequence, and in terms of wider relationships
—the ambiguity usually disappears.
It certainly is not for me to judge the interpretations of the
Sabian symbols that are now publicly available. I feel none are
quite adequate and many of them seem to me at least partially
biased by considerations that are extraneous to the symbols
themselves; I am sure, however, that a similar criticism will be
leveled at the approach and the interpretations which this book
presents. There is room for many approaches and for several
levels of interpretation. My main purpose in writing is to point
out what is actually implied in such a set of symbols, involved
in its interpretation, and possible in terms of its use at the oracu­
lar level. I also want to show in what sense the Sabian set can
be compared to the I Ching and other cyclic series of symbols.

THE INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF THE SABIAN SET WILL BE DIS¬

cussed in Part Three, after the reader has had time to familiar­
ize himself with the actual images. In order to avoid a superficial
and atomistic interpretation, however, the reader must have at
least a general understanding of the structural relationships
between the individual symbols and of the underlying process
of subdivision of the 360-degree circle into various patterns.
This process follows the usual astrological practice in many

30 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ways, but it has really quite a different meaning and purpose.
As already stated, the Sabian symbols do not deal exclusively
with the degrees of the zodiac. They refer to the division of any
cyclic life process into 360 phases; for this reason I have stressed
the phase number of the symbol as much as the zodiacal degree
to which it refers. The essential point to remember is that we
are dealing with a life process; we might say a cosmic process,
but in any case it is a gradual process of actualization of a set of
new potentialities. It is a gradual process, i.e. it proceeds by
"degrees." But the progression is not to be considered unidirec­
tional; it is rather multidirectional and in a sense multidimen­
sional, as it involves the actualization of potentiality on at least
three levels. We should not expect that the sequence of symbols
will reveal a straight line of progress. There is progression, but
only within a number of definite structural fields of activity.
First, it should be clear that any life cycle divides itself
essentially into two hémicycles, just as the soli-lunar cycle is
divided into waxing and waning halves. One may use différent
names to characterize these two halves. In the soli-lunar cycle
—which deals not with the Moon itself but with the changing
relationship of the Moon to the Sun, as this relationship is per­
ceived by human observers on this Earth—one can speak of the
hémicycle of "action" and of that of "consciousness."* During
the first period concrete forms of the energy released at New
Moon are being progressively built (unless the entire cycle
proves to be negative and the energy release ineffectual); dur­
ing the second period the capacity for action tends to gradually
wane while, on the other hand, energy is focused (after Full
Moon) at the consciousness level and becomes productive of, or
subservient to, mental forms (including ideological systems and
sociocultural institutions).
In the cycle of the year, the period between the spring and
the fall equinoxes represents an effort toward the formation of
life organisms or of individualized persons at the human level.
The One Life becomes differentiated into and through many

*Cf. Dane Rudhyar, The Lunation Cycle (Shambala Publications, Berkeley, California, 1970).

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 31
living organisms, each of which constitutes a whole—i.e. a struc­
tured field of interrelated and interdependent activities. The
One seeks to become the Many—the many little "ones" which
nevertheless at least reflect the fundamental wholeness of the
universal Whole.
After a transition period of readjustment the Many tend to
gather together for the purpose of establishing a larger whole,
a vaster organism. The phase of Integration succeeds that of
Differentiation. The spring-summer half of the year cycle is one
marked by an individualizing trend, while the fall-winter half
witnesses the opposite, that of collectivization. Each of the an­
nual hemicycles displays a moment of triumph, or of maximal
intensity at the solstices. Thus the great ritual drama of the year
can be characteristically divided into four Acts. I have used four
Keywords: Differentiation, Stabilization, Group-Integration,
Capitalization. We are dealing here not merely with the four
seasons—spring, summer, fall and winter—but more generally
with the four basic periods of any cycle of cosmic manifestation,
whether micro- or macrocosmic, because all concrete physical
manifestations answer to the rhythm of the four. We will see
therefore that the Sabian symbols for the phases 1,91,181 and 271
(i.e. Aries i*, Cancer i*, Libra i * and Capricorn i") form a very
characteristic and significant sequence.
Next in importance is the six-fold pattern of cyclic unfoldment, and indeed the numbers 6 and 6 0 have figured signifi­
cantly in ancient astrology, particularly in Chaldea. The fact
that one can inscribe six contiguous circles of the same size
within a circumference, plus a seventh one at the center, has
been given great prominence in geometrical symbolism. It can
be considered at least one of the main reasons for the division
of the circumference (and thus in astrology of the zodiac) into
360 degrees, i.e. 6 times 60, and for the numerological emphasis
placed upon the number 7, the latter defining the fulfillment of
a process, and thus the "seed" of it; that is, both a conclusion and
the prenatal foundation of a new cycle.*

*Cf. Dane Rudhyar, The Astrology of Personality (original edition, Lucis
Publications, New York, 1936), p. 230. Also available in paperback from Doubleday & Company, Inc.

r

32 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

By mviding the zodiacal belt—which is actually the orbit of
the Earth—into six sections, we characterize six basic types or
polarizations of the one central power of the Sun, source of all
energies operating on the planets. Each polarization produces
a male/female couple (or zyzygy); and the zodiac is thus divided
into alternatively "masculine" and "feminine" signs: Aries/¬
Taurus, Geniini/Cancer, Leo/Virgo, etc. We shall see in Part
Three how these pairs can be correlated with the six great
forces (or shakti) of Hindu occult philosophy.
Number 5 occupies a highly significant place not only in
symbolism, but in the structure of living organisms in contrast
to that of nonliving material systems. In terms of the subdivid­
ing of cyclic processes one may use this number 5 in two ways:
the whole process can be divided into five sections, each of 7 2
phases, thus inscribing afive-pointedstar in the circle; or, even
more significant in terms of the scheme of interpretation, by
studying the successive sequences of five degrees it can be seen
that such sequences all have a broadly similar structure. That is
to say, each sequence (for instance Aries T, 2', 3', 4*, 5") repre­
sents archetypally five steps, or five stages of development
Moreover, these five stages can be seen to take place
successively at the three basic levels of human activity and
experience. These levels can be defined very broadly, yet char­
acteristically, as the actional, the cultural-emotional and the

individual-mental levels. What we have is a kind of dialectical
process, but one which does not operate as the ordinary se­
quence of thesis, antithesis and synthesis broadly used in West­
ern philosophy since Hegel and Marx, but rather according to

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 33
a five-fold rhythm. Thisfive-beatdialectical sequence has been
studied in some Oriental systems, particularly in Zen philoso­
phy*; but it came to my mind some forty-five years ago when
I attempted to outline what I then called "a pentarhythmic
system of social organization"—an attempt which at that time
I did not carry to completion.
Such a "pentarhythmic" (five-beat) process, operating at
three levels, produces unit sequences of 15 phases. There are 2 4
such sequences in a complete cycle; and here the 2 4 hours of the
day period at once comes to mind. The day can be divided into
four periods—from sunrise to noon, from noon to sunset, from
sunset to midnight, and from midnight to sunrise. In a series of
articles entitled The Wheel of Significance which I wrote in
1944-45 for American Astrology magazine, I spoke of these four
periods as "Watches." According to Cyril Fagan, however, the
term was apparently used to refer to an archaic division of the
astrological day into eight parts (Watches) corresponding to
what we now call the twelve Houses of a chart, but operating
in the opposite (i.e. clockwise) direction. This is partly why here
I have instead used the term "four Acts."
Each Act has six Scenes, or Hours; thus the number 2 4 is
obtained. Sacred scriptures have spoken of the 2 4 Elders sur­
rounding the Deity. Marc Jones used the term "Span" in his
mimeographed course on symbolical astrology, and I kept it in
my initial condensation of that course in The Astrology of Personality. The term one uses is not of great importance, pro­
vided it can be referred to a singleframeof reference. As I now
stress the concept of cosmic process, this whole process can
most significantly be considered a ritual drama in four Acts and
twenty-four Scenes. However one may wish to subdivide it, this
cosmic process, when apprehended in its essential structure, is
a ritual; indeed, all life is a ritual—a symbolic performance—for
the individual who intuitively "sees" himself as a participant in
the universal process of actualization of the potentialities in-

•I heard it mentioned in Paris a few years ago, by the eminent philosopher-psychologist Karlfried von Durckheim, author of the well-known book
Hara.

34 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
herent in the Creative Word "in the Beginning," the Logos.
I used the word "actor," but at a certain stage of human
development the actor becomes an "agent," for he has come to
realize that through him the purpose of the universe is indeed
focused according to the time and place of his life performance.
The ego in him has become a crystalline lens through which the
"Will of God" is concentrated into individualized acts. He does
not think; the One Mind thinks him. His life has become "sa­
cred" because it is no longer "his" life, but the Whole perform­
ing within and through the space of his total organism, and at
the time determined by the rhythm of the planetary process,
whatever act is necessary.

i

3. T h e Positive a n d
Negative A p p r o a c h e s t o
Individual E x p e r i e n c e

®
ONE BASIC FACT DOMINATES MAN'S EXPERIENCE: WHENEVER

a new way of releasing power is made possible, implying a
fundamental reorganization of either the human person or so­
ciety in general, this possibility can be, and indeed is bound to
be, actualized to some extent in both an essentially constructive
and an inherently destructive manner. A generalization of this
fact of human experience has to be the foundation of any cos­
mology or world-view, at least as far as our universe is con­
cerned. It is a universe in which the principle of duality is to be
observed everywhere. One can postulate beyond and/or
through this dualistic universe a condition of essential unity, and
the reflection of this unitarian state is found in the fact that all
existence is perceived by us in terms of "wholes of existence,"
i.e. of units that are born, grow and decay. The very fact that
there is birth, development of generic or individual potentiali­
ties, and eventual disintegration implies a dualistic process. I t
implies the interplay of two polarized forces, symbolized by
Chinese philosophers in the dynamic interaction of Yin and
Yang.

36 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
To live is to consume energy. There are two basic ways in
which this consumption of energy can be said to take place: the
purposeful use of power or the automatic operation of forces.

In either case energy is consumed, but the meanings given to
this consumption differ; that is, the type of consciousness arising
from the living and experiencing of life is positive in the first
instance and negative in the second.
The distinction between "powers" and "forces" should be
clear when we consider even briefly the cosmological approach
taken by traditional philosophies and the contrasting worldview implied in the average scientific mentality of the present,
at least in the West. To the ancient philosopher as well as to his
modern heirs, "the building of the universe" was the result of
the purposeful and supremely intelligent (though not "con­
scious" in the human sense of the term) work of Creative Hier­
archies of spiritual Beings, themselves the seed-products of pre­
vious cosmic evolutions or the direct Emanations of the creative
God—Freemasonry's "Great Architect of the Universe." On the
other hand, most modern scientists (with notable exceptions)
regard the universe as the product of the interplay of "forces"
which somehow exist of themselves and operate without refer­
ence to an intelligent or purposeful Source. The real scientist,
it is true, refuses to commit himself in regard to metaphysical
principles and a Cause of causes; nevertheless, the scientific
training and the concentration upon analysis of material facts
tend to build into modern men a belief in "forces" rather than
in "powers"; human consciousness and personality tend to be
seen as the end products of the long evolutionary interplay of
these immutable and nonpurposeful forces of nature.
To another type of human mind, however, consciousness
and personality, culture and civilization, are the results of the
constant use by human individuals of "powers" which are latent
in every human being as well as expressed in the activities of the
universe. Every human being is understood to be a microcosm
in whom all the creative powers of the great universe (mac­
rocosm) are to be found in a state of potentiality. Human evolu­
tion—whether it is that of the race at large, or of a particular
individual—is thus interpreted as a process of unfoldment of

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLE8 37
creative powers and faculties. This process is directed from
within and is purposeful, at least to the extent that given a
number of seed-potentialities "in the beginning'' of the cycle of
human evolution, the end'of that cycle should find these poten­
tialities (or in individual cases, some of them) expressed in actu­
ality. Such an expression culminates in a creative activity (or a
karma), which in turn generates or conditions the beginning of
a new cycle.
The philosopher who holds such views thinks of the uni­
verse as ruled by laws, but it is also the expression and incorpo­
ration of universal consciousness. The events presenting them­
selves to human experience not only display a sequential order
which permits inferences as to what future events will be, but
these eventsfitinto the pattern of unfoldment of a cosmic whole
and of a cyclic sequence, and as such they have meaning. Both
the scientist and the philosopher believe in universal order and
predictability; but in considering any group of events the scien­
tist is satisfied if he discovers how they came about and how they
will cause new events, while the philosopher asks the question:
"What does it mean?"
To the scientist-astronomer, the zodiac is merely a way of
tabulating and classifying sequences of celestial events and peri­
odical changes. To the true philosopher-astrologer, the zodiac is
a structural framework within which man can shape his unceas­
ing search for more inclusive and vital meanings. Needless to
say, in this book I am taking the point of view of the philosopher
exclusively, for I am dealing with a series of symbolic pictures
that are meant to arouse in the student a realization of the
power of his own creative Spirit. The purpose of this work is to
develop a profound understanding of the nature, character,
sequence of unfoldment, and the overall scope and significance
of those powers that are the mark of the spirit in man—those
powers man must use as he faces his own experience and ex­
tracts from it meaning, direction and purpose. As man does this
(as an individual or as a race, nation or group) he becomes truly
"human"; that is, he lives up to the capacities inherent in the
human kingdom, capacities which actually are as yet very little
developed. He lives his life, instead of being lived by events. He

38 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
uses powers, instead of being swayed by natural forces. He lives
from the creative Spirit in him. And this is positive living,
spiritual living.
One should add that this type of positive living can be
demonstrated as well by the materialistic scientist as by the
philosopher who believes in universal creative intelligence. In­
deed on the surface modern Western man displays a far more
"positive" approach to everyday living than does archaic man,
or the followers of Zen and similar philosophies who believes in
"letting" things happen. This is superficially a more passive
attitude; yet we must go beneath surface orientations if we want
to reach the vital creative meaning of human behavior. The
modern individual imbued with scientific and materialistic con­
cepts may make a most positive and purposeful use of natural
forces; but so does any man who handles machines, tanks, explo­
sives. Count Keyserling once referred to modern man as charac­
terized by the "chauffeur type." Today we would speak of the
technologist or the technocrat. However, the man who deliber­
ately uses machines and the forces operating them acts funda­
mentally in a way not too different from the powerful warrior
of old who dominated his surroundings by sheer force and an
instinct for quick and sound decisions in battle.
Let me take an extreme example from the recent past: Nazi
Germany nearly succeeded in dominating mankind by using
natural "forces" (physical and psychological) with great positiveness; however, Nazism failed to use the creative powers of
the Spirit within Man. It achieved spectacular successes for a
while through the ruthless use of technology, but it was de­
feated, not only by superior forces but by the very power of
human evolution. The Roman empire some sixteen centuries
ago suffered much the same fate, in spite of excellent adminis­
trators and its masses of slaves. And the Vietnam war should
have shown us how "superior forces" can be successfully met by
the power of the collective human will when focused by an
unyielding desire for seff-determination and autonomy, a desire
based on the deeper realities represented by the phase in hu­
man evolution which mankind has reached.
Because by the very logic of planetary evolution a phase of

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 99
global organization and integration of mankind is now ahead of
us, what is today loosely called "imperialism" has become ob­
solete—just as dinosaurs became obsolete. The Nazi or Fascist
type of technocracy—and I must add the Pentagon type—con­
stitute a throwback to a period of the vast cycle of human evolu­
tion which is now definitely past. This behavior has therefore
lost its positive spiritual meaning. It represents the negative
actualization of the new set of human potentialities which has
been released during the last centuries of our Western civiliza­
tion. It is based on the use of "superior force" in an attempt to
overwhelm any manifestation of the deep-seated, planet-wide
urge for human—personal and social—transformation.
He who lives from the creative Spirit in him lives not only
in a determined, active and positive manner; he lives in terms
of the need of the particular, present moment in the cycle of his
individual evolution, and in the cycle of collective human evolu­
tion as well. He acts within the framework of an evolutionary
whole, each moment of which has a particular meaning in terms
of the timely use of particular powers. Timeliness and the accu­
rate focalization of action upon the point of space which fits this
action are essential factors in significant living. Essential also is
adequacy in terms of the overall cyclic purpose of the life of the
one who acts.
The modern engineer, it is true, also considers these three
factors—timeliness, spatial accuracy andfitnessto purpose—but
he considers them in relation to his machines rather than in
relation to his life as a creative participant in the organic whole­
ness of humanity and, ultimately, of the universe. Thus many of
his machines turn destructive. They do so because they are
produced and put to use by a society that chooses to be forceful,
rather than purposeful; that, by seeking above all to control the
automatic operation of forces, has come to consider human be­
ings merely as products of such an automatic operation of mean­
ingless and purposeless forces of nature.
To be force-full is not to be purpose-full. Modern society
today functions for no really significant purpose except perhaps
that of generating more material comfort and abundance for an
ever-increasing mass of human bodies, thus making our planet

40 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDAXA
increasingly uninhabitable. Modern society demonstrates in the
main a negative type of consciousness, because any conscious­
ness without a universal frame of reference within which action
can be seen in its timeliness, spatial accuracy and fitness to
cyclic purpose is a negative type of consciousness. It is con­
sciousness devoid of creative significance and therefore spiritu­
ally empty, however great the intellectual and engineering ca­
pacities sternrning from i t

I F ONE UNDERSTANDS WHAT I HAVE JUST SAID, IT SHOULD BE

clear that any symbol can be interpreted in a positive and a
negative manner. The symbol is the key to the adjustment between the individual act, problem or situation and a universal
frame of reference—relative as this universality may be. In this
present study, which is derived from a symbolization of the 360
degrees of the zodiacal cycle, the constantly changing annual
relationship of the Earth to its basic source of energy, the Sun,
provides us with the basic frame of reference. It is a frame of
reference for the release of energy within the total field of
activity of the Earth-as-a-whole, and more particularly the bio­
sphere. The adjustment to such a year-long release of solar en­
ergy can take place on the basis of either the "purposeful use
of power" or the "automatic operation of forces"—depending
upon the positive or negative character of the consciousness
confronted with the need for adjustment
In most cases, obviously the adjustment will be made by the
individual person without any deliberate reference to symbol­
ism. Yet, in actual fact, a. subconscious reference to collective
"images" is always present; that is to say, the individual will act
in a personal situation by unconsciously identifying himself with
the "image" of what a father, a husband, a faithful citizen, a
devoted son, etcetera, is supposed to do according to some kind
of a social or religious tradition; or he will act by associating the
new situation with previously experienced ones which hurt or
exalted him (i.e. according to a "complex"). In any case, the
present behavior will be conditioned by the mental-emotional
memories of the individual or his race and family—such memo­
ries having crystallized into an "image" or symbol.

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 41
The Sabian series of picture symbols (or any similarly
valid series, ancient or modern) intends to help the individ­
ual make such images conscious, and to establish them
within a universal frame of reference. The ability to do this
is latent in every human being, but it needs to be trained
and developed, and the deeper purpose of the series of sym­
bols is to stimulate it by actual and consistent use. What is at
stake here is the development of the power to relate every
particular activity to a universal meaning and every individ­
ual consciousness to its spiritual source in the universal Mind.
This source is fundamentally to be understood as the moment
in cyclic Time, the place in spheroidal Space, and the purpose in the Harmony of the Whole (or "God") that the indi­
vidual occupies and fulfills.
If this power of symbolic relatedness between the acts of
the individual self and the rhythm of the universal Whole is used
positively, every situation of the individual's life becomes an
opportunity for growth and for the creative expression of the
Spirit within man. If it is used negatively, then—as Marc Jones
writes in the Introduction to "Symbolical Astrology"—"all
things are engaged in what to him is a very real conspiracy
against him; while his satisfactions are elements of destruction,
transformed by his own symbolizing of them in desirable fac­
tors."
In his book The Sabian Symbols in Astrology, as well as in

his earlier mimeographed course, Marc Jones offers positive and
negative interpretations of each of the 360 degree symbols of
the zodiac. Partly because I feel that such either-or polarized
interpretations can be quite confusing at the psychological
level, and partly because I have been trying here to go beyond
a strict relationship between this set of symbols and the zodiac
so that they can be referred to any basic cycle of actualization
of new potentialities of existence and human unfoldment, I
have omitted such clear-cut positive-negative characteriza­
tions. I find some of Marc Jones's interpretations very signifi­
cant, others much less so or hardly even justifiable; and they are
completely different in two versions that have been made pub­
lic. In The Astrology of Personality, as I had to condense the

material in "Symbolical Astrology," I only introduced the posi-

42 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tive-negative characterizations in a few instances and in a short­
ened form.
As I see it, the interpretation of the symbols should be based
on two sets of factors: (1) An objective analysis of the most signifi­
cant features in the symbolic image, and (2) the relationship of
the symbol to other symbols within the framework of the entire
cyclic process. We find the same situation as we deal with any
cyclic set of symbols or images from which meaning is to be
derived. This is particularly true of the images characterizing
the twelve signs of the zodiac—which have little apparent
resemblance to the group of stars they were supposed to repre­
sent when constellations and signs coincided, presumably to­
ward the close of the Greek period (around 100 B.C.).
In the same way, if we consider the ten original Rorschach
cards used in clinical psychology, it seems most evident that the
cards constitute a definite sequence beginning with simple
shapes and ending with a complex picture in which several
colors add to the meaning. The appearance of color in one of
these cards at a characteristic stage of the sequence should be
significant to anyone who thinks at all holistically and in terms
of structured process. Yet I am told that the people to whom this
test has been given, including Carl Jung, have not been aware
of the significance of there being ten cards in a clearly—even
if perhaps unconsciously—structured series. Thus, I feel con­
strained to repeat that no experience can be understood in its
total meaning unless it is related to the whole process in which
it occurs, at the very place and the very moment that conditions
and reveals its function. No isolated occurrence has any basic
meaning of itself. It only acquires meaning as it is related to the
larger whole or process of which it is a part. The relating may
be entirely unconscious, yet it is the foundation of the meaning.
Moreover, it is not the function which should be considered
positive or negative; no action of itself is positive or negative,
good or evil. It is the response of the individual-as-a-whole to the
performance of the function when the time has come for it to
be performed, and in the particular environment in which it has
to be performed, which determines the positive or negative
character of the act We acclaim the soldier who has killed five

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 43
enemies in hand-to-hand combat, but we send to the electric
chair the person who has been crazed by frustrations and social
conditioning and has killed policemen who tried to beat him
after he perhaps stole food from a store. The function of the
acids and enzymes of the digestive tract breaking down food
into chemicals is as positive as that of brain cells transforming
sense input into a beautiful painting or an inspiring concept.
No doubt one can define in principle at an abstract or
archetypal level the basic positive and negative meanings of
a symbol or of an interpersonal confrontation. But the very
suggestion of a negatively polarized archetype introduces
into the situation a negative undertone of meaning which
can easily influence an oversusceptible person. This person
may appreciate the positive meaning; but if he feels unable
or is reluctant to embody such a meaning in his own re*
sponse, he is likely to read the negative meaning in a mood
that conditions him to accept it as what "fate" has in store
for him, or as the evident result of his being a failure or a
weak person.
No symbol should be considered inherently negative. Even
if the image or scene presented seems full of negative implica­
tions, these should be considered as a form of teaching and thus
perhaps as the via negativa which leads man to spiritual heights
by forcing him to experience a violent revulsion from the
depths of human misery and even degradation. Nothing in as­
trology indicates "This is so as a fact" or "This will occur."
Astrology shows us the best—because natural—way of facing
any situation in terms of our own individual nature. There are
easier as well as much harder ways, considering what man is
today and how he has been conditioned by Western society and
a materialized Christianity; but the "culture-of-makmg-thingstoo-easy" (as Keyserling wrote) leads men to a loss of inner
vitality, character and mental acuity.

IN ORDER TO SHOW HOW THE STATEMENTS MADE IN THE

preceding paragraph can be applied to definite cases, I shall take
what is perhaps the most "negative" symbol in the Sabian series:

44 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
the symbol for Cancer 5'.* In his book The Sabian Symbols in
Astrology Marc Jones states the symbol as follows: An automobile wrecked by a train. Then in order to remove some of the
negativity from the picture, he interprets it as follows:
This is a symbol of the irresistible power of completion inherent in the
very make-up of man's world whenever a sequence of events once is
set in motion, as is evident continually on the objective side of things.
Implicit in the reverse symbolism is the concept of control, or the
assurance that it is not necessary to continue any given action to the
point of self-cancellation. The ultimate obligation of the individual is
to himself and not to the narrow and momentary direction of circum­
stances. The keyword is DISPERSION. When positive, the degree is
a special genius for a creative reorganization of all experiences, and
when negative, an insensitive recklessness.
I cannot help feeling that this interpretation is not based
strictly on an analysis of the elements in the picture, but centers
on the emotional implications of the word "wrecked." I do not
know, of course, how Miss Wheeler described the image she
"saw," but let us analyze it carefully. There is practically no way
an automobile can be wrecked by a train except when the road
on which the automobile is driven crosses a railroad track. We
must therefore consider three factors involved in the image: the
automobile, the train and the crossing of their paths.
An automobile is a private means of transportation; a train
a public one. Obviously therefore the symbol relates in a cer­
tain way—a tragic or destructive way—the private or individual
and the public or collective spheres in a technologically devel­
oped society. These two spheres or realms of activity usually
exist more or less parallel with each other; a person may give
his allegiance to, or at least prefer to operate in, one or the other
realm. But there are times when these realms "cross"; that is to
say, their directions become roughly perpendicular, and a mo-

*I should make it clear here that, if the symbol is referred to the position
of a planet in an astrological chart, Cancer 5* begins at 4*1* (four degrees and
one second or minute) and ends with Cancer 4*59'59"; just as the first year
(year number 1) of a life begins at birth and ends with thefirstbirthday. We
are dealing with a process, and "Phase One" starts the very moment the
process begins.

THE INTERPRETATION OF LIFE CYCLES 45
ment of potential tension arises. They work at cross-purposes.
When this happens, the symbol tells us that there is a potential
of destruction involved for the person who does not stop to
consider the possible results of his "rugged mdividualism." So­
ciety should make it impossible or very difficult for the individ­
ual to be so careless; but even though society may build safe­
guards or red-light signals, the individual may senselessly or
carelessly ignore them. Then the automobile may be wrecked.
This does not necessarily imply that the driver is killed—he
could jump out at the last moment—yet his consciousness, i.e.
what his ego rides in, his set of values and his approach to life,
may experience a more or less total breakdown.
As I see it, this is what the symbolic image presents; it
presents it not as a fact, but as a "message," a teaching or
warning. If a person has one of his planets on that fifth degree
of Cancer he is warned that if he insists on allowing the function
or psychological drive represented by that planet to operate
carelessly or recklessly in a strictly individualistic manner at
times when his own and society's purposes cross, then he will
presumably experience a crucial defeat, and this function or
drive is likely to be invalidated, perhaps beyond repair.
There is nothing inherently negative or frightening about
this symbol in itself; it is simply a warning. I do not see why it
should mean an "irresistible power of completion inherent in
the very make-up of man's world," etcetera. It simply tells us
that if at a certain time the ways of the individual and those of
society are at cross-purposes, it is to be expected that society will
win—or, colloquially speaking, "crime does not pay."
But we must go a step further and see how and where the
symbol fits into the process to which the entire set of symbols
belongs. If the reader refers to the seventh scene of the ritual
drama of the year (cf. pp. uo-20) he will see that his Cancer 5*
symbol constitutes the fifth stage of a five-fold sequence which
began with Cancer 1", i.e. the degree of the summer solstice.
The symbol for this Cancer i is said to refer to a phase of activity
implying "A radical change in the allegiance exteriorized in a
symbolical act: a point of no return."
Thus we have in the last symbol of this pentarhythrnic
#

46 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
sequence a warning of what the first symbol might lead to—i.e.
of how at critical times society might react to the "radical
change of allegiance." If the symbols had been visualized today
we might have had the image of a policeman beating a youthful
protester during an antiwar demonstration! If we consider care­
fully the sequence of the first five degree symbols of the sign
Cancer, we can see the possibilities which the "radical change
of allegiance" opens up in terms of action. The entire sequence
has to be considered and understood; and much more still
should be considered, for the whole seventh scene refers to
"Decision." For instance, this seventh scene in Act Two of the
entire ritual can be related to the corresponding nineteenth
scene of Act Four, whose Keyword is "Crystallization."
The whole series of 360 phases is structured in a manner
quite clear to anyone able to consider it in the light of a holistic,
if not eonic, consciousness. We are dealing here with a signifi­
cant process of gradual and purposeful transformation. The
symbols enable us to get a new perspective on the interrelated
phases of this vast process of existence, the keynote of which is
indeed transformation.
After becoming acquainted with each of the symbols we
can return to the study of their interrelationship and to the two
basic ways they can be used.

Part T w o
A REFORMULATION
IN D E P T H O F T H E
SABIAN SYMBOLS

First Hémicycle:
The Process
O f Individualization

®

ACT I: DIFFERENTIATION
SCENE ONE:

DESIRE

(Aries i* to Aries lg)

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 1 (ARIES 1*): A WOMAN JUST RISEN FROM THE SEA.
A SEAL IS EMBRACING HER.
KEYNOTE: Emergence of newforms and of the potentiality
of consciousness.

This is the first of the 360 phases of a universal and multi­
level cyclic process which aims at the actualization of a par­
ticular set of potentialities. These potentialities, in the Sabian
symbols, refer to the development of man's individualized con­
sciousness—the consciousness of being an individual person
with a place and function (a "destiny") in the planetary organ-

80 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ism of the Earth, and in a particular type of human society
and culture.
To be individually conscious means to emerge out of the sea
of generic and collective consciousness—which to the emerged
mind appears to be unconsciousness. Such an emergence is the
primary event. It is the result of some basic action: a leaving
behind, an emerging from a womb or matrix, here symbolized
by the sea.
Such an action is not to be considered a powerful, positive
statement of individual being. In the beginning is the Act; but
it is often an imperceptible, insecure act. The small tender germ
out of the seed does not loudly proclaim its existence. It has to
pierce through the crust of the soil still covered with the re­
mains of the past. It is all potentiality and a minimum of actual
presence.
In the symbol, therefore, the emergent entity is a Woman;
symbolically speaking, a form of existence still close to the un­
conscious depths of generic biological nature, filled with the
desire to be rather than self-assertion. The woman is seen em­
braced by a seal because the seal is a mammal which once had
experienced a biological, evolutionary but relatively uncon­
scious emergence, yet which retraced its steps and "returned to
the womb" of the sea. The seal, therefore, represents a regres­
sive step. It embraces the Woman who has emerged, because
every emergent process at first is susceptible to failure. This
process is indeed surrounded by the memory, the ghosts of past
failures during previous cycles. The impulse upward is held
back by regressive fear or insecurity; the issue of the conflict
depends on the relative strength of the future-ward and the
past-ward forces.
The possibility of success and that of failure is implied
throughout the entire process of actualization. Every release of
potentiality contains this two-fold possibility. It inevitably opens
up two paths: one leads to "perfection" in consciousness, the
other to "disintegration"—the return to the undifferentiated
state (the state of humus, manure, cosmic dust—i.e. to the sym­
bolic "great Waters of space," to chaos).

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 51
This symbol characterizes thefirstoffivestages which are repeated
at three levels. This stage represents the initial statement, or theme,
of thefive-foldseries which refers to thefirstlevel: IMPULSE TO BE.

PHASE 2 (ARIES £*): A COMEDIAN REVEALS HUMAN NATURE.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to look objectively at oneself and
at others.

While the first phase of the process of emergence is essentially
in terms of subjective impulse and the desire to act, the second
phase represents the attempt to evolve an objective awareness
of existence. Through a sense of contrast, consciousness is gradu­
ally being built. It is what Teilhard de Chardin calls "reflective
consciousness": the ability to see oneself reflected as in a mirror,
and eventually to laugh at the inadequacy of the form one sees;
thus "humor," the triumph of objective consciousness over sub­
jective feeling or moods, or involvement in self.
This symbol characterizes the second stage in thefirstfive-foldse­
quence of phases: the stage of OBJECTIVATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS.
This second phase complements and polarizes thefirst,which stresses
the subjective desire to become individually conscious.

PHASE 3 (ARIES 3*): THE CAMEO PROFILE OF A MAN, SUGGESTING THE SHAPE OF HIS COUNTRY.
KEYNOTE: The sustaining power of the Whole, as the individual identifies himself with Its life.

Having become objectively aware of his nature and his basic
humanity, the individualizing person finds power and inner
security in realizing his essential identity with the section of the
universe in which he operates. He and it seem to his conscious­
ness united in a cosmic-planetary process—in a "participation
mystique." Metaphysically expressed, this is the concept of the
identity, of Atman and Brahman. In another sense, through his

52 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ability to identify himself with the complex of life activities
surrounding him, the individual person can become truly, not
only an image and representation of the Whole of his natal
environment (local, planetary and perhaps eventually cosmic),
but an agent through whom the Whole may express itself in an
act of creative resonance and outpouring. This is the avatar
ideal—the ideal of a "transpersonal" life and consciousness to­
tally consecrated to and directed by a divine Power. This Power
can also be conceived as the archetypal Self, the Christ-princi­
ple as it operates in and through an individual person and des­
tiny who have become its outward manifestation in order to
meet a collective human need.
The concept of the formal-structural identity of the univer­
sal macrocosm and the human microcosm is a very important
one, as it manifests itself at many levels. It provided an inner
sense of security and harmonic strength to archaic man. To the
modern individual assailed by surface evidence of meaninglessness and futility it gives a feeling of participation in the vast tide
of evolution. It is the answer to the tragic sense of alienation so
prevalent today.
This symbol characterizes the third stage of thefirstfive-foldsequence
of phases: the stage of PARTICIPATION IN A GREATER LIFE.

PHASE 4 (ARIES 4°): TWO LOVERS STROLLING ON A SECLUDED WALK.
KEYNOTE: The progressive polarization of energies needed
for fulfilling ones life function.

In order to respond fully to the potentialities released by a sense
of identification with a greater Whole, the human being should
be himself whole. An interplay of bipolar energies is needed to
provide a sustained and dynamic "resonance" to any superior
and encompassing form of life. This may imply a temporary
withdrawal from routine activity, i.e. a "secluded" process. It is
not, however, a closed process. The positive and negative
polarities do not meet in a closed circuit, reconstituting a neu-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 53
tral state of potentiality. They operate in dynamic, open, un­
resolved togetherness in contact with the surrounding energies
of nature.
This symbol characterizes the fourth stage of the first five-fold se­
quence of phases: the stage of dynamic and unresolved POLARIZATION. It introduces the basic means—one might say, the technique—
to establish consciousness in the world of duality.

PHASE 5 (ARIES 5*): A TRIANGLE WITH WINGS.
KEYNOTE: The capacity for self-transcending.
This is the symbol of the desire to reach a higher level of exist­
ence, of pure aspiration or devotion, of bhakti. What has
emerged in the first phase of the process of differentiation is
becoming aware of the possibility of further up-reachings. The
principle of "levitation" is seen as one of the two essential fac­
tors in evolution. The emergent being glorifies and deifies it, but
it is still only an ideal. At this stage, nevertheless, the whole
being experiences a childlike longing for its eventual realiza­
tion.
At this point the last and synthesizing stage of thefirstfive-foldunit
in the cyclic process is reached. A NEW DIMENSION of being is envi­
sioned mobilizing creative endeavors.

SECOND LEVEL: EtaOTIONAL-CULTURAL

PHASE 6 (ARIES 6*): A SQUARE, WITH ONE OF ITS SIDES
BRIGHTLY ILLUMINED.
KEYNOTE: The emotional desirefor concrete and stabilized
existence as a person.

This desire for individualization operates at first as a onepointed or one-sided drive focusing itself upon an exclusive
goal. All emotions are at first possessive, and all cultural manifes­
tations operate on the principle of exclusion. All that does not

54 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
belong to the tribal sphere (one blood, one land, one folk) is the
potential enemy. This is a necessary phase, for—as in the case
of "the woman emerging from the sea"—the first attempt at
building an inner realization of integral being may be defeated
at any time by the regressive pull toward undiflerentiation and
the prenatal state of nonindividualization within the vast womb
of nature or within unformed cosmic space.
Thisfirststage of the secondfive-foldsequence of symbols presents the
theme which will be dialectically developed—afive-phasedialectical
process: A ONE-SIDED URGE FOR INNER STABILITY.

PHASE 7 (ARIES 7 # ): A MAN SUCCEEDS IN EXPRESSING HIMSELF SIMULTANEOUSLY IN TWO REALMS.
KEYNOTE: The first realization of the dual nature of man
and of the possibilities it implies.

This symbol represents the antithesis of the thesis pictured in
Phase 6, yet in such a five-fold sequence what we see is contrast
rather than opposition. The primordial one-sidedness of emo­
tional and cultural manifestation actually calls for the compen­
satory ability to operate at two levels. Thus the primary dualism
of Sky and Earth, of the divine and the human, of spirit and
matter. The vision and the emotions are focused within sharply
defined boundaries, but within these boundaries they express
themselves at two levels. This is the foundation of religion as
well as of magic.
A situation which has become characterized by this symbol
can be successfully faced if its spiritual and material implications
are understood and actualized.
At this second stage of the secondfive-foldsequence of symbols we see
at work man's capacity for LIVING TWO SEPARATE LIVES—and finding
fulfillment and happiness in both. On this capacity are founded many
of the complexities of human nature.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 55
PHASE 8 (ARIES 8 # ): A LARGE WOMAN'S HAT WITH STREAMERS BLOWN BY AN EAST WIND.
KEYNOTE: Protection and spiritual guidance in the development of consciousness.

This somewhat strange image can be understood if every stated
feature in it is clearly analyzed without preconceptions. Here
again we see a woman; but now her head is covered with a large
hat—a protection against the forces of nature', i.e. cold and /or
the penetrating rays of the sun. At this emotional-cultural level
(Phases 6 through 10) the mental processes are still largely un­
developed; thus they need protection from the elemental forces
of life. A too great openness to the Sky-energies and the
"spiritual" level could lead to obsessions of one kind or another.
The symbolic image implies a rather strong wind, thus the
activity of some more-than-material, and especially psychic,
forces. These originated in the East, traditionally the seat
of spiritualizing and creative-transforrning influences. The
woman's hat has streamers, which enable it not only to respond
to the wind but to indicate its source. In other words, the image
symbolizes a stage of development of consciousness in which
the nascent powers of the mind are both protected and in­
fluenced by energies of a spiritual origin. This suggests a proba­
tionary stage in the process of individualization. Under protec­
tive guidance a still most receptive person (a woman) is being
influenced by spiritual forces.
This is a third stage symbol in which we see the first and second stages
of this second five-fold sequence producing results which require PROTECTIVE FORMS (which is what a culture and ethical precepts provide)
and SENSITIVITY to spiritual energies.

56 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 9 (ARIES g°): A CRYSTAL GAZER.
KEYNOTE: The development of an inner realization

of or-

ganic wholeness.

The crystal sphere symbolizes wholeness. Within the sphere
images take form. These images may reveal future events, but
more significantly they picture "the situation as a whole"—the
situation which the clairvoyant is meant to interpret. The nas­
cent mental faculties operating through still dominant emotions
(or collective cultural incentives) act as a centralizing and
whole-making power. What the intelligence perceives in its
concentration is the function of every inner impulse and outer
events in the open field of a "personality" still unclouded by
egoism.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence the new technique re­
quired for the development of individualized consciousness is re­
vealed: CONCENTRATED ATTENTION.

PHASE 10 (ARIES 10*): A TEACHER GIVES NEW SYMBOLIC
FORMS TO TRADITIONAL IMAGES.
KEYNOTE: Revision of attitude at the beginning of a new
cycle of experience.

This phase is the fifth of the second five-fold sequence, and in
it we find expressed the capacity to restate the problem inher­
ent in the first phase, i.e. the problem of focusing one's energies
upon emotional drives and cultural values which exclude far
more than they include. The subsequent stages of development
taken together have added considerably to this attitude; as a
result, there arises in the consciousness a desire to reformulate
at a new level much that had been taken for granted because
it indeed originally had been an evolutionary necessity. The
very concrete emotion-arousing images of the past can now be
reinterpreted as "symbols" with a wider scope of meaning.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 57

At this fifth stage a new dimension of consciousness is discovered,
revealing higher possibilities of experience and mental development
This is a phase of ABSTRACTION and of emotional allegiance.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 11 (ARIES 11°): THE RULER OF A NATION.
KEYNOTE: The power resulting from theformal integration
of the collective desire for order.

At this stage of the cyclic process this symbol refers to the
appearance of the (personal) ego as the central manifestation of
a type of "order" which transcends and seeks to rule the emo­
tional and instinctual drives of the individual person. Actually
the ruler at this social-political and mental level of integration
is often the one who is being ruled by collective pressures.
Nevertheless, a desire for a larger type of integration has now
emerged. It is no longer biological-impulsive (Aries i°) or emo­
tional-personal (Aries 6*), but social-collective and institutionaL
At this ego level, laws and the restrictive power of a police force
are dominant features. Psychologically speaking, this means
that the integrative principle is the limited, more or less narrow
" I am" realization. It manifests itself as the personal ego exert­
ing its will to control the reactions of the bio-psychic organism.
This is the first stage of the third five-fold sequence of the cyclic
process. It indicates a CENTRALIZATION OF POWER at the level of a
rigidly structured consciousness.

PHASE 12 (ARIES 12*): A TRIANGULARLY SHAPED FLIGHT OF
WILD GEESE.
KEYNOTE: An idealistic reliance upon a mental image of
universal order.

The wild goose is the mystical bird, hamsa, of Hindu tradition.
This word, which has recurred in various cultures (the Hansa

58 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
League of Germanic cities in the late Middle Ages, and El
Hanza, the founder of the occult Brotherhood of the Druzes in
Lebanon, during the era of the Crusades), has always had at least
an undertone of integration at an expansionistic level, spiritual
or economic. The Hindu hamsa was the symbol of man's tran­
scendent soul. What previous interpretations of this Sabian sym­
bol have failed to grasp is that the flight of geese presents not
only a remarkably geometrical V-shape moving through the
sky, but also that this flight is seasonal and therefore attuned to
planetary rhythms. Thus, it symbolizes comic order, in contrast
with the social-political order within a nation which is repre­
sented by its ruler. I t is order made visual on the background
of the clear sky. I t is a "celestial" type of order, even though i t
is earth-born birds which reveal it by their ability to keep their
flight structured. The symbol therefore refers to the Soul-con­
sciousness as visualized by the heaven-oriented mind. Yet this
soul-consciousness can be called transcendent because it has not
yet become "incarnated."
Because this is a second stage in the thirdfive-foldsequence begun
with Phase u, we have to consider what it pictures in contrast to the
preceding symbol. A basic dualism of consciousness is thus suggested.
We see arising a potential conflict between cosmic and social princi­
ples of order. The principle of COSMIC ORDER polarizes the all-toohuman reliance on the social concept of law and order.

PHASE 13 (ARTES13*): AN UNEXPLODED BOMB REVEALS AN
UNSUCCESSFUL SOCIAL PROTEST.
KEYNOTE: An immature evaluation of the possibility of
transforming suddenly the status quo*

The symbol pictures the result of a particular attempt to resolve
the conflict between two concept-feelings of order. Resolution
by violence fails because the ego-power at this stage of the
process of individualization is far too strong. "The State"
thwarts attempts at popular revolution, because these are
premature expressions of a consciousness which is not free, but

a REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 59
can only react "wildly" to constraint and to a central ruling
power. It is thus a symbol of immature refusal to conform, in the
name of an overidealistic desire for harmony and peace.
This is the third stage of the third five-fold sequence. A negative
attempt at reconciling the spiritual ideal and the very earthly reality,
denying the validity of the latter. It suggests ADOLESCENT FRUSTRA-

TION.

PHASE 14 (ARIES 14*): A SERPENT COILING NEAR A MAN
AND A WOMAN.
KEYNOTE: Identification in bipolar relationship with the
impersonal rhythm of natural energy.

The symbol for Phase 4 pictures a man and a woman in love
walking together. At this new and more mentally stimulated
level of experience and consciousness, a third factor appears:
the serpent, whose coiling represents the spiral-like process of
evolution—not merely "sex" according to the maker of cathar­
tic symbols, Sigmund Freud. We can understand this "triangu­
lar" image—man, woman and the serpent—if we relate it to the
preceding one in the series, the unexploded bomb of the
anarchist or activist. The urge to blow up some structure which
somehow has become in the activist's mind a symbol of the
Establishment—the ruling elite—is usually the protest of an
alienated and often immature mind that refuses relationship,
because in the relationship he would occupy a subservient posi­
tion. In this symbol, the serpent represents the acceptance of
relationship by the two polarized human beings.
There must be a polarization before there can be fulfill­
ment. The tragedy of so many contemporary lives is that, hav­
ing become sharply individualized, the men and women cannot
find their truly matching polar-opposite. Because they are not
fulfilled at the root level of human emotions and vitalistic forces,
they pass their lives seeking the ideal complement, often glamo­
rized as the "soul mate." This search can find its expression at
several levels. At the mystical level we have the examples of the

60 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
"spiritual marriage" of Saint Francis of Assisi and Santa Clara,
or recently of Sri Aurobindo and Mother Mira.
The Adam and Eve story (in Hebrew, Ish and Ma—much
more significant names!) refers to this principle of polarization,
although the story has been turned upside down by priestly
intellects to serve their purposes. Adam and Eve accepted the
Presence, not of the Tempter, but of the Individualizer, who
sought to have them born out of the womb of unconscious
passivity to Nature's God. But the result of the experience
frightened them. They "hid"; they failed in the great test of
individuahzation, and in this sense the archetype of that failure *
is deeply imbedded in man's generic unconscious. It is repeated
time after time.
Modern "individuals" are confronted with another test, but
they do not understand its meaning. It is the test of polarized
conscious participation in the evolutionary process—a polariza­
tion that could dissolve alienation, isolation and egocentricity.
In a sense at least, this was the old Tantric concept in India; but
today many young people accept the concept only superficially
and miss its real essence. They cannot understand the meaning
of entering into the serpent, i.e. of developing eonic conscious­
ness and that transpersonal living which once was characterized
by the words: Not I live, but Christ lives me—Christ, whose
symbolic number in Gnosticism is 888.
At this fourth stage of the thirdfive-foldsequence, we are confronted
with an image suggesting the transpersonal way to the "cosmification"
of desire and the conscious acceptance of polarization as the solution
of the problems generated by individualization. But this need not
mean what is currently meant by "sex" and the glorification of the
orgasm. It implies rather the RTTUALIZATION OF RELATIONSHIP.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 61

PHASE 15 (ARIES 15*): AN INDIAN WEAVING A CEREMONIAL
BLANKET.
KEYNOTE:

Projecting into everyday living the realization
of wholeness and fulfillment

In Christian tradition one hears of Jesus' "seamless robe." In
Asia one is told of the "spiritual vesture" of the Perfect Ones.
The man who has attained the spiritual state is figuratively
robed in the universe—and more precisely, in the Milky Way,
the Great White Robe of interwoven stars. This is the ultimate
kind of weaving. There was also Penelope's weaving and un­
weaving, waiting for the return of her polarizing mate. The
mind of the American woman in which these symbols took
concrete form could think only of "Indian weavers." For the
white man who is hungering for symbols of a state of living in
total harmony with the universe, the traditional Indian can be
glamorized as the answer to the inner emptiness of the citydweller surfeited with artificial values. At any rate, we may thus
prefigure a future state of fulfillment in conscious harmony and
unpossessive love.
If this symbol comes to the consciousness of the inquirer
after meaning, deliberately or through an aleatory act of revela­
tion (like the act of throwing sticks to obtain an I Ching symbol),
implied is the profound fact that every individual has as his
ultimate conscious task the weaving of his "immortal body," his
Gnostic Robe of Glory. It may sound very mystical and "far
out," but there is a moment in every cycle when, in however
small a degree, every individual may be confronted with the
potentiality of a fulfilling act of self-realization and may, ever so
relatively, find himself "clothed in light" for an instant.
Thisfifthstage of the thirdfive-foldsequence of symbols ends the first
of the twenty-four "scenes." We are told by it that the FULFILLMENT
OF DESIRE is a possibility, at whatever level and in however incom­
plete a manner it may be experienced.

62 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
SCENE TWO:

POTENCY

(Aries iff to Aries 30*)

FIRST LEVELS ACTIONAL
PHASE 16 (ARIES 16*): NATURE SPIRITS ARE SEEN AT WORK
IN THE LIGHT OF SUNSET.
KEYNOTE: Attunement to the potency of invisible forces of
nature.

In the light of personal fulfillment (symbol of sunset and wis­
dom) man may be able to establish a life-giving contact with
natural forces. These are active any time growth processes take
place, but man's individualized mind is usually too focused on
working for consciously set goals to be able to realize concretely
the presence of invisible (or "occult") forces in operation. These
forces constitute a specific realm of any planetary life. They are
inherent in all "biospheres," on whatever planet. They are
nonindividualized and unfree energies forming in the sub­
stratum of all life processes—thus of the process of integration
at the level of the planet-as-a-whole, i.e. the planet as an organism with its automatic systems of growth, maintenance and
organic multiplication. In this planetary organism those nature
forces act as guiding and balancing-harmonizing factors—some­
what as the endocrine system does in a human body, and behind
this system the more occult web of chakra energies related to
prana—the solar energy. It is when this energy becomes less
dominant—thus symbolically at sunset—or when the body en­
ergy is weakened by illness, fasting or sensory deprivation, that
it becomes easier to perceive these "nature spirits" and to give
them forms that symbolize the character of their activities.
These forms differ with the cultural imagery of each human
collectivity, retaining nevertheless some basically similar char­
acteristics.
When this Sabian symbol reaches into the consciousness of
a man seeking meaning, it should be seen as an invitation to

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 63
open his mind to the possibility of approaching life in a holistic
and nonrational, intuitive manner.
This is the first stage of the fourthfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases.
It implies a call to REPOTENTIAUZATION. What this means also is the
process of "becoming like a little child."

PHASE 17 (ARIES 17*)} TWO DIGNIFIED SPINSTERS SITTING
IN SILENCE.
KEYNOTE:

The ability to transform a natural lack of potency into poise and inner serenity.

Here we have a symbol which contrasts with the preceding one.
In our culture, the "spinster" represents the woman who has
been unable to meet or accept the vitalizing power of love and
organic fulfillment through biological polarization. Yet the sym­
bol depicts two spinsters, emphasizing that refusing the natural
expression of bipolar love has produced a special kind of dualism
of experience. The two women are silent because this dualism
has a narcissistic character. Life has turned inward seeing itself
in a self-created mirroring. We have here the result of a nega­
tive inward approach to potency. The ascetic or saint also turns
inward, but he accepts a higher nonbiological type of polariza­
tion: man and. God. Just as the activity of nature has a compul­
sive character, so the resistance of the spinster to biological
fulfillment is also compulsive.
This is the second stage of the fourth five-fold sequence. Like all
second stages it reveals a contrasting potentiality of experience which
can also be seen to complement or polarize the symbol of the first
stage. It refers to the value of a dignified INWARD WITHDRAWAL.

PHASE 18 (ARIES 18*): AN EMPTY HAMMOCK STRETCHED
BETWEEN TWO TREES.
KEYNOTE: A

constructive alternation of activity and rest.

The symbol refers to the ability to balance outer vitalistic ac­
tivity and withdrawal from such activity and relaxation. The

64 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
owner of the hammock is active, but in his consciousness he can
hold the image of rest in the midst of reenergizing nature. The
concept of following the rat race of business therefore has no
hold. Potency may be preserved and extremes avoided. Time is
found for recuperation.
This is a third stage symbol which suggests a middle path between
total involvement in instinctual or social drives, and withdrawal in
impotent silence and narcissism—thus LIVING RHYTHMICALLY.

PHASE 19 (ARIES 19*): THE "MAGIC CARPET" OF ORIENTAL
IMAGERY.
KEYNOTE:

The use of creative imagination*

A way of life refusing a hectic involvement in social competition
and waste-producing overproduction allows for the develop­
ment of unattached and transcendent understanding. The static
floor (carpet) on which man's feet (symbols of understanding)
rest can become transformed into the means for great flights of
imagination and super-physical perception. The period of rest
from outwardly directed activity bound to collective normality
presents the creative mind with the possibility of surveying in
dreams the totality of the present-day social situation, thus "to
see whole."
The fourth stage of the fourthfive-foldsequence of symbols invokes
the possibility of developing a new technique of perception, A STRIFE-

TRANSCENDING AND UNATTACHED OUTLOOK UPON EVERYDAY REALITY.
PHASE 2 0 (ARIES 20*): A YOUNG GIRL FEEDING BIRDS IN
WINTER.
KEYNOTE: Overcoming crises through compassion*
Nature's seasonal rhythms imply an oscillation between living
and dying. Through creative imagination man can "fly over"

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 65
the cycle, and discover means not only to escape from the fatal­
ity of seasonal decay or deprivation, but to assist other living
entities to survive through crises. Migrating birds fly south (cf.
symbol of Aries 12*), but by establishing a partnership with other
creatures unable to escape wintry deprivation or death, man
can maintain the life of the spirit (symbolized by birds) steady
through all crises if, like a "young girl," he is widely open to the
promptings of love and sympathy.
At thisfifthstage of the symbolic sequence we witness human activity
motivated by sympathy overcoming the seasonal phase of impotency*
Life potency in nature spirits reaches a higher level in the human
being. The theme is THE TRANSMUTATION OF LIFE INTO LOVE.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 21 (ARIES 21*): A PUGILIST ENTERS THE RING.
KEYNOTE: The release and glorification of social aggressiveness.

Here we find potency glorified as muscular strength and will-topower. Because it is potency operating at a harshly competitive
level, it can and often does imply the possibility of defeat or
disfiguration. In one sense the symbol translates into social
terms the primordial struggle for survival of the fittest, adding
to it an eagerness for social fame and social power (i.e. money).
In another sense, the ring with twofightersin it can be referred
to the Tai Chi symbol and the interplay between Yang and Yin.
Each of the two types of energy wins in turn. Victory is always
temporary in a dualistic world.
This is the first stage of thefifthfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases.
Potency and the two-fold possibilities inherent in any release of power
are seen operating at the sociocultural and emotional level. The sym­
bol reveals man's deeply rooted feeling of admiration and envy for
whoever can generate OVERWHELMING POWER.

66 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 2 2 (ARIES 22*): THE GATE TO THE GARDEN OF ALL
FULFILLED DESIRES.
KEYNOTE: Abundance made possible by human togetherness and cooperation.

In contrast to the crude and cruel road to fame and power
symbolized by the prize fighter, we now see a symbol of appar­
ently wide-open and effortless fulfillment. Alone, a human be*
ing can barely survive in nature's great life drama; in organized
groups men can in due time fulfill their desires. The abundant
life is in theory open to all. At least this is the ideal, the great
dream. This symbol can also be given an erotic meaning, refer­
ring to womanhood
At the second stage of this series of symbols, the goal of happiness
dominates the consciousness of cultural man, the more validly so the
more modest his desires. Religious philosophies, like American. New
Thought, glorify this social feeling of abundance, glamorizing it into
an avid COSMIC OPTIMISM and a cult of success.

PHASE 2 3 (ARIES 23*): A PREGNANT WOMAN IN LIGHT SUMMER DRESS.
KEYNOTE: Fecundity.
Masculine aggressiveness and the woman's desire for fulfillment
(Phases 21 and 22) are integrated and realized in the expected
child. This three-fold sequence can be seen operating at several
levels, and the third term, the child, can take various emotional
and cultural forms. The basic meaning remains the same. Sum­
mer is the period of fruition. Man—at the receptive "woman**
level—reaps the fruits of his dynamic activity.
This is the third stage of thefifthfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases.
It combines the two preceding ones and suggests INNER FULFILL-

MENT.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 07
PHASE 24 (ARIES 24*): BLOWN INWARD BY THE WIND, THE
CURTAINS OF AN OPEN WINDOW TAKE THE SHAPE O F
A CORNUCOPIA.
KEYNOTE: Openness to the influx of spiritual energies.
The principle of abundance is brought to a further stage in this
rather cryptic symbol. Physical fruition is shown operating at a
more subtle and spiritual level. The wind (pneuma, spirit) blows
through the open mind-window and brings into the house of
personality a promise of more-than-material potency. Wind
blows from a region of high pressure to one of low pressure. As
the window curtains are blown inward, the individual con­
sciousness represented by the house is receiving a more concen­
trated influx of spiritual energies, enabling this consciousness to
extend the scope of its awareness and creative expression.
This message applying to this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence is
that inner growth demands not just an open mind but one able to
provide a container for a spiritual harvest. The cornucopian shape of
the window's curtains suggests that the subtler translucent aspect of
the mind (the curtains) has acquired a plastic quality enabling it to be

MOLDED BY TRANSPERSONAL FORCES.
PHASE 2 5 (ARIES 25*): THE POSSIBILITY FOR MAN TO GAIN
EXPERIENCE AT TWO LEVELS OF BEING.
KEYNOTE: The revelation of new potentialities.
In some unspecified way the symbol is a guarantee that man can
operate successfully at two levels of consciousness, i f he has
previously met the condition mentioned in the preceding sym­
bol. "Be open. Be able and willing to shape your translucent
mind in the form revealing spiritual fulfillment. And you will be
able to experience life and power on inner as well as outer
planes." The implied message is one of faith. Man can only truly
experience what he deeply believes he can experience.
This is the last stage of thisfifthfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases. It
announces the possibility of a new step in evolution, but it is still only
a possibility, a promise. The individual is truly ON PROBATION.

68 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 2 6 (ARIES 26'): A MAN POSSESSED OF MORE GIFTS
THAN HE CAN HOLD.
KEYNOTE: Obsession by potentiality.
The mind whichfindsitself confronted with a totally unfamiliar
and as yet unexperienced type of potencyfindsit difficult at first
to adjust to its new world of perception and possibilities of,
action. He may rush ahead excitedly and lose his bearings. He
should try to reach a state of calm watchfulness, and to learn
that at this level too there are limits and restrictions, i.e. laws
expressing this new type of "order."

This is the first stage of the sixth five-fold sequence of cyclic phases.
This entire sequence of symbols shows us that man at this evolutionary
station has to move carefully in his new realm, for his consciousness
is not yet fully able to operate in it, except with closely defined limits.
It is a symbol of WARNING—a warning against undertaking more than
it is as yet safe and sound to attempt.
PHASE 2 7 (ARIES 27*): THROUGH IMAGINATION A LOST OPPORTUNITY IS REGAINED.
KEYNOTE: Revision of attitude and inner revaluation.
The second stage of a five-fold sequence of phases always re­
veals a contrast to the first, but not necessarily an opposition.
This symbol makes it clear that the mind that has become overstimulated and obsessed by all it appears to be able to accom­
plish in some new realm of experience may easily fail. The
disciple fails in his test, or at least it seems to him that he has
failed. Actually the "failure" may have been meant by his guru
to be a challenge to the emergence of a new capacity; generally
speaking, this capacity is what one calls "creative imagination."
The mind must first "imagine" that which he will then be able
sooner or later to actually experience.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 69
At this stage it may be difficult to distinguish success from failure.
Nothing may fail like success, people say. What counts is the develop­
ment of UNDAUNTED FAITH in the pursuit of one's ideals.

PHASE 2 8 (ARIES 28*): A LARGE AUDIENCE CONFRONTS
THE PERFORMER WHO DISAPPOINTED ITS EXPECTATIONS.
KEYNOTE: The necessity for mature preparation and selfcriticism.

We see here the tangible results of the situation evoked by the
two preceding symbols. Great hopes, excited expectations can­
not be sustained. The last symbol reveals the performer's state
of consciousness; in this one he is actually made fully aware of
having promised—to the many elements of his own personality
as well as perhaps to other human beings—more than he was
able to deliver. The issue is how to handle this situation. In one
form or another, it is an often recurring situation in the life of
an individual person. The manner in which it is met determines
the individual's future possibilities of development and achieve­
ment.
This is the third stage of thisfive-foldsequence. What is implied here
is the need to be more than "obsessed by potentiality" and subjectively involved in the use of the new powers. The objective results
have to be considered, i.e. what this use will do. The individual is not
alone concerned, for in a sense mankind as a whole will be affected.
What is required, therefore, is an objective inclusiveness of the whole
environment; thus a sense of RESPONSIBILITY for what one's actions
will produce in people who have been made to expect significant
results.

70 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 2 9 (ARIES 29 S ): THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES.
KEYNOTE: Attunement to cosmic order.
At the fourth stage of a five-fold sequence a technique is often
presented. It is based on the experiences implied in the preced­
ing symbols. In this case, what the individual who has entered
into a new realm of possibilities of action should learn is the
harmonic principles operating in this realm. The music of the
spheres is the celestial embodiment of principles of polyphonic
interplay. The individual advancing "on the Path" should seek
to understand and realize his place in the vast scheme of man­
kind's evolution, in the immense Chord of the harmony of the
universe.
The message to the seeker for meaning which is implied in this symbol
is TO LISTEN TO THE INNER VOICE; to listen without personalizing this
Voice in a glamor-producing manner. It is the Voice of the Whole, of
which one begins to realize that one is a tiny little part—yet a signifi­
cant part, for every note of the universal Chord has its place and its
ineradicable meaning.

PHASE 3 0 (ARIES 30*): A DUCK POND AND ITS BROOD.
KEYNOTE: The realization of natural boundaries.
After the preceding symbol this may seem anticlimactic. What
is shown here is that every form of activity has its limits, and that
even the consciousness that has been able to get-a glimpse of
universal order has to bring down to its own "karmic" field of
operation the message of harmony it has heard inwardly. Peace
and inner contentment with one's essential destiny (dharma) is
required to meet the everyday world. The mystic may experi­
ence flights of imagination and transcendent vision, but he must
return to the concrete earth and to his task in his social environ­
ment. Extensive as the latter may seem it is still very small
compared to the galactic field; it is indeed a duck pond com­
pared to the ocean. But it is there that the substance for con­
crete action has to be found, and every effective activity has to

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 71
be focused; thus the boundaries imposed by the very nature of
this activity have to be consciously accepted.
This is the last stage in the lastfive-foldsequence related to the second
scene, characterized by "Potency." It leads to the third scene, whose
Keyword is "Substantiation." Potency has to become substantiated—
it has to mate with substance—in order to be effective power. Power
must accept the principle of FOCALIZATION.

SCENE THREE:

SUBSTANTIATION

(Taurus i° to Taurus lg)

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 31 (TAURUS 1°): A CLEAR MOUNTAIN STREAM.
KEYNOTE: The pure, uncontaminated and spontaneous
manifestation of one's own nature.

Here we see life substance in its original dynamic form and as
it emerged from its spiritual source. This is true whatever the
nature of the source may be. In a sense the mountain stream is
conditioned by the nature of the soil and by all the forces which
in the past have formed the mountain's rock strata: that is to say,.
by past history. Yet out of this past a new, pure (i.e. unadul­
terated) release of potentiality has emerged. It is ready to per­
form whatever work its dharma is to accomplish.
This is the first stage of the seventh five-fold sequence of phases.
Matter is still imbued with great potential energy, energy being mat­
ter at its source. It isflowingirresistibly toward its own destiny. It is
simply ITS OWN NATURE.

72 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 3 2 (TAURUS 2*): AN ELECTRICAL STORM.
KEYNOTE: The cosmic power able to transform all the implications of natural existence.

At this second stage of the five-fold sequence we see a picture
which contrasts with the one for the first stage: thus, a celestial
display of power versus a clear, lovely-sounding little stream.
Back of every natural self-expression stands the tremendous
power of the "Soul-field," itself but one of the myriad aspects of
the Creative Word that is the origin of this universe. At certain
times, this power compels the natural earth-conditioned per­
sonality to accept, perhaps in awe, the spiritual potentialities of
its "higher" celestial destiny. This experience of power can both
illumine and shatter. The next symbol reveals its positive pos­
sibilities.
This is a stage of existence in which "revelation" is implied, at least as
a potentiality. The consciousness may be deeply disturbed by THE
VISITATION, but the substance of the individual being can be fecun­
dated by the experience.

PHASE 3 3 (TAURUS 3'): NATURAL STEPS LEAD TO A LAWN
OF CLOVER IN BLOOM.
KEYNOTE: The gradual expansion of the individual consciousness after a fecundating experience.

Having been "activated" by electrical energy, the pure water
of the mountain stream is able to fertilize the soil which covers
itself with small blossoms. "Clover" however, is normally a sym­
bol of the Triad ("Trinity"), and thus of the often-mentioned
"three natures" in man. To reach the flowering garden of mind,
the consciousness must proceed by steps. Effort is needed. What
is reached is a flowering display of the simple, quite humble
kind, yet bees are after it for honey. There is sweetness and
energy latent in the blossoms.
This is the third stage of the seventhfive-foldsequence of phases. It
is a stage at which one should seek with diligence and determination,
but in humility and faith, to reach NATURAL FULFILLMENT.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 73
PHASE 34 (TAURUS 4*): THE POT OF GOLD AT THE END OF
THE RAINBOW.
KEYNOTE: Riches that come from linking the celestial and
the earthly nature.

In Genesis, the rainbow is the symbol of the Covenant of God
with Noah. In all mythologies it expresses, in one way or an­
other, a linking process—or the bridge used by divine beings to
communicate with mortals. What the linking process brings to
the individual consciousness is elusive, as the rainbow never
ends where you are, yet it is the source of symbolic, universally
valid wealth. All wealth, in a very real sense, comes from "com­
merce"; i.e. from the commingling of minds and from contracts,
and thus is based on faith in the validity of a promise.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldprocess we are given a mode of
operation, which reminds us of the symbol for the second stage, "an
electrical storm." Man need not be overawed by the celestial display
of power, for it leads to a fruitful contact with beings of light. This is
a natural kind of COMMUNION, involving a transubstantiation of mat­
ter.

PHASE 35 (TAURUS 5 ): A WIDOW AT AN OPEN GRAVE.
KEYNOTE: The impermanence of all material and social
#

bonds.

"All natural compounds decay," said the Buddha. The most
beautiful and most enjoyed substance loses its potential energy
through continuous actualization and the principle of integra­
tion and form is withdrawn, leaving the Void—"the open
grave" that ends all attachments. The Void is the great chal­
lenge: What next? One must begin anew, and if possible at a
"higher," i.e. more inclusive and universal, less egocentric,
level.
This fifth conclusive stage of the sequence which deals with root ele­
ments and basic actions and responses may seem negative, yet it opens
the door to self-renewal. Beyond the personal attachment rises the

74 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
possibility of participating in a larger sphere of existence. This possibil­
ity rarely manifests itself except as one is ready to DISCARD THE PAST.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 36 (TATJRUS 6°): CANTILEVER BRIDGE ACROSS A
DEEP GORGE;
KEYNOTE: The conquest of separativeness through groupcooperation.

The person who has suffered deprivation and loneliness can
give new substance to his or her emotional life by participating
in a collective project. All great evolutionary challenges imply
the overcoming of basic difficulties. A step ahead must be taken,
yet an abyss confronts evolving man. It is no longer a personal
Void—an "open grave"—but a chasm that is an integral part of
the "land" upon which man's evolution must proceed. A link
must be built through the power of the collective mind of the
group or of the community at large, on the basis of the legacy
of the past, to make a bridge over the canyon.
This is thefirststage of the eighthfive-foldprocess of "Substantiation.''
The man-made bridge built with collective skill gives substance to and
demonstrates man's capacity to CONQUER OBSTACLES and to achieve
evolutionary continuity as well as expansion in space.

PHASE 37 (TAURUS 7 ): THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA AT THE
ANCESTRAL WELL.
KEYNOTE: The meeting of the traditional past and of the
#

creative spirit pointing to the future.

The symbol refers to a most important, but usually narrowly in­
terpreted (or interpreted awayl) episode of the Christ mythos.*
Early in his ministry, Jesus meets a Samaritan woman at an
ancestral well This woman belongs to a tribe despised by the
•See discussion of mythos on p. 382.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 75
Jews; moreover, she is unmarried and therefore on the fringe
of even her own society. It is to just that kind of woman that
Jesus reveals that he is the Messiah: " I am He," a revelation that
he apparently will not bestow even upon his disciples, at least
not in words. (Words in occultism are the creative factor.)
What does this mean? Jesus, as the Avatar incorporating the
Christ-Impulse, came to replace the old tribal order with a new
order based on universal Love. It is not to representatives of, or
even to men still attached to, the old order that Jesus could
reveal his spiritual, evolutionary and society-transforming
status; they had instead to reach a point where they could discover his avatar-ship—as did Peter just before the Transfigura­
tion scene. But to the woman of Samaria—who, in her openness
to love's urgings, had already repudiated any narrow subservi­
ence to the old order—Jesus could reveal his function. The
highest meets the lowest when this lowest is free from tradi­
tional bonds and open to love. The creative future descends first
to that which has become chaos. An old order is never open to
a new Revelation until it has accepted disorder in the name of
that Power which subsumes all forms of order, i.e. Love.
In this second stage of thefive-foldsequence, a contrasting element
enters upon the scene. It is no longer a collective-cultural effort based
on past knowledge—as in the preceding symbol—but a "meeting"
that introduces into the collective situation a totally new factor which
transcends it. A NEW QUALITY OF BEING is revealed which renders the
old patterns obsolete.

PHASE 38 (TAURUS 8 ): A SLEIGH ON LAND UNCOVERED BY
SNOW.
1
KEYNOTE: The value of anticipating and preparing for ex#

pectable conditions.
Here we have a combination of two factors: "the sleigh," which
is a product of traditional skill (cf. Taurus 6* symbol) and the
ability man has to foresee and thus to prepare for a future

1

76 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
situation. This ability relates this symbol to the one for Taurus
7*, because the woman from Samaria had the capacity to re­
ceive a revelation of the future state of human evolution,
though in a different and subconscious sense. Man should be
ready to use past knowledge and skill to meet the demands of
a stage yet to come.
At this third stage of the eighthfive-foldsequence we should realize
the value of FUTURE-ORIENTED IMAGINATION but also of relying upon
the natural order of unfoldment of all life processes.

PHASE 39 (TAURUS 9 ): A FULLY DECORATED CHRISTMAS
TREE.
KEYNOTE: The ability to create inner happiness in dark
#

hours.

In northern or mountainous countries where the Christmas tree
symbol took form, we find a contrast between the tree outside
—bare and normally covered with snow—and the tree inside
the home—loaded with decorations and gifts for the family. I f
we follow up the meaning of the preceding symbol, we see that
snow has come outside; but the prepared and closely united
group has created abundance, beauty and happiness within,
overcoming the cold barrenness of the outside world—just as
man had overcome, in a previous symbol (Phase 35), the natural
obstacle to his progress. The Christ symbol is also included in
the background—that is, the vivid faith in a transformed future.
This fourth stage symbol suggests the ever-present possibility open to
man to transfigure the darkness and deprivation of the low point of a
life cycle by incarnating in it an antiphonic response celebrating the
ever remembered and always expected high moments of life. It
evokes man's undying FAITH IN CYCLIC RENEWAL.

1

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 77
PHASE 40 (TAURUS 10*): A RED CROSS NURSE.
KEYNOTE: The compassionate linking of all men.
This symbol reveals the feeling of human cooperation at the
stage of pure altruism and service to the social Whole. On that
foundation of Christ love (agape, or true companionship), man
can reach a still higher level of experience made possible by the
refinement of the substance of his being, his consciousness and
his will. This goes beyond imagination and faith in the future—
beyond Christmas tree celebrations—for it implies going into
the dark to bring life and love to the tormented and the de­
prived.
At thisfinalstage of thefive-foldsequence we see what isfinallyopen
as new potentiality to the "widow before an open grave"—the closing
symbol of the preceding sequence. Personal attachment in love to a
husband or wife has changed level becoming a CONSECRATION TO

HUMANITY.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 41: (TAURUS 11°): A WOMAN WATERING FLOWERS IN
HER GARDEN.
KEYNOTE: Development of the powers of the mind on
which ego-consciousness is based.

The psycho-mental nature of a human being takes form out of
the fulfillment and transcendence of biological functions and
drives, much as the bud appears as the sap rises, and bursts forth
into bloom. "As the roots, so the flowers" is an old axiom. The
consciousness attaches itself to this wondrous efflorescence; it
lavishes its attention upon it, its love—alas, usually a possessive
kind of love ("This is my garden!"). Thus the ego develops. I t
may develop in a negative, resentful way if a belated frost de­
stroys the buds.

78 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This is thefirststage of the ninth sequence of phases, a sequence that
basically refers to the overall situation related to the development of
the ego. The Keyword here is CULTIVATION.

PHASE 42 ('TAURUS 12*): A YOUNG COUPLE WINDOW-SHOPPING.
KEYNOTE: The fascination of the youthful ego with the
products of its culture.

The woman waters flowers in her garden: this is the inwardturned attention of the mind reveling in its ownflowering.But
now we have a scene symbolizing the outward longing of the
ego, which has polarized itself and become "man-woman." The
"man" aspect is that part of the ego which craves direct partici­
pation with society and the world of other egos. Fully to partici­
pate requires a special kind of substantiation—and we are still
in this third scene, the Keyword of which is "Substantiation."
Clothes, goods of various types, adornment, and working tools
are needed. The consciousness surveys possibilities; they are
defined by organic nature (personal abilities) and by the ambi­
tion to succeed in society.
This second stage is defined in contrast to thefirst.The ego becomes
aware of what society has to offer. Its attention is turned outward. An
interplay takes place between the individual and his culture. He is
being molded by what he sees and by prospects for growth in social
prestige. It is a phase of SOCIALIZATION OF DESIRES.

PHASE 43 (TAURUS 13*): A PORTER CARRYING HEAVY BAGGAGE.
KEYNOTE: Self-mobilization for social advantage.
The "man" spoken of in the preceding symbol is now integrated
in a social pattern. He has to carry a load—perhaps a load of
debts following an ambitious buying spree, or some other social

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 79
burden. He is the strong man, the man of ambition who has to
take care of the inward-turned "woman" aspect of his con­
sciousness, the aspect that seeks to grow a beautiful "garden" of
individual selfhood.

At this third stage of the ninth five-fold sequence we see the outcome
of the first two. The relationship of ego-man and society has taken the
aspect of COMPULSION FOR GAIN.
PHASE 44 (TAURUS 14*): O N THE BEACH, CHILDREN PLAY
WHILE SHELLFISH GROPE AT THE EDGE OF THE WATER.
KEYNOTE: Returning to simpler joys for revitalization.
This somewhat ambiguous picture suggests the way in which
simultaneous activities of different natures can fill the individu­
alizing mind. The consciousness of socialized man operates at
two levels, in close parallelism with what goes on in the uncon­
scious parts of the mind (i.e. the sea). Natural urges are half
conscious, half unconscious. They exist in a borderland—the wet
sands still partly covered by small waves. The children play a
little further away, learning imaginative yet sociocultural
games. The hardworking porter loaded with baggage should
remain a little child at times and allow himself to be close to
subconscious but natural urges. At least he should do so for a
while until he feels surer of himself.
This symbol suggests that it is better not to attempt at once more than
one can achieve through conscious and ego-driven ambition. It refers
to the value, at this stage, of close contact with natural energies and
simple pleasures, of a LIVE AND LET LIVE attitude.

80 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 4 5 (TAURUS 15'): HEAD COVERED WITH A RAKISH
SILK HAT, MUFFLED AGAINST THE COLD, A MAN
BRAVES A STORM.
KEYNOTE: The courage needed to meet the crises precipitated by social ambition.

The man with the silk hat has seen some of his ambitious efforts
bring him social success; but he learns that often "nothing fails
like success." The storm may be within him, or it may attack his
social status. He is ready to face it daringly. This shows a willing­
ness to accept crises and to go through them—and therefore
great character, the soil upon which a higher kind of conscious­
ness may develop.
This is the fifth and final stage of this ninth five-fold sequence of
symbols. It implies a transition to a new level at which the individ­
ual who has learned from experience demonstrates a truly mature
mind. What is revealed here is CHARACTER under adverse circum­
stances.

SCENE FOUR:
CONFIRMATION
(Taurus iff to Taurus 30V

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 46: (TAURUS 16*): AN OLD TEACHER FAILS TO INTEREST HIS PUPILS IN TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE.
KEYNOTE: The inadequacy of past knowledge in time of
crisis.

During this Act One of the cyclic process the emergence of new
developments is emphasized. In time of crisis—as, for example,
the "storm" being braved by the man of the last symbol (Phase
45)—the type of wisdom learned from this past remains in the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 81
background to be revived later on in new forms; what is empha­
sized is change. Traditional concepts are not adequate to confirm the new conditions of existence. Thus whenever this sym­
bol comes to a seeker's attention it indicates that even the most
consecrated tradition does not have the real answer to the prob­
lem.
At thisfirststage of the tenthfive-foldsequence of phases of the cyclic
process a seemingly negative picture is shown. From the Zen point of
view the mind facing trouble should not depend on past concepts but
should repeat: "Not this! Not that!"—until the pure Void is reached.
We might speak here of the principle of CREATIVE FRUSTRATION.

PHASE 47 (TAURUS 17*): A SYMBOLICAL BATTLE BETWEEN
"SWORDS" AND "TORCHES."
KEYNOTE: Refusing to depend upon the past, the seeker
turns warrior, fighting anew the eternal "Great War."

When Gautama, having sought in vain for the answers to his
questions among the teachers of tradition, sat under the Bodhi
Tree, he had to fight his own battle in his own way, even though
it is an eternal fight. The spiritual light within the greater Soul
must struggle against the ego-will that only knows how td use
the powers of this material and intellectual world. There is no
possibility of escape; it is the energy that arises out of the pres­
ent moment—the inescapable NOW—that the daring individ­
ual has to use in the struggle.
This second stage symbol suggests that salvation is attained through
the emergent individual's readiness to face all issues as if there were
only two opposed sides. So teaches the Bhagavad-Gita. This is the
dharma of this stage of human evolution: a stage of POLARIZATION OF

VALUES.

82 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 48 (TAURUS l8 ): A WOMAN AIRING AN OLD BAG
THROUGH THE OPEN WINDOW OF HER ROOM.
KEYNOTE: The cleansing of the ego-consciousness.
#

In this third stage of the present sequence the first two stages
should be considered background. The traditional teachings
concerning man's nature are somehow reconciled with the
youthful enthusiasm that sees in every problem of growth an
issue between the "good" and the "bad." The symbol suggests
that the real enemy is within the mind; it is the ego and its
attachment to possessions. The mind is shown in the likeness of
a "bag," now empty and needing to be aired in the sunlight. But
the "window" must first be opened and the bag emptied.
The phrase "cleansing the doors of perception" has become well
known of late. But even more to be cleansed is the container of per­
ceptual images—i.e. the ego mind. The Keyword is PURIFICATION.

PHASE 49 (TAURUS 19*): A NEW CONTINENT RISING OUT OF
THE OCEAN.
KEYNOTE: The surge of new potentiality after the crisis.
The symbol need hardly be commented upon. When the mind
has been emptied and light has been called upon to purify the
consciousness freed from its attachment and contaminations, a
new release of life can emerge out of the infinite Ocean of
potentiality, the Virgin SPACE. What will it be used for?
Because this is a fourth stage symbol wefindin it a suggestion of how
to approach whatever new phase of life has been not only hoped for,
but actually confirmed. The "technique" is simply to allow the infinite
Potential to operate in unconstrained SPONTANEITY. This means to
have reached a state in which the conscious, rational ego is no longer
a controlling factor.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 83
PHASE 5 0 (TAURUS 20°): WlSPS OF WINGLIKE CLOUDS

STREAMING ACROSS THE SKY.

KEYNOTE:

The awareness of spiritual forces at work.

Any emergence of life potentialities from the depth of the vast
Unconscious is answered by the spiritual activity of superconscious forces in a cosmic kind of antiphony. The individual who
has taken a new step in his evolution should look for the "Signa­
ture" of divine Powers confirming his progress. It may reveal
the meaning of what is to come next. The "winglike clouds"
may also symbolize the presence of celestial beings (devas, an­
gels) blessing and subtly revealing the direction to take, the
direction of "the wind" of destiny.
This is the fifth stage of the tenthfive-foldsequence. It concludes a
process, having experienced which the individual shouldfindhimself
more securely established in his own original nature, receiving the
BLESSINGS of super-natural forces.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 51 (TAURUS 21°): A FINGER POINTING TO A LINE IN
AN OPEN BOOK.
KEYNOTE: Learning to discern what in your culture and
religion is meaningful to you personally.

This symbol evokes the traditional practice, when one is in need
of guidance, of opening at random a Sacred Book (for Christians,
the Bible) and spontaneously placing one's finger on a para­
graph. We are parts of a cultural-religious whole, and every
whole has a message for its many parts, if these are willing to
submit their little wills to the great meaning and destiny of the
whole. In an even broader sense, the open mind can learn to
detect "signatures" in many events which he has allowed to
occur. The too great reliance on repeated symbolizations can
lead to a schizoid state of over-subjective dependence upon
signs and omens.

/

84 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This is the first stage of

the eleventh five-fold sequence of symbolic
phases in the general process of "Differentiation" (Act One). By relying on cultural guidance a person identifies himself with a differentiated type of collective response to a particular environment. It is a
State Of SUBSERVIENCE TO COLLECTIVE VALUES.
PHASE 5 2 (TAURUS 22*): WHITE DOVE FLYING OVER TROUBLED WATERS.
KEYNOTE: The spiritual inspiration that comes to the individual in the overcoming of crisis.

Here also we are confronted with a symbol of guidance, and the
dove flying over troubled waters reminds one of the story of
Noah and the Ark. Noah met his and mankind's crisis coura­
geously and in complete obedience to God's promptings. The
test completed, he received the dove's message. It is a message
from the Holy Spirit announcing a new Dispensation. This sym­
bolic scene can be applied to personal crises resulting from
emotional upheavals or from the irruption of unconscious forces
and impulses into the consciousness—if the crisis has been faced
in the right spirit.
This second stage symbol is in contrast to the preceding one because
here it is not the product of a culture, a "book," but instead the rhythm
of cosmic, God-ordained cycles that reveals its conclusive beat through
a living and concretely significant sign—a REWARD TO THE FAITHFUL.

PHASE 5 3 (TAURUS 23*): A JEWELRY SHOP FILLED WITH
VALUABLE GEMS.
KEYNOTE: The social confirmation of natural excellence.
Two elements should be distinguished in this symbolic picture:
the gems that result from natural processes, often induced by
extreme volcanic heat and pressure, and the finished products
of refined craftsmen. Both the gems themselves and the artistry
are highly prized and bring prestige to the owner of the jewels.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 85
The symbol applies to any product in which culturally acquired
skill has embellished or transformed the end results of a lengthy
and demanding natural process.
This is the third stage of the eleventhfive-foldsequence of phases. At
this stage we are concerned with the social process which brings about

a CERTIFICATION OF PERSONAL WORTH.
PHASE 5 4 (TAURUS 24*): AN INDIAN WARRIOR RIDING
FIERCELY, HUMAN SCALPS HANGING FROM HIS BELT.
KEYNOTE: The aggressiveness of human instincts when
fighting for their earthly base of operation.

In the mythology of early America, the Indian represents the
"savage," close to nature and led by primordial instincts. Alas,
our present century has revealed that under far less imperative
circumstances so-called civilized man is capable of far more
cruel tortures and extermination. This symbol related to a
fourth stage seems to imply that violence and aggressiveness are
basic components of human nature at the level of the emotions
and of a deep-seated identification with a particular culture
which insists on regarding men of other cultures as potential
enemies.
What is being confirmed here is the value of a group of men's differ­
ences from other groups. We are still in the period of "Differentiation"
(Act One of the cyclic process) and the need for a differentiation of
human behavior and collective values is still very strong. At the emo­
tional level man apparently still has to believe in VIOLENCE FOR SUR-

VIVAL.

PHASE 5 5 (TAURUS 25*): A VAST PUBLIC PARK.
KEYNOTE: The cultivation of natural energiesfor

collective

use and recreation.

At this final stage of the sequence of symbols focusing on emo­
tional-cultural values, we witness the positive and impressive

86 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
results of man's collective endeavor to live in peace and to enjoy
moments of relaxation. The public park is designed and kept for
the enjoyment of all the people of the city.
This is a symbol of COLLECTIVE ENJOYMENT. The individual finds in
the products of his culture an emotional enhancement bom of the
feeling of "belonging" to a large, organized, peaceful whole.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 5 6 (TAURUS 26*): A SPANISH GALLANT SERENADES
HIS BELOVED.
KEYNOTE: The ritualization of individual desires.
At this level we see the play of collective values as they
affect the individual person and indeed confirm his individu­
ality by giving it a solid basis in a tradition. The individual is
still attached to these group-values; he "belongs." Neverthe­
less, this state is necessary for a safe and secure sense of
differentiation within an enfolding whole. Music and the cul­
turally acceptable rituals of love are cultural products, yet
each person can use them for the spontaneous fulfillment of
his very own desires.
This is the first symbol in the twelfthfive-foldseries. It reveals the
individual human being making use of his personal status to find fulfill­
ment and a sense of social identity. This is ROLE-PLAYING in its most
enjoyable form.

PHASE 5 7 (TAURUS 27*): AN OLD INDIAN WOMAN SELLING
THE ARTIFACTS OF HER TRIBE TO PASSERS-BY.
KEYNOTE: Peaceful adaptation to collective needs.
In contrast to the impetuosity of the Spanish serenader, we now
see the quiet and smiling face of an old Indian woman offering
for sale the traditional products of her tribal culture. She too is ,
functioning within the culture which has been sustaining her

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 87
activity through a long life, bringing to her personal peace and
inner contentment. In old age, the power of the collectivity
once more reasserts itself, overcoming the perhaps wearying
effort man makes to assert his uniqueness and individual char­
acter.
At this second stage of the twelfthfive-foldsequence the aging mind
of the individual peacefully reintegrates itself into the psychic matrix
of his group and culture, in serene ADJUSTMENT to the vital needs of
the whole of which he sees himself as afleetingpart.

PHASE 5 8 (TAURUS 28*): A WOMAN, PAST HER "CHANGE OF
LIFE," EXPERIENCES A NEW LOVE.
KEYNOTE: Man's capacity to rise in consciousness and feelings above biological limitations.

After having stated the youthful and the aged approach of the
human individual to the use of what his culture has brought to
him, the symbolism stresses man's capacity to rise above the
limitations which both biological nature and the "normal" social
pattern of behavior have tried to impose on him. As in many of
the preceding symbols, a "woman" is pictured, because at this
early stage of the cyclic process the individual consciousness still
has a receptive or "feminine" polarity—as was indicated in the
very first symbol of the entire cycle (Aries i°).
Whenever this third stage of the twelfth sequence is brought to a
person's consciousness, the indication is that he or she should freely
open his or her mind to the possibility of always new REBEGINNINGS.
Ideally, the new beginning should imply a more mature response to
the new possibility of experience.

88 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

PHASE 5 9 (TAURUS 29 0 ): TWO COBBLERS WORKING AT A
TABLE.
KEYNOTE: The two-fold character of man's mature understanding.

In symbolism the feet are the symbol of understanding. Under­
standing differs from mere knowledge because it implies at least
some degree of identification in depth with what is being under­
stood. Moreover it is impossible fully to understand anything
except when its opposite is taken into consideration. The mental
process of understanding—and therefore of appreciation—im­
plies confrontation between two points of view. Thus the mind
gains a sense of perspective. The way to dispel a shadow is to
have the object iUumined (on its own two-dimensional level) by
two sources of light. True understanding dissipates any intellec­
tual shadow. The "two cobblers" symbolize two contrasting
ways of approaching the understanding of an experienceespecially a new experience-^and they provide concrete forms
which may clothe and protect the understanding.

This is the fourth stage of this twelfthfive-foldsequence. It reveals
symbolically the way in which a mature individual mind works in an
attempt to gain PERSPECTIVE; a true perspective becomes the founda
tion upon which to build a new approach to life.

PHASE 60 (TAURUS 30*): A PEACOCK PARADING ON THE
TERRACE OF AN OLD CASTLE.
KEYNOTE: The personal display of inherited gifts.
A great person able to display a multitude of gifts is always, at
one level or another, the consummation of a long past of efforts
and victories. As a great occultist once wrote: "Adepts are the
flowering of their races and cultures." The peacock is the bird
consecrated to Venus; in occult tradition the Promethean Spir­
its who gave to animal mankind the divine gift of self-conscious

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 89
intelligence had come from "Venus'—which may or may not
refer to the physical planet we can observe in the sky.
This is thefinalsymbol of the fourth scene, whose Keyword has been
given as "Confirmation." This peacock symbol indeed confirms the
social status of the owner of the ancestral estate. It indicates a CONSUMMATION of individual efforts; and it suggests that such a consummation
is hardly possible except when a line of "ancestors'—biological or
spiritual—forms its base.

SCENE FIVE:

DISCOVERY

(Gemini f to Gemini tf)

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 6l (GEMINI 1*): A GLASS-BOTTOMED BOAT REVEALS
UNDERSEA WONDERS.
KEYNOTE: The revelation of unconscious energies and submerged psychic structures.

Within the relative security of a "boat," an individual person
can learn to be aware of the as yet hidden contents of man's
collective Unconscious—provided this boat (that is to say, his
ego that separates him from the collective planetary psyche of
mankind) has been given a glass bottom. The conscious mind
must have become, in part at least, translucent This translucency is not direct openness. The window of the mind remains
closed, but through it the individual can become aware of the
outside—here "outside" means the psychic depths below the
normal level of consciousness.
At this first stage of the "discovery" process one can only speak of
vision, not identification. The feeling is one of wonder. " I did not know
this could exist! How beautiful!" or "How exciting!" A NEW DIMENSION
OF REALITY is perceived by the earnest inquirer.

90 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 6 2 (GEMINI 2 # ): SANTA CLAUS FURTTVELY FILLING
STOCKINGS HANGING IN FRONT OF THE FIREPLACE.
KEYNOTE: A rewarded faith in spiritual blessings.
The popular allegory refers to the spiritual blessings which
come to the "pure in heart," whose consciousness is likened to
that of a little child. Polarized by eager expectation and faith in
the existence of celestial Powers, the pure consciousness as yet
unsolidified by ego and rationalistic arguments experiences the
concrete manifestation of what it had imagined. In this symbol,
Santa Claus acts "furtively." The gifts from an imagined and
intensely believed in spiritual world must not be examined
closely or at length by the reasoning intellect. The would-be
clairvoyant is told not to look straight and intently at what he
begins to "see"; instead he should cast sideways glances at it,
since the sharply focused mind would make the apparition
vanish.
At this second stage of the thirteenthfive-foldsequence we have once
more a symbol in contrast to the one for the first stage. In order to
discover the wonders of the normally unconscious depths of the collec­
tive psyche, the individual has to build the proper kind of vehicle (a
glass-bottomed boat); but the reception of new blessings from the
spiritual realm above (the superconscious) requires mostly faith and
purity of heart, and a common type of understanding (stockings)—thus
a state of INNOCENCE.

PHASE 63 (GEMINI 3*): THE GARDEN OF THE TUTLERIES IN
PARIS.
KEYNOTE: The formalization of collective ideals through

the application of reason and order to newly discovered aspects of nature.

The gardens of the Tuileries and Versailles are typical represen­
tations of the classical spirit and its need for order and symme­
try. The reign of the French king, Louis XIV, followed the
Renaissance, which was filled with the excitement of a new

1

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 91
spirit of discovery and a period of internal troubles. A reaction
had to come to consolidate the gains made by the collective
mind of European man. Such a consolidation usually leads to
another extreme, i.e. formalism and often the narrow intellec­
tual crystallization of dualistic concepts.
At this third stage of the thirteenthfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases
we see the contents of thefirstand second stages brought to the state
of clear and lucid, but also formalized, conceptualization. The heav­
enly gift-bearing Santa Claus has become the paternalistic autocrat,
king by "divine right." The warm family circle celebrating the birth
of the Deliverer from wintry darkness is now the Court of the king
ruled by rigidrituals.There is clarity, but there is also ego-centraliza­
tion and the worship of FORMALISM.

PHASE 64 (GEMINI 4*)l HOLLY AND MISTLETOE REAWAKEN
OLD MEMORIES OF CHRISTMAS.
KEYNOTE: A longing for the preintellectual state of consciousness.

The intellect ruled by the ego has taken all that had been seen
by the translucent mind (the "glass-bottomed boat") and has
given it a logical, rational form. Yet old memories of childhood
and its naive faith sometimes make their way into the conscious­
ness. They are aroused by what remains of the ancestral images
that once had great vitality and power (mistletoe was sacred to
the Druids). The holly with its brilliant contrast of red and green
recalls a more primitive and magical sense of color, as exem­
plified in Tibetan art. A nostalgia for more natural and feelingoriented values tends to lead to a movement of protest—thus,
to the intensification of the emotions in the individual personal­
ity, or to the Romantic Movement after the post-classical and
post-rationalistic European period.
This is the fourth stage in the thirteenth series. It recalls the fourth
stage in the eighth sequence (Phase 39, Taurus 9") symbolized by "a
fully decorated Christmas tree." But the vivid experience of childhood
now has become only an obsessive or nostalgic memory. It heralds a

92 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

resurgence of deeper values and aspirations which had been forced
back into the collective unconscious. What is stressed here is the value
of tradition-based archetypes during the process of "discovery," a
RETURN TO THE SOURCE. The contact with archetypes may nevertheless lead to explosive situations.
PHASE 65 (GEMINI 5*): A REVOLUTIONARY MAGAZINE ASKING FOR ACTION.
KEYNOTES The explosive tendency of repressedfeelings and
root emotions.

Every movement overstressing one direction calls forth in time
an equally extreme movement in the opposite direction. This is
particularly true at the level of the dualistic mind symbolized
in the zodiac by Gemini. What is rigidly bound in form and
convention tends to explode into formlessness. It may do so
violently if socially oppressed—through revolution—or at the
psychological level in psychosis; or it may withdraw inwardly
into the mystical state in which one identifies with an unfbrmulatable Reality.
Thisfifthstage is related to thefirst,forit is the experience of a world
of being so far unperceived by the everyday consciousness which
starts the process. In the same sense a psychedelic experience may
momentarily make the mind transparent to a non-ego-structured
realm of consciousness, and may lead to a sustained attempt at under­
standing what has been revealed of a transcendent Reality. Whether
the revolutionary action is violent or peaceful, bitterly resentful or
loving, the one desire is TO REACH BEYOND ESTABLISHED FORMS.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 66 (GEMINI 6'): WORKMEN DRILLING FOR OIL.
KEYNOTE: The avidity for that knowledge which ensures
wealth and power.

This symbol superficially considered can be referred to the
insatiable drive of modern man for power and wealth, his

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 93
readiness to accept the risk of failure. But it has a deeper
meaning, especially if related to the next symbol. Oil is the
end result of the decay of living materials. Drilling for oil
may represent the attempt to penetrate to the deep layers of
the collective Unconscious and to reawaken the powers of
the archaic psyche which once flourished—for instance in
the true ceremonial magic of the tribal world, perhaps
among the adepts of the fabled Atlantis, or even among the
shamans and witch doctors of more recent times. The ar­
chaic powers may be "refined" for modern situations, but
the almost inevitable result is the release of noxious waste
products, "pollution." And there is a pollution of conscious­
ness as well as of the atmosphere man breathes.
The zodiacal sign Gemini has basically the meaning of
insatiable curiosity and avidity for knowledge; it is logically a
"human" sign (the Twins). One of the Twins tends to seek
power and knowledge from the ancient past, the other to
discover a living source of strength and wisdom which is
forever being replenished by the celestial downpour of
Spiritual Consciousness and love (cf. the next symbol). It is
man's nature, alas, to begin with potentially negative emo­
tions and desires.
This is the first stage of the fourteenthfive-foldsequence of cyclic
phases. It deals with the emotional and, at the present-day level of
evolution, socially prized reaction of most human beings to the attain­
ment of new forms of knowledge, i.e. AMBITION.

PHASE 67 (GEMINI 7*): A WELL WITH BUCKET AND ROPE
UNDER THE SHADE OF MAJESTIC TREES.
KEYNOTE: Man's primordial faith in the hidden sustaining
power of life.

In contrast with the ambitious drive of modern man for power
and wealth we now have the image of the eternal search for that
which is at the root of all living processes, i.e. water. This search
also demands some effort—raising the water-filled bucket—but

94 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
it is a simple natural effort under the shade of trees which attest
to the presence of the life-giving fluid. This presence depends
on the cooperation of sky (rain) and earth (the geological forma­
tion able to hold the water), and man must develop the intuitive
sense which enables him to feel this presence and to make it
effectual in his daily life. He must sense the hidden reality which
preserves for the use of all living organisms this gift of the "sky,"
the bounteous rain.
At this second stage of the fourteenthfive-foldsequence of symbols,
the power of the collective and bio-spiritual energies which sustain all
earth-rooted cultures is stressed, in contrast to whatever the techno­
logical mind of man can make available to increase his personal com­
fort and mastery over matter. The symbol implies A FUNDAMENTAL

TRUST IN AND COOPERATION WITH LIFE.

PHASE 68 (GEMINI 8'): AROUSED STRIKERS SURROUND A
FACTORY.
KEYNOTE: The disruptive power of the ambitious mind
upon the organic wholeness of human relationship.

We are dealing in this sequence of symbols with man's discovery
of the new powers residing in his special contribution to the
total organism of this planet Earth—his consciousness and ag­
gressive mind. The first stage (Phase 66) dealt with oil, the
typical form of energy which the modern mind has made avail­
able. (These symbols were revealed before atomic energy was
even thought of as a practical possibility.) Now we see in this
new symbol a pictorial indication of what the use of this intel­
lect-generated energy inevitably leads to: industrial unrest and
violence. As man manages to rape the earth in order to demon­
strate his power and intensify his pleasures and his sense of
proud mastery, conflicts and disruptive processes are inevitably
initiated.
The arousal is presented to us here in its collective social form because
we have reached the emotional-cultural level. The type of power

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 95
generated by the analytical intellectual faculties is essentially disrup­
tive; it is based on the destruction of matter, and invites egocentric
hoarding and spoliation—and, in general, privileges of one kind or
another. This leads to a REVOLT AGAINST PRIVILEGES.

PHASE 69 (GEMINI Q*): A QUIVER FILLED WITH ARROWS.
KEYNOTE: Man's aggressive relationship to natural life, as
a basis for survival and conquest

The bow and arrows represent symbolically man's ability to
extend the scope of his conquest of nature and to kill enemies
in order to build a larger base for the collective development
of a culture and an organized society. Implied in the symbol of
the arrow is the piercing of a target. The mind of man is essen­
tially a trans-piercing power; it goes through the object toward
which it is aimed. It seeks to go through and beyond the obsta­
cles on its path, and this usually implies the destruction of the
obstacle. At a higher level—-as in the Zen practice of archery—
the obstacle is the ego.
At this fourth stage of the fourteenthfive-foldsequence of phases in
the cyclic process of human existence we are shown the archetypal
symbol of Man, the Conqueror. It may be a conquest of outer nature,
or that of instinctual drives and of the limiting power of the ego. It is
always CONQUEST.

PHASE 70 (GEMINI 10*): AN AIRPLANE PERFORMING A NOSE
DIVE.
KEYNOTE: A superior ability to challenge nature and play
with danger.

Through the controlled use of mental powers man is able to
challenge the most basic force in nature: gravitation. He enjoys
playing with it as a lion tamer with his violent animals. But what
he challenges is within himself as well as outside. Gravitation is
the universal binding force of the material world. By challeng-

96 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ing it man prepares himself to pierce beyond the physical and
to reach higher realms of existence. He may lose the struggle,
but that prospect makes the effort more exciting. He might gain
"immortality."
This is thefinalstage of the fourteenth sequence. The symbol for it has
a strong sense offinality.No possibility of half measures exist. Man is
committed irrevocably to success or failure—at least as a conscious and
self-reliant mind. The alternatives are clear-cut. One may describe it
as MIND vs. MATTER, or as Man's will against the fate that gravitation
so aptly symbolizes.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVTDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 71 (GEMINI 11*): NEWLY OPENED LANDS OFFER THE
PIONEER NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR EXPERIENCE.
KEYNOTE: The power and joy of new beginnings.
These "newly opened lands" can refer to any as yet unex­
perienced field of potential activity at any level—material, emo­
tional, mental or supermental. We are now dealing with the
third level of experience, at which individuality—or at least the
ego character—operates more definitely. While in the preced­
ing phases much was said concerning the powers of the mind,
this mind was essentially based on the collective patterns of a
culture and a society. Now, at this third level, we find the human
being essentially engaged in his personal and particular struggle
for full and effective individualization. And the initial realiza­
tion he has to experience is that he has reached a potentially
virgin field of consciousness and activity. He is facing the un­
familiar. Anything could happen.
This is the first stage of thefifteenthfive-foldsequence of symbols.
Having conquered, at least to some extent, the collective and material
energies of nature and society, man has become relatively "separate"
from the past. He faces the future. Every step ahead should show him

RISING TO THE OCCASION.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 97

PHASE 7 2 (GEMINI 12#): A NEGRO GIRL FIGHTS FOR HER
INDEPENDENCE IN THE CITY.
KEYNOTE: Liberation from the ghosts of the vast
While "newly opened lands" theoretically offer virginfieldsfor
experience, in fact those men and women who reach them find
themselves conditioned by their own past. They carry the
ghosts of their former lives and the memories of collective social
patterns with which they had identified their egos. Every new
beginning is surrounded with ghosts (or personal and social
karma). The racial struggle for equality of opportunity must go
on, even if this equality is officially guaranteed by the Law. The
struggle is within and takes many forms. The Puritans brought
to the theoretically "New World" the fears, the fanaticism and
the aggressiveness of their European existence, and these often
grew more virulent under the conditions found in the New
World. But no field of activity is ever totally "virgin." It has its
inhabitants, and they cling to their possessions or privileges.
Whoever seeks to be truly an individual must be liberated from
the past
Here at this second stage we have the usual contrasting type of sym­
bol. The new lands are opened, but they are filled with lives, and the
pioneer's mind filled with ghosts, preconceptions, and prejudices or
expectations. What is needed is a total LIQUIDATION of the past: virgin
minds for virgin fields.

PHASE 7 3 (GEMINI 13*): A FAMOUS PIANIST GIVING A CONCERT PERFORMANCE.
KEYNOTE: Individual fulfillment in the performing of a
social function to which some prestige is attached.

Having entered upon the path of individualized experience
that brings him in touch with broader or higher realms of su¬
perpersonal inspiration, the individual person is able to become
himself a source of inspiration, an agent for Man and the forma-

98 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
rive Powers guiding human evolution. His role is to mobilize
emotions, to present to others an image of what for most people
is beyond their mediocre and lukewarm responses to the chal­
lenge of becoming "more-than-man"—to experience more in­
tensely and to see farther. This is the role of the true and ideal
"virtuoso" (vir meaning strength, manliness; thus "virtue") and,
in a far-reaching sense, of the Avatar whose example fascinates
human beings, leading them to leave behind their past and to
venture forth into new realms of experience.
At this third stage we see the meanings of the two preceding symbols,
synthesized. One moves into new realms and successfully challenges
the fears, the insecurity and the lack of self-confidence of the past in
oneself—all negative attitudes which, while conditioned by the social
environment, have become engraved upon the unconscious. Having
achieved this liberation, one can bring to the environment the power
generated by self-discipline, skill and self-confidence. One has become
an at least potential SOURCE OF INSPIRATION.

PHASE 7 4 (GEMINI 14*): BRIDGING PHYSICAL SPACE AND
SOCIAL DISTINCTIONS, TWO MEN COMMUNICATE TELEPATHICALLY.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to transcend the limitations of
bodily existence.

In order to function in the world of material entities man needs
to focus the energies of life in a limited organism and an egomind that is formed by the pressures of a particular culture and
family background. Yet a time comes when the individual can
still transcend the limiting boundaries of culture and ego. An
effort should then be made to enter a realm of consciousness in
which the communication from mind to mind can take a more
direct form, because the minds then operate within the One
Mind of humanity. It is then as if two cells in a human body were
communicating to each other, perhaps through some kind of
invisible nerve channels, or, as it were, from nucleus to nucleus
by means of vibratory resonance.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 99
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence we see the potentiality
of a new technique to be used in the "newly opened lands" confront­
ing the pioneers in human evolution. It is a TECHNIQUE OF TRANSCENDENCE. It evidently can also bring confusion and many failures, as well
as illusory claims and self-deceit.

PHASE 7 5 (GEMINI 15*): TWO DUTCH CHILDREN TALKING
TO EACH OTHER, EXCHANGING THEIR KNOWLEDGE.
KEYNOTE: The need to clarify one's experiences through
actual contacts with like-minded

individuals.

This symbol adds something vital to the preceding one. Tran­
scendent experiences and supernormal faculties must be tested
and clarified through the use of normal and collectively tested
means of communication—which may mean through scientific
procedures. The "Dutch children" seem to have been intro­
duced by the subconscious mind of the formulator of the symbol
because of an association with neatness and the open spirit of
discussion which has prevailed in Holland. They are "children"
because the new experiences are still very fresh and require
certification; this demands a "clean" and open mind eager to
test what is experienced in an exchange of views with one's
peers.
This is the last stage of thefifteenthfive-foldsequence of symbols. It
closes the scene of "Discovery." All discoveries must be checked and
their validity tested. In old tribal cultures a man's "great dreams"
were accepted as valid and acted upon only if another tribesman also
had a similar dream. The need for OBJECTIVITY has to be met; and this
implies the confirmation of any subjective realization by some similar
experience. It implies also the type of dualism inherent in all mental
experiences as well as in mental concepts.

100 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
SCENE SIX:

EXTERIORIZATION

(Gemini iff to Gemini 30V

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 76 (GEMINI l6'): A WOMAN ACTIVIST IN AN EMOTIONAL SPEECH DRAMATIZING HER CAUSE.
KEYNOTE: A passionate response to a deeply felt new experience.

What has been "discovered" not only needs to be discussed and
tested through an intellectual exchange which permits its for­
mulation, it also demands "exteriorization." This implies the act
of dealing with those who are still unaware of the new knowl­
edge or realization. A public is needed, and it has to be con­
vinced; its inertial resistance to change has to be overcome. This
usually requires an emotional dramatization of the issues at
stake. Here again, as at the very start of the cycle (Aries i*), a
woman is depicted, which means a person depending upon
feelings and fiery images to sway the receptive public.
This is the first stage in the sixteenthfive-foldsequence in the cyclic
process. We are dealing now with the exteriorization of the original
impulse—i.e. the emergencefromthe vast ocean of potentiality which
constitutes human nature at all levels. What is at stake is a process of
communication of new experiences. The mind is called upon to per­
form its work, but what comesfirstis the action of that mind which
is violently moved and which attempts to move other minds by violent
means, the PROSELYTIZING MIND.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN 8YMBOLS 101

PHASE 77 (GEMINI 17*): THE HEAD OF A ROBUST YOUTH
CHANGES INTO THAT OF A MATURE THINKER.
KEYNOTE: The transformation of physical vitality into the

power to build concepts and intellectual formulations
through which knowledge can be transferred*

While in the preceding symbol we see the explosive release of
impulses generated by a new realization of what is right and
wrong—the "woman" way controlled by feelings—now we
have a picture of a process of quiet and steady metamorphosis
of biological energy into mind-power, which can be seen sym­
bolically as the "man" way. The symbolism may seem old-fash­
ioned today, but the two contrasting approaches to communica­
tion of new experiences remain evident, however one wishes to
symbolize them.
This second stage of the sixteenth sequence, as is nearly always the
case, presents a contrast with thefirststage. What we see pictured is
the transformation of emotions into mind, of instincts into thoughts—
a process of MENTAL METAMORPHOSIS.

PHASE 78 (GEMINI l8*): TWO CHINESE MEN CONVERSE IN
THEIR NATIVE TONGUE IN AN AMERICAN CITY.
KEYNOTE: The needfor the mind to retain its independence

from its physical environment in order to concentrate
on its special problems*

Individuals who have entered into a new realm of activity usu­
ally find themselves alienated from their social environment. In
a sense they "live in the world" (the world of ordinary men still
bound to common earthly and biological pursuits) but "are not
o/the world." They normally seek companions who can speak
their language. It may be an "old" language, that of wisdom
rather than that of knowledge. China's culture is far older than
that of the American masses swarming through greed-infested
cities.

102 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This third stage of the process reveals what may occur when the
individual has developed new capacities for experience that may en­
able him to tap the vast reservoir of the planetary mind of Man. To
the common man he appears to speak a foreign tongue. He experi­
ences a process of INSULATION; yet he is never really alone. Here and
there hefindsthose who can understand him.

PHASE 7 9 (GEMINI 19*): A LARGE ARCHAIC VOLUME REVEALS A TRADITIONAL WISDOM.
KEYNOTE: Contacting the all-human planetary Mind t/nderlying any cultural and personal mentality.

Occult tradition tells us that all cyclic manifestations of the
human mind have had a primordial revelatory Source. It speaks
of ancient books made of especially treated papyrus leaves and
conveying through symbols the archetypal processes at the root
of all earthly existence (see Blavatsky's Secret Doctrine). Such
volumes, said to remain in the possession of certain Adepts,
constitute the "exteriorization" of archetypal knowledge and
wisdom. They contain the "seed-ideas" from which the human
rnind grows, cyclically producing cultures of various types.
This fourth stage symbol evokes for us the "technique" by means of
which the human mind can uncover the foundations of its nature and
- acquire what might be called SEED-KNOWLEDGE, the knowledge of
the structure of cyclic and cosmic manifestations of life on this planet

PHASE 8 0 (GEMINI 20*): A MODERN CAFETERIA DISPLAYS
AN ABUNDANCE OF FOOD, PRODUCTS OF VARIOUS REGIONS.
KEYNOTE: The assimilation of multifarious knowledge
through the synthesizing power of the mind.

From the One, the Many arise in due time. The Original Source
gives birth to the mountain stream which, gathering to itself the
downflow of rain water, becomes the large river around which
cities are built. These in turn pollute the river on its way to the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 103
vast ocean. This modern symbol expresses the fact that man,
now at the close of a cultural cycle, is able to gather foodstuffs
—mental as well as physical—from many regions of the globe.
His diet has acquired a planet-wide foundation; history tells us
that the search for salt and spices, then for commodities rare i n
local regions, provided the impetus for global trade and thus
eventually for a planetary consciousness. The results may be
satiety and indigestion, and mental confusion caused by lack of
discrimination.
This is the last symbol of the sixteenthfive-foldsequence. As is most
often the case such a fifth stage implies a certain land of synthesis or
at least a preparation which leads to a new level. The keynote here is
indeed ASSIMILATION; the negative potentiality of the symbol is

WASTE.

SECOND L E V E L :

EMOTIONAL-^XJLTURAL

PHASE 8l (GEMINI 31-): A TUMULTUOUS LABOR DEMONSTRATION.
KEYNOTE: The revolutionary impact of mental concepts
upon the collective emotions and desires of man.

This symbol parallels the one which began the process of "ex­
teriorization" (Gemini 16*), but the process is seen here operat­
ing definitively at the level of collective responses. The mass of
men have been aroused by mental images, slogans and an appe­
tite for the abundance the "ruling class" enjoys. This also applies
to the individual person in whom contrasting spheres of activity
have taken shape as the result of the mind-based individualizing
process. The organic functions make their collective demands
upon the lordly intellect. The stage may be set for the kind of
"revolution" we call psychoneurosis.
This begins the seventeenthfive-foldsequence of symbols. It sets the
stage for a tumultuous process, which may lead to a new approach to
the problems resulting from individualization. The repressed or op­
pressed instincts stage an EMOTIONAL OUTBURST, claiming their due.

104 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

PHASE 8 2 (GEMINI 22°): DANCING COUPLES IN A HARVEST
FESTIVAL.
KEYNOTE: The wholesome enjoyment of organic processes
and emotional drives.

Again we have an image in strong contrast to the first of this
series. From the mind-built city, where workmen claim a larger
sphere of social abundance, we find ourselves in the village,
where men and women live in far greater harmony with natural
and seasonal processes, giving free rein to their emotional in­
stincts. The two poles of a wholesome society—the large indus­
trial city and the agricultural village—should be included; like­
wise the two poles of a healthy personality—mind and natural
emotions—should be active.
This is the contrasting second stage of the seventeenth sequence of
five symbols. It stresses the value of rhythmic, healthful activity in a
natural setup, for this leads to an often much needed process of Bio-

ENERGETIC REBUILDING.

PHASE 8 3 (GEMINI 23*): THREE FLEDGLINGS IN A NEST
HIGH IN A TREE.
KEYNOTE:

The growth of spiritually creative processes in
an at least relatively integrated mind*

In traditional symbolism birds usually refer to spiritual forces,
or at least to the higher and freer aspects of the mind. Here we
see only the very beginning of a process in what we might also
call "the upper chamber" of the consciousness where the crea­
tive power of the spirit can be received and assimilated. Fecun­
dated by the spirit and supported by a deeply rooted cultural
and vitalistic tradition, man can gradually develop an integral
personality. It is essentially three-fold, reflecting the Divine
Trinity, in India expressed as Sat-Chit-Ananda.

This is the third stage of a process which should lead to a deeper and
more natural understanding of human existence. It suggests that the

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 105
ambitious mass protests of aroused and largely blind desires should be
transmuted through harmonization with natural drives and in terms
of spontaneous responses attuned to the phases of natural evolution.
Stressed here is CREATIVE INTEGRATION.
PHASE 8 4 (GEMINI 24*): CHILDREN SKATING OVER A
FROZEN VILLAGE POND.
KEYNOTE: The use of inhibiting circumstances for the development of character and a transcendent approach
to the environment.

Winter symbolizes darkness and the restrictions imposed upon
living things by cold. Natural life is in a state of hibernation or
inward-turned activity. Yet the developing mind can learn to
use restrictions and the m^ciplining power of "cold" external
responses to rise above the outer "freeze" and to grow in
strength and skill. Man is nature rising above the cyclic oscilla­
tion of natural polarities. His way is often the via negativa. He
learns rhythmic freedom ("skating") by using the most binding
situations ("ice") to demonstrate his transcendent capacity for
pleasure and self-mobilization.
Here again the fourth stage symbol presents us with a special tech­
nique. It is a mental technique inasmuch as it is through mind that
man can transcend the entropy of the universal process of existence.
We see here indeed man's TRIUMPH OVER ENTROPY.

PHASE 8 5 (GEMINI 25*) A GARDENER TRIMMING LARGE
PALM TREES.
KEYNOTE: Bringing under control nature's power ofexpansion.

The intellect of man is like a tropical plant in that it tends to
expand "wildly" in many directions, seeking direct contact with
the sun's rays. Like a palm tree it uses its dead leaves to protect
itself against dry heat, the heat of the realm of mind when

108 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
deprived of the complementary power of the feelings. A culture
is characterized by specific "forms" and "prime symbols"; edu­
cation's main object, at least in cultural and classical periods, has
been to contain the imagination of individuals within these tra­
ditional forms. An entirely different approach to education is
being attempted in our transitional age.
At this last stage of the seventeenth five-fold sequence we have
reached the level of fulfillment of the impulses which began at the first
stage (Gemini 21*) in a tumultuous upsurge of self-assertion and protest
against the past. Now this upsurge has found its place in the evolution
of mankind and society; and—symbolically speaking—"labor" has be­
come not only unionized, but a strong force in the body politic. Yet
the energies released seek constant expansion and therefore have to
be controlled. There is need for repeated PRUNING.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVTDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 8 6 (GEMINI 25*): FROST-COVERED TREES AGAINST
WINTER SKIES.
KEYNOTE: The revelation of archetypal form and essential
rhythm of existence.

At this third level of "exteriorization" a contact with archetypes
and pure forms of individual selfhood is to be sought—also with
the characteristic images (Spengler's Ur-symbols) of the culture.
Externals are left behind. This is a step beyond "pruning"; it is
rather a process of removal of all superficialities of existence.
Cyclically, nature helps us to reach this state of bare reality. I t
is not that we experience the Buddhist's void (sunya), but
rather that we reach the essence of our individual being, the
form of pure selfhood which is the stmcturing power under­
neath all external features—all that belong to the "leaf* realm.
This is the first stage of thefive-foldprocess, now in its eighteenth
phase. In a sense we can speak of it as a stage of ascetic repudiation,
but it is also one of ESSENTIALIZATION.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 107

PHASE 8 7 (GEMINI 2f): A GYPSY EMERGING FROM THE
FOREST WHEREIN HER TRIBE IS ENCAMPED.
KEYNOTE: Reaching out toward participation in a larger
whole of mind-structured existence.

The contrast between this and the preceding symbol is signifi­
cant The first revealed the periodic opportunity nature offers
man to penetrate beyond mere appearances and the glamour
of existential abundance (the mass of green leaves); now we see
at work another process which depends upon the individual—
a conscious attempt to leave behind the tribal-instinctual stage
of earthbound existence and to emerge into the realm of mind
and complex, tense interpersonal relationships (i.e. the city).
The "wild" drives of nature are reaching toward a situation i n
which they will be "tamed."
This is the second stage of thefive-foldsequence. It reveals a period
of transition, a more or less clear yearning for a new state of conscious­
ness, and thus for inner transformation. It is a phase of REPOLARIZA-

TION.

PHASE 8 8 (GEMINI 28*): THROUGH BANKRUPTCY, SOCIETY
GIVES TO AN OVERBURDENED INDIVIDUAL THE OPPORTUNITY TO BEGIN AGAIN.
KEYNOTE: A releasefrom unbearable pressures, freeing one
for new tasks.

This symbol can easily be misinterpreted, for while it obviously
has a connotation of failure, it nevertheless depicts a particular
state of the complex relationship of an individual to his commu­
nity. The bankruptcy proceedings mentioned here should not
be construed as referring to a fraudulent type of bankruptcy. At
least in the United States bankruptcy does not imply a moral
condemnation; rather, it means that individual failure cannot
be separated from the health of the community. The special
nature of the whole is implied in the failure of the part to

J

106 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
perform adequately under particularly harsh economic condi­
tions. A society which enthrones the principle of ruthless competition must also develop mechanisms to exteriorize the prin­
ciple of compassion. The latter was at first emphasized by
Northern Buddhism, and soon after by Christianity. The con­
cept of atonement is directly related to that of release from
unbearable economic pressures in bankruptcy.
This is the third stage in the eighteenth sequence of cyclic phases. In
the first two stages we have seen the emergence of a new conscious­
ness based on leaving behind the externals of bio-psychic living in its
at least relatively wild and exuberant aspect. Here we have another
kind of "leaving behind," a LIBERATION FROM THE PAST.

PHASE 89 (GEMINI 2Q0): THE FIRST MOCKINGBIRD OF
SPRING.
KEYNOTE: The creative exuberance of the human soul in
response to basic life experiences.

The mockingbird is able to imitate sounds he hears, but actually
he does more than imitate, for he weaves all these sounds into
melodies which at times can have joyous amplitude and instinc­
tively creative spontaneity. The symbol refers to the capacity
which the talented individual has to take collective material and
to transform it under the urge of biological productivity and
instinctual love. The song rises, powered by these great natural
drives, very much as so-called popular songs rise from the
youthful soul in response to deep personal or social emotions.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence, what is presented to us
symbolically is the reaction of the individual who has become sensitive
to many life currents in his environment and who is able to exteriorize
this welling-up response as a gift to his society, displaying VIRTUOSITY.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 109
PHASE 90 (GEMINI 30*): A PARADE OF BATHING BEAUTIES
BEFORE LARGE BEACH CROWDS.
KEYNOTE: The setting ofsocial standards through personal
excellence and competition.

In this very American scene we see a very ancient and basic
process which can operate at several levels. Society sets certain
collectively acceptable cultural standards, and recompenses by
prestige and fame the persons who embody them, physically or
mentally. This generates emulation and the desire to bring the
social images to their most perfect and concrete manifestation.
The archetypal image or canon of proportion is thus incarnated
for all to behold and be fascinated by. The process of exterioriza­
tion is completed.
This is the last phase of the sixth scene. In the zodiac the spring season
has come to a close. It is summer solstice. Fulfillment leads to new
demands upon the individual human consciousness. The SHOW is over.
Now comes the hour of decision.

110 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

ACT II: STABILIZATION
SCENE SEVEN:

DECISION

(Cancer i * to Cancer lg)

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 91 (CANCER 1*): O N A SHIP THE SAILORS LOWER AN
OLD FLAG AND RAISE A NEW ONE.
KEYNOTE: A radical change of allegiance exteriorized in a
symbolical act: a point of no return.

We have now reached a square (go-degree angle) to the begin¬
ning of the cyclic process. This is a moment of crisis, a sharp
turning point. In the zodiacal cycle, at the summer solstice the
northward motion of the sun (in "declination") stops; the sun
rises and sets as far north of exact east and west as it can during
the year-cycle. Its motion is now reversed. Slowly the sunset
points move southward on the western horizon, and the length
of the day decreases. In the lunation cycle (from New Moon to
New Moon) this is the First Quarter phase. On the "ship" which
symbolizes the ego-consciousnessfloating,as it were, on the sea
of the vast Unconscious, the individualized will makes a basic
decision. The dominant Yang force allows the Yin force to begin
its six-month long rise to power. The "collective" will gradually
overcomes the "individual," and at the end the state will over­
power the person. Now, however, the individual person enjoys
his most glorious hour; he exults in his ability to make a "free

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 111
decision*'—i.e. to act as an individual who selects his life goal
and his allegiance.
This is thefirststage in the nineteenthfive-foldseries of degree sym­
bols. In a decisive act heavy with consequences, the symbolic collegeyouth might realize that he should bring to an end his quest for the
ideal companion and enter into matrimony. He assents to the possibil­
ity of progeny, of home responsibility. His consciousness accepts a
process of fundamental REORIENTATION, implying the stabilization of
his energies.

PHASE Q2 (CANCER 2*): A MAN ON A MAGIC CARPET HOVERS OVER A LARGE AREA OF LAND.
KEYNOTE: The ability to expand one's consciousness by
stabilizing one's point of view at a higher level

This is the paradox which confuses so many minds. As long as
the intellect restlessly searches for new horizons it is confused
by its searching. Accepting a stable focus, the mind can raise its
point of observation and see reality in a truer perspective. The
individual becomes the whole focused at this particular point
for a particular task and function. He can at least reflect the
consciousness of the greater Whole, Humanity.
This second stage symbol establishes a contrast between a stabilizing
new allegiance which limits the will, and the capacity to envision life
from a wider perspective, thanks to which many lives are seen to
converge upon the raised consciousness. At this stage one realizes that
by giving up an indefinite search for two-dimensional extension, one
gains ELEVATION in the third dimension of consciousness.

PHASE 93 (CANCER 3*): A MAN BUNDLED IN FUR LEADS A
SHAGGY DEER.
KEYNOTE: The need to overcome stagnation and "cold"
during trial of endurance.

This rather enigmatic symbol has suggested an exploration i n
arctic regions; but it seems more relevant to see in it simply the

118 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
difficult phase imposed by the new allegiance upon the reori­
ented consciousness. In India the deer was the symbol of
Brahma, the Creative Cod. The antlers represent the extension
of the mind-power located in the head. The new path may lead
to cold regions requiring insulation from harsh circumstances.
There may even be a desire to escape from new responsibilities.
The will leads the mind on toward the spiritual North of the
soul
This is the third stage in the nineteenthfive-foldsequence. A period
of trials is implied. The focalized mind may seek to escape its limits
by venturing forth toward an idealized goal—the North Star, perhaps.
This represents A TESTING OF THE WILL.

PHASE 94 (CANCER 4*): A CAT ARGUING WITH A MOUSE.
KEYNOTE: An attempt at self-justification.
We are still involved in the results of an act which brought about
a radical reorientation of one's life. The drives of the bio-psychic
organism are still not easily conquered. A multitude of lesser
decisions inevitably follows the big and grand gestures of
repudiation and realignment. The desires of the body still
drown the voice of the "new man." One argues with oneself,
hoping to convince oneself that the old impulses are still legiti­
mate.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence hesitancy and conflicting
motives are still inevitable. The mind is very clever at not facing the
consequences which follow from desires or even from restlessness.
Attempts at RATIONALIZATION are experienced and should be under­
stood.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 113
PHASE 95 (CANCER 5 ): AT A RAILROAD CROSSING, AN AUTOMOBILE IS WRECKED BY A TRAIN.
KEYNOTE: The tragic results which are likely to occur when
0

the individual's will pits itself carelessly against the
power of the collective will of society.

The automobile symbolizes the individualized consciousness ea­
ger to pursue its own course of action regardless of how it may
conflict with the collective consciousness of the community (the
train). The symbol implies that at this early stage of the new
process which began with this seventh scene, all such individual
and relatively anarchistic or law-defying attempts are bound to
fail. The driver may live, but his car will be wrecked.
Lest we consider this phase totally negative, we should realize that
most of the time man learns his lessons through relatively destructive
experiences—the via negativa of the mystic, or even the strange oc­
cult concept expounded in some sects of "salvation through sin." One
may speak here more generally of KARMIC READJUSTMENT. This will
become evident as the nextfive-foldsequence is considered.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 96 (CANCER 6*): GAME BIRDS FEATHERING THEIR
NESTS.
KEYNOTE: An instinctual dedication of self to new forms
of life.

The original symbol (which was subsequently altered) spoke
here of "game birds"; thus we deal with spiritual forces (birds)
placed within a social context. As in the symbol for Cancer i we
see here the beginning of a process; action is definitely oriented
toward the future. A new wave of life is starting and a concrete
—and no longer symbolical—preparation is made for it. At a
social level—we can speak of the pioneering efforts dedicated
to the building of a new culture, new institutions.
#

114 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This is the first stage of the twentiethfive-foldsequence of symbols.
It reveals a preparation for rebirth, and a significant note is sounded
by the mention of game birds. What is being built is instmctively--but
not yet consciously—offered to a higher level of consciousness. The
young-to-be are potential sacrifices to feed human beings Just as tribal
men sacrificed virgins to satisfy the gods. Already the meaning of the
second half of the cycle (the first degree of Libra, for instance) is
implied, just as the entire social process is implied in the formalism of
the marriage ceremony. An appropriate key would be SYMBIOSIS, i.e.
a deep unconscious cooperation between different levels of existence,
the "animal" level producing lives for the sake of the "human."

PHASE 97 (CANCER 7*): TWO NATURE SPIRITS DANCING
UNDER THE MOONLIGHT.
KEYNOTE: The play of invisible forces in all manifestations
of life.

To the clairvoyant who visualized these symbolic scenes, the
nature spirits (or fairies) most likely were thought of as more or
less imaginary or ideal creations. At least they were linked with
hidden and mysterious processes in nature, and the "moon­
light" emphasizes this otherworldly or elusive character. Thus
a contrast is implied between this character and the concrete
and material process of building a nest for a physical progeny.
The basic concept is that behind all vital processes one can
perceive occult forces at work. They operate within a realm
often called "astral" or "etheric"; and the moon has a deep
influence upon that realm, releasing special solar rays of occult
potency.
This is the second stage of the twentieth sequence. It contrasts the
invisible with the visible, the inner with the outer, the dream and the
ideal with everyday reality. In a sense this refers to man's CREATIVE

IMAGINATION.

/

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 115
PHASE 98 (CANCER 8°): A GROUP OF RABBITS DRESSED IN
HUMAN CLOTHES WALK AS IF ON PARADE.
KEYNOTE: The tendency in all forms of life

to imitate

higher forms as a stimulus to growth.

This rather strange symbol points to what is essential in all first
attempts at developing consciousness and furthering one's
growth through association with those who have already
reached a superior evolutionary or mental level. Every seeker
looks for an "Exemplar." The religious mystic speaks of "the
Imitation of Christ." In Japan the music student sits in front of
his teacher playing an instrument, and carefully imitates his
every gesture.
At this third stage of thefive-foldsequence we see at work the basic
features at the start of all LEARNING PROCESSES. At the next stage we
will watch a more advanced, more typically human questforknowl­
edge.

PHASE 99 (CANCER 9*): A SMALL, NAKED GIRL BENDS OVER
A POND TRYING TO CATCH A FISH.

KEYNOTE: The first naive quest for

knowledge and for an
ever-elusive understanding of life.

The "small, naked girl" symbolizes the innocent and spontane­
ous mind, as yet unclothed in cultural patterns and unrestrained
by don Ys, trying to satisfy its curiosity about what seems mys­
terious and fleeting. In a sense the "pond" is the infant's mind
with a very limited scope of consciousness, yet eagerly reaching
out to catch the swift and elusive first realizations of the mean­
ing of life.
At thisfourthstage we are confronted with the nascent curiosity about
knowledge, a curiosity which makes the little mind reach out in spon­
taneity, rather than merely imitate the elders. Whenever a person is
confronted with this symbol he or she should realize that there is much
value indeed in simply reaching out with a pure and unconditioned

116 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
mind to the most elementary experiences which natural life offers to
us. The key here is PURITY IN UNDERSTANDING.

PHASE 100 (CANCER 10 ): A LARGE DIAMOND IN THE FIRST
STAGES OF THE CUTTING PROCESS.
KEYNOTE: The arduous training for perfection in order to
#

fully manifest an ideal.

We are still dealing with the evolution of consciousness and of
personality at a preliminary stage. The potentiality of a com­
pletely formed mind through which the light of understanding
will shine brightly is already in evidence, but much work is still
to be done. We may meditate upon the transformation of the
"pond of water" (in the preceding symbol) into a diamond not
yet completely cut. The conscious mind must acquire solidity so
it can be worked upon by higher agencies—ideally by the teach­
ers of the community. It no doubt must be a painful operation
for the rough stone, but the goal is worth the suffering, the heat,
the grinding noise . . . provided of course the diamond cutter
is an expert craftsman—a rare case among teachers!
At this last stage of thefive-foldsequence we once more deal with an
operation which when completed will acquire a social value. When
fully grown, the "game bird" (first stage) may satisfy a hungry stomach;
once cut to perfection, the "diamond" may fill a woman with pride.
As Keyword we suggest CRAFTSMANSHIP, here meaning especially the
training for perfection.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 101 (CANCER 11*): A CLOWN CARICATURING WELLKNOWN PERSONALITIES.
KEYNOTE: The value of humor in developing objectivity
and independence of mind.

Humor or irony is a powerful tool in assessing the value of
sociocultural realities, and thereby in freeing oneself from

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ARIAN SYMBOLS 117
glamor and prejudice. Laughter deconditions and often paves
the way to a realization that we need not be unduly impressed
by what our tradition has more or less forced upon our con­
sciousness. The clown, of course, is the more popular manifesta­
tion of this urge to laugh, which seems to be such a basic charac­
teristic of human nature. Caricature and satire are more
intellectual forms of the same need for intellectual freedom.
In this twenty-firstfive-foldsequence we witness the development of
true individuality in man. And the first step is a cathartic one—the
ability to laugh, which includes the ability to laugh at one's petty habits
and mannerisms—indeed, at one's own pomposity. It is a DECONDITIONING step.

PHASE 102 (CANCER 12*): A CHINESE WOMAN NURSING A
BABY WHOSE AURA REVEALS HIM TO BE THE REINCARNATION OF A GREAT TEACHER.
KEYNOTE: The revelation of latent worth in an experience
once it is seen in its deeper meaning*

In contrast to the "clown" symbol, which shows us man's capac­
ity to criticize and laugh at his superficial mannerisms and auto­
matic habits or gestures, we now have a symbol which demands
that we look beyond common appearances and try to discover
the "occult" (i.e. hidden) character of every person and every
experience. This symbol has been unduly glamorized: there is
no particular reference here to an avatar or messiah, except in
the sense that every man is potentially the avatar or manifesta­
tion of a Soul that has a definite and relatively unique function
in the vast field of activity we call the Earth. To discover this
occult potential of being, one requires a deeper or higher "vi­
sion," a holistic perception—which is usually, but not always
justifiably, called clairvoyance. The caricaturist also has to de­
velop a special kind of "seeing" to enable him to extract the
salient features of an outer personality or of a face. He picks out
the most characteristic parts of a whole; the true clairvoyant
perceives the essential meaning (or "message" and function) of
the whole.

118 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
The contrast between thefirstand second symbols of this twenty-first
five-fold sequence is indeed very significant. There may be no particu­
lar meaning in the fact that the nursing woman in this symbol is
Chinese. Perhaps the psychic who visualized the scene may have
mistaken a Tibetan for a Chinese woman, and unconsciously thought
of the rather familiar process through which a new Dalai Lama, or
other great Lamas, are searched for among newborn babies. The Key­
word is REVELATION.

PHASE 103 (CANCER 13*): A HAND WITH A PROMINENT
THUMB IS HELD OUT FOR STUDY.
KEYNOTE: The power of the will in shaping character.
Here again we see how a personal characteristic reveals what
is behind it psychologically and spiritually. The thumb in pal­
mistry signifies the will; a very rigid thumb shows an unbending
will; a more flexible one, a more pliable individual. In the origi­
nal formulation of the symbol the "hand" was said to be "slighdy
flexed" which may be taken to suggest a moreflexiblecharacter.
Nevertheless, the basic meaning is that individuahty can only
express itself through a strong character. Whenever this symbol
confronts a person or a situation it is shown that a strong will is
required to face the issue at stake.
This is the third stage in the twenty-firstfive-foldsequence, and the
Keyword is CHARACTER.

PHASE 104 (CANCER 14*): A VERY OLD MAN FACING A VAST
DARK SPACE TO THE NORTHEAST.
KEYNOTE: Fulfillment in transcending and changeless wisdom.

This symbol describes the Wise Old Man, an archetypal figure
found in all systems of symbolism. In occult terminology the
northeast is the direction from which spiritual-cosmic forces
enter the Earth-sphere. This is probably because the polar axis

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 119

of the Earth is inclined by some 2 3 degrees away from the exact
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit. Thus the actual pole of
our globe not only differs from the permanent pole of the
Earth's orbit, but constantly changes its direction, successively
pointing to several large "circiimpolar" stars during the socalled precessional cycle (or "tropical year," or Great Polar Cy­
cle), which lasts somewhat less than 26,000 years. Because of this
inclination of the polar axis, we have the phenomenon of sea­
sonal change. Supposedly during the early Golden Age no such
change occurred; a "perpetual spring" reigned. This is the (tra­
ditionally) spiritual state. The Wise Old Man faces the Change­
less Reality, the true North—which for us is located in a
northeast direction. He faces the great Void, that apparent
Darkness which is an intense Light invisible to our senses.
As this is a fourth stage symbol in thefive-foldsequence, there is as
usual a hint of technique. Implied is that by consistently and for a long
time meditating on the changeless and spiritual reality at the very
core of all experiences one can attain the supreme and age-old wis­
dom. We see in the symbol a way beyond appearances and toward

PERMANENCE IN TRUTH.

PHASE 105 (CANCER 15*): IN A SUMPTUOUS DINING HALL
GUESTS RELAX AFTER PARTAKING OF A HUGE BANQUET.
KEYNOTE: The need that exists at an early stage of human
growth to materialize the concept of

fulfillment

This may be considered a curious symbolic scene following the
preceding one, for it pictures a scene of fulfillment at the purely
physical level of eating, if not overeating. Possibly the person
who visualized the symbol could think of fulfillment—con­
sciously or unconsciously—only in terms reminiscent of the Mo­
hammedan picture of paradise, a place filled with all the good
things earthly life provided, only most sparsely. It may also be
that the symbol is a reference to the fact that what in European
countries is seen rather broadly and spiritually as "plenitude of

120 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
being'* is usually related in the United States to the idea of
"plenty." Thus when in books or articles I have used the word
"plenitude," the printer in most instances wrote the nonexist­
ent and barbaric word "plentitude." We are hypnotized today
by the ideal of physical abundance. Perhaps physical abundance
is less mind-haunting than deprivation, and there may at times
be a need to "turn to superficial things for self-strengthening."
This is the via negativa already mentioned. Through satiety
man learns to appreciate and desire asceticism; after months of
boredom the modern teenager in an ultramodern "progres­
sive" school is often ready to accept disciplined work.
This is the last of thefivesymbols in the twenty-first sequence. It ends
this part of the quest for individuality and the process of "decision'making on a note which indicates a phase of only temporary fulfill­
ment. The darkness in the northeast may have been too much for the
consciousness at this stage of the great cycle. The mind yearns to
translate what it has seen in purely physical terms. This is perhaps the
keynote of American life: the MATERIALIZATION OF THE SPIRITUAL.

SCENE EIGHT:

CONSOLIDATION

(Cancer iff to Cancer 30V

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
P H A S E 106 (CANCER l6 ): A MAN STUDYING A MANDALA IN
FRONT O F HIM, W I T H T H E HELP O F A VERY ANCIENT
BOOK.
#

KEYNOTE: A deep concern with problems raised by the
process of personality integration*

After a person decides to follow a certain course of action, ac­
cepting a new allegiance, the results of this decision at the three
basic levels of human experience (actional, emotional-cultural
and individual-mental) have to be stabilized and consolidated.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 121
This is what is meant by the process of personality integration.
In Asia the great symbol of this process is the Mandala; in the
Christian world we find, in various forms, the symbol of the
Cross. The Christian design is often simple and bare; it is its
reference to the crucifixion of a God-man that personalizes or
emotionalizes it. The Oriental Mandala can take an infinite vari­
ety of forms and can encompass a vast multiplicity of contents;
it is psychological and cosmic. The square—the foundation of
the Mandala—potentially encloses diverse contents. The Cross,
on the other hand, represents conflict in action; it is a symbol
of tragic overcoming. The Mandala symbolizes integration of
opposing trends and multiple bipolar energies.
This is the first stage of the twenty-secondfive-foldsequence. It re­
veals a deep effort on the part of the individualized consciousness to
reach a solid basis of understanding that will allow it to perceive the
structural relationship of every part of the personality to every other
part. It is a mental process implying study and an inward-turning of
the attention, CONCENTRATION; even more it is a symbol of what
might atfirstbe called CONFORMATION—that is, a profound and stabil­
izing sense of form, but of one's own individual form, not an external
sociocultural pattern.

PHASE 107 (CANCER 17'): THE UNFOLDMENT OF MULTILEVEL POTENTIALITIES ISSUING FROM AN ORIGINAL
GERM.
KEYNOTE: The life urge to actualize one's birth potential
What is pictured here is simply the process of germination. As
it unfolds from the sundered seed the plant pierces the crust of
the soil and reaches up toward the light. This is a dynamic
process turned outward, in contrast to the more static or intro­
spective process of mtegration-through-understanding de­
picted in the preceding symbol. Gennination is the crucifixion
of the seed. The seed becomes the germ, just as the Tibetan
student meditating silently and peacefully on the Mandala is

122 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
followed by the Christian Crusader—and, at a materialistic level
of productivity, by the engineer-technologist intent upon trans­
forming the globe for the greatest possible enjoyment of the
greatest possible number of human beings.
As usual, the second stage of thefive-foldsequence establishes a con­
trast with thefirst.Action polarizes meditation. The expanding proc­
ess of self-actualization—which may mean nothing more than egoexpansion through conquest—contrasts with the introspective study
of the structural relationship between, and the meaning of, the various
energies and potentialities of one's nature (svaruva in Sanskrit). The

Keyword is GROWTH.

P H A S E 108 (CANCER l8 ): A H E N SCRATCHING T H E GROUND
#

T O FIND NOURISHMENT FOR HER PROGENY.

KEYNOTE: The practical concern with everyday nourishment necessary to sustain one's outreaching activities.

Every mother is originally responsible for the feeding of her
progeny, and all the activities into which a person has poured
his energy are his symbolic children. He has to feed them with
social substance gathered from "the ground" of his community,
and to watch with concern over their unfoldment The tender
stem consolidates into the tree trunk, the chicken into the hen,
the infant into the theoretically self-reliant and socially wise
adult
This third stage of the twenty-second five-fold sequence shows the
results of the two previous stages. Seed, germ and the growing plant
requiring the chemicals of the soilforits daily growthforma clear
sequence. What is at stake here is the FULFILLING OF LIFE'S RESPONsmiLrriES.

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 123

P H A S E log (CANCER 19 S ): A PRIEST PERFORMING A MARRIAGE CEREMONY.

KEYNOTE: The ritualization of productive interpersonal relationships.

This scene symbolizes the profound need for referring the in­
terplay and the relatively permanent and productive union of
all polarities to some third factor which either includes, or tran­
scends and gives spiritual meaning to, the relationship. A conju­
gal union is essentially and traditionally the union of a man and
a woman for the sake of producing progeny able to perpetuate
the racial type, the family tradition and the way of life of a
particular culture (or "subculture"), including a set of religious
beliefs. The married couple is the basic productive unit in our
society—as it has been for miflennia in all patriarchal societies.
The purpose of any established religion (including tribal cults)
is to glorify, sanction and bless with a superpersonal meaning
all personal and interpersonal activities. This occurs through
the "sacraments," and indeed through most religious rites.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence we are given the basic
technique used in all processes of effectual social or group integration.
It is the technique which takes the form of sociocultural, and thus
business or religious,ritualization.Through this technique common­
place individual endeavors acquire SANCTION; that is, they are ritual­
ized an indeed "sanctified."

P H A S E 110 (CANCER 20°): VENETIAN GONDOLIERS GIVING A
SERENADE.
KEYNOTE: Happiness as an overtone of social integration
and conformity to custom.

Venice can be considered the symbol of a social consciousness
risen directly from the unconscious urges of human nature—
because the city emerged out of the sea, just as the lotus flower
floats on top of the lake, its roots implanted in the bottom mud.
The serenading gondoliers "float" over the water, their songs

124 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
raised to the balconies where the "flower" of consciousness, the
beloved, may make her appearance. This play of basic human
drives toward acceptance by the consciousness housed in the
structures of the ego is performed according to social tradition.
Everything plays its part, and man experiences social happiness
and a sense of fulfillment
This is the fifth of the twenty-second sequence offivesymbols. The
urge for individual integration represented in the first—integration
through meditation on ancient traditional forms—is now reflected in
the driveforsocial integration through the elegant and standardized
play of acceptable emotions. The Keyword might be FESTIVITY.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C ^ T U R A L
P H A S E 111 (CANCER 21°): A FAMOUS SINGER IS PROVING HER
VIRTUOSITY DURING AN OPERATIC PERFORMANCE.
KEYNOTE: The emotional reward accompanying cultural
excellence.

If anything represents the type of response that a welldeveloped society gives to the individual who successfully pours
his energy into the skillful externalization of the great images'
of its culture, it is the opera. The operatic prima donna is not
merely a lonely performer, like the piano virtuoso (Geniini 13*);
he or she is the star in a collective effort The opera is not only
music, but a story, a mythos, which embodies some of the most
basic images and emotions characterizing the culture that gave
it birth. Euro-American culture is indeed extolled—or con­
demned—by its operas and their lurid and tragic passions. It is
interesting to compare the opera with the equivalent type of
social performances and their topics in India, Java or Tibet.
At this first stage of the twenty-thirdfive-foldsequence of cyclic
phases we find the drive toward individualization by means of con­
creteformsof cultural activity glorified in social andfinancialsuccess.
In its deepest sense the symbol refers to THE PRICE OF SUCCESS—for
the individual, as well for as the collectivity acclaiming him or her.
What is success really worth? A question few people ask.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 125
PHASE 112 (CANCER 22*): A YOUNG WOMAN AWAITING A
SAILBOAT.
KEYNOTE: The longing for transcendent happiness in the
soul opened to great dreams.

Here the symbol pictures the imaginative youthful person who
basically cannot be satisfied with what his or her ordinary social
environment offers, and who instead is longing for the unknown
visitation of which he or she has dreamed. From the uncon­
scious beyond, the concretization of a spiritual image—spiritual
because impelled by the "wind" (pneuma, spirit)—is hoped for
and expected. The Beloved may come—not in a glittering opera
house, but in the silence of the inner sea of consciousness.
At this second stage of thisfive-foldsequence the contrast with the first
is strongly marked. Will the great dream become concrete? Will the
emotion ready to well up in response to the Advent have its chance?
Will the EXPECTANCY of the Eternal Feminine be rewarded with
reality?

PHASE 113 (CANCER 23*): THE MEETING OF A LITERARY
SOCIETY.
KEYNOTE: An objective and critical approach to the common factors ki our culture and to its psychological
problems.

The poets, novelists and critics of a society represent the en­
deavor by especially sensitive and intellectually gifted individu­
als to give form and meaning to the most characteristic
situations and interpersonal relationships of their society and
culture. They mirror society and at the same time influence and
guide its development. It is their function to discuss the signifi­
cance of what is, and to image what might be. They are both
barometers and thermostats, reflectors and projectors of as yet
mostly unconscious images.

128 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

With this third stage we reach the level of INTELLECTUALIZATION.
Here the individual operates both as an objective mind an an emo­
tional participant in the events and hopes of his day. He makes con­
crete what to most people may be only a subconscious aspiration or
urge.

P H A S E 114 (CANCER 24*): A WOMAN AND TWO MEN CASTAWAYS O N A SMALL ISLAND O F T H E SOUTH SEAS.
KEYNOTE: The focalization of complex inner potentialities
in harmonic and concrete relationships.

We are dealing here with a special phase of the process of
integration. The woman and the two men represent the three­
fold aspect of the human personality, particularly at this stage
when one of these aspects—the emotional life (the woman)—is
facing the possibility, if not the inevitability, of relating itself to
both the spiritual and the mental. This confrontation occurs on
a small island of the South Seas, and "south" always refers sym­
bolically to the strong and passionate impulses of human nature.
Somehow the three-fold consciousness has to develop a har­
monious and well-integrated modus vivendi (a specific way of
life). I f successful, this will release powerful energies and will
lead to the next symbolic scene.
We have reached the fourth stage of the twenty-thirdfive-foldse­
quence. As is most often the case, we are introduced here to a specific
technique—or at least to a problem of technique—in living. The three
human beings should become integrated; but the form this integration
will take seems left open. It has to be a concrete type of integration
in terms of the emotional and biological drives of human nature (an
island of the South Seas) and thefieldof integration is "small." The key
to the problem of relationship should be the realization of INTER-

DEPENDENCE.

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 127

P H A S E 115 (CANCER 25*): A WILL-FULL MAN IS OVERSHADO W E D B Y A DESCENT O F SUPERIOR POWER.

KEYNOTE: The response of spiritual forces to the integration of personality through positive will-full
deavors.

en-

We are dealing here with a man who uses his will and positive
imagination in facing his life problems. To him comes a Pen­
tecostal descent of power. He receives the "mantle of power,**
the grace (baraka in Sufi philosophy) or the Providential assist­
ance which can make him a true leader in his culture.
In this fifth symbol we witness a more transcendent expression of
"success." It is not merely external success (as is given by society to its
prima donnas), but a spiritual response, a sign of inner strength and

uncommon ENDOWMENT.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E l l 6 (CANCER 26*): GUESTS ARE READING I N T H E
LIBRARY O F A LUXURIOUS HOME.
KEYNOTE: The transference of social privilege to the level
of intellectual enjoyment

We now see the concretization of cultural excellence and
wealth at the level at which individuals can exercise their devel­
oped mental capacities in comfort. The process is individualized
because the library belongs to a private residence, the luxury of
which implies an individual's concentration upon the acquisi­
tion of wealth. This scene shows the result of such a concentra­
tion, including the acquisition of friends who can relax in and
enjoy intellectual pursuits.
This is the first phase of the twenty-fourthfive-foldsequence which
here begins, and will end, on a note of social opulence and prestige.
We are not dealing now with leaders in the intellectual community,
but with wealthy guests who apparently seek to improve their minds
or to keep up with intellectual trends of the time, thus maintaining

128 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

CLASS STANDARDS OF INFORMATION. What is at stake here is the need

to conform to the requirements of one's social status.

P H A S E 117 (CANCER 27*): A VIOLENT STORM IN A CANYON
FILLED WITH EXPENSIVE HOMES.
KEYNOTE: A confrontation with a social upheaval demanding the reconsideration of static values.

The deeper implications of the scene depicted in the symbol are
that the sociocultural elite can always see its position and
security challenged by forces beyond its control, even if it may
be successful in protecting itself from destruction. The individ­
ual may not be able to depend on the standards and values he
has acquired through education and through a relatively shel­
tered and rich life. He has to rise to the occasion, and perhaps
to undergo an inner metamorphosis as a result of the crisis he
has been able to accept as a personal challenge.
The contrast between the two first phases of this twenty-fourth se­
quence is evident: peace in luxury and intellectual development in
terms of collective cultural values (reading books), then the challenge
to meet a crisis situation produced by uncontrollable karmic forces
that could lead to a successful CATHARSIS.

P H A S E l l 8 (CANCER 28*): A N INDIAN GIRL INTRODUCES
H E R W H I T E LOVER T O H E R ASSEMBLED TRIBE.
KEYNOTE: Inner rebirth through a total acceptance of the

primordial values manifest in the human body and its
natural functions.

Even as this symbol was formulated in the clairvoyant's mind,
a few individuals belonging to the American intelligentsia were
trying to find in their absorption into the culture of the Indian
pueblos of the Southwest absolution to their intellectual artifi­
ciality and personal emotional emptiness. Fifty years later this

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 129
process has gained great momentum, especially among the dis­
enchanted youth of our affluent middle class. The soul—or in
Jungian terms, the "anima"—is leading the sophisticated and
colorless (white!) intellect to a level of consciousness at which
man can again operate in tune with the vast process of the
biosphere and recover the simplicity and the inner peace which
city life and business deny.
At this third stage of the twenty-fourthfive-foldsequence the situa­
tions presented in the two preceding symbols can be seen combined
and projected into a possibility of dramatic transformation. What is
shown here is an emotional and warm commitment to the RETURN TO
NATURE which today appeals so strongly to the new generation, but
which Jean Jacques Rousseau, many great Romanticists and Gauguin
long ago advocated and exemplified.

PHASE 119 (CANCER 29*): A GREEK MUSE WEIGHING NEWBORN TWINS IN GOLDEN SCALES.
KEYNOTE; The intuitive weighing of alternatives.
This symbol seems to show that the "return to nature" pictured
in the preceding symbol is only one of two possibilities. Some­
how the repolarization of consciousness and life activities im­
plied by that symbol may be more a dream or ideal than a
practical reality. In any case, at this stage in the process of
individualization two ways are open. The individual person may
hesitate before making his decision. His "intuition" (the Muse)
is able to show him what the choice is. Perhaps there can be a
way of combining the two alternatives. But, as the next symbol
implies, the one which in the end has the greatest appeal may
not be the "nature" way. The "white boy" may rather bring the
"Indian girl" to the city, as in Pocahontas' life story.
Thefourthstage of this sequence of symbols reveals to us the pro and
con operation of the mind when faced with a vital decision. Because
it is the "Muse" that is doing the weighing, it is apparent that forces
deeper or higher than the intellect are actually at work—the intuitive

130 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
mind, or what Jung calls the "anima," i.e. the psychic function which
relates ego-consciousness to the collective Unconscious. What we see
happening, at the very threshold of a new cycle, is an INNER PRESEN-

TATION OF ALTERNATIVES.

P H A S E 120 (CANCER 30*): A DAUGHTER O F T H E AMERICAN
REVOLUTION.
KEYNOTE: The prestige and conservatism of a long-maintained heritage.

Here we have a symbol of the proud preservation of socio¬
cultural values in a tradition. After several generations the
ancestor who was perhaps a violent revolutionist or rabblerouser—or even a fugitive from justice—acquires a halo of re­
spectability. The tradition that once was born of revolution now
extolls "law and order," attempting to suppress any new forms
of the same revolutionary spirit.
This is the last symbol of the section of the cycle referring
mainly to the consolidation and concretization of life urges
within a stable form of organization. In many instances the
scenes presented picture social activities or events, yet at this
stage it is the individual person and the problems attendant
upon his development that are primarily considered.
This eighth scene with a keynote of "Consolidation," began with the
study of a traditional symbolforpersonality integration, the Mandala;
it ends with an example of what occurs when the individual chooses
a path which totally embodies and glorifies tradition, a path which

ends in a GLORIFICATION OF THE PAST.

1

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 131
SCENE NINE:

COMBUSTION

(Leo i* to Leo lg)

FIRST LEVEL: A C T I O N A L
P H A S E 121 (LEO \*)\ BLOOD RUSHES T O A MAN'S HEAD AS HIS
VITAL ENERGIES ARE MOBILIZED UNDER T H E SPUR O F
AMBITION.
KEYNOTE: An irruption of bio-psychic energies into the
ego-controlled field of consciousness.

The occult tradition speaks of three kinds of "Fire": Electric
Fire, Solar Fire and Fire by friction. The three Fire signs of the
zodiac correspond to these. Aries refers to the "descent" of the
spiritual energy of the Creative Word. In its material aspect we
know this energy as electricity, and without electrical energy no
life processes could exist. Leo represents Solar Fire, the energy
which is released from an integrated person, either through
spontaneous radiations of apparently nuclear forms of energy,
or, at the truly human and conscious level (and also superhuman
in still more transcendent realms), through conscious emanations (e-mana-tions, from manas meaning "mind" in Sanskrit).
Sagittarius is related to the Fire by friction, because all social
processes are based on interpersonal relations, which imply po­
larization and often conflict.
The key symbol for Leo depicts a rising of energy from the
heart to the head, a "mentalization" process. However, this
process is a potentially dangerous one. Thus the original word­
ing of the symbolic scene seen by the clairvoyant referred to "a
case of apoplexy"—just as a man standing with his head uncov­
ered for a long time in tropical regions could get sunstroke. The
sun can destroy as well as vivify. Without its symbolical mate,
water, it produces deserts on earth. The realization of atman,
the spiritual self, the existence of a formed and steady e g o provided the ego can become a lens of pure crystal focusing the
all-pervasive cosmic light of the Brahman without introducing

132 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
the shadows of pride, possessiveness and showmanship. But this
"provided" raises a very large question. The transmutation of
"life" into "mind" is a difficult process.
This is thefirststage of the twenty-fifthfive-foldsequence of symbols
which opens the ninth Scene. The keynote of "Combustion"forthe
entire series offifteenphases hardly needs interpretation. In a general
sense the key word for this first degree of the sign Leo could be
CONFLAGRATION. The energies of the biological drives as they irrupt,
more or less forcefully, into the field of consciousness.

P H A S E 1 2 2 (LEO 2°): A N EPIDEMIC O F MUMPS.
KEYNOTE: The spreading power of individual

crises

through a collectivity.

This symbol should be interpreted at two levels without evading
the issues posed by its original wording. What does an epidemic
imply, and why mumps? The broad meaning of an epidemic is
that one individual, if infected by a certain type of disease, can
spread the disease to a vast number of persons in his environ­
ment, and in some cases all over the globe. In the preceding
symbol we were confronted with the individual crisis, and its
dangerous possibilities for the individual were implied. Now
we deal with a process that affects the entire society; this obvi­
ously points out that the whole of mankind is potentially
affected by, and thus, consciously or not, cannot help being
involved in the critical situations faced by any individual or
special group of people. Why then an epidemic of mumps? A
childhood disease is implied, but it may have very serious conse­
quences for adult men who catch it, since it affects not only all
lymphatic glands, especially in the neck region, but also the
testicles. If the sign Aries symbolizes birth as a natural organism
on this Earth, Leo represents (at least potentially) rebirth—at
the level of the conscious and mind-based individuahty. Thus in
Leo man, in this sense, is as yet only a "little child"—one might
say a would-be initiate, an infant in spirit. The relation of the
mumps to the sexual glands is characteristic, for the entrance
into the realm of the conscious and individualized mind can

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 133
affect the sex force, either through overstimulation and irrita­
tion, or in terms of a deliberate ascetic deprivation.
This second stage symbol also provides a contrast with thefirst.What
was an individual issue is now seen as a collective danger. Thus we are

dealing with THE INFECTIOUS SPREAD OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCES.
PHASE 123 (LEO 3*): A MIDDLE-AGED WOMAN, H E R LONG
HAIR FLOWING OVER HER SHOULDERS AND IN A BRALESS YOUTHFUL GARMENT.

KEYNOTE: The will to meet the challenge of age in terms of
our modern society's glorification of youth.

While the original reading of the symbol over fifty years ago
spoke of the mature woman having dared to bob her hair, today
a similar kind of rebellion against aging and the customs of late
middle age would manifest itself in different ways. The meaning
of the symbol can be extended to any desire an individual
woman would have to claim her right to experiences of youth
which may have been denied to her, especially when according
to the fashion of the day such experiences are considered highly
valuable.
This third stage symbol implies a reorientation of one's ideal of action
in relation to the collective mentality of the social environment; more
particularly, a refusal by the individualized consciousness to be bound
by biological or social standards. The Keyword: INDEPENDENCE.

PHASE 124 (LEO 4*): A FORMALLY DRESSED ELDERLY MAN
STANDS NEAR TROPHIES H E BROUGHT BACK FROM A
HUNTING EXPEDITION.
KEYNOTE: The masculine will to conquer his animal nature
and to impress his peers with his skill in performing
the ancient traditional power rituals.

This symbol may be interpreted at the strictly social level—the
hunter's trophies, his pride in showing them to members of his

134 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
high-class club, etc. But i f one refers to the higher spiritualmental implications of the sign Leo, one can see in this picture
a reference to man's capacity to overcome the animalistic ten­
dencies of his bio-psychic nature according to certain traditional
procedures. The implication of being "formally dressed" is that
an important, if not the most important, goal the individual had
in developing this capacity has been to "prove himself'—-to
others, as well as perhaps to himself.
This is the fourth stage of the twenty-fifth five-fold sequence. The
symbol can be referred to eagerness to show oneself to the best of
one's advantage, which is characteristic of the Leo temperament: TO

DRAMATIZE ONE'S ACHIEVEMENTS.

P H A S E 125 (LEO 5*): ROCK FORMATIONS TOWER OVER A
D E E P CANYON.
KEYNOTE: The structuring power of elemental forces during the long cycle of planetary evolution.

Dwarfing the time allowed to individual human beings, the vast
periods of geological evolution not only awe our imagination,
but allow the slow yet magnificent work of elemental forces as
they mold landscapes and canyons, rocks and mountains. This
symbol points to our need to acquire a much vaster perspective
on what we are able to do—and on our yearning for prolonged
youth and our pride in masculine achievements. The works of
nature should make us feel humble and help us to "planetarize"
our consciousness.
This fifth stage symbol concludes thefirst-levelsequence. It stands in
broad pictorial contrast to thefirst,or rather it seeks to impress us with
our vanity as creators of forms and mental achievers. To the dramatic
and proud Leo type, it presents a picture of IMPERSONALITY.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 135
SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 126 (LEO 6*): A CONSERVATIVE, OLD-FASHIONED
LADY IS CONFRONTED BY A "HIPPIE" GIRL.
KEYNOTE: The need to transcend our subservience to fashion, in morals as well as in clothes.

This refers to the ever-changing pageant of social values, as
ideals of human relationship succeed one another, one genera­
tion facing in the next an antithetic picture of what it has been
brought up to consider worthwhile and decent. The confronta­
tion may lead to great bitterness, yet it should show us the
impermanence of most of what society impresses upon our col­
lective mentality.
This is the first stage of the twenty-sixthfive-foldsequence of phases
of the cyclic process. We are dealing now with cultural values and the
emotional impact they have upon our character formation. Whereas
thefirstdegree of Leo dealt with an individual crisis of reorientation,
the sixth degree refers to a collective, cultural and social crisis which
challenges us to realize THE RELATIVITY OF SOCIAL VALUES.

PHASE 127 (LEO 7*): THE CONSTELLATIONS OF STARS SHINE
BRILLIANTLY IN THE NIGHT SKY.
KEYNOTE: The power of basic spiritual values which refer
to man's common humanity and to all enduring archetypes.

The experience of the night sky with its multitude of stars,
especially brilliant in all the countries from which astrology
came, is just as basic and archetypal an experience as that of
sunrise, full moon and seasonal changes. Every people on this
Earth has developed the concept of constellations, probably
because of a need to find order in existence and to personalize
everything that could be given a permanent form. Such person­
alizations can be called "psychic projections," but the projec­
tion concept should be worked out both ways. If man projects

i

136 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
his basic human nature upon the star-filled night sky, is it not
just as logical to say that the universe projects its own foreverevolving patterns of order upon human nature? In either case
we deal with archetypal factors which endure through a long
series of generations.
This second stage symbol once more stands in perfect contrast to the
preceding one. The nearly unchanging patterns of star groups are
opposed to the sequence of ever-changing fashions and social ideals.
The Keyword here is PERMANENCE.

PHASE 128 (LEO 8*): A COMMUNIST ACTIVIST SPREADING
HIS REVOLUTIONARY IDEALS.
KEYNOTE: The emotional and ideological attempt to return

to a state of non-differentiation and chaos as a prelude
to a new type of order.

This symbol, beyond all present-day socio-political controversy,
represents the activity of destructive or catabolic forces (one
aspect of the Indian god Shiva) in answer to the type of confron­
tation suggested by the symbol for Leo 6\ The old order is
confronted by the youthful drive for a new way of life and a new
sense of values. As the old order refuses to yield its prerogatives,
this refusal polarizes violent revolutionary action. The revolu­
tionary may have beautiful dreams of a "classless" society free
from greed and harsh struggles for survival, but the first practi­
cal result of his activity almost inevitably appears as "chaos." Yet
chaos is a state of being that calls for a new descent of the power
to reorganize and differentiate. Alas, such a descent most often
is still based on old concepts, and one witnesses a struggle for
personal and dictatorial power.
This is the third stage of the twenty-sixth sequence offivephases, and
ideally it could show how the vision of a cosmic order (stage two) might
heal the potential conflict between an obsolete Establishment and its
youthful challengers (stage one). But reality today presents a more

cruel picture of CATABOLIC ACTION.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 137

PHASE 129 (LEO 9*): GLASS BLOWERS SHAPE BEAUTIFUL
VASES WITH THEIR CONTROLLED BREATHING.

KEYNOTE: The need to involve one's most spiritual and

vital energies in the creative act if it is to produce
significant and beautiful new forms.

The breath represents the power of the spirit, animator of all
living manifestations. Because the glass blower uses his breath
to shape the glass vessels, he is a fitting symbol of how deeply
any creative individual has to involve his total being in his crea­
tion. He is also using the fire of the spirit—transpersonal inspira­
tion—or, in another sense, the fire of deeply felt emotions. Any
creative activity which does not involve both the "breath" and
the "fire" cannot transform into beautiful artworks—or indeed
into any new form of order—the raw materials, remains of the
past (the "sand").
Thisfourthstage of the twenty-sixth sequence symbolically shows us
the technique required in true and successful transforming activity. It

always implies CREATIVE INTENSITY.

PHASE 130 (LEO 10'): EARLY MORNING D E W SPARKLES AS
SUNLIGHT FLOODS T H E FIELD.
KEYNOTE: The exalted feeling that rises within the soul of

the individual who has successfully passed through
the long night which has tested his strength and his
faith.

The cold air of night having precipitated upon the field of man's
consciousness the moisture of his deepest feelings, this widely
spread dew is blessed with the light of significance by the rising
sun of the new day. Even tears can be transformed into jewels
in the light of victory over night and sorrow.
At thisfifthstage of the present sequence we see the potential culmi­
nation of the process which began on a note of social and cultural crisis.
The would-be reformer has to meet many emotional problems as he

138 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
begins his work of creation. Creation means transformation; the re­
former is actually a transformer if he is truly a creative and inspired
individual open to the spirit that "makes everything new." The build­
ing of a new society, and of one's renewed personality as well, is just
as much a process of artistic creation as the making of a delicate glass
vase or a symphony. The Keyword is TRANSFIGURATION.

THIRD LEVEL: iNDIVroUAL-MENTAL

P H A S E 131 (LEO 11*): CHILDREN PLAY O N A SWING HANGING
FROM T H E BRANCHES O F A HUGE OAK TREE.
KEYNOTE: The power of tradition as it shelters the beginnings of individual self-expression.

The great Tradition of mankind has been symbolized by a vast
tree, every spiritual Teacher being one of its many branches
issuing from the one trunk of a primordial Revelation. As a man
begins his spiritual journey he is like a child in a state of excite­
ment, playing with rhythmic up-and-down moods. He plays
with words and concepts which "hang" from the "branches" of
the Tradition—and often the whole quest is mainly a game for
him. Yet he is securely held by the tree, protected by its foliage
from too great and burning a light.
This begins the twenty-seventhfive-foldsequence of symbols; it deals
essentially with the release of emotional intensity at various levels of
the individualized consciousness as it reacts to the newly developed
potentialities of the mind. We are dealing at thisfirststage with the

SPONTANEOUS ACTIVITY O F THE INNOCENT MIND.

P H A S E 132 ( L E O 12*): A N EVENING PARTY O F ADULTS O N A
LAWN ILLUMINED BY FANCY LANTERNS.
KEYNOTE: Group-relaxation in fashionable surroundings
as an escape from work routine.

While the preceding symbol dealt with the simple and spon­
taneous pleasure of children, this one refers to the more or less
standardized and fashion-dictated relaxation of adults who have

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 139
left behind their day's work and are exchanging pleasantries
and gossip. The "lawn" and the "lanterns" are cultivated; the
type of mind displayed in the animated conversations, stimu­
lated by liquor, is thoroughly socialized and not always inno­
cent. The great Tradition has become reduced to a mere social
fashion.
This second stage symbol contrasts with that of the first phase. We
have now reached a stage of SOPHISTICATION and involvement in
externals and superficial intellectuality or wit.

PHASE 133 (LEO 13*): A N OLD SEA CAPTAIN ROCKING HIMSELF O N T H E PORCH O F HIS COTTAGE.
KEYNOTE: The quieted mind's recollections of crises and
joys long past

The sea captain has steered the ship of his ego-consciousness
through seas and storms, maintaining the integrity of his indi­
vidual selfhood while in close contact with the collective Uncon­
scious. Now retired, he may try to distill wisdom from his many
experiences and from his victories over elemental forces. The
"swing" of the child-consciousness has now become a "rocking
chair" from which one can contemplate past as well as present
scenes, gently moving as waves roll over the shore. Peace at last.
At this third stage we find the consciousness of old age, after having
witnessed the spontaneous play of children close to protective nature
(Leo u*) and the fashionable social parties of escaping adults (Leo 120):
three phases of mental development. Keyword: QUIET RECOLLEC-

TION.

PHASE 134 (LEO 14 # ): A HUMAN SOUL SEEKING OPPORTUNITIES F O R OUTWARD MANIFESTATION.
KEYNOTE: The yearning for self-actualization.
Behind the many rhythms and drives of individual existence,
beyond the child, the adult and the old man, stands the soul
seeking always to manifest itself through the personality. This

UO AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
is the transpersonal urge of the spirit, expressing itself in many
ways during the whole life span. But most avenues are blocked,
and the soul waits until it can wait no longer. Then comes the
dramatic release, which may mean a joyous carnival or mad­
ness.
The fourth stage of this twenty-seventh sequence brings a transcen­
dental clue to the technique of living: Let the soul speak outl Allow
the power of the true tone of your being to manifest itself smoothly,
easily, unobstructed—or expect a variety of consequences, LET the
soul manifest!

P H A S E 135 (LEO 15*): A PAGEANT, WITH ITS SPECTACULAR
FLOATS, MOVES ALONG A STREET CROWDED WITH
CHEERING PEOPLE.
KEYNOTE: The more or less sensational release of energies
in a form dramatizing the unconscious aspirations of
mans primitive and instinctual nature.

This last picture of the series dealing with the ninth scene,
"Combustion," recalls in a collective sense the dramatic event
represented by the first (Leo i°). The street pageant, perhaps a
tumultuous carnival, brings men and women to a peak of emo­
tional excitement, and perhaps incandescence. But the pageant
had to be planned carefully by individual minds that sought to
express themselves in the process of giving a concrete form to
the desires and expectations of the collective crowd. The theat­
ricality of the Leo type is fully expressed here.
This is the fifth stage of the twenty-seventhfive-foldsequence of
phase. At this stage the mind of the individual is able to give a public
DEMONSTRATION of his ability to sway the multitudes by a dramatic
presentation of popularized ideals. This leads to a new scene on the
cyclic journey around one's own universe, symbolized by the signs of
the zodiac.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 141
SCENE TEN:

RELEASE

(Leo iff to Leo 30V

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 136 (LEO 16*): T H E STORM ENDED, ALL NATURE REJOICES IN BRILLIANT SUNSHINE.
KEYNOTE: The surge of life and love after a major crisis.
The symbol speaks clearly for itself. How brilliant the light after
the long "night of the soul"! The battered but unconquered
consciousness finds itself exalted in the marriage of sunbeams
and rising sap. This indeed is "Release"—-light and life singing
in the cleansed and refreshed mind, flooded for a while by the
waters of feeling.
This is the first stage in the twenty-eighthfive-foldsequence. It is a
sequence that reveals consciousness at its most inspiring moments of
enjoyment. But these "peak experiences" can operate at several lev­
els. The first and most basic level is that of life itself, and of the
overcoming of its many crises—THE JOY AND POWER OF NEW BEGIN-

NINGS.

PHASE 137 (LEO 17*): A VOLUNTEER CHURCH CHOIR SINGING RELIGIOUS HYMNS.
KEYNOTE: The feeling of togetherness which unites men
and women in their dedication to a collective ideal.

Religion in its institutionalized aspect is the attempt to give a
transcendental character to the feeling of commumty. The fel­
lowship of common work needed for substance and security in
a dangerous world is exalted in periodic rituals in which the
co-workers participate. At such moments the consciousness and
feelings of human beings flow into a common mold in which
they become refreshed by the experience of shared values and
beliefs.

142 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This second stage symbol presents a contrast with that of thefirstonly
in that the collectively human aspect of experience is in contrast to the
purely natural and fundamental character of instinctual life. The exist­
ence of a volunteer church choir implies a rather steady phase of
culture and society. What is sung reflects the special way in which a
particular community of human beings—extensive as it may be—
interprets the deepest realities of human existence and man's longings
for an ideal The symbol expresses the idealized aspect of TOGETHER-

NESS.

PHASE 138 (LEO 18*): A CHEMIST CONDUCTS AN EXPERIMENT FOR HIS STUDENTS.
KEYNOTE: In inquiring into the hidden process of nature,
the human mind experiences the thrill of discovery.

Here we reach the level of intellectual analysis and the human
ability to control natural processes. This ability is based on the
inherited knowledge acquired by a community of men, genera­
tion after generation. The symbol stresses this fact, as it presents
a teaching situation. The individual demonstrates his power,
which is founded on a long series of efforts. He is one link in an
ancestral chain which his activity prolongs into the future.
At this third stage of the twenty-eighth phase of the cyclic process we
see man, as an agent of the collectivity of human beings, approaching
nature in terms of the possibility of transforming it in order to satisfy
his needs or his wants. At the highest level of this activity one can
speak of ALCHEMY.

PHASE 139 (LEO 19 - ): A HOUSEBOAT PARTY.
KEYNOTE: The enjoyment of temporary freedom from

rig-

idly structured social behavior.

This symbol in a sense duplicates the one for Leo 12*, except that
it implies a less conventional and more youth-oriented type of
gathering. The houseboat brings an intimacy and a "bohemian"

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 143
character to the relationships between the participants, while
"the evening lawn party" reflects a more socially respectable
and superficial kind of interaction between middle-class sophis­
ticates. The houseboat may be anchored, yet it floats on the
river which—symbolically at least—extends far beyond the nar­
row social setup. What is suggested is that in such a gathering,
men and women seek to at least get the feeling of the free flow
of énergies, as an escape from the routine activities of their
business or student lives.
This fourth stage symbol indicates the possibility offinding"release"
for natural energies in group entertainment and enhanced interper­

sonal contacts. It speaks of FREEDOM FROM SOCIAL RIGIDITY.

P H A S E 140 (LEO 20*): Z U N I INDIANS PERFORM A RITUAL T O
T H E SUN.
KEYNOTE: A return to the glorification of natural energies*
While the first symbol of this five-fold sequence pictured the
magnificence of the returning sun after a storm, in this last
symbol we see, by implication, man returning to nature and
glorifying the sun after the long crisis of "civilized" living in
artificial cities. For many years now, the American Pueblo In­
dian has been for the weary city dweller and the dried-up intel­
lectual a symbol of this "return to nature." After having
ruthlessly destroyed him, we come to him as an exemplar of
peaceful and harmonious group living.

This fifth symbol of the twenty-eighth sequence brings us the image
of a reversal of our socialized activity and opens for us the way to the
deepest release of our long-denied root energies. Natural man links
himself consciously to the source of all life on earth. And this means
IDENTIFICATION THROUGH WORSHIP—and the sanctification of the
creative power.

i

144 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L < * J L T U R A L
P H A S E 141 (LEO 21°): INTOXICATED CHICKENS DIZZILY
FLAP THEIR WINGS TRYING T O FLY.
KEYNOTE: The often-negative and at times ludicrous first
experience with spiritual teachings.

In Near Eastern symbolism wine, intoxication, and vineyards
always refer to ecstatic experiences and to the contact with
mystical or occult schools. "Chickens" here suggest that we are
dealing with human beings who are the standardized products
of their culture, and more or less undifferentiated specimens of
a social norm. Brought accidentally or prematurely to mystical
or occult experiences, they usually react to them in a highly
confused and "dizzy" manner. What reacts in them is the ego,
and the ego can never "fly" (i.e. experience spiritually transcen­
dental realities in an effectual manner).
Thisfirstsymbol of the twenty-ninthfive-foldsequence presents to us
a picture of the unsatisfactory way many people today—especially
young people—approach what purports to be spiritual reality. The
"food" may be intoxicating, consciousness-expanding, but the inner
openings lack depth and constructiveness, whether or not they pro­
duce what appears to be wonderful feelings. One may speak here of

the danger of PREMATURE EXPANSION OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

P H A S E 142 (LEO 22°) : A CARRIER PIGEON FULFILLING ITS
MISSION.
KEYNOTE: Spirituality, in terms of training for service to
mankind.

In contrast with the intoxicated chicken, we now have the suc­
cessfully trained carrier pigeon delivering the message it was its
function to carry. Here the domesticated bird is seen endowed
with a special significance and purpose. This refers to spiritual
energies which are being used constructively and which bring
to the consciousness messages from other realms. Individual

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 145
realizations acquire their true meaning only as they fulfill a
collective function.
This second stage symbol clearly presents a contrasting alternative to
what the preceding picture revealed. The "release" of higher energies
becomes effective and Valuable to the extent to which it serves a
higher, but concrete and definite, purpose. This is the ideal of the

WORLD SERVER.

PHASE 143 (LEO 23*): IN A CIRCUS T H E BAREBACK RIDER
DISPLAYS HER DANGEROUS SKILL.
KEYNOTE: The audacity and perseverance required to control and play with the powerful energies of the vital
realm in human existence.

The horse has always been the symbol of the vital energies. In
a wild state the horse represents the magnificent, raw, impetu­
ous energy of the libido in all its forms. When tamed, this energy
is put to man's service. There are men who have dominated
their natural energies so well that they can perform spectacular
feats. Here these achievements are seen within the context of
a social function and expressing a flair for dramatics.
At this third stage, the ego is in control; he is a great showman, but
he serves a purpose. The performance stirs the imagination of the
young consciousness. It raises the mind above the commonplace. The

Keyword is VIRTUOSITY.

PHASE 144 (LEO 24*): TOTALLY CONCENTRATED UPON INNER SPIRITUAL ATTAINMENT, A MAN IS SITTING IN A
STATE O F COMPLETE NEGLECT O F BODILY APPEARANCE AND CLEANLINESS.
KEYNOTE: An interior focalization of energy and con-

sciousness at the expense of all forms of outward activity and care.

This traditional image of the Hindu holy man in the typical
Western mind may well hide the fact that without proper train-

r

146 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ing and intense concentration, what we usually consider
spiritual attainment, self-realization and the "God experience
is not possible. The "intoxicated chickens" of the Leo 21* symbol
must learn self-discipline if they want to "fly." There can be no
halfway measures i f the goal of true Yoga is to be reached.
,,

This fourth stage symbol, as usual, suggests a certain kind of "tech­
nique," or at least an adequate means to reach ah envisioned goal The

means is TOTAL CONCENTRATION.

P H A S E 145 (LEO 25*): A LARGE CAMEL IS SEEN CROSSING A
VAST A N D FORBIDDING DESERT.
KEYNOTE: Self-sufficiency in the face of a long and exhausting adventure*

The camel here represents a living organism that is able to
sustain itself independently of its environment at the start of a
trying journey. (The original formulation of the symbol did not
refer to "a man on camel back.**) The organism carries within
itself what is absolutely needed for survival. At the deeper hu­
man level of consciousness it is easy to see the value of selfreliance and self-sufficiency as one enters the occult Path
leading to a more dynamic and more inclusive realm of exis­
tence.
The camel carries water within its body, and it is said that the drome­
dary is able to utilize the matter stored in its large protuberance as
food. The suggestion here is that in order to be released from bondage
to the "old world" we should be completely self-contained emotion­
ally; having absorbed the mental food which this old culture has given
us, we are ready to face "the desert," nothingness, Sunya... until we
reach the "new world." We need TOTAL INDEPENDENCE from our
surroundings and utter SELF-RELIANCE.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 147
T H I R D LEVEL: INDIVTOUAL-MENTAL
P H A S E 146 (LEO 26'): AFTER T H E HEAVY STORM, A RAINBOW.
KEYNOTE: Linking above and below, the Covenant with
one's divine nature, promise of immortality.

In the Bible the rainbow is the sign of the Covenant established
by God with Noah (the cyclic "Seed man") guaranteeing that no
longer shall the destructive power of Spirit (the Shiva aspect of
the Divine) be used to destroy life on earth. As we come to the
third level of the scene of "Release," we find the man who has
been able to weather the cathartic storm face-to-face with his
divine Archetype; because he has been victorious, a link has
been established with his divine Soul-being. Both the human
and the divine partners should remain thus linked. H. P. Blavatsky's last words are said to have been: "Keep the Link un­
broken"—the Link she forged with the Trans-Himalayan
Brotherhood that had sent her into the darkness of nine­
teenth-century materialism for this purpose.
At thefirststage of this thirtieth sequence, the symbol of the rainbow
shows us the need to maintain a state of open communication between
the Sky and the Earth within our total being—not for the sake of
finding an ever-elusive "pot of gold" at the end of the rainbow, for this
end is never to be reached, but in order to face the totality of our
individual selfhood as it is projected in the many-hued dome of our
sky-flung consciousness. After every successfully met crisis, the REVELATION OF WORTH comes to us, and with it comes the promise of
success, if only we do our part

PHASE 147 (LEO 27*): T H E LUMINESCENCE O F DAWN IN T H E
EASTERN SKY.
KEYNOTE: The exalting challenge of new opportunities at
the threshold of a new cycle.

While the rainbow marks the end of the crisis, early dawn indi­
cates the real beginning of the new period of activity. I n the

148 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDATA
Biblical symbolism Noah plants his "vineyard"—he begins to
teach the "secret doctrine" which he inherited from those Ben
Elohim (Sons of God) who had not been sucked down into
whirlpools of materiality. After the "peak experience" in which
we touch our "divine" potentialities comes the struggle with
everyday problems. But at first the state of deep inner exulta­
tion remains within us. We are aglow with its promise.
The crisis and the blessings it has brought to us are relatively unusual
events; every day has its dawn, which we should meet with a pure
heart and a clear mind. Alpha (dawn) and omega (the concluding peak
experience) are opposites, yet the same. The Keyword here is ILLUMI-

NATION.

P H A S E 148 (LEO 28*): MANY U T T L E BIRDS ON A LIMB O F A
BIG TREE.
KEYNOTE: A wide, and perhaps confusing, openness to a
multiplicity of inspiring potentialities.

There is a stage in the spiritual life—which is not different from
the everyday life—during which the consciousness, aspiring to
greater realizations or more impressive forms of self-expression,
feels itself flooded with new ideas and new possibilities. This can
be very exciting, yet also quite confusing. It becomes necessary
to focus oneself by limiting one's field of vision and activity.
This third stage of the thirtiethfive-foldsequence brings us the results
of the two preceding ones. We should try not to be OVERWHELMED
WITH POTENTIALITIES, yet should enjoy the wonderful lightness of
feeling this may bring after perhaps many days, months or years of
frustration or darkness.

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 149

PHASE 149 (LEO 29 0 ): A MERMAID EMERGES FROM T H E
OCEAN WAVES READY FOR REBIRTH IN HUMAN FORM.

KEYNOTE: The stage at which an intense feeling-intuition

rising from the unconscious is about to take form as a
conscious thought.

The mermaid personifies a stage of awareness still partially en­
veloped by the ever-moving and ever-elusive ocean of the col­
lective Unconscious, yet already half formulated by the con­
scious mind. Any creative thinker or artist knows well the
peculiar mixture of elation and anxiety characterizing such a
stage. Will the intuitive feeling fade away reabsorbed, into the
unconscious, or will the inexpressible realization acquire the
concreteness and expressible form of a concept or a definite
motif in an art form?
This fourth symbol in the thirtiethfive-foldsequence suggests that the
fire of desire for concrete and steady form burns at the root of all
techniques of self-expression. An unconscious energy archetype is
reaching toward consciousness through the creator, as cosmic Love
seeks tangible manifestation through human lovers. The whole prehu­
man universe reaches eagerly to the human stage of clear and steady
consciousness. It is this great evolutionary urge, this élan vital, which
is implied in this symbol of the mermaid seeking human incarnation

—the YEARNING FOR CONSCIOUS FORM AND SOLIDITY.

PHASE 150 (LEO 30 0 ): AN UNSEALED LETTER.
KEYNOTE: The realization by the individual that all

thoughts and all messages are inevitably to be shared
with all men.

Coming as it does as the end of this tenth scene and linked with
the last degree of the zodiacal sign, Leo, this symbol seems at
first quite puzzling; when it has been thought of as an isolated
symbol, its essential meaning has not been apparent. The fact
that a letter is unsealed does not imply a trust that other people
will not read its contents, but rather the idea that the contents

150 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
are for all men to read. The letter contains a public message in
the sense that when man has reached the stage of true mental
repolarization and development—which we see in the very first
symbol for Leo—he has actually become a participant in the
One Mind of humanity. Nothing can really be hidden, except
superficially and for a brief time. What any man thinks and
deeply realizes becomes the property of all men. Nothing is
more senseless than possessiveness in the realm of ideas. If God
speaks to a man, Man hears the word. Nothing can remain
permanently "sealed."
As this thirtieth sequence offivesymbols ends, it is made clear to us,
and particularly to the inherently proud Leo type, that all that takes
form within the mind of a man belongs to all men. Communication
and SHARING must always prevail over the will to glorify oneself by
claiming sole possession of ideas and information.

SCENE ELEVEN:

CHARACTERIZATION

(Virgo 1* to Virgo ig)

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 151 (VIRGO 1*): IN A PORTRAIT, THE SIGNIFICANT
FEATURES OF A MAN'S HEAD ARE ARTISTICALLY EMPHASIZED.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to picture to oneself clearly the
salient features and the overall meaning of any life
situation.

During the two preceding Scenes the "feel" of energy at work
has been the dominant feature of a consciousness still strongly
ego-centered yet at times eagerly and devotionally reaching up
to a realization of divine or cosmic order. Now we have come
in the seasonal cycle of the year to the sign Virgo. It is in a sense
the symbol of harvesting, but it is also that of the Path of disci-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 151
pleship, and of all strongly determined processes of training, or
retraining. Flooded with and having enjoyed and released energy, the personalized consciousness now has to learn the lesson
'of significant form. It must be able to see life situations as
wholes of experience, and to discover their meaning by distin­
guishing their most characteristic features.
This is the first stage of the thirty-firstfive-foldsequence of symbols
and its Keyword is DISCRIMINATION. Implied in discrimination is both
analysis and intuition. The mind separates and identifies—and unfor­
tunately often exaggerates—what makes a person or a situation differ­
ent from another; but the intuitive responses of the whole person to
what confronts him or her is also essential, for what matters is not only
. my or your "difference," but the place and function this difference
occupies in the organic pattern of the evolution of "humanity as a
whole," i.e. of Man.

PHASE 152 (VIRGO 2*): A LARGE WHITE CROSS DOMINATES
THE LANDSCAPE.
KEYNOTE: The wisdom and compassion which only the
experience of suffering and isolation can bring.

The individual must have gone beyond the state of ego-subjec­
tivity in order truly and objectively to "see" and to mscriminate.
He must have learned detachment; and it is a lesson that no one
can learn without the "crucifixion" of the ego-centered emo­
tional life. In the occult tradition, the eye that "sees" must be
washed by the blood of the heart. The experience of the Cross
dominates the mystic Path that leads to Initiation, i.e. to the
entrance into a greater realm of activity and participation with
an exalted Company of perfected beings.
While the discovery of significant features in any situation implied the
use of the mind, both analytical and intuitive, now a contrasting stage
is reached at which the mind itself has to be left behind and perhaps
even seemingly destroyed in order that compassion and understand­
ing may rise from the depth of the innermost being: a LIBERATING

ORDEAL.

152 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
P H A S E 153 (VIRGO 3 0 ): T W O GUARDIAN ANGELS.
KEYNOTE: Invisible help and protection in times of crisis.
Though the consciousness may not yet be able to realize this as
a fact, man is as surrounded by spirit as fish by water. Angels,
devas and the like are entitized forms of spirit. In a sense at
least, they collectively constitute a realm of existence comple­
mentary to mankind. They are specialized fields of energy
which are apparently conscious, but not "free" in a human sense
—that is, free to be what they are not. We are told, by seers and
even by merely clairvoyant persons, that they constitute hierar­
chies of energy-distributing forms which sustain all life proc­
esses—particularly in the vegetable and telluric realms—as well
as protective agencies attached to human beings. Modern psy­
chologists may think of them as symbols of as yet latent powers
in man's unconscious. By being aware of their presence and
sustaining power a man may avoid the desperate feeling of
aloneness and alienation which usually pervades the "night of
the soul" and the symbolic forty days in the wilderness.
This third stage symbol comes to those who may greatly need its
reassurance. It is an answer to the symbol of the Crucifixion. The
personal ego-centered feelings may be quartered and destroyed; in
their place man may develop a sense of deep companionship with
consciousnesses which, though utterly differentfromhis, complement
his assuaged mind. He may then realize STRENGTH WITHIN.

P H A S E 154 (VIRGO 4*): BLACK AND WHITE CHILDREN PLAY
TOGETHER HAPPILY.
KEYNOTE: The overcoming of sociocultural prejudices.
Freedom from all the forms, biases and idiosyncrasies of the
particular culture and class in which one has been born and
educated is a sine qua non of the consciousness truly "on the
Path." The ideal of universal brotherhood underlies all great
spiritual teachings, for they all are like branches of the One
Tree, Man, in his divine state. This does not mean there are no
racial differences, but rather that these differences have afunc-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 153

tional value in terms of the whole organism of Man—and of the
planet Earth.

At this fourth stage the basic technique which applies to all truly
spiritual progress is clearly stated. Every human being should be seen,
approached and warmly met as a "child of God," or in less religious
terms as an exemplar of Man. Such a status gives to every social and
interpersonal group the character of a BROTHERHOOD.

PHASE 155 (VIRGO 5 0 ): A MAN BECOMING AWARE O F NATURE SPIRITS AND NORMALLY UNSEEN SPIRITUAL
AGENCIES.
KEYNOTE: The opening of new levels of consciousness.
In thefirstof this sequence offivesymbols we saw the individual
seeking to bring out of everyday contacts a consciousness of
significant form and meaning. Now, as the sequence ends, a
further stage of realization is shown in its initial and relatively
primitive character. The consciousness is gradually reaching
beyond physical characteristics and becoming aware of energy
processes, i.e. of the dynamism of forces which externalize
themselves as life forms.
This is the last stage of the thirty-firstfive-foldsequence of phases of
the cyclic process of consciousness. The mind in its objectivizing and
analytical character always tends to give "name and form" (noma and
rupa in Sanskrit) to that which it contacts as energy process. It "images
forth" energy or feeling, relating it to more or less familiar sense
experience. We call this IMAGINATION.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C ^ T U R A L
PHASE 156 (VIRGO 6*): A MERRY-GO-ROUND.
KEYNOTE: The first experience of the dynamic intensity of

life processes and of the possibility of using them to
reach a characteristic ego-satisfaction*

Several features connected with the old-fashioned type of mer­
ry-go-round should be understood in their deepest symbolism.

154 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
Two stages of experience are distinguishable: that in which a
very young child is seated with his mother or nurse in an open
carriage—the only experience is that of circular, perhaps at first
dizzying, movement—and the stage of riding a horse (or some
other animal) which often goes up and down as well as around.
As the horse always represents the vital energy (later under­
stood as libido or "psychic energy"), the merry-go-round at this
stage symbolizes or prefigures the awareness of the cyclicity and
the ups and downs of the emotional life. In the fully developed
merry-go-round the child on his horse is given some kind of
handle to try and catch a ring hanging within his reach at a fixed
point just outside the merry-go-round. I f he succeeds in this
rather difficult operation the child wins a prize or gets a free
ride. The symbolism is sexual in its implications, but more gen­
erally it implies that any cyclic release of life energy provides
us with the opportunity of demonstrating some type of skill and
mastery.
This is thefirststage of the thirty-second sequence offivesymbols. In
its broadest sense we see here a characterization of what the develop­
ing consciousness (and at a certain level, the "disciple on the Path")

experiences: AN OBJECTIVE APPROACH TO THE LIFE FORCE.
P H A S E 157 (VIRGO 7*): A HAREM.

KEYNOTE: A fateful (even if sought after) subservience to
the vagaries or desires of the emotional nature.

in a sense this symbol is related to the preceding one, while
revealing a deeply contrasting phase of the emotional and cul­
tural life. The experience symbolized here is a passive one,
while that for Virgo 6* was intensely dynamic. Yet there may
be for the woman in the harem some sort of cyclic pattern and
a prize to reach—the sultan's favor. In both cases thè motive
power is exterior to the experiencer, who is caught in a pattern
offerees over which he or she has no control; yet the child may
purposefully use his small allowance to get a ride, and the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 155
woman may use her charm to attract the attention of her mas­
ter. The individual in both cases finds himself one with a num­
ber of other individuals all seeking or being subjected to the
same type of experience or fate.
This second stage symbol contrasts with, but also supplements, that of
the first stage. It supplements it in the sense that one may become
addicted to the excitement of the merry-go-round of vital emotions
and may become a slave to the hope of recapturing the exultation of
the initial experiences; yet one may learn how to put to use even the

EMPTINESS OF WAITING.

P H A S E 158 (VIRGO 8*): A FIVE-YEAR-OLD CHILD TAKES A
FIRST DANCING LESSON.
KEYNOTE: Learning to use one's capacity for emotional
self-expression according to cultural standards.

The process of emotional experiencing under controlled situa­
tions is shown now to demand self-induced, active movement;
yet the movements are still conditioned, i f not totally deter­
mined, by cultural and thus collective patterns. The individual
can express his own individual character only according to tra­
ditional modes. He is still entirely responsible to his teacher or
guru. Yet new perspectives are now open to him.
At this third stage of thefive-foldthirty-second sequence of symbols
we witness at work the transitional phase which may lead to mastery.
The child-consciousness is still dominated by some form of authority;
but if the child is "five years old," the implication is that he is entering
the level of conscious manhood, represented by the number 5, the
five-pointed star which outlines at least the POTENTIALITY OF INITIA-

TION.

156 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 159 (VIRGO 9'): A N EXPRESSIONIST PAINTER A T
WORK.
KEYNOTE: The urge to express one's individualized sense of
value regardless of tradition.

At this stage the individual is seen reacting against cultural
standards and stereotyped ways of interpreting his perceptions.
This is a statement of uncompromising self-reliance, which may
even imply a kind of defiance and a challenge to society. The
mind is seeking to discover the character of the basic and true
foundation of individual selfhood, the AUM tone (or logos) of
individual being. In the process, however, what is expressed is
usually the reflection of a deep catharsis with emotionally
charged and often tragic overtones.
This fourth stage symbol brings to us the hint of a technique of trans­
formation of the personality. What predominates is a sense of inner
conflict and an overselfconscious attempt at "being oneself." But there
is a great difference between being an origin of development preg­
nant with futurity, and deliberately sought for ORIGINALITY.

P H A S E 160 (VIRGO 10*): T W O HEADS LOOKING OUT AND
BEYOND T H E SHADOWS.
KEYNOTE: The growth of true understanding, born out of
the transcendence of duality even while immersed in
the world of duality.

The mind operates inevitably in this world of conflicts, opposi­
tions and duality. Yet when the opposites realize that they are
complementary aspects of the one Reality which sustains and
encompasses all dualistic modes of existence, they are able then
to look away from internal conflicts and beyond the shadows
these conflicts generate. They may come to realize the One
Consciousness-Force, not in Itself (for this is, if not an impossi­
ble, at least an inexpressible experience), but as the Creative
Unity, the New God, Ishvara, source of a new cycle of manifesta­
tion.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 157
This is the last stage of the thirty-second sequence; it leads us to the
new sequence, which deals with the characteristic features of the
steadily progressing consciousness in the most critical part along its
arduous Path toward transformation. In a deep philosophical sense we
witness here the mind attempting to jump beyond the very shadow
it inevitably casts upon all experiences; i.e. the SELF-TRANSCENDING
ACnVnY

OF THE MIND.

THIRD LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE l6l (VIRGO 11*): IN HER BABY A MOTHER SEES HER
DEEP LONGING FOR A SON ANSWERED.
KEYNOTE: The Spirit's answer to the vital needs of whatever became individualized out of its infinite ocean of
potentialities.

All cycles of manifestation end in an essential duality of "suc­
cess" and "failure," as every release of new potentiality at the
start of a cycle is inevitably polarized in two opposite directions,
becoming sharply differentiated at the mystical "separation of
the sheep and the goat." But out of duality a new unity eventu­
ally is produced: the child, the new God of a new universe.
Subconsciously or consciously, during pregnancy, the mother
dreams of the son-to-be and the imprint of the dream in time
is revealed in the boy's structural being. The true disciple must
become the Mother of the living God and should eventually
fulfill the great need of humanity and of all his people. MAN is
constantly renewed through the great dreams and sacramental
pregnancies of all disciples of the One Master.
This is thefirststage of the thirty-thirdfive-foldsequence of phases of
the cycle. At this stage the power to bring one's dreams and ideals to
a clear and sharp focus of mental activity or imagination needs to be
developed. It is the power of creative visualization (Kriyashakti) for
which a significant word was coined during World War II: IMAGINEERING—a combination of "imagination" and "engineering." Alas, the
word was there, but our statesmen failed to incarnate it in deeds.

158 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 162 (VIRGO 12*): AFTER THE WEDDING, THE GROOM
SNATCHES THE VEIL AWAY FROM HIS BRIDE.
KEYNOTE: The penetrating and unveiling power of the
trained mind.
T

In contrast to the preceding symbol we have now a scene stress­
ing a physical action with psychological and/or spiritual over­
tones. In ancient cosmologies the male god often appears in
three roles as son, husband and father of the woman element of
nature. Nature is fulfilled by the human mind and will that
overcome her; she resists only better to be subdued by the
power that transcends her, and by transcending her gives her
a spiritual meaning. The element of "training" in the symbolic
scene comes from the fact that there has been a marriage ritual;
thus the sociocultural factor is in the background. The teacherguru is here the priest who has performed the ritual
At this second stage the rules are reversed, the masculine element
assuming the dynamic positive part in the great play of polarity. The
masculine act balances the feminine dream visualization. The Key­
word is UNVEILING. There can also be an unveiling of mysteries, long
protected by secrecy.

PHASE 163 (VIRGO 13*): A POWERFUL STATESMAN OVERCOMES A STATE OF POLITICAL HYSTERIA.
KEYNOTE: The focusing of the collective needfor order and

structural interdependence into a personage who incarnates the answer to this need

The husband role of fecundator of nature here takes on a collec­
tive social significance. We are at the stage where a powerful
realization of the very purpose of the cycle of existence faces the
chaotic remains of a dis-structured past. The character of the
leader is always delineated by the need, subconscious though it
may be, of the unformed agglomeration of entities he is called
upon by destiny to lead. In time the leader will be worshiped
as the "divine Father" of the society he structured.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 159
At this third stage of the thirty-third sequence we see a new type of
characterization of the many-faceted polarization of positive and
negative. We have before us a personage endowed with CHARISMA,
this elusive and mysterious power that comes from a man's or woman's
openness to the power of planetary evolution.

P H A S E 164 (VIRGO 14*): A N ARISTOCRATIC FAMILY T R E E .
KEYNOTE: A deep reliance upon the ancestral roots of individual character.

Stressed here is the fact that the power available to any man in
time of crisis and decision has very deep roots in the past,
whether the past of physical ancestry or the past outlined by a
series of previous embodiments conditioned by some dominant
purpose and by the many-phased development of a particular
type of complex character. True spontaneity and creativity are
always based on a structured sequence of antecedents if they
are at all genuinely spiritual, i.e. i f they are able to meet a
collective need. Only the actions that are necessary—even if
only in the long run—for meeting such a need can actually be
called "spiritual."
This fourth stage symbol, strange as it may seem to many peopleespecially young people of our day—suggests a technique which, at
critical times, must be used. It characterizes the means for true "suc­
cess." One returns to the roots in order to produce thefloweringof
personality, if thisfloweris to bring forth a living seed. ROOT POWER
is essential to seed-achievement

P H A S E 165 (VIRGO 15*): A FINE LACE HANDKERCHIEF, HEIRLOOM FROM VALOROUS ANCESTORS.
KEYNOTE: The quintessence of deeds well done.
Root strength produces beautifulflowers.The neophyte who
acts with determination, courage and discrimination while fol­
lowing "in the footsteps" of his predecessors receives a symbolic

160 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
prize from the Brotherhood ready to welcome him when he has
fully proven himself on the battlefield where he meets his past,
which tries to block his way. The mystic Beloved hands him
what she has woven for him out of spiritual threads.
This is the last stage of the thirty-third sequence which also ends the
eleventh scene, "Characterization." This scene began with the revela­
tion in a portrait of salient features in a man's face. It ends with
symbols which bring out the ultimate validity of the many efforts of
generations of men toward the building of a beautiful and significant
CULTURE. The Man of Culture is, in the deepest and best sense of the
term, the Aristocrat. He is thefloweringof a line of ancestors who have
accepted responsibility for a group or community. Likewise, the true
"disciple" is the blossom that crowns a long series of incarnations.

SCENE TWELVE:

EDUCATION

(Virgo iff to Virgo 30*)

F I R S T LEVEL: ACTIONAL
P H A S E 166 (VIRGO l6 ): I N T H E Z O O , CHILDREN ARE
BROUGHT FACE T O FACE W I T H AN ORANG-UTANG.
4

KEYNOTE: A direct confrontation with the "wild" power of
primordial nature within oneself

During this twelfth subcycle closing the first half of the cycle we
deal with phases of unfoldment which can be very broadly clas­
sified under the term "e-ducation," i.e. a leading out into the
world of transcendent activity. Every hidden motive and depth
energy has to be "led out" and objectively faced. According to
the occult tradition, at least some of the ape species are actually
throwbacks resulting from the perversion of the Man archetype
when it belatedly came in touch with the elemental energies of
an adolescent Earth. Likewise many of the so-called "primitive''
tribes in places like Australia and New Guinea should be consid-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 161
ered degenerate remnants of races which once had reached a
much higher level of culture. In other words, the symbol refers
to the confrontation of future-oriented modern children with
the results of what one might refer to as an "original sin"—that
is, with the degeneration of enormous vitalistic power once
available to the human being. That power is now directed to­
ward the mind, and has been immensely magnified by modern
technology. Yet there are residual remains of this vitalistic
power in modern man's nature, and we may well repeat at a
higher level the "sin of the mindless." The candidate for Initia­
tion must face this possibility; the whole of mankind, in a sense,
is a candidate for a planetary Initiation.
This is the first stage of the thirty-fourth sequence of symbols. Its
symbol speaks of KARMIC CONFRONTATION.

PHASE 167 (VIRGO 17*): A VOLCANIC ERUPTION.
KEYNOTE: The explosive energy of long-repressed contents
of the subconscious.

We are dealing here with the dramatic release of energies
which have been kept in check by the outer shell of the egocontrolled consciousness. It may be a spectacular catharsis, but
it often takes paths of destruction. Yet unless some form of
purification by fire is experienced, the inner pressure of the
karmic past or of more recent frustrations would shake up per­
haps even more destructively the very foundations of the per­
sonality.
At this second stage, the objective confrontation with an image of the
karmic past is replaced by a subjective irruption of repressed memo­
ries and primitive cravings. Everything must be released from the
psyche seeking to attain the transfigured state. The soul must become
empty, the mind translucent. The Keyword is EXPLOSION.

162 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 168 (VIRGO l8*): A OUIJA BOARD.
KEYNOTE: The ability to contact deeper recesses of the unconscious psyche and sensitiveness to psychic intimations and omens.

The ouija board is to be considered here a modern device simi­
lar to many ancient instruments used for divination and
prophecy. Certain states of threshold consciousness are stimu­
lated by such a use, and what the experience produces may vary
greatly in quality and in origin. The release of unconscious
material has lost the explosive force pictorialized in the preced­
ing symbol, yet at this stage there is still no conscious and willful
control over what reaches the ego-consciousness.
This is the third stage of the thirty-fourth sequence of symbolic phases
in the life process. It is at best a stage of transition which stresses a
passive openness to the unknown. The glamor of it may subdy pervert
the mind of the aspirant; but in some cases, this can be the first
manifestation of INNER GUIDANCE. The difficulty is to correcdy evalu­
ate what or who does the guiding.

P H A S E 169 (VIRGO 19*): A SWIMMING RACE.
KEYNOTE: The stimulation that comes from a group effort
toward a spiritual goal

When man has become an expert swimmer he has symbolically
learned how to operate in a new element. This element, water,
represents the ever-flowing stream of psychic energy, and, in a
sense at least, the "astral" world. In a still deeper sense man is
now able, mystically speaking, to cross the river and reach "the
other shore"—or to swim back toward the source. Whether or
not the symbol should suggest the competitive spirit at work is
questionable. At the biological level a host of spermatozoa are
swimming toward the ovum, and each presses on toward the
goal, the act of impregnation. A seeker after spiritual rebirth
actually does not strive alone. It is Man who, acting through the
most advanced individuals of the race, is taking a step toward

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 163
"rebirth," or toward a new mutation. The personal ego-cen­
tered ambition to succeed and to be "first" is indeed a sign of
expectable spiritual failure.
At this fourth stage we are confronted with a problem of interpreta­
tion. Is not ambition a subtle form of deviation under the pressure of
ancient karma, and the competitive spirit so valued by our civilization
a sign of failure to understand the deeper reality of existence? What
is needed is E N O J L A T I O N , not competition.

PHASE 17O (VIRGO 20*): A CARAVAN O F CARS HEADED T O
T H E WEST COAST.
KEYNOTE: The need of cooperative effort in reaching any
"New World" of experience

It is difficult to know, from the original formulation of the clair­
voyant's vision, the type of caravan of cars that was visualized;
what seems to be clearly implied is a process in which a group
' of persons are journeying together—thus linking their con­
sciousnesses and energies (the "car" symbol)—in order to safely
reach the goal of destiny. Here there is no longer any sense of
competition, but an ordered and structured endeavor.
At this last stage of the five-fold sequence the past is entirely left
behind; men cooperate in the great "adventure in consciousness" in

a TOTALIZATION OF PURPOSE AND EFFORT.
SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - i ^ T U R A L
P H A S E 171 (VIRGO 21*): A GIRL'S BASKETBALL TEAM.
KEYNOTE: Physical training as a means to inculcate the
feeling of participation in a collective culture.

Basketball presents an interesting symbol. The ball must be
thrown into a narrow opening high above the head of the
player. The ego-consciousness (the ball) must be driven upward
to a focal point or circle that is ready to receive i t I n a sense,

164 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
this parallels what the boy on the merry-go-round (Virgo 6*) can
do if he succeeds in penetrating the ring with his stick, but there
are notable differences. Here the players operate as a team; in
the original formulation of the symbol there was no reference
to two teams and thus to the competitive character of the game.
What should be stressed here is the formation of a group acting
as an organic whole and training itself to operate in a social
context.
This is thefirststage of a second-level sequence offivesymbols, as was
the symbol of the merry-go-round. A definite type of educational ac­
tivity is implied with cultural, and as well emotional, overtones. It
implies the training for GROUP INTEGRATION of "girls," i.e. of a type
of consciousness more specifically receptive to collective forces.

PHASE 172 (VIRGO 22 # ): A ROYAL COAT OF ARMS ENRICHED
WITH PRECIOUS STONES.
KEYNOTE: The certification of aristocratic status, at what¬

ever level "nobility" expresses itself in cultural emi- *
nence.

Once more a reference to ancestral achievements occurs
among these symbols for the sign Virgo. It is seen here in its
most exalted character, for "royalty" is spoken of. Traditionally
the king is the spiritual symbol of unity of an integrated nation;
as a coat of arms is visualized, we are dealing with a status that
is not merely personally acquired but has its roots in a notable
past. Every great Adept has come out of a line of human beings
who have made their marks upon human evolution. Spiritual
attainment is the result of a series of long, repeated efforts; it is
the end of a "royal road," (raja yoga) in the broadest sense of
the term, raja, meaning king.
This second stage symbol contrasts with that of thefirstin that it refers
to heredity rather than to the training of youthful raw material.
Gautama the Buddha was known occultly as "He who comes after his
predecessors." The coat of arms represents the collective status, the
Spiritual Office. Whoever wears it assumes the responsibility of an

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 165
Office. As the French say, "Noblesse oblige. " NOBILITY confers upon

a man exacting responsibility. The question implied in the symbol is,
Are you willing, able and ready to assume a "royal" office, at whatever
level it may be?

PHASE 173 (VIRGO 23*): A U O N TAMER DISPLAYS HIS SKILL
AND CHARACTER.
KEYNOTE: The need to tame one's vital energies in order to
fulfill one's destiny.

We see here the development of the concept of training. The
true aristocrat is the individual who is in complete control of his
vital and emotional energies; at the spiritual level this includes
the overcoming of pride—pride in one's strength and mastery,
and the pride attached to an exalted status or social Office.
This is the third stage of the thirty-fifth sequence offivesymbols. The
meaning of this phase of development is traditional and evident. The
whole process of social-ethical and occult-spiritual conditioning of the
individual aims at the control of man's "animal nature." The energies
of this nature can be put to many uses. Implied in any successful
process of taming and training is RESOLUTENESS and PATIENCE.

P H A S E 174 (VIRGO 24*): MARY A N D H E R U T T L E LAMB.
KEYNOTE: The need to keep a vibrant and pure simplicity

at the core of one's being as one meets the many tests
of existence.

Corning after the preceding symbols this one tells us that,
though great, spectacular and resolute efforts are needed in
order to achieve one's higher goals of destiny, still the essential
quality as one journeys on "the Path" is a pure, spontaneous,
fresh and nonviolent approach to all encounters. This of course
is Jesus' entreaty to his disciples—that they should be like "little
children." Without such a deep, heartfelt simplicity the seeker
after spiritual experiences or Initiation is bound to find himself

166 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
glamorized by his own successes, and to see his ego feeding on
the drama of struggle and victory.
This is the fourth stage of the thirty-fifth five-fold sequence and it
presents us with a subtle hint of technique. Beyond individual prowess
and social eminence, the individual whose innocence is fixed upon
spiritual realization should genuinely radiate INNOCENCE.

P H A S E 175 (VIRGO 25*): A FLAG AT HALF-MAST IN FRONT
O F A PUBLIC BUILDING.
KEYNOTE: The social acknowledgment of a job well done
and a destiny fulfilled.

As an individual who has accepted any significantly met public
responsibilities reaches the end of his service to his community
or to mankind as a whole, he gains social immortality, at least
to some extent. In death he becomes identified with the ar­
chetype that ensouled his public office. He becomes a "culture
hero," enshrined in the official memory of his race. He has found
his place in history. The symbol implies the ability to carry any
task to its ultimate fulfillment, provided this task is carried out
with reference to the need of a collectivity, small or large as it
may be.
In thisfinalphase of the thirty-fifthfive-foldsequence of symbols we
are presented with an image of the end results of the individual's
service to mankind. His personal failings may be forgotten but his
achievements remain. They are given PUBLIC RECOGNITION.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 176 (VIRGO 26*): A BOY W I T H A CENSER SERVES T H E
PRIEST NEAR T H E ALTAR.
KEYNOTE: The first stage of actual participation in the
great ritual of planetary evolution.

Whether we think of the ancient mysteries, or of a Catholic
Mass, or of some still more transcendent ceremony in which

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 167
great Beings charged with planetary responsibihties are in­
volved, we are dealing with a type of archetypal activity. The
ritual is archetypal in that it represents, in however small a field
of activity, a portion of the evolving structure of the cosmos, as
this structure is understood in its "sacred" sense. Every such
activity is performed "in the presence of God." Menial as it may
be, it nevertheless acquires a sacred meaning.
This is the first stage of the thirty-sixth five-fold sequence, which
brings us to the close of the first half of the cycle. The individual is
"e-ducated," i.e. led out into the world of transcendent activity, the
world of archetypal performance. He must learn to serve, humbly and
with intense attention, in what as yet is beyond his spiritual under­
standing. He learns to perform every action superpersonally. He

learns to PRACTICE IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD.

P H A S E 177 (VIRGO 27'): A GROUP O F ARISTOCRATIC LADIES
MEET CEREMONIALLY AT A COURT'S FUNCTION.
KEYNOTE: The ability to carry on a revered tradition in
order to perpetuate cultural standards of excellence.

At the highest peak of achievement of any fully developed
culture the King considers himself in some manner a repre­
sentative of the Power that controls the order of the universe.
From him descends a hierarchy of offices performed by an aris­
tocracy. On the feminine side, to be an aristocrat is to be able
to act efficiently in the many rituals of a culture—from official
tea parties to presentations at the Court. Dignity, elegance and
respect for formal rules are essential. We may consider the
formalism obsolete and meaningless, yet when it ceases to be
observed the culture breaks down. Even now in this age of crisis
and world transformation, there may be times when honoring
formal procedures can be of great value for the disordered and
rebellious mind.
This second stage symbol presents the contrast between the "profane"
and the "sacred" ritual. But the two need not be antithetic. Our
overindividualistic and confused new generations find it valuable to

168 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

study Japanese tea ceremonies, flower arrangement, judo, etc. The
undisciplined need to learn REFINEMENT.

P H A S E 178 (VIRGO 28 # ): A BALDHEADED MAN W H O HAS
SEIZED POWER.
KEYNOTE: The sheer power of personality in times that call
for decision*

Whether at the religious or at the socio-political and cultural
level there comes a time when obsolescent patterns of order
and cultural refinement have to be radically and relentlessly
challenged. Catabolic personages emerge to seize power and
dictate decisions that alter the structures of society; or within an
individual life, an intense urge for cathartic changes mobilizes
the will, and traumatic decisions are made. At such times, the
issue has to be met and, ruthless as the power may appear, it
must be accepted.
At this third stage of the thirty-sixth sequence we face the unpostponable necessity for decision and transformation. Existence is motion. No
static formation, however beautiful and inspiring, can remain long
unchallenged. Everything bows to THE POWER OF THE WILL—divine,
executively human, or Satanic.

P H A S E 179 (VIRGO 29*): A SEEKER AFTER OCCULT KNOWLEDGE IS READING AN ANCIENT SCROLL WHICH ILLUMINES HIS MIND.
KEYNOTE: After a crisis one should seek to realign the

renewed consciousness with the primordial Revelation
of the Truth of Man.

Any revolutionary movement, once it has succeeded in over­
coming the inertia of the past and in toppling obsolete struc­
tures, needs to tap the most essential realities of what Man
represents and signifies in the universal Order; or else it merely
reembodies in a superficially altered manner the very things it

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 169
has destroyed. This is the crucial moment. In occultism the
"Pattern of Man" is an archetypal Power that may be contacted.
It must be sought with undeviating determination. After each
revolutionary crisis this Pattern and this Power can be con­
tacted—always the same, yet at each new cycle perceivable in
a different light.
This fourth stage symbol presents us with the technique required to
"reach the other shore." But each individual, and each group or racial
unit, must come in its own way to the ROOT KNOWLEDGE which
provides the only safe foundation for rebirth.

PHASE 180 (VIRGO 30*): TOTALLY INTENT UPON COMPLETING AN IMMEDIATE TASK, A MAN IS DEAF T O ANY ALLUREMENT.
KEYNOTE: The total concentration required for reaching
any spiritual goal

This is the final symbol of the first half of the cycle. In the year
cycle the fall equinox is now at hand; autumn begins. Through
spring and summer many ways and byways have been ex­
perienced. The last message of this hemicycle of "Individualiza­
tion" is that on all decisive occasions what must be done has to
be done so intently that no outer voices can penetrate the mind,
still less the soul. The neophyte stands at the gates of the sacred
Pyramid. There is only one step he can take—ahead, or he is
lost
This is the culminating step, the decision that results from a myriad
of small choices. Still a shadow of hesitation can remain. Attention may
be distracted from the Now by a voice from the past, glamorizing
some old memory. The outer doors of perception and thought must
be closed, so the soul can complete its CONQUEST OF ILLUSION.

S e c o n d Hémicycle:
The Process
of Collectivization

®

ACT III: GROUP-INTEGRATION
SCENE THIRTEEN:
(Libra t to Libra

TRANSFIGURATION

if)

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L

PHASE l8l (LIBRA 1*): IN A COLLECTION OF PERFECT SPECIMENS OF MANY BIOLOGICAL FORMS, A BUTTERFLY DISPLAYS THE BEAUTY OF ITS WINGS, ITS BODY IMPALED
BY A FINE DART.
KEYNOTE: The immortal archetypal reality that a perfect
and dedicated life reveals.

Just as the symbol for Aries i * evoked the keynote of the entire
first half of the cycle, i.e. differentiation out of the undifferen­
tiated "Ocean of potentiality," this symbol for libra i * reveals
to the intuitive consciousness the essential character of the sec-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 171
ond hemicycle. In the yearly cycle we have reached the fall
equinox, the symbolic time of bringing in the harvest in prepa­
ration for winter. It is the time consecrated to the seed, just as
the spring equinox is consecrated to the germ, the new rise of
life which in-forms the growth of individual organisms.
At this autumnal point, the drive toward individualization
and self-assertion has lost much of its momentum, while a new
trend is successfully and dynamically challenging its hegemony
—the trend toward the formation of collectivities of individuals.
But this new trend can be misunderstood if seen only superfi­
cially as the mere gathering together of individual persons. The
process has a much deeper meaning, and indeed an inner
source of power, for what is at stake is not merely an aggrega­
tion of separate units (simple or already complex, as in the case
of "families"). At the core of this "coming together," the "de­
scent" or externalization of archetypal realities is gradually oc­
curring. At the Libra stage, these archetypal realities are
"Forms"; at the Scorpio stage they will be "Powers." The sym­
bol for this degree of the fall equinox thus describes a "perfect
form"—the result of the metamorphosis of "worm" into but­
terfly, a process the symbolism of which has so often been used
to indicate to man the possibility of his being transformed into
"more-than-man," the transhuman being, the true Initiate, the
Adept, the Perfect. The perfect butterfly is impaled by a fine
dart; the symbol of "dart of wisdom" was used in Marc Jones's
mimeographed course, while the original notation of what the
clairvoyant had seen indicated "a butterfly made perfect by a
dart through it," suggesting a process of perfection through
sacrifice.
As I see it, the dart can hardly be said to have made the
butterfly perfect, but it keeps it perfect by killing the living
organism. The impaled butterfly is preserved by the dart which
"fixes" it in perfection for a whole cycle, i.e. it makes an ar­
chetype of it. By thus escaping the normal process of dying and
decay, the butterfly form (the "perfection") is kept. It is kept in
the mystical Shamballah, where it is said that the Pattern of Man
is kept, just as the perfect bar measuring exactly one meter is

172 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
(or was) kept in a crypt in Paris, where the metric system was
originally devised.
The perfect butterfly thus represents the outcome of the
process of occult discipleship symbolized by the sign Virgo.
From then on, a new process begins, that of collectivization; at
the very core of that new process the perfect Form of Man must
remain as a standard of value if this process is to be valid and
meaningful.
This is the first statement in the thirteenth scene of the great ritual
drama. It is an actional phase because in it the perfection of individual
activity is revealed and immortalized. This is the symbolical Transfigu­
ration; at the Mount of Transfiguration, Jesus, the Son of Man, was
"impaled" by the ray of Divine Light, making of him a Son of God. It
was at this very moment that he learned of the Crucifixion awaiting
him. Thus the merely human individual is MADE SACRED, becoming
the pure embodiment of an archetype.

P H A S E 182 (LIBRA 2 # ): T H E TRANSMUTATION O F T H E
FRUITS O F PAST EXPERIENCES INTO T H E SEED-REALIZATIONS O F T H E FOREVER CREATIVE SPIRIT.
KEYNOTE: A repolarization of inner energies leading to a
creative centralization of consciousness.

The original formulation of this symbol was both "occult" and,
I believe, confusing: "The light of the sixth Race transmuted to
the seventh." It could be interpreted in terms of the process of
mankind's development through the seven great Races (or evo­
lutionary periods) outlined in the second volume of H. P. Blavatsky's Secret Doctrine, but there are no other symbols in the
series having such a frame of reference. What seems more likely
to be implied in the revealed image is a reference to the
numerological and occult meaning of Number 6 and Number 7,
especially geometrically expressed in the diagram (on page 32)
in which seven circles, contiguous and of the same size, fill a
larger circle whose diameter is three times that of the smaller
one. The six circles touching the circumference of the larger

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 173
one represent the six basic approaches to Truth and Reality
possible to man's developing intelligence—thus the well-known
Six Schools of Hindu philosophy, and at the level of energy the
six fundamental colors, or "Rays." But central to this six-fold
system is the hidden or occult "Seventh," the Atma Vidua of
Hinduism, the unformulatable Truth of the Self which both
includes and transcends the six approaches, Schools or Rays.
Number 6 (also Solomon's Seal) represents the synthesis of
descending spirit and ascending matter. It represents the frui­
tion of all past efforts; within the six-fold fruition the seed may
be found, the seventh. Outer activity is fulfilled (the Six Days of
Creation in the first chapter of Genesis); and the Supreme Actor
can be seen in His changelessness and therefore his transcend­
ing all-inclusiveness.
All that was manifested in the plant is gathered in the
hidden seed, which in due time becomes the foundation of a
new cycle of existence. The fruit decays. For a brief moment the
released seed may be seen; this is the "seventh" period that
becomes the creative power fathering a new cycle. This symbol
for Libra 2* refers to the process of centralization in the Self (the
creative Reality) after the experience of fulfillment in the per­
fect Form of manifestation.
This is the second stage of the thirty-seventhfive-foldsequence of
symbols and phases. It refers to a dynamic process in contrast to the
picture representing thefirststage—a picture of maintained and im­
mortalized, thus static, perfection of form. Formal perfection is now
transcended through a process of CREATIVE CENTRALIZATION.

PHASE 183 (LIBRA 3*): THE DAWN OF A NEW DAY REVEALS
EVERYTHING CHANGED.
KEYNOTE: The ever-present possibility of beginning again
on a new foundation of values.

This symbol hardly needs to be interpreted, except for pointing
out that these first three symbols beginning the second hemicy¬
cle of the cyclic process should be seen as a basic trinity. It can

174 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

be related to the process of true Initiation: (1) The experience
of the undying Form of perfection; (2) The release of the energy
incorporated in the Form in order to reach "That-which-isbeyond-form-and-name"; (3) The reembodiment of energy in a
new creative Act
The third stage of this thirty-seventh sequence leads us to a vision of
the fulfilled purpose of thefirsthalf of the cycle. What emerged hesi­
tantly from the ocean of infinite potentiality (Aries 1") now faces a
totally new world in a truly individualizedformof existence. He or she
is ready to act significantly in the sphere of culture and social together­
ness, the sphere in which an individual, aware of his archetypal es­
sence and planetary function, can play his true role (dharma). In a
basic sense it is always a new role, for no cycle repeats itself as far as
its contents are concerned. The person who plays this role is always

potentially an INNOVATOR.

PHASE 184 (LIBRA 4*): AROUND A CAMPFIRE A GROUP OF
YOUNG PEOPLE SIT IN SPIRITUAL COMMUNION.
KEYNOTE: The necessity to unite with kindred spirits as one
enters unbeaten paths illumined by the still-insecure
light of a dawning intuition of new values.

As one partially visionary leader said a few years ago: "Beaten
paths are for beaten men." The urge to create a new society and
respond to new values leads the pioneer to the wilds, which
represent the state of planetary possibility—i.e. the as-yetuncultured, the virgin forest. Around the fire of a common
dedication (or at least a common hope!) minds and bodies can
commune, forming a "chalice" or Grail for the reception of
creative inspiration.
At this fourth stage of thisfive-foldsequence of phases of development
we find, as usual, a hint of technique. If a new society is to be built,
those who yearn for it, or perhaps who have envisioned its outlines,
should commune. But communion is useless where no central "fire"
burns, IN-SPIRITING the group.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 175

P H A S E 185 (LIBRA 5*): A MAN REVEALING T O HIS STUDENTS
T H E FOUNDATION O F AN INNER KNOWLEDGE U P O N
W H I C H A " N E W W O R L D " COULD B E BUILT.

KEYNOTE: The necessity for the youthful spirits to learn

from a Teacher who through his long experience has
been able to reach solid and illuminating truths, i.e.
"seed ideas"

An old saying is just as valid today as ever: When the pupil is
ready, the Master appears. But he may appear in many dis­
guises. What matters is not the Master, but the Mastery he
"re-veals." It is veiled in his person. It has to be contacted
through his person, rather than in his person. Devotion to a
guru may be the way, but sooner or later it should be trans­
muted into reverence: the truth within the disciple saluting i n
true humility the truth in the Teacher.
This is the last stage of the thirty-seventhfive-foldsequence and it
marks the culmination of the four preceding stages. What is evoked
by the symbol is the essential, withal rather mysterious, process of
TRANSMISSION. What is transmitted, if the situation is really adequate
and understood (at least tentatively) by all participants, is not merely
knowledge. It is actually "being-ness."

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A I S - C U L T U R A L
P H A S E 186 (LIBRA 6*): A MAN WATCHES HIS IDEALS TAKING
A CONCRETE FORM BEFORE HIS INNER VISION.
KEYNOTE: The need to visualize clearly one's dreams or
ideals in order to make them truly effectual

According to a French proverb, "What is well conceived can
easily be formulated." The process of interior visualization can
be quite essential, except in the case of a creative individual
who has become a totally pure channel for the descent of
spiritual Power, and a clear lens through which the Archetype

1

176 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
in the Mind of Man (or God) can be projected without distortion
wherever needed. In other cases the creative act is less direct:
a man projects into the world what he has "seen" reflected on
the screen of his individualized consciousness.
This is thefirststage of the thirty-eighthfive-foldsequence of symbol­
ized phases in the process of individualized existence. It is a phase of
INTERIOR FORMULATION in preparation for a creative projection of
one's ideals or concepts.

P H A S E 187 (LIBRA 7°): A WOMAN FEEDING CHICKENS AND
PROTECTING THEM FROM T H E HAWKS.
KEYNOTE: The need to face the antagonism of "powers of

darkness" as one attempts to feed the mind of as yet
helpless and frightened apprentices.

J
I
I
I
I
I
I
f
&
I
I
I

The most basic "Law" of our universe is that every release of
new potentialities (or modes of energy) brings about a polariza¬
tion of effects—that is, the new potentiality will be used both for
construction and destruction. It will arouse individuals (or
groups and nations) to take a series of steps which will lead some
to greater success, others to deeper failure. Whoever makes
possible this new release has to accept the karma of both the
success and the failure. When Jesus showered his immense love
upon lukewarm, self-centered individuals, it inevitably came to
be turned into violent hatred when these soul-minds were unable to cope with its frightening intensity. Jesus had to accept
spiritual responsibility for those who crucified him.

I
I
1

At this second stage we witness the contrast between the ideal situa¬
tion envisioned clearly by the creative consciousness (first stage) and
what it will be in actual operation; thus the forever-present struggle
involved in making it possible for the future-oriented actualizers of an
ideal to survive the attacks of tradition-worshiping minds that can only
follow the lines of automatic response. The keynote is GUARDIANSHIP.

!
I

1

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 177

PHASE l88 (LIBRA 8*): A BLAZING FIREPLACE IN A D E SERTED HOME.

KEYNOTE: The need to realize that even through the most

empty hours a spiritual power is ever ready to welcome
and warm up the wayward consciousness returning to
center.

Until the fire of the Soul within the human psyche totally dies
out—a rare and tragic occurrence—there is always hope of
recovery and rebegirming. Many disciples find themselves com­
pelled to abandon their spiritual quest, even after having had
sense of essential being. Yet "the home** that once received
them—the guru's love—remains ready to welcome the return
of the "prodigal sons.**
This is the third stage in the thirty-eighth sequence offivesymbols. In
a sense it links the vision, catalyzed by the contact with an inspirer,
with the possible reaction of fear or shock that arises from such a
contact. Within the abandoned great dream, some intangible and
warm "presence" remains: the ever-renascent HOPE for a rebeginning.

PHASE 189 (LIBRA 9*): T H R E E " O L D MASTERS" HANGING
ON T H E WALL O F A SPECIAL ROOM IN AN ART GALLERY.
KEYNOTE: The need to return to source during a confused
search for new value in a chaotic society.

There are always moments which focus in our minds the long­
ing to re-ground ourselves in the great achievements of the past
The number 3 suggests completeness; esoteric traditions speak
of the three-fold Soul, or of three fundamental "Rays**—of
Power, of Love-Wisdom, and of Intelligence-in-action. Medita­
tion, in its deepest sense, is a return to Source—an attempt to
reidentify oneself with one's archetypal essence of being, which
is triune in manifestation, and now, after confused but challeng­
ing wanderings, to identify oneself consciously with this "es­
sence.** The finer forms of one*s culture provide the means to
do this. The great moments of the collective past become an

178 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
inspiration for new, yet sound, beginnings. The seed of tomor­
row salutes the seed of yesteryear.
At this fourth stage of the thirty-eighth sequence it is suggested that
in the process of 'Transfiguration" the presence of the greatest mo­
ments of the past, is called upon, as Moses and Elijah were invoked in
Jesus* Transfiguration. The seed of the new day depends upon the seed
of yesteryear for an experience of the cyclic continuity of spirit. This
is the basis for the institutionalized ideal of APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION,
the guruampara (an uninterrupted chain of gurus) of Indian tradition.

P H A S E 190 (LIBRA 10*): HAVING PASSED SAFELY THROUGH
NARROW RAPIDS, A CANOE REACHES CALM WATERS.
KEYNOTE: The self-control and poise necessary to reach a
steady state of inner stability.

This symbol hardly needs to be commented upon. It could be
related to the fifth symbol of the preceding five-fold sequence
referring to guru-chela relationship at the actional level. Here
we are dealing essentially with the emotional life and its crises.
At the next—mental and individual—level, the concluding sym­
bol will suggest the perfect and smooth working of the intellect
ruled by logic and simplicity of means.
This is the fifth stage of the thirty-eighth sequence; it concludes what
was begun at the first stage. The inner "revelation" which brought
about dramatic confrontations can now be meditated upon as it is
reflected on the calm waters of the mind. As a Keyword one may use

the term RELIEF.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 191 (LIBRA 11*): A PROFESSOR PEERING OVER HIS
GLASSES AT HIS STUDENTS.
KEYNOTE: Problems attending the transmission of knowledge in a special cultural setup.

This is a rather peculiar symbol for this phase of the process, and
it reveals a rather humorous approach to what man's mind can

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 179
accomplish at this stage. However, there seems to be no valid
reason to make the image into some kind of a caricature, or to
sentimentalize it by referring to a "kind old professor." Rather
one should analyze the picture in order to discover its basic
elements. The professor has dealt so much with books that he
has greatly strained his eyes; in days when bifocal lenses were
not widely used, he had to peer over his glasses in order to see
his students. The symbol thus simply reveals two aspects of the
condition of "professor-ship"—that is, of being able to transfer
to the young generation the vast sum of knowledge ac­
cumulated by the past. The need to absorb this enormous
amount of book knowledge affects the mind as well as the eyes;
in order to meet the demands of the turbulent youth, the
teacher in a sense has to look above this knowledge and to see
his students simply as human beings.
This is thefirstsymbol in the thirty-ninthfive-foldsequence. It deals
at the intellectual level with the teaching of accumulated collective
knowledge, and the problem posed by the acquisition of that knowl­
edge. This is what INSTRUCTION means—a process not to be confused
with "education."

PHASE ig2 (LIBRA 12°): MINERS ARE SURFACING FROM A
DEEP COAL MINE.
KEYNOTE: The need to carry on at ever deeper levels the
quest for knowledge which keeps burning the fires of
the collective mind of a society.

The search for knowledge demands the dedication of many
minds digging ever deeper into the realities of our earthly exist­
ence. It is a hard, often dark pursuit amidst great difficulties and
the possibility of being spiritually asphyxiated by the constant
intellectual effort and tension. When a person is confronted by
this symbol it could be interpreted as showing the need for such
an intellectual dedication but also as pointing to the advisability
of emerging from it and leading a more natural life.
This second stage symbol is related to thefirstin that in both we see
conditions of existence dealing with work for the sake of the collec-

180 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tivity. The opposition between intellectual and manual work is evi­
dent; less so is the fact that both classes of workers experience definite
physical consequences as a result of their occupation: the eyes of the
professor, the lungs of the coal miner. The professor digs in the intel­
lectual past of mankind to find what may warm up the mental proc­
esses of his students; the coal miner brings to the surface the ancient
remains of what once was living substance. Keyword: EXTRACTION.

P H A S E 193 (LIBRA 13*): CHILDREN BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES.
KEYNOTE: The cultural fantasies through which young
minds dream of perfect

fulfillment

This seems to refer to the use of the imagination and the value
of fantasy in a collective setup. Men dream together as a prepa­
ration for acting together. Rituals related to the great aspira­
tions of mankind are both sacred ceremonies and playthings for
young minds; so also are court ceremonies and operas for the
social elite, or baseball games for the crowds. Some men work
hard at acquiring knowledge and providing society with what
it needs to enjoy warmth and lighted palaces; others play at
imagining themselves perfect spheres of multicolored radiance
—soap bubbles so soon proven evanescent!
At this third stage of the thirty-ninth sequence we deal with another
aspect of the cultural life made possible, in a sense, by the two just
symbolized. It is a symbol of IMAGINATIVE PLAY, which foreshadows
the idea of "global man," the man of plenitude.

P H A S E 194 (LIBRA 14*): I N T H E HEAT O F T H E NOON HOUR
A MAN TAKES A SIESTA.
KEYNOTE: The need for recuperation within the social pattern of everyday activity.

At the emotional-cultural level man today is not able to sustain
constant activity. There must be rest periods, siestas or coffee

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 181
breaks, during which the individual withdraws within his own
sphere of selfhood, not only for physical relaxation but for allow­
ing the strange, but evidently necessary play of dream fantasies.
Social structuring cannot be maintained healthfully without
breaks, in whatever climate man may live. Besides, the body
needs quiet and relaxation fron nervous tension after what is
often the main meal of the day.
This fourth stage symbol can be seen as emphasizing the need for
techniques of RELAXATION, and the need to allow the functions of
body and psyche to "digest,"freefromexternal pressures, the com­
plex experiences of social living and particularly of business.

PHASE 195 (LIBRA 15*): CIRCULAR PATHS.
KEYNOTE: Coming to terms with the inevitability of establishing steady rhythms of social activity.

In his early course, "Symbolical Astrology," Marc Jones sought
to concretize this abstract image by speaking of "machinery
parts, new and circular." It is far better, however, to face the
image in its most general sense, as he himself did later on. It is
because everyday activities, whether in the home or in business,
inevitably tend to repeat themselves in circular fashion that it
is necessary for the individual to have rest times during which
he can be released from repetitive patterns. It is only when the
individual has become fully attuned to, and in a sense identified
with the vast planetary and cosmic rhythms of the universe, and
thus free from emotional and group tensions, that he can act
serenely and at peace along "circular paths."
At this last stage of the thirty-ninth sequence offivesymbols we find
an abstract image which can be interpreted in a positive or negative
manner. We deal with repetitive activity; but that activity may either
bind orfreethe consciousness of the actor. It can mean BOREDOM or

TRANSPERSONAL PEACE in action.

182 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
SCENE FOURTEEN:

(Libra iff to Libra 30*)

RECONSTRUCTION

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L

PHASE 196 (LIBRA 16*): AFTER A STORM A BOAT LANDING
STANDS IN NEED OF RECONSTRUCTION.
KEYNOTE: The need to keep in operation steady links between the vast Unconscious and the ego-consciousness.
Confrontation with broad issues of relationship and currents of
energies released by man's contact with archetypal-spiritual
realities often results in temporary destruction. "Boats" nor­
mally link distant regions, or enable men to draw food from the
sea (i.e. new realizations which so far existed only in the uncon­
scious realm of the planetary Mind). They may also be used to
enjoy temporary excursions and the feel of the water and the
waves. Any cultured society, however, may be wary of the dan­
ger inherent in venturing far away from the consciously defined
and socially structured ways of life. Such adventures may in­
deed turn destructive; the points of contact between the vast
Unconscious and the ego-consciousness molded by cultural as­
sumptions and rituals may be wrecked by psychotic storms. The
boat landings must then be slowly reconstructed.
This is thefirststage in the fortiethfive-foldsequence of cyclic phases
in human experience. It brings to us vividly the realization that what­
ever men build in order to be able to venture away from solidly
individualized and conscious bases of operation is likely to be damaged
by as yet unfamiliar cosmic forces. The tenuous link between two
realms constantly needs REPAIR.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 183
PHASE 197 (LIBRA 17*): A RETIRED SEA CAPTAIN WATCHES
SHIPS ENTERING AND LEAVING THE HARBOR.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to gain an objective and calm understanding of human experiences in which one was
once deeply involved.
Old age may or may not bring to man this objective and calm
understanding as one remembers the crises overcome and the
quiet enjoyment of great life vistas or "peak experiences," but
wisdom and inner serenity can hardly develop save on the basis
of the overcoming of struggles and conflicts. The "sea captain"
sailed his ship through storms and still waters of consciousness,
his mind perhaps battered by gales, his ego-crew perhaps in
revolt. Now there is peace and quietude. Another generation is
sailing seas better charted perhaps, yet inherently nonrational
and at times savage in their fury. He watches. He knows. Others
are learning. At any age the ego-will may "retire" and contem­
plate, and be at peace before a greater voyage over even more
poorly charted seas.
At this second stage we see a picture of true overcoming of storms, in
polar opposition to the preceding one which revealed the destructive
effect of psychic upheavals tearing apart the occult link—the antakarana—between the incarnate consciousness and the transcend­
ent Soul-field, the CALM MIND beyond struggles and victories.

PHASE 198 (LIBRA l8 ): TWO MEN PLACED UNDER ARREST.
KEYNOTE: A breakdown in the constructive relationship
between the individual and society, and the expectable
result.
#

If it is to remain steady and consistent, every form of order must
be able to protect itself by the application of sanctions. Both a
society and a personal ego constitute forms of order. Any form
of order excludes what the form cannot securely and safely hold.
It excludes, or exiles, the alien, the unassimilable; if it cannot
send them to outer space, it must isolate them in a special type

184 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
of inner space, a prison. The individual whose actions introduce
unacceptable principles into the established order runs the risk
of being "punished" or re-formed according to this order. The
problem for a society is how to include in its patterns of order
agencies or channels for transformation—and particularly how
to keep them truly operative; for individuals, it is how to make
their transforming vision or impulse acceptable to society. The
symbol does not reveal what caused the breakdown in the rela­
tionship between the individual and society; but if one also
considers the symbols that follow, one's thoughts may be led
back to the image of the storm that wrecked boat landings
(Phase 196). The suggestion is that whatever violence is released
originates in unconscious pressures (the sea and the wind). A
new step in the evolution of society—the Industrial and Elec­
tronic Revolutions of the last hundred and fifty years—caused
a collective, world-wide upheaval which led to widespread vio­
lence. The fact that two men are pictured under arrest suggests
a polarization and a purpose transcending a merely personal fit
of recklessness.

This is the third stage of the fortieth sequence. Negative as the image
may seem, one may see implied in it the power in every individual to
assume socialrisksin order to express his convictions or deepest
desires. Nevertheless, one thing is needed: FACTNG THE CONSE-

QUENCES.

PHASE 199 (LIBRA 19*): A GANG OF ROBBERS IN HIDING.
KEYNOTE: Protest against disharmonic social privilege
It is questionable whether the formulation of the symbol at this
place is adequate, but it is kept on general principle. One might
rather think of Robin Hood and his band, or early Bolsheviks in
Russia robbing banks to finance the revolution. The protest
against an unbalanced society with its rigid stratification into
classes can be seen as a positive factor, even if it challenges the
principle of order, for it reveals dynamic qualities in individuals
and the will to transformation. In another sense, it is the dark

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 185
shadow of the ideal of "nonpossessiveness." The question is:
How valid and effectual is this kind of protest?
The fourth stage in afive-foldsequence of symbols and phases usually
presents us with at least a hint of technique. What can this mean at
this level? Perhaps the fact that any effective resistance to the momen­
tum of crystallized institutions should be organized if it is to be effec­
tive. Individuals alone are impotent in producing actual changes in
social consciousness. A "group" must be formed. The Keywords are

CROUP PROTEST.

PHASE 2 0 0 (LIBRA 20*): A RABBI PERFORMING HIS DUTIES.

The ability to draw on the power of an ancestral
tradition in order to serve and inspire one's fellowmen.

KEYNOTE:

Here we see at work the constructive use of rather rigid yet
effectual sociocultural and religious patterns. The energies of
the collective Unconscious are channeled through well-defined,
age-old forms and formulas. This implies limitations and the
possibility of sclerosis or inertia when confronted with new
situations, yet there is beauty and wisdom in such a ritualization
of behavior and of thinking.
This is the fifth stage of the fortiethfive-foldsequence. At this stage
the relation of man, the individual, to his community-—and beyond it,
the universe—is seen in stabilized and effective operation, INHERITED
WISDOM can be focused through a person who accepts its limitations.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C ^ T U R A L
PHASE 2 0 1 (LIBRA 21°): A SUNDAY CROWD ENJOYING T H E
BEACH.

A revivifying contact with the Mother-force of
nature and of social togetherness.

KEYNOTE:

The sea is the vast matrix from which living organisms originally
emerged. It also symbolizes the collective Unconscious, the

186 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
"matricial" envelope of the biosphere within which conscious­
ness takes individualized forms. The consciousness of human
beings is given specific form by the culture in which they live
and the particular occupations they carry on in everyday work.
But i t is very good and healthful for their minds to become
revitalized by collective experiences and deep feelings of un­
differentiated unity as they merge in the vast refreshment of
the planetary "Mother" where "she" is most dynamic, unlim­
ited and unconfined by boundaries.
At thisfirststage of the forty-firstfive-foldsequence of symbols we see
thefoundationon which coming developments will be based. It is in
a sense a biodynamicfoundation,but it reaches beyond even the
biosphere to what in all cosmic types of organization is the Motherprinciple—for instance, galactic Space. We may speak here of
OCEANIC FEELING, born of attunement to the most basic rhythms of
existence, at whatever level it might be.

PHASE 202 (LIBRA 22*)\ A CHILD GIVING BIRDS A DRINK AT
A FOUNTAIN.
KEYNOTE: The concern of simple souls for the welfare and
happiness of less-evolved beings who thirst for life
renewal
The original statement of this symbol is far more significant than
the later formulation, for what is expressed here is a reversal of
the operation mentioned in the preceding symbol. Man, who
has built the fountain—perhaps on arid land and through skillful
work—gives the life-bestowing water to the thirsting birds. He
does not go to the sea, but he brings the purified, drinkable
water to the birds needing it. The connection between "child"
and "birds" implies a spontaneous, naïve rapport at the spiritual
level, a soul-touch at the level of pure feelings.
At this second stage of thefive-foldprocess the contrast with the first
takes on a suggestive aspect. What you received from the Infinite, you
can give to the finite beings that thirstforit. Man does not need to
destroy nature's wilderness through greed and carelessness; he can

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 187
transform this wilderness into a garden, whose singing fountains will
attract birds. We can use here Marc Jones's Keyword for this degree:
SOLICITUDE.

PHASE 203 (LIBRA 2&)l CHANTICLEER'S VOICE HERALDS
SUNRISE.
KEYNOTE: A

creative and joyous response to life processes.

The cock that crows as the first coloring of dawn appears at the
eastern horizon is a beautiful symbol of the ability, demon­
strated by all pioneers and cosmically attuned individuals, to
give voice to what is as yet unmanifested, but is on the way to
manifestation. At the ego level, chanticleer may feel that he
makes the sun rise; but someday he will learn through painful
experiences that to create is only to reveal what essentially is.
It is the vivid recognition of the as-yet-unknown in the known.
This third stage symbol should make us think afresh about issues we
too often take for granted. At every "sunrise" there are a few isolated
witnesses that herald the coming of a new day. What is at stake here
is the individual's capacity of RESPONSE TO LIFE'S RENEWALS—renew­
als which are cyclic, predictable, yet always new, always creative.

P H A S E 204 (LIBRA 24'): A BUTTERFLY W I T H A THIRD W I N G
O N ITS LEFT SIDE.

The ability to develop, for inner strengthening,
new modes of response to basic life situations.

KEYNOTE:

The butterfly is the ancient and tradiţional symbol of the results
of the process of spiritual rebirth. If the butterfly has three
wings instead of two, a special development of an aspect of the
spiritual life is shown. Three is a symbol of fulfillment. Some
power has been added to the normal spiritual life of the individ­
ual person. The left side usually refers to the instinctual field of
the consciousness, but it is also the heart's side. A new strength
is shown, perhaps as yet unrealized.

188 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
A fourth stage symbol usually refers to some kind of technique or
technical achievement. What is implied here is that the contact with
the revivifying Life-force (cf. the first stage symbol) can result in the
appearance of a new faculty, the use of which may not as yet be
consciously evaluated. Indeed it is the establishment of such a contact
which constitutes a technique for ORIGINAL MUTATION.

P H A S E 305 (LIBRA 25*): T H E SIGHT O F AN AUTUMN LEAF
BRINGS T O A PILGRIM T H E SUDDEN REVELATION O F
T H E MYSTERY O F LIFE AND DEATH.

The ability to discover in every experience a
transcendent or cosmic meaning.

KEYNOTE:

The mind open to the multifarious wonders of natural proc­
esses, because it sees everything with fresh eyes, not only wit­
nesses simple facts, but pierces through appearances and per­
ceives the great rhythms of universal life. Without such a faculty
the aspirant to spiritual realities is always looking for "else­
where." Yet the spirit, life, God is ever present, here and now.
And every death is an omen of rebirth.
At this fifth stage of the forty-firstfive-foldsequence of phases of the
cosmic process, the implications of the four preceding stages are
brought to a new state of consciousness which is truly the spiritual
state. It is a state of CLAIR-SEEING, or "seeing through." This world is
illusion only to the individual who cannot see through its phenomena
and fails to apprehend the reality these phenomena reveal even as
they conceal it.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 206 (LIBRA 26*): AN EAGLE AND A LARGE WHITE
DOVE CHANGE INTO EACH OTHER.

The interaction of the spiritual Will and of the
Love principle when critical needs arise.

KEYNOTE:

This sequence of symbols concluding the Libra phase of the
cycle deals with problems met by the seeker for the fulfillment

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 189
of a higher life of Relationship. Implied here is a kind of YangYin interplay. When the circle encompassing both principles
rotates fast, they appear to change into each other. Conscious­
ness operates beyond duality, because the polarized energies of
the Soul (or spirit), Will and Love, though ever distinct, work for
a single purpose.
This is the first stage of the forty-second five-fold set of symbolic
phases. It represents a new, higher approach to the use of polarized
forces within the personality which has been ever so little transformed
and operating within a new framework. The Keyword ADEPTNESS fits
this phase—but there are many levels of "adept-ship"!

PHASE 207 (LIBRA 27 0 ): AN AIRPLANE SAILS, HIGH IN THE
CLEAR SKY.
KEYNOTE: A consciousness able to transcend the conflicts
and pressures of the personal life.
This picture symbolizes the capacity, latent in every individual,
to contemplate the stress of existence in our world of duality
from a higher level. Through the use of his mind, backed by the
efforts and struggles of past generations and the cooperation of
other men, the individual can gain a new perspective on human
problems and reach freedom and peace in a supernal realm of
being.
This second stage symbol contrasts with the first, for while the first
dealt with the cooperation between polarized energies, this one in­
troduces us to the realm of unity beyond polarity. It is a stage of

TRANSCENDENT REALIZATION.

190 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 2 0 8 (LIBRA 28*): A

MAN BECOMING AWARE O F
SPIRITUAL FORCES SURROUNDING AND ASSISTING HIM.

KEYNOTE: The realization, at any level of existence, that
one is never alone, and that the "community"—visible
or invisible—is sustaining one's efforts.
Every individualized organism is part of a larger organized
whole, whether or not it is aware of this or of the sustaining
power of the whole. A man, however, can deliberately choose
to follow the dark path of ego-isolation which sooner or later
always leads to destruction and self-loss in "matter." At the
animal level, the whole biosphere is the community; for the
ordinary human being, it is the tribe or family, the village com­
munity, the nation. As the individual expands his consciousness,
he may become aware of a spiritual community, even beyond
the "noosphere" (the one Mind of humanity), i,e. the realm of
the pure light of the "Supermind," which is what the concept
of the "White Lodge" suggests.
This is the third stage of the forty-secondfive-foldsequence. To the
man who has ever so little transcended the world of conflicts, and, for
a moment at least, experienced the oneness of all existence, this stage
should bring the realization of "belonging" to a greater whole. This

produces a state of INNER ASSURANCE.

PHASE 2 0 9 (LIBRA 29*): MANKIND'S VAST AND

ENDURING
E F F O R T T O REACH F O R KNOWLEDGE TRANSFERABLE
F R O M GENERATION T O GENERATION. •

KEYNOTE: A deep sense of participation in, and commit'
ment to, social processes which seek to bring to all men
Truth and a greater Life.
The most characteristic trait in human nature is the ability to
"bind time" (as Korzybsky once stated): that is, to transfer to
other men as yet unborn the harvest of his conscious experi­
ences and his deliberate endeavors. This ability far transcends

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 191
instinct and biological mutilations, for it is based on conscious­
ness, choice, will and self-sacrifice for the sake of future human
beings. It rests upon a deep feeling of the value of "commu­
nity"; its use increases this feeling and eventually destroys the
roots of loneliness.
This fourth stage symbol suggests the technique that makes a life truly
"human." To join other men and women in the vast process of a living
civilization is to fulfill the basic implications of the human stage of
cosmic evolution—a stage characterized by CONSCIOUS PARTICIPA-

TION.

P H A S E 210 (LIBRA 30*): T H R E E MOUNDS O F KNOWLEDGE
ON A PHILOSOPHER'S HEAD.

The fulfillment of man's power of understanding at whatever level of existence the person operates.

KEYNOTE:

A true philosopher is a man who is able to "understand," not
merely "know," the processes of life as he comes to experience
them directly. He is the man of wisdom, different indeed from
the man of science; for while there must be knowledge before
understanding, knowledge alone can be both barren and de­
structive of wisdom. This peculiar symbol refers of course to
"phrenology," which is usually considered a pseudoscience, but
may provide significant indications. Number 3 always indicates
a state of completion. The symbol implies a fulfillment of philo­
sophical understanding, which obviously has nothing to do with
academic degrees or the writing of successful treatises on ab­
stract concepts.
This fifth stage symbol is the last of the libra series. Understanding
and wisdom develop in terms of the life of community and through
experiences provided by interpersonal and group relationships. Cul­
tural factors are always involved, even though true wisdom transcends
cultural values and is rooted in the essential nature of Man. What is

at stake here is A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO KNOWLEDGE, based on
universals.

192 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
COMMUNION
(Scorpio i* to Scorpio 15V

SCENE FIFTEEN:

F I R S T LEVEL: ACTIONAL
P H A S E 2 1 1 (SCORPIO 1*): A CROWDED SIGHTSEEING BUS ON
A CITY STREET.

The fundamental human eagerness to expand
one's social horizon and to experience the results of
collective achievements and new ways of life*

KEYNOTE:

In this symbol we are dealing with a group-experience of a vast
collective achievement, a city. Individuals coming from a vari­
ety of places and backgrounds "commune" in new awareness of
a greater whole of human existence, an organized whole with
its own rhythms of multifarious activity. New feelings and an
expansion of consciousness result. What begins in the libra
phase of the cycle is given substantiation during the Scorpio
phase. The process of "initiation" into collective values is now
reaching the feeling nature.
This symbol begins the forty-thirdfive-foldsequence. It refers to the
first realization of what a larger whole of existence—a more encom­
passing frame of reference—implies, in very concrete and perhaps
startling terms. What is at stake is A WIDENING OF EXPERIENCE.

P H A S E 2 1 2 (SCORPIO 2*): A DELICATE BOTTLE O F PERFUME
LIES BROKEN, RELEASING ITS FRAGRANCE.

The accidental nature of opportunities that impel one to break away from a past, the remembrance of
which is still poignant and cherished.

KEYNOTE:

A new and greater realization usually demands the sacrifice of
something which has brought loveliness and fragrance to a
lesser form of living and feeling. Old feelings are poignantly
remembered, even as one moves into a new and wider sphere

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 193
of experience. Old relationships may be left behind, but the
memory of their essential moments lingers on, perhaps strong
and nostalgic.
This is the second stage of the forty-third sequence. It contrasts with
the first in that it reveals the difficulty of dealing with the past as one
enters into a new realm of feelings. To the excitement of novelty
answers the memory of the graciousness of the past one has SURREN-

DERED.

PHASE 2 1 3 (SCORPIO 3*): A HOUSE-RAISING PARTY I N A
SMALL VILLAGE ENLISTS T H E NEIGHBORS' COOPERATION.

The feeling of community demonstrated in a
basic joint effort.

KEYNOTE:

In rural neighborhoods, especially as the American West was
being developed, the building of at least the framework of a
house was often a collective, friendly enterprise. Newcomers
building their home-to-be found friendly helpers in their neigh­
bors. The sense of togetherness and participation in a common
enterprise was developed by such collective work. The home
remains "our" home, yet the whole community is involved in
its erection and the welcome marking its completion.
At this third stage of thefive-foldsequence, feeling becomes activity.
The past and its memories are repolarized in terms of the expanded
social consciousness. From that activity a new sense of reality will
derive. The Keyword is COOPERATION.

PHASE 214 (SCORPIO 4*): A YOUTH CARRIES A LIGHTED
CANDLE IN A DEVOTIONAL RITUAL.

The educative power of ceremonies which impress the great images of a culture upon its gathered
participants.

KEYNOTE:

A community of human beings is ensouled by a few basic sym­
bols which structure and illustrate the group's particular culture

194 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
and way of life. Rituals and social ceremonies of all types (from
a baseball game to a ticker-tape parade for returning heroes, or
a religious service in an old cathedral) incorporate these sym­
bols in traditional forms of activity. As they participate in these
collective presentations of commonly accepted values and
ideals, the minds and feelings of young people are formed by
these symbols. They take the values for granted until the day
when they choose to assert their individuality—or their partici­
pation in a generation's revolt—by scorning the traditional ritu­
als, including as well business rituals. Then they may poignantly
search for new ones to participate in!
Thisfourthstage symbol picturesforus the method by which a com­
munity of feelings is built during theformativeyears of childhood and
adolescence. The zodiacal sign Scorpio is especially related to rituals
including the sex rituals which unite the communicants at the roots of
their beings. In these sex rituals too, THE POWER OF SYMBOLS is evi­
dent, above and beyond the mere biological act

P H A S E 2 1 5 (SCORPIO 5*): A MASSIVE ROCKY SHORE RESISTS
T H E POUNDING O F T H E SEA.
KEYNOTE:

The inertia of all institutionalized

procedures.

Slow is the rise of the land from the vast ocean, but once it is
formed it develops a formidable resistance to change in spite of
storms. Likewise, once a culture has expressed its basic symbols
and its particular way of thinking, feeling and acting in concrete
institutions, these change very slowly indeed. The individual
who came to the great city (Scorpio i * symbol) soonfindshis life
set by the rhythms of city living, which obliterate vaster life
processes and the moving tides of evolution.
This is the last of thefivesymbols of theforty-thirdsequence. We see
in it how binding and resistant a communal way of life can become.
In this there is strength and stability, and these are necessary factors
in the social life of man—until new horizons beckon. The Keyword is

STABILITY.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 195

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
PHASE 2l6 (SCORPIO 6*): T H E GOLD RUSH TEARS MEN
AWAY FROM THEIR NATIVE SOIL,

The passionate search for new values which, at
any level, promise a more abundant life.

KEYNOTE:

The greatness of man is that he can always be greater; likewise,
at a national level, man's "greed" can more easily be aroused by
whatever promises more wealth, more power, and ever-greater
achievements at all levels, spiritual as well as material. Beyond
this arousal of greed is the deep-seated desire to play a more
important or spectacular role in one's society or community.
Greed is the perverse intensification of the social sense, just as
lust is the perverse intensification of the longing for love. Always
at this Scorpio level the yearning is for an ever more intense and
all-absorbing union with a person or a community—a yearning
which motivates a search for more effectual means to achieve
as total a feeling experience as is possible.
This is the first stage of the forty-fourth sequence of symbolic phases
in the cycle of existence. It dramatizes the capacity in man to tear
himself away from the known and the familiar, gambling everything
on a vision or dream. A Keyword could be AVIDITY.

PHASE 217 (SCORPIO 7*): DEEP-SEA DIVERS.

The will to explore the hidden depths of all
experiences and to search for primordial causes.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol essentially refers to depth psychology—a coming to
terms with the collective Unconscious and its contents. This
type of depth-plumbing adventure is basically different from
the one symbolized by the gold rush, for it can take place within
the individual and with no relation to social value. It refers
symbolically to a quest for "under-standing"—i.e. for what lies
under the surface waves of daily living. This quest may lead to

196 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
great dangers. It demands a strong will and good breathing—
i.e. a degree of spiritual strength. It usually challenges powers
hidden in the depths of the unconscious.
The contrast between "deep-sea divers" and "men of the gold rush"
is significant. It presents in an interesting manner the opposition be­
tween afirststage and second stage symbol in thefive-foldsequence
of cyclic phases. The inward quest opposes the outward search for the
great social symbol, gold. It should lead to a DEPTH REALIZATION of
the very roots of consciousness.

PHASE 2l8 (SCORPIO 8'): A CALM LAKE BATHED IN MOONLIGHT.
KEYNOTE: A quiet openness to higher inspiration.
One could stress the romantic suggestions such an image
evokes, but even at the level of a love relationship what is
implied is a surrender of two personal egos to the inspiration of
transcendent feelings which are essentially impersonal. Love
expresses itself through the lovers, for real Love is a cosmic
undifferentiated principle or power which simply focuses itself
within the "souls" of human beings who reflect its fight. The
same is true of the mystic's love for God. Man strives hard to
achieve great things through daring adventures, but a moment
comes when all that really matters is to present a calm mind
upon which a supernal fight may be reflected.
This is the third stage of the forty-fourthfive-foldsequence. It tells us
that beyond all efforts lies the need for peace and the readiness to
accept the illumination from above. The Keyword is QUIESCENCE.

A REFORMULATION O F THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 197 '
PHASE 219 (SCORPIO 9°): A DENTIST A T WORK.
KEYNOTE: Overcoming the negative results of social

tices and ego-cravings.

prac-

In order to properly evaluate and interpret this symbol, we
should realize the meaning of the teeth. Permanent teeth ap­
pear normally at age 7, when, according to some occultists, the
personalized individuaHty of the child—the ego—takes full con­
trol of the physical organism. The teeth are used to tear down
foodstuffs so they can be digested and assimilated. Social living
and cultural patterns impose upon us certain habits of eating,
arouse desires for unwholesome or denatured food, force us
perhaps to eat in tense circumstances and hurriedly. This results
in tooth decay far more frequently than should be inevitable
through aging. The symbol therefore shows us how society and
civilization, which may indirectly cause tooth decay, then have
to invent means to skillfully repair the damage.
At thisfourthstage of thefive-foldsequence we see once more a hint
of technique. Life in society both perverts and repairs, destroys and
rebuilds—truly a vicious cycle. Man is compelled by social needs to

display INVENTIVENESS.

PHASE 2 2 0 (SCORPIO 10*): A FELLOWSHIP SUPPER R E UNITES OLD COMRADES.

The overtones of human relationships based on
a community of work or experiences.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol pictures the essential nature of the bond that unites
individuals who have participated in some common activity.
The social feeling of communion, plus all that it engenders,
arises after the act performed together. Activity is at the root
of consciousness. Activity in common generates social con­
sciousness and cultural patterns which become set in the form
of institutions. A group-personality emerges, which displays
characteristic features and gives birth to collective emotions
and values.

198 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
This is the final stage of the forty-fourth five-fold sequence. Wherever
the symbol appears, it suggests the importance of establishing or
strengthening links with those with whom one has shared, or can
share, living experiences. The value of COMRADESHIP is emphasized.
T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 221 (SCORPIO 11*): A DROWNING MAN IS BEING RESCUED.

The deep concern of the social group for the
safety of individuals.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol should be interpreted

as revealing the basic feeling
of relationship between the individual and his fellow-men.
What is pictured is the expression of this Telationship rather
than the experience of the person who, carelessly perhaps, ventured too far beyond his depth and then was given a "second
chance" to five. A man risks his life to save another: this is love,
based on a sense of responsibility produced by a vivid sense of
interrelatedness. Sustained by this love, the individual may be
more secure in venturing forth; but this assurance can also lead
to unwarranted daring and trust.
This is the first stage of the forty-fifth sequence of five symbolic phases.
It pictures the concern of the social whole for any one of its parts, even
if this concern is merely the spontaneous act of rescue performed by
a chance bystander. The HUMANITARIANISM thus displayed has deep
cultural roots.
P H A S E 222 (SCORPIO 12°): A N OFFICIAL EMBASSY BALL.
KEYNOTE: Group-consciousness, as it flowers at the highest

level in cultural interchanges between
of the elite of the ruling class*

representatives

At present the largest unit of social organization is the nation.
The symbol pictures the ruling class of such national wholes

A REFORMULATION OF THE SAB IAN SYMBOLS 199
displaying at least the superficial forms of a concern for estab­
lishing permanent relationships in peaceful cooperation. What
is evoked is the value of meeting other people at the highest
possible level of cultural interplay (i.e. in "full dress"), rather
than with an everyday type of consciousness and behavior.
In contrast to the natural spontaneity of the rescue operation shown
in the preceding symbol, we have here the image of a ritualized
DISPLAY of power, prestige and wealth. Relationship has been made
hierarchical and is institutionalized. Phase 222 tells us that this too is
an essential feature in the development of rhythmic give-and-take in
order to achieve global peace.

PHASE 2 2 3 (SCORPIO 13*): AN INVENTOR PERFORMS A
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT.
KEYNOTE: The driving urge toward achievement, which is
at the root of civilization.
At whatever level, the development of more complete and effi­
cient forms of social interplay—the essence of the process of
civilization—demands ingenuity, inventiveness and the willing­
ness to experiment within relatively secure test conditions. One
must try to go to the roots of problems of interpersonal or
international relations, as well as to discover the principles con­
trolling the interaction between material particles and larger
bodies. Modern technology is only one approach to an im­
mensely complex problem. Intuition is as necessary to success
as intellectual analysis.
This is the third stage of the forty-fifth sequence offivesymbols. The
symbol stresses the value of individual initiative, perseverance and
caution in any attempt to understand how everything is related to
everything else. What is most needed is the ABILITY TO RELATE SEEM-

INGLY UNRELATED FACTS.

200 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 2 2 4 (SCORPIO L| # ): TELEPHONE LINEMEN AT WORK
INSTALLING N E W CONNECTIONS.
KEYNOTE: The need to establish new channels of communi-

cation.

The growth of community feeling among separated human be­
ings requires the development of constantly more complex
means of interchanging feelings and ideas. Wherever this sym­
bol for Scorpio 14* is found, the indication is that such channels
of communication are essential for the success of any interper­
sonal relationship. They are not only to be built, but to be used
significantly and wisely.
This fourth stage symbol brings to our attention the essential value of
communicating with our fellow-men and even our close associates—
with whom such a communication may not always be easy. There can
be no communion without communication at some level, including
the level of biological attunement Keyword: THE WILL TO ASSOCIA-

TION or COMPREHENSION.

P H A S E 2 2 5 (SCORPIO 15 9 ): CHILDREN PLAYING AROUND
FIVE MOUNDS O F SAND.

Early steps in the development of a mind seeking to be attuned to the higher level of human evolution.

KEYNOTE:

This is a particularly cryptic symbol. It may be deciphered if one
realizes that Man's essential destiny is to develop as a five-fold
being, a "Pentagram" orfive-pointedstar. Number 5 symbol­
izes mind in its most creative and penetrating aspect, while
number 4 refers to the life processes operating at present within
the earth's biosphere. Our Western civilization has realized
only the lower level of this vibration 5; i.e. mind contaminated
by compulsive instincts and emotional involvement. Some in­
dividuals, however, are born with a special potential for devel­
opment of the higher, creative mind, and in social circum­
stances favoring this development. In most cases, they are still

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 201
"playing around" with their unusual capacity. They are in the
kindergarten stage of this higher mind development.
In thisfinalstage of the forty-fifth sequence offivesymbols the tran­
scendent possibilities of mental evolution, which require interper­
sonal communion in consciousness, are evoked. Thefreespirit of true
scientific inquiry is only a foreshadowing of a such a type of mind,
which demands dedication to mankind as a whole. What is seen here

is FUTURE-ORIENTED GROWTH.

FAITH
(Scorpio iff to Scorpio 30*)

SCENE SIXTEEN:

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL

PHASE 226 (SCORPIO 16*): A GIRL'S FACE BREAKING INTO A
SMILE.
KEYNOTE: The fervent reaching out on the part of the
young of heart to new experiences.
Faith in life and in other human beings enables us to go forth
toward relationships with whatever attracts our senses or stirs
our imagination. Smiling is perhaps a uniquely human charac­
teristic because it implies a conscious acceptance of relation­
ship, thus a choice. The animal, on the other hand, is compelled
by unconscious instinct, at least in its natural state. It is not free
to choose between love and hate.
This is the first symbol of the forty-sixth five-fold sequence. It in­
troduces us to a series of responses to human experience and pictures
a glowing WARMTH OF FEELING.

202 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
P H A S E 2 2 7 (SCORPIO 17*): A WOMAN, FECUNDATED BY H E R
O W N SPIRIT, IS "GREAT W I T H CHILD."
KEYNOTE: A

within.

total reliance upon the dictates of the God-

In contrast to the outgoing smile of the girl in the preceding
symbol, here we see the result of a deep and complete concen­
tration reaching to the innermost center of the personality
where the Living God acts as a fecundating power. This reveals
the potency of the inward way, the surrender of the ego to a
transcendent Force which can create through the person vivid
manifestations of the Will of God
This second phase of the forty-sixthfive-foldsequence brings to us the
realization of normally hidden potentialities in the average human
being of our day. Faith in the Divine is shown here being concretely
justified. The human person becomes a "mother of the Living God."
This is THE TRANSPERSONAL WAY of existence. It is the way that leads
to creative mutations.

P H A S E 2 2 8 (SCORPIO 18*): A PATH THROUGH WOODS BRILLIANT W I T H MULTICOLORED SPLENDOR.

The exalted feeling of a work well done and a
truly consummated life.

KEYNOTE:

The person who has lived with faith the transpersonal life—the
life through which spirit radiates creatively—can experience
blessedness and peace, even though his or her cycle of experi­
ence nears its end. It has been a life full of seed. The seeds are
hidden perhaps, yet they are filled with the power to overcome
cyclic death. The soul is at peace. The clear autumnal sky si¬
, lently intones the great message: "Well done, little manP
In this third symbol of thefive-foldsequence we see the smile of the
youth brought to a more mature, more spiritual culrnination. Human
nature is a magnificent symphony of warm, rich colors, now that the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 203

strictly biological green of vegetation experiences its TRANSFIGURA-

TION.

PHASE 2 2 9 (SCORPIO 19 # ): A PARROT REPEATS T H E CONVERSATION H E HAS OVERHEARD.
KEYNOTE:

edge.

The capacity to transmit transcendental

knowl-

To the individual who lives in a state of ardent and sustained
faith it may become possible to become a channel for the trans­
mission of a knowledge or wisdom that transcends his normal
mental understanding. The mind that has learned to be silent
and attentive can become attuned to the rhythm of utterances
which he may not comprehend intellectually, yet which may
truly manifest superhuman realizations. Discrimination is
needed here to balance the overeagerness of faith.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence of symbols we are given
a hint as to man's capacity to attune himself to sources of higher
wisdom if he can be sufficiently attentive and careful in channeling a
"higher Voice." To stress here the negative element of automatism
and unintelligent repetition is to use only one's intellect. All birds in
symbolism suggest spiritual faculties or forces. What is evoked is the
possibility of learningfromhigher Intelligences. Keyword: CHANNEL-

SHIP.

PHASE 2 3 0 (SCORPIO 20'): A WOMAN DRAWS AWAY T W O
DARK CURTAINS CLOSING T H E ENTRANCE T O A SACRED
PATHWAY.

The revelation to the human consciousness of
what lies beyond dualistic knowledge.

KEYNOTE:

The "Woman within"—the faith that is rooted in the deepest
intuitions of the soul—is seen here as the hierophant unveiling
the realities which the either-or, pro-and-con mind of man
alone cannot perceive. The path to the mystic's "unitive life" is

204 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
opened up once the darkness of fear, egocentricity and dualistic
morality is removed.
This is the last symbol of the forty-sixthfive-foldsequence. It reveals
what a positive reliance upon faith and intuition can bring about
Courage is needed to go through the veiling darkness—the courage to
venture beyond the familiar and the traditionally known, to PLUNGE

AHEAD INTO THE UNKNOWN.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 231 (SCORPIO 21°): OBEYING HIS CONSCIENCE, A
SOLDIER RESISTS ORDERS.
KEYNOTE: A readiness to face the results of a refusal to
follow the authoritarian patterns of an aggressive society.
As a personfindshimself involved in activities which are tradi­
tional in his particular culture—and in many instances in all
societies at this stage of human evolution—he often faces a
conflict between his own individual sense of value (his con­
science) and the demands of society. The conflict may be most
typical in terms of the armed services—thus this symbol. In it
we find the individual asserting his own values, though he can­
not escape the consequences of his decision. In such a case he
has to be quietly ready to face these consequences, whatever
the cost
This is the first stage in the forty-seventhfive-foldsequence of phases
in the great cyclic ritual of activity. The issue it presents is clear.
Society in this situation seems to be all-powerful; yet the individual
need not be spiritually bound, even if imprisoned. He still can display
INNER FREEDOM and prove himself an "individual."

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 205

P H A S E 2 3 2 (SCORPIO 22'): HUNTERS SHOOTING W I L D
DUCKS.

The socially accepted release of an
or a group's aggressive instincts*

KEYNOTE:

individual's

What this symbol clearly stresses is the socialization of mam's
primitive instincts according to a cultural ritual. Social hunting
is a regulated seasonal outlet for male aggressiveness—a safety
valve for emotional pressures in human beings in whom animal
compulsions and biospheric values are still strong.
In this second stage symbol wefinda strong contrast with thefirst.In
the latter, the individual proved himself truly "man** by refusing to
accept the practices of war imposed upon him by his society; in this
symbol for Scorpio 22* it is society that willingly accepts—and in ac­
cepting, ritualizes and to some extent refines—the aggressiveness in­
herent in most individuals. The Keywords are SOCIALIZATION O F

INSTINCTS.

PHASE 2 3 3 (SCORPIO 23*): A RABBIT METAMORPHOSES
INTO A NATURE SPIRIT.
KEYNOTE:

The raising of animal drives to a higher level

The rabbit is traditionally a symbol of an overabundance of
progeny, thus of a great stress on procreative and sexual proc­
esses. "Nature spirits," on the other hand, represent the higher
aspect of life energies, as they are said to guide those normally
invisible forces controlling the growth of all living organisms,
particularly in the vegetable kingdom. Thus the symbol refers
to the transmutation of the generative power into a more
ethereal and subtle form of potency.
This is the third symbol in the forty-seventh sequence. It brings a new
dimension to the preceding two. Whether it is the sexual desire for a
progeny, or aggressiveness, the instinctual urge can be raised to a new
level. The course can become subtle through a process of TRANSUB-

STANTIATION.

206 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 2 3 4 (SCORPIO 24*): A F T E R HAVING HEARD AN INSPIRED INDIVIDUAL DELIVER HIS "SERMON ON T H E
MOUNT," CROWDS ARE RETURNING HOME.

The need to incorporate inspiring
and teachings into everyday living.

KEYNOTE:

experiences

Today we hear a great deal about "peak experiences" (Maslow).
The great problem facing everyone who has had such experi­
ences is how to assimilate what has been felt, seen or heard, and
how to let it transform his everyday consciousness and behavior.
If this is not done the experience may turn confusing or toxic
and perhaps destructive of the integrity of the person.
This fourth symbol as usual suggests to us what has to be done or how
to do it. The "return home" from the high mountain, or from any
"upper chamber" of the consciousness, may lead to a sense of oppres­
sion by the normal realities of existence, or else the soul that has been
illuminated may retain enough of that light to transfigure every daily
situation. This is the great CHALLENGE TO TRANSFORMATION.

P H A S E 2 3 5 (SCORPIO 25*) A N X-RAY PHOTOGRAPH.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to acquire a knowledge of the

tural factors in all existence.

struc-

The true philosopher is able to grasp and significantly evaluate
what underlies all manifestations of life. His mind's eye pene­
trates through the superficialities of existence and perceives the
framework that gives an at least relatively permanent "form"
to all organized systems. Thus if the structure is weak, deformed
by persistent strain, or unbalanced, the basic causes of outer
disturbances and dis-ease can be discovered.
This symbol concludes the forty-seventhfive-foldsequence. It gives an
added dimension to the preceding four. For instance, it provides the
conscience of the individual who refuses to obey his society with a
depth-understanding of what is wrong in the situation he faces.
Beyond the powerful feeling quality of "peak experiences," the mind
can understand the great Principles of which they were the manifesta-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 207
Hons. This is STRUCTURAL KNOWLEDGE in contrast to existential
knowledge.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
PHASE 2 3 6 (SCORPIO 26*): AMERICAN INDIANS MAKING
CAMP AFTER MOVING INTO A N E W TERRITORY.

The ability to adjust suHftly to a new situation
by tuning in to its requirements.

KEYNOTE:

He who lives in harmony with nature, moving on as new needs
arise, finds liimself intuitively at home everywhere. He does not
make demands upon life, for he has identified himself with the
great ryhthms of the biosphere and he functions at peace with
what they produce. This is the message of the American Indian
culture which European invaders so wantonly and meaninglessly destroyed nearly everywhere. Western man has lost faith
in life because he wants to dominate and enslave manifesta­
tions.
This represents thefirststage of the forty-eighthfive-foldsequence in
the cycle of experience. It brings to us a message we gready need
today—the message of peaceful adaptation to nature, and through
adaptation, of EFFICIENT FUNCTIONING in all life situations.

P H A S E 2 3 7 (SCORPIO 27 # ): A MILITARY BAND MARCHES
NOISILY ON THROUGH T H E CITY STREETS.
KEYNOTE:

The aggressive glorification of cultural values.

Every cultural-social collectivity sooner or later tries to impress
the value of its achievements forcibly and noisily upon all those
' who belong to it, as well as upon foreign onlookers. At the
individual-mental level the member of such a collectivity swells
with pride and excitement when a display of the excellence of
that in which his consciousness and personality are deeply

208 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
rooted is publicly affirmed. Thus the feeling of social unity binds
the individuals of a culture through collective pride.
This second stage symbol contrasts sharply with the first one. Our
aggressive, tense, domineering Western civilization is indeed in oppo­
sition to the natural spontaneity and instinctive adjustment to nature
of tribal societies. The Keyword here is POMP.

P H A S E 2 3 $ (SCORPIO 28*): T H E KING O F T H E FAIRIES APPROACHING HIS DOMAIN.

The capacity in man to recognize and to pay
homage to an integrating Principle at the core of all
existence.

KEYNOTE:

This rather peculiar picture tells us perhaps a good deal about
the limitations of the mind of the clairvoyant who saw it, though
it can be related to the symbolism of the various creatures of a
spirit world mentioned in some alchemical and Rosicrucian
books. What seems to be implied is that beyond both outer
nature and the realm of the proud ego, a spiritual world exists
to which the intuitive consciousness of man can pay allegiance.
In that world, all manifested entities are seen as multiple as­
pects of a central Power and Consciousness. It is such a central
principle of unity that human societies have sought to revere
symbolically in human, all-too-human kings. In an individual
sense, this principle is the Self.
This is the third stage in the forty-eighthfive-foldpattern of symbols.
It adds a new dimension to the two preceding ones. At this stage the
presence of a spiritual unifying factor begins to be sensed by the
individual perhaps weary of the outer shows of his culture. An INNER
ALLEGIANCE begins to polarize the consciousness.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 209
PHASE 2 3 9 (SCORPIO 29°): AN INDIAN SQUAW PLEADING T O
T H E CHIEF FOR T H E LIVES O F HER CHILDREN.
KEYNOTE:

Love as a principle of redemption.

Here the soul is presented as a mother whose sons (i.e. her active
energies) have become disruptive forces in the collective life of
the tribe. She seeks to counteract the karma of their misdeeds
through her love and implorations. The soul is responsive to the
experience of unity (the spiritual king or chief) but the energies
of human nature often follow their self-seeking, divisive tenden­
cies.
This is the fourth symbol of the forty-eighth sequence. It presents us
with the value of prayer. The principle of wholeness in man—the soul
—acts to offset or attenuate the dictates of karma. In a religious sense,
Mary, the Mother, is seen as the Mediatrix, in constant acts of INTERCESSION for the sake of waylaid individuals.

PHASE 240 (SCORPIO 30*): CHILDREN IN HALLOWEEN COSTUMES INDULGE IN VARIOUS PRANKS.

The periodic outlets society furnishes within traditional limits to still-immature energies.

KEYNOTE:

In the symbol for the first degree of Scorpio we see individuals
beginning to be involved in the collective life of a large city.
This leads them to a great diversity of experience which stimu­
lates their sense of belonging to a vaster whole; or it may stimu­
late their rebellious instincts. Some of the latter in most cases
cannot be completely overcome, but society has built in several
ways of allowing them to operate under ritualistic procedures
that are sufficiently safe to the collectivity. Wherever this sym­
bol is found, the need for such outlets is shown to exist. But the
rules of the game have to be obeyed.
This is the last symbol referring to Scene Sixteen of the greatritualof
cyclic being. It tells us that in any feeling experience of collective
living and interhuman relationships one has to deal with un-

J

210 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
regenerated and centrifugal elements. These should be carefully
managed. They can also be controlled by the power of mind—the
Sagittarian way. The symbol points to an imaginative RELIEF FROM

TENSION.

ABSTRACTION
(Sagittarius i* to Sagittarius lg)

SCENE SEVENTEEN:

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L
P H A S E 241 (SAGITTARIUS 1*): RETIRED ARMY VETERANS
GATHER T O REAWAKEN OLD MEMORIES.

The will to reaffirm the value of the struggle
upon which civilization and group-achievements are
founded.

KEYNOTE:

Two important factors are revealed in this symbol: the men who
have come together are Army men, and they are linked by
actions and a type of consciousness that have roots in a common
past. What we call "civilization" is built by constant struggles
against nature, for it seeks to wrench power from nature. This
element of power is seen in its most obvious aspect in the mili­
tary consciousness. Moreover, all civilization is built upon the
accumulated products of the experiences of past generations of
dedicated men who agree to follow rather rigid procedures of
work. Veterans' groups in all countries seek to rekindle in their
members the old fire of well-fought battles; but the type of
abstract or religious thinking normally related to the zodiacal
sign, Sagittarius, also implies a special kind of "fire." I t is a fire
that burns the "now" of natural living in order to build a greater
"tomorrow." I t is future-oriented. I t aspires to produce a
greater, wider civilization, even though it finds its roots in the
harvest of mankind's past. Comradeship and group activities are
implied, but the togetherness is one of fighting spirits.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 211
This is the first stage of the forty-ninth five-fold sequence of cyclic
phases. The symbol should be understood in its widest and most basic
meaning, not merely as the reunion of old comrades, but as referring
to the very power implied in the process of civilization, as opposed to
culture—thus to the PERPETUATION of the spirit of struggle for power.

PHASE 242 (SAGITTARIUS 2*): WHITE-CAPPED WAVES DISPLAY T H E POWER O F W I N D OVER SEA.

The mobilization of unconscious energies under
the pressure of superpersonal motives.

KEYNOTE:

Wind and sea are in constant interplay, and the results of that
interplay are inspiring and beautiful. In symbolism, the wind
(pneuma is the early Greek word for "spirit") is associated with
spiritual dynamism; the stirring of deep energies this dynamism
produces obeys cosmic or superpersonal rhythms, the power of
which is irresistible.
At this second stage of the forty-ninth five-fold sequence we have a
picture which contrasts the powerful but beautiful storms of nature
with the often gory and hysterical crises of a civilization which pro­
gresses through war. The picture presented speaks of SUBTILIZATION

THROUGH RHYTHMIC INTENSITY.

PHASE 2 4 3 (SAGITTARIUS 3*): T W O MEN PLAYING CHESS.
KEYNOTE:

The transcendent ritualization of conflict.

Essential to sociocultural living is the transmutation of man's
natural aggressiveness under most conditions of existence.
Manyrituals,sports and games have no other basic aim. In chess
the complex types of energies which in their togetherness con­
stitute a human person are symbolized by six kinds of pieces
(king, queen, bishops, knights, rooks and pawns). The struggle
between light and darkness (the Yang and Yinforces)is ritual­
ized, ending in most cases with the checkmating of the king (the
ego, the conscious self). I n a dualistic world such a contest be-

212 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tween polarized forces is omnipresent. The chess game trains
men to be more objective, more careful, more aware of whole
situations—and less impulsive and intent upon side issues.
This third stage symbol deals with conflict, but at the level of group
culture and psychological symbolization. It brings to the objective
consciousness the basic realities in interpersonal INTERPLAY.
*

P H A S E 244 (SAGITTARIUS 4*): A LITTLE CHILD LEARNING
T O WALK W I T H T H E ENCOURAGEMENT O F HIS PARENTS.

The natural assistance of superior powers during crises of growth.

KEYNOTE:

At an early stage in its development, every living organism must
make an attempt to overcome the power of gravitation, or
rather to learn to use it in order to fulfill the purpose of its life.
This implies passing through a critical state of growth—growth
in freedom, potency and individuality, inasmuch as "walking"
always symbolizes self-induced progress. In such a crisis the
individual is not left alone. Some more evolved Power and Intel­
ligence watches, encourages and gives examples to be followed.
As usual, this fourth stage symbol in the forty-ninth sequence gives a
hint of technique. It presents a picture of the conditions under which
a RESOLUTION OF CONFLICT can be ensured, whether at the organic,
the personal or the superpersonal level of unfoldment.

P H A S E 2 4 5 (SAGITTARIUS 5*): AN OLD OWL SITS ALONE ON
T H E BRANCH O F A LARGE TREE.
KEYNOTE: A

poised and wise approach to existence based
on a clear perception of unconscious factors and their
operation.

The owl has always been a symbol of wisdom, and its hooting
call has evoked a rise to mysterious and hidden elements in life.
The owl functions lucidly in the night aspect of existence. His

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 213
eyes see what men normally fail to perceive. He represents that
consciousness which is active where the processes of life nor­
mally escape the attention of the personal ego and its intellect.
This is the last of the five symbols in the forty-ninth sequence. It
suggests the possibility of developing a wisdom beyond tragedy, a
peace and poise beyond conflict One might speak here of TRANSLU-

CIDITY.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
PHASE 246 (SAGITTARIUS 6*): A GAME O F CRICKET.

The development of skill in
testing collective goals.

KEYNOTE:

group-situations

Any society is built on the interplay between groups of people,
each group united by an at least temporary aim. The individual
person within the group is assigned a particular role in the play,
and definite rules have to be obeyed. The game teaches not only
personal skill, but fairness and cooperation. Where this symbol
is found, the value of making individual-will or ego-will subser­
vient to collective cultural patterns is emphasized. Several sym­
bols belonging to Scene Seventeen (Sagittarius) relate to games
or grouprituals,because these are "ab-stracted" from everyday
social behavior and used as educative means to develop groupconsciousness and an individual sense of responsibility to the
group.
This is thefirstsymbol of thefiftiethfive-foldsequence. It refers to the

importance of developing GROUP SOLIDARITY.

PHASE 247 (SAGITTARIUS 7*): C U P I D KNOCKS AT T H E DOOR
O F A HUMAN HEART.
KEYNOTE: A

tic love.

stirring-up of individual longings for roman-

In contrast to the preceding, this symbol refers to what one
might call a personal initiation through an ideal love. Far from

214 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
being related to social value, ideal love tends to exalt individual
characteristics in that it glorifies what seems able to fill poignant
and often unconscious needs. Such a love is a projection of the
anima or animus Images which in a sense complement the outer
character of the one who loves. It is a subjective event which
tends to bring to the lover a crisis or emotional chaos. Such a
love often turns asocial i f not antisocial and is blocked or
frowned upon by society.
This second stage symbol is in direct opposition to that of the "cricket
game." Intensely romantic love knows no rules and ignores collective
purpose or dictates of reason. Yet it may bring to the individual an
intensity of feeling which no group togetherness can arouse, at least
at the ordinary social level. What is implied is a challenge to EMO-

TIONAL REBIRTH.

P H A S E 2 4 8 (SAGITTARIUS 8 # ): W I T H I N T H E DEPTHS O F T H E
EARTH N E W ELEMENTS ARE BEING FORMED.
KEYNOTE: The alchemical fire which both purifies and

transforms the very substance of man's inner life.

Forces are at work in the deepest layers of the psyche which in
their own way respond to the outer stimulation produced by a
strong involvement in group ambitions and emotions, and even
more by the powerful tensions and releases of love. An alchemi­
cal process goes on, usually unnoticed by the conscious ego,
until it becomes obvious that a kind of mutation has taken place
and a new level of awareness and of responses to life has been
reached.
At this third stage of thefive-foldsequence we deal with both the basic
rhythm of growth of the human being and the reaction to more in­
dividualized experiences which aroused the emotions. The very sub­
stance of the person's nature undergoes modifications, on the basis of
which a new step may be taken. The symbol draws our attention to
the inner changes. We have to become aware of them. What is implied

is a kind of PSYCHIC GESTATION.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 215

PHASE 249 (SAGITTARIUS 9'): A MOTHER LEADS HER SMALL
CHILD STEP BY STEP UP A STEEP STAIRWAY.
KEYNOTE: The need in any social situation to assist the less

evolved in their management of the problems
society requires its members to solve.

which

A staircase does not present a natural difficulty to a very
young child. Man builds stairs and therefore is responsible for
assisting the child to climb them step by step. Social and cultural
living is not "natural." The child must first be taught by exam­
ple, then helped along as he imitates as well as he can the
grownup's behavior. Climbing stairs is only an illustration of a
general process. Every generation must involve itself in teach­
ing the next even the simplest skills needed for social existence.
At the fourth stage of the precedingfive-foldsequence we saw parents
encouraging a little child to walk. Walking is a natural human func­
tion; climbing stairs is a skill made necessary by the building of severalstoried houses—a product of civilization. What is implied here is
SOCIAL CONCERN for the less evolved of society's members.

PHASE 250 (SAGITTARIUS 10*): A THEATRICAL REPRESENTATION O F A GOLDEN-HAIRED GODDESS O F OPPORTUNITY.
KEYNOTE: Society's efforts at dramatizing the greatness of

what it offers to the ambitious

person.

Civilization as a process demands the goading of individuals to
spend their vital energies in the pursuit of achievements which,
while fulfilling the individual's ambition and greed, neverthe­
less generate various forms of what we call "progress." This
sequence of symbols mainly refers to the drive for advancement
along "human, all too human" paths of growth.
This is the last symbol of thefiftiethfive-foldsequence. We see in it
how sociocultural forces operate by dramatization and propaganda.
The result is all too often a process of FORCED GROWTH.

216 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

T H I R D LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL-MENTAL
P H A S E 251 (SAGITTARIUS 11*): I N T H E LEFT SECTION O F AN
ARCHAIC TEMPLE, A LAMP BURNS IN A CONTAINER
SHAPED LIKE A HUMAN BODY.

The value of the "return to the body" advocated
by modern thinkers in order to balance the stress on
intellectuality and objective consciousness.

KEYNOTE:

This sequence of five symbols confronts us with rather mysteri­
ous images, which nevertheless can be given very profound and
important meanings for today. The original formulation of this
symbol spoke of "physical enlightenment," but what seems to
be implied, in contemporary terms, is the need to rely upon
"the wisdom of the body" of which so much is made in sen­
sitivity training and Gestalt psychotherapy. This refers to the
process of deconditioning a consciousness that has become a
prisoner of intellectual concepts with their total reliance on
quantitative values, objectivity and conformity to the official
patterns of our culture.
This represents the first stage of a challenging process—the fifty-first
sequence of five symbols. It stresses the importance, for many in­

dividuals, of RELYING UPON ORGANISMIC RESPONSES in meeting life's

challenges.

P H A S E 2 5 2 (SAGITTARIUS 12*): A FLAG TURNS INTO AN
EAGLE; T H E EAGLE INTO A CHANTICLEER SALUTING
T H E DAWN.

The spiritualization and promotion of great
symbols of a New Age by minds sensitive to its preeursory manifestations.
*

KEYNOTE:

In the background of this strange allegory we can recognize the
deep-seated belief that the American nation and its basic demo­
cratic institutions were constituted to be the cradle for a new
step in human evolution. The "flag" is the abstract symbol of the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SASIAN SYMBOLS 217
nation; it becomes an "eagle"—another U.S. symbol—when the
concept is made alive by bold and transcendent action. The
eagle symbolizes spiritual will and the power to rise to the
highest possible altitude of consciousness and purpose. Flying at
such an altitude, the eagle is the first living creature to perceive
the rising sun. Having perceived it, it heralds it—and by so
doing is identified with the crowing chanticleer, who had con­
vinced himself that his resonant cry was responsible for the rise
of the sun and the coming of a new day.
This second stage symbol contrasts with the first in that it is completely
future-oriented. It speaks of "peak experiences" instead of the wisdom
found in the organismic depth of the body-consciousness. It urges us
to bring our noblest ideals to actual life through the power of the
spiritual will. A Keyword might be ANNUNCIATION.

PHASE 2 5 3 (SAGITTARIUS 13*): A WIDOW'S PAST I S
BROUGHT T O LIGHT.

The karma of past actions as it affects opportunities presented by a new cycle.

KEYNOTE:

What the "widow's past" is remains obscure but the point is that
even as a past cycle is closed—a phase of married life ends—the
karma of whatever deeds or misdeeds this cycle witnessed will
almost inevitably intrude into the new life period. Also, once a
cycle of activity is concluded, much that was unclear or uncon­
sciously motivated in the events it witnessed can now more
easily come to the clear consciousness of the mind. It is possible
to joyously herald the dawn from high above the actual stresses
of existence (the preceding symbol), but the new day may be
found loaded and darkened by the unfinished business of many
a yesterday.
This is the third stage of thefifty-firstfive-foldsequence. Mankind is
"the widow," because our soon-to-be-concluded Piscean Age has
buried most of the ideals it once revered and proclaimed. Yet the New
Age will have to deal with many oppressive ghosts. This is a symbol

Of RETRIBUTION.

218 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
P H A S E 2 5 4 (SAGITTARIUS 14°); T H E G R E A T PYRAMID AND
T H E SPHINX.

The enduring power of occult knowledge and of
its quasi-divine Custodians, "Seed-men" of a previous
cycle of existence.

KEYNOTE:

The belief in an Original Tradition based on the perfect knowl­
edge of the archetypal principles and forms which underlie all
manifestations of life on this Earth (and by extension in the
cosmos) is deeply rooted in man's consciousness. The Great
Pyramid and the Sphinx are witnesses to such a Tradition, espe­
cially for the Western world. The symbol implies that such an
archetypal knowledge remains the foundation upon which
men's minds can still build solid and valid formulations, as new
evolutionary developments are pending.
Thisfourthstage symbol suggests that this occult knowledge and the
traditional process of acquiring it is still available, and that by accept­
ing their principles modern man can best meet the challenge of our
present world crisis. The symbol, interpreted from a personal point of
view, points to the greatness of a Soul's past achievements and the
value of trying to reevoke this past What is revealed is THE POWER

OF SPIRITUAL ANCESTRY.

P H A S E 2 5 5 (SAGITTARIUS 15*): T H E GROUND HOG LOOKING
F O R ITS SHADOW O N GROUND-HOG D A Y , FEBRUARY 2.

The value of anticipating new turns of events
and ascertaining future prospects.

KEYNOTE:

In our modern industrial society where policy changes and deci­
sions often take several years to reach full actualization, it has
become essential to plan with an eye on probable future devel­
opments. Such planning requires a study of past trends and the
extrapolation of the results. What above all is implied in the
symbol is a sensitivity to social or planetary rhythms, and the
need to ensure at least relative safety by planning ahead.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 219
This is the last symbol in thisfifty-firstsequence. Something of the
meanings of the first four is involved in the process it suggests. In its
highest form the knowledge required is "eonic consciousness"—in
modern terms the new science of PROSPECTIVE.

TRANSFERENCE
(Sagittarius iff to Sagittarius 30*)

SCENE EIGHTEEN:

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
PHASE 256 (SAGrTTARTUS l6 ): SEA GULLS FLY AROUND A
SHIP IN EXPECTATION OF FOOD.
KEYNOTE: The easily acquired dependence of psychic
desires upon the stimulation of social circumstances.
#

Animals drawn into the circle of what human society produces
find it easier to depend on man's handouts than to pursue their
usually difficult search for sustenance. The sea gulls here sym­
bolize the more wild and normally untamable energies of the
human soul, but they too can develop a kind of domesticated
dependence upon the by-products of man's adventures within
the realm of the unconscious (the sea). Natural instincts feed on
the reactions, and often perversions, of the socially conditioned
mind-ego.
This is the first stage in the process represented by the fifty-second
sequence offivesymbols. It shows us how nature can readily become
subservient to man's restless ambition to dominate the entire bio­
sphere through an all-human planetary socioeconomic organization.
This is a symbol of DEPENDENCE.

220 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
P H A S E 257 (SAGnTARIUS 17*): A N EASTER SUNRISE SERVICE DRAWS A LARGE CROWD.
KEYNOTE: The culturally stimulated longing for group
participation in a process of rebirth.
Since the very early days of man's evolution, religions and
cults of various types have used the most significant periods in
the year's cycle to dramatize the deepest longings of human
nature, thus giving them direction, meaning, and through
group action, a greater dynamic intensity. Easter is the Chris­
tian way of celebrating the coming of spring and the rebirth of
life on this earth after the hardships of winter.
At this second stage of thefive-foldsequence we see, in contrast to the
first, man discovering in nature's cycles great movements that stimu­
late his spiritual quest for the psychic and mental equivalent of solar
light and warmth. The obvious Keyword here is REBIRTH.

P H A S E 258 (SAGITTARIUS l8 ): CHILDREN PLAYING ON THE
#

BEACH, THEIR HEADS PROTECTED BY SUNBONNETS.
KEYNOTE: The protection society affords to as yet immature
individuals as they begin to deal with the powerful
energies of their unconscious nature.

What we call "culture" is an attempt to limit and define the
areas of consciousness and interpersonal or group behavior
within which growth and exploration into superphysical realms
can be considered safe and sound. Sun and sea are powerful
forces; they can kill as well as iUumine and inspire, as can various
kinds of forces within man's unconscious. The cultural and reli­
gious institutions of society aim to act as protective agencies,
especially for the youth. Overprotection* and hypocritical
behavior by supposed grownups defeat this purpose, and today
we are witnessing an at least partially healthy rebellion against
the protective paternalism of social institutions. This, however,
does lead to many a symbolic "sunstroke."

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 221
This is the third symbol in thefifty-secondfive-foldsequence. It brings
to us a realization of the value of PROTECTTVENESS, yet also evokes the
negative possibility that too much protection may be unhealthy and
defeat its purpose.

PHASE 259 (SAGITTARIUS 19*): PELICANS MENACED BY THE
BEHAVIOR AND REFUSE OF MEN SEEK SAFER AREAS
FOR BRINGING UP THEIR YOUNG.
KEYNOTE: The need for people concerned with the future
to discover a new way of living and more wholesome
surroundings.
The evident reason for using "pelicans" at this stage of the
cyclic process is that tradition tells us that these birds are so
concerned with their young that they give their own blood
and flesh to feed their progeny. Whether this is fact or sym­
bol, the meaning of this picture refers to a situation that
lately has acquired great urgency. Our technological society
is polluting not only our global environment, but the mind
and feeling-responses of new generations as well. The search
for a new way of life is seen by many people to be impera­
tive.
In thisfourthsymbol of thefifty-secondsequence we are told that the
race's SURVIVAL has become a matter of extreme importance. Whole
animal species may be destroyed by our civilization; mankind itself is
in danger. Going to distant planets is hardly the answer. A generation
may have to sacrifice itself for the sake of its descendants.

s

222 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 260 (SAGITTARIUS 20*): I N AN OLD-FASHIONED
NORTHERN VILLAGE MEN CUT T H E ICE O F A FROZEN
P O N D F O R USE DURING T H E SUMMER,

The foresighted use of natural resources to supply future human needs.

KEYNOTE:

At the close of this series of symbols we again see a reference
to the relationship between man and nature. Man's ingenuity
and foresight make it possible for him to plan for the future in
terms of his knowledge of the seasonal rhythm of cold and heat
and, by implication, of even larger cycles of change. Quiet and
relaxation may have to be sacrificed, and some hardships en­
dured, in order that another type of problem, which may in­
volve survival through proper feeding, may be met at some
later time.
This is the fifth and last phase in thefifty-secondsection of the cycle.
It stresses the value of actively planning for future need, and of fore­
sight based on the knowledge of cyclic processes. Keywords: ASSURING

SUPPLY.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L ^ U L T U R A L
P H A S E 261 (SAGITTARIUS 21*): A CHILD AND A DOG WEARING BORROWED EYEGLASSES.

The use of imagination and make-believe in anticipating higher stages of development.

KEYNOTE:

This rather peculiar symbol seems to imply here that by imitat­
ing features belonging to a level of consciousness as yet unreach­
able, the process of growth may be accelerated. Eyeglasses
symbolize intellectual development; the chiefs of primitive
tribes in some instances have sought to impress their people by
wearing spectacles without glass, or Western hats—simply be­
cause these objects seemed characteristic of a race of superior
people. This is similar to the process of growth by identification
with a "Master" or guru. In a sense it is mere pretending or

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 223
make-believe, yet by wearing the "mask" of a god the medicine
man at the time becomes for all practical purposes the incarna­
tion of the god. Growth is always a hierarchical process, even if
the growing entity is not aware of it.
This is the first offivesymbols constituting the fifty-third sequence. It

suggests the value of LEARNING THROUGH IMITATION.

P H A S E 2 6 2 (SAGITTARIUS 22*): A C H I N E S E LAUNDRY.
KEYNOTE: Making use of one's special racial-cultural back-

ground in order to survive and prosper in an alien
environment

There are many life situations in which because of his ancestral
or personal background, or his special interests, an individual
finds himself separated from the people in the midst of whom
he has to live. Yet he often can use this background as a valuable
foundation for smooth operation and for acceptance by the
alien environment, without losing his own natural character.
This second stage symbol stands in contrast to the one for the first
stage. There is no longer a question of imitating the ways of a superior
group, but instead of maintaining one's own integrity in situations
which neither give value for, nor favor what one basically is. What is
asked here is SELF-CONTAINMENT . . . and good humor!

P H A S E 2 6 3 (SAGITTARIUS 23*): A GROUP O F IMMIGRANTS
AS THEY FULFILL T H E REQUIREMENTS O F ENTRANCE
INTO T H E N E W COUNTRY.

Consciously accepting the ways of a new stage
of experience, in readiness for the opportunities it will
present

KEYNOTE:

As we pass any threshold leading to a new realm of existence we
have to meet certain requirements and the necessity to adjust
to new ways of life—in action, thought and feeling. At times this

224 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
may seem an ordeal, but it is inevitable. Everything that will
follow depends largely on how we cross this threshold, and on
the spirit in which we meet unfamiliar and perhaps shocking
experiences.
At this third stage of thefifty-thirdfive-foldsequence we face a combi­
nation of the two preceding symbols. Wefindourselves in a period of
TRANSITION. We have to imitate, yet retain our inner integrity.

P H A S E 264 (SAGITTARIUS 24 0 ): A BLUEBIRD PERCHED ON
T H E GATE O F A COTTAGE.

The reward which meets every effort at integration into a social environment for those who remain
true to their own selves.

KEYNOTE:

The bluebird is a well-known symbol of happiness, but also it
refers to what one might call a spiritually oriented mind—to
which the color blue relates, especially when a "bird" is men­
tioned. A cottage is normally part of a community, and the
implication is that its inhabitants are well-adapted, either to the
life of the community, or to their more or less isolated together­
ness.
This is a fourth stage symbol, and it suggests that the essential tech­
nique for successful living is the development of a consciousness in
which peace and happiness dwell. There is also a hint that GOOD
FORTUNE is going to bless your life.

P H A S E 2 6 5 (SAGITTARIUS 25*): A CHUBBY BOY ON A HOBBY-HORSE.

The anticipatory enjoyment of powers one can
only as yet dream of utilizing.

KEYNOTE:

The horse has always been a symbol of power and, in many
instances, of sexual energy. Until very recently the horse gave
man a greater possibility of conquering more space and what

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 225
that space contained. Mounted on his hobby-horse and ex­
periencing the to-and-fro rhythm of its motion, the well-fed boy
unconsciously, and perhaps nowadays half-consciously, may an­
ticipate the rhythm of the sexual act. In a sense it is also a kind
of make-believe and growth through the imagination, but here
—in contrast to what was shown in the symbol for Phase 261—
the imagination is active at the organic body level. There is
something of an initiation in the play.
This is the last symbol of the fifty-third sequence offive.It ends in a
mood of play, but it is a playfilledwith cultural and emotional expecta­
tion, unconscious though this expectation may be. We see here the
FORESHADOWING of the mature experience of manhood.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
PHASE 2 6 6 (SAGITTARIUS 26*): A FLAG BEARER IN A BATTLE.

The nobly accepted subservience of the individual to collective values and goals.

KEYNOTE:

A flag symbolizes an organized collectivity of human beings, a
nation or even a social class. In the old-fashioned type of battle,
whoever carries the flag has to feel himself the representative
of the integrity and unity of his group. His personal life and his
welfare should therefore be totally submerged in and identified
with the welfare of the "greater Whole" of which he carries the
standard. In certain circumstances, every person can act as a
conscious and responsible agent for mankind. In substance, the
symbol asks: Are you ready to assume this role?
Thisfirststage of thefifty-fourthfive-foldsequence presents a picture
of what social consciousness can mean in its highest implications. The
flag bearer is unarmed, defenseless; yet he can be the rallying point
for the total effort of a large collectivity. This is a symbol of CONSECRA-

TION TO AN IDEAL.

226 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 2 6 7 (SAGITTARIUS 2J*)t A SCULPTOR A T HIS WORK.
KEYNOTE: The ability to project one's vision upon and to

give form to materials.

At this stage we see the individual creatively expressing his own
particular individuality. He takes the materials available in his
social-geographical environment and shapes them so they re­
veal to other people something of his inner life and purpose.
This second phase in thefifty-fourthsequence is, as usual, in contrast
to thefirst.The "flag bearer" symbolizes the selfless representative of
a collective tradition or of national unity; the "sculptor,** on the con­
trary, represents man as a creative individual intent on making his
mark upon society. This is a symbol of man's capacity to transform raw
materials according to his personal vision—thus a symbol of SELF-

PROJECTION INTO A WORK.

P H A S E 2 6 8 (SAGITTARIUS 28*): A N O L D BRIDGE OVER A
BEAUTIFUL STREAM IS STILL I N CONSTANT USE.

The enduring elements in a society which reveal
its ability to significantly link the genius of its individuals to the everyday needs of the collectivity.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol brings together, as it were, the essential values
implied in the two preceding ones. The mastery over material
factors of a few imaginative and trained individuals enables
their community to remain well-integrated and able to function
easily in the best possible environment. The work of these sculp­
tor-engineers allows their people to develop a relatively perma­
nent culture. A tradition is built which enables men to link their
outer nature with the highest vision their leaders can conceive
and objectively demonstrate.
«
This third symbol of thefifty-fourthsequence also suggests the way in
which the works of man can blend harmoniously with natural environ­
ment in producing beautiful and enduring shapes of profound mean­
ing. Reacting against the ugliness of our commercial and chaotic cities
and highways, today we tend to long for "wilderness.** But the combi-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 287
nation of natural beauty and human skill and imagination is the true
ideal to strive for. As Keywords we might use the tide of an excellent
book by the architect Claude Bragdon: THE BEAUTIFUL NECESSITY.

P H A S E 2 6 9 (SAGITTARIUS 2Q*): A FAT BOY MOWING T H E
LAWN O F HIS HOUSE O N AN ELEGANT SUBURBAN
STREET.

The need to attend to everyday tasks which both
ensure social worth or respectability, and benefit one's
constitution.

KEYNOTE:

This rather trivial picture becomes quite significant if related to
the preceding three symbols. It brings down to a very concrete
and commonplace level what the "flag bearer** and the "sculp­
tor" symbols have presented. A well-attended front lawn is a
symbol of the homeowner's concern for his social position, and
of his desire to give beautiful form to the growth of natural
forces, thus revealing his appreciation of order and esthetic
values. The "fat boy" suggests that constructive working habits
are needed to compensate for self-indulgence in the amenities
of social living.
Thisfourthstage symbol speaks of one of the commonplace technical
imperatives which face an individual belonging to a social elite. It
reveals another phase in the cycle relationship between the individual
and the community, and the need to maintain SOCIAL RESPECTABIL-

ITY.

P H A S E 270 (SAGITTARIUS 30 # ): T H E P O P E , BLESSING T H E
FAITHFUL.
KEYNOTE: The need to pay homage to traditional values

upon which the Invisible Community of the spirit is
built.

The concrete integration of myriads of human individuals
within a great religious institution with a long tradition reflects,

228 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
as well as having produced century after century, an invisible
spiritual Community. The "flag bearer" has now become the
"Pope," who assumes the role of God's representative on earth.
It is a role, but culture is based on embodying great Images and
deeply moving symbols in physical reality. The symbol asks of
the individual: "Are you willing to live a transpersonal life as a
symbol?" This is the final and supreme statement of that section
of the cycle of the year represented by Sagittarius.
This concludes Scene Eighteen. A collectivity of human beings is seen
having "transferred" their sense of spiritual value to a man who has
become an incarnation of their common ideal. Keywords: PERSONALIZED WORSHIP. It can be a blessing or in some cases, a curse.

i

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABJAN SYMBOLS 329

ACT IV: CAPITALIZATION
CRYSTALLIZATION
(Capricorn i* to Capricorn ig)

SCENE NINETEEN:

FIRST LEVEL: ACTIONAL
P H A S E 271 (CAPRICORN 1*): A N INDIAN CHIEF CLAIMS
POWER FROM T H E ASSEMBLED TRIBE.

The power and responsibility implied in any
claim for leadership.

KEYNOTE:

The religious ideal implied in the preceding symbol has now
materialized or crystallized into sheer power—the power to
lead the community and to ensure its welfare or even its physi­
cal survival. The energies released through group cooperation
(Libra), deepened and emotionally experienced as forces of
great potency (Scorpio), and given meaning and conscious pur­
pose (Sagittarius) are now stabilized and hierarchized. The
power of the group is turned into a measurable and carefully
managed "capital." The words "chief and "capital" come from
the same Latin word, caput, meaning "head." A time comes in
many lives when the individual finds himself placed in a situa­
tion that allows him to assume power over his comrades, how­
ever limited this power may be. Is he ready to do this effectively
and responsibly? This is the supreme test of man in society. It
complements its polar opposite (summer solstice degree), which
refers to the acceptance by the individual of a new kind of
allegiance as a foundation for the integration of his mature

230 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
personality. Such a foundation may, but need not, refer to estab­
lishing a home.
This represents the first stage in a five-fold process—the fifty-fifth
sequence of five symbols. It refers to the capacity latent in every
individual to claim and assume AUTHORITY in a vital group-situation.

P H A S E 2 7 2 (CAPRICORN 2 # ): T H R E E ROSE WINDOWS IN A
GOTHIC CHURCH, O N E DAMAGED BY WAR.
KEYNOTE: The necessary realization by any individual

making a violent use of collective power that it will
lead to the inevitable destruction of some of the values
ensuring group-integration*

It seems obvious that the interpretation of this symbol should
refer to the disruptive consequences of war. The "chief* who
claimed power from his tribe in order to lead or save it must
reckon with the consequences of a too-impulsive use of this
power in terms of violence. The integration he seeks to main­
tain or enhance may be partially destroyed if in his ambition he
yearns to be the victorious war leader glorified by his people. A
"rose window'* is not absolutely essential to a cathedral, yet it
symbolizes that through which the "light of the Spirit** enters
into the edifice. Man's soul is said to be three-fold. Which part
of man*s inner trinity of principles tends to be destroyed by the
use of violence? Evidently the principle of love and compassion.
This second stage symbol is in contrast to the preceding one because
it opposes the power to destroy to the power to build. The "capital"
of group-energies is partially squandered in armaments and death.
WASTE is the opposite of group-integration.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 231

P H A S E 2 7 3 (CAPRICORN 3 # ): A HUMAN SOUL, IN ITS EAGERNESS F O R N E W EXPERIENCES, SEEKS EMBODIMENT.

A powerful yearning for whatever will increase
the scope and depth of one's contacts with other living
beings.

KEYNOTE:

One wonders what the clairvoyant "saw" and said to the re­
corder of this symbol. How did she visualize a "human soul" or,
as Marc Edmund Jones recorded it, its being "receptive to
growth and understanding"? What is implied in the position of
this symbol seems to be the strong drive in every human con­
sciousness or will toward new experiences, whether they are
constructive or destructive. Man may grow and gain under­
standing and wisdom through both types. Yet the yearning
needs to be tempered by an instinctive evaluation of the end
results of the experience.
This is the third phase of thefifty-fifthfive-foldprocess. It shows us
what is behind all uses of power, anabolic or catabolic: a strong DESIRE

TO PROVE ONESELF.

P H A S E 2 7 4 (CAPRICORN 4*): A GROUP O F PEOPLE OUTFITTING A LARGE CANOE AT T H E START O F A JOURNEY BY
WATER.
KEYNOTE: The ability to use natural resources and basic

skills in order to achieve a group-purpose.

As this scene was recorded in the original version only in impre­
cise terms, it seems merely to indicate the start of a journey
undertaken by a cohesive group of people, who perhaps to­
gether have built this large canoe. Thus we see here a common
enterprise which may be an answer to the need for a change of
locality. A social group more strongly than ever reveals its
homogeneity and common will when it decides to move away
from its familiar habitat. The zodiacal sign Capricorn brings this
common will to a focus in concrete actions. It does so in terms

232 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
of socio-political expediency and under a definite type of execu­
tive direction, even though the decisions are arrived at by com­
mon consent
As this is the fourth symbol in thefifty-fifthfive-foldsequence, we find
in it a hint of how to do something concrete. The "canoe" may also
have a special technical meaning, as it uses water in order to move.
A common feeling-response to a specific situation may be implied. The
main emphasis is nevertheless on GROUP-ACTIVITY in circumstances
implying a need for change.

P H A S E 2 7 5 (CAPRICORN 5*): INDIANS O N T H E WARPATH.
W H I L E SOME MEN R O W A WELL-FILLED CANOE, OTHERS I N I T PERFORM A WAR DANCE.

The mobilization of physical and emotional energies in a spirit of conquest

KEYNOTE:

War is often undertaken mainly to mobilize the common will
and avoid individualistic disintegration. The "Indian chief in
the symbol for Capricorn i* may find it convenient or necessary
to arouse the war spirit—perhaps under a very slight provoca­
tion—in order to more firmly establish his authority. The scene
presents an extremely dynamic situation. .The group (or the
nation) affirms its solidarity and unity of purpose by taking the
offensive. The group-life demands constant activity and chal­
lenges in order to remain healthy.
This is the last symbol of the fifty-fifth sequence. It suggests that AGGRESSIVENESS may be a necessary ingredient in the activation of the
potential of growth inherent in any social group.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 233

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
PHASE 276 (CAPRICORN 6°): T E N LOGS LIE UNDER AN
ARCHWAY LEADING T O DARKER WOODS.

The need to complete any undertaking before
seeking entrance to whatever is to be found beyond*

KEYNOTE:

Number 10 is a symbol of completion; it symbolizes even more
the revelation of a new series of activities just ahead. Yet unless
the concluded series is brought to some degree of fulfillment,
nothing truly significant is likely to be accomplished by a restless
reaching out toward the as-yet-unknown. Number 10 is a symbol
of germination, but the seed (Number 9) must have matured
well. No natural process can be accelerated safely beyond cer­
tain limits.
This represents the first stage in thefifty-sixthfive-foldsequence. It
establishes a foundation for what will follow. Here man reaches a
THRESHOLD in which he may have to pause in order to safeguard his
further advance.

PHASE 277 (CAPRICORN 7*): A VEILED P R O P H E T SPEAKS,
SEIZED BY T H E POWER O F A GOD.

The ability to act as a mouthpiece for the revelation of a transcendent will and truth determining future action*

KEYNOTE:

Here we witness the deepest manifestation of that Power which
operates within all relatively permanent social units, especially
at the level of tribal organization. A tribe is a bio-psychic whole
(or organism) integrated by a collective superphysical Power,
the god of the tribe. In the Hebrew tradition this god is YHWH
(Yahweh-Jehovah); in earlier tribes it may have been a deified
more or less mythical "Great Ancestor." All these tribal gods are
local manifestations of the very power of "Life" within the
earth's biosphere. It is this deified Power which psychically
"seized" especially sensitive or religiously trained men or

234 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
women, who became Its mouthpiece—prophets, seers, oracles.
That Power operates in our days as well, but in different ways
because of the individualization and intellectualization of mod­
ern man's consciousness. It binds together and helps to maintain
the integration of organized social collectivities. It guides their
development by releasing and focusing through especially open
persons the visionary expectation of developments about to oc­
cur.
At this second stage of thefifty-sixthsubcycle the future interacts with
the present to release it from the inertial power of the past. Thus this
symbol stands in contrast to the preceding one. At the threshold of
tomorrow man is allowed to have a vision or revelation of the essential
elements of the as-yet-unknown next step in evolution. The key word

iS MEDIATORS HIP.
P H A S E 278 (CAPRICORN 8*): I N A SUN-LIT HOME DOMESTICATED BIRDS SING JOYOUSLY.

The wholesome happiness which subservience to
the ideals and patterns of a well-established culture
brings to those who accept them unreservedly*

KEYNOTE:

I n various ways this section of the cyclic process brings to us
images glorifying the power and benefits which a steady and
well-integrated society brings to its members. Saturn rules Ca­
pricorn; Saturn was the ruler of the Golden Age before he be­
came a symbol of binding limitations. He who accepts willingly
or—even better—takes for granted the value of these limita­
tions can lead a serene and happy existence, whatever his social
status.
The third stage of thisfive-foldsequence suggests to us how we can
enjoy our life condition by allowing the spiritual values it embodies to
fill our consciousness. In every condition provided by a healthy culture
—-which hardly refers to our present chaotic world!-human beings
can find ENJOYMENT in the roles they are born to play.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 235
PHASE 279 (CAPRICORN Q*): AN ANGEL CARRYING A HARP.
KEYNOTE: The revelation of the spiritual meaning and purpose at the core of any life situation.
This picture simply'says that "heaven is within us." All we have
to do is to be open and listen to the total harmony of life, a
harmony in which we play a part that is necessary to the com­
pleteness and meaning of the whole. In order to do this we have
to surrender our separative ego-consciousness and flow with the
universal current which, to the religiously minded person, is the
Will of God.
This is the fourth symbol of the series. The technique it implies is that
of ATTUNEMENT to the rhythm of universal life. Angels are to be
considered personalizations of various aspects of this life, and totally
subservient to its rhythms and purposes.

PHASE 2 8 0 (CAPRICORN 10*): AN ALBATROSS FEEDING
FROM THE HAND OF A SAILOR.
KEYNOTE: The overcoming of fear and its rewards.
The man who radiates perfect harmlessness can call the wildest
creatures to him and can establish with them a partnership
based on mutual respect and understanding. Every living entity
plays a role in the world's ritual of existence; beyond these
specific roles, which too often separate one entity from another,
the communion of love and compassion can bring together the
most disparate lives.
At this last stage of thefifty-sixthsequence we are presented with a
picture extending the ideal of peace and happiness through culture so
it now includes all living organisms on this planet. The power of such
a culture of harmlessness and compassion generates TRUST every­
where.

836 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 28l (CAPRICORN 11°): A LARGE GROUP O F PHEASANT
O N A PRIVATE ESTATE.

The refinement and propagation of aristocratic
values by means of which man participates in the evolution of life toward ever more perfect forms of existence.

KEYNOTE:

All life implies a hierarchy of values, from the crude to the
subtle, from the rough and the ugly to the beautiful. By the use
of biological techniques, man is able to develop new species, or
at least to greatly improve those found in the wild. This ability
is at the root of all cultural processes. Wilderness is turned into
the gardens of an aristocracy having the leisure, taste and
money to produce or encourage the creation of beautiful forms.
This is what the social process produces in its highest aspect.
The first symbol of thefifty-seventhfive-foldsequence shows us how
man can cooperate with nature in creating beauty and elegance by
capitalizing on skill and opportunity. The Keyword is ARISTOCRACY.

P H A S E 282 (CAPRICORN 12°): A N ILLUSTRATED LECTURE
O N NATURAL SCIENCE REVEALS U T T L E - K N O W N ASPECTS O F LIFE.

The ability to explore unfamiliar realms and
discover the laws underlying the complex processes of
nature.

KEYNOTE:

The aristocratic garden of the preceding phase has become the
laboratory and lecture hall of a modern college. The emphasis
here is on the acquisition of extensive knowledge, the satisfac­
tion of intellectual curiosity. Nevertheless, there is also an aris­
tocracy of science: this is the modern type. Its use of acquired
knowledge can pose as many problems as the use of hereditary
aristocratic wealth. But it is man's essential function to become
fully conscious of all life forms and processes on this earth.
Mankind is thè conscious mind of the planet

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 337
At this second stage the intellectual searchforempirical knowledge
contrasts with the display attendant to the wealth and culture of an
elite. Civilization isfoundedon an ever-extended capitalization on
knowledge and use of technology. It features EXPLORATION preemi­
nently at all levels.
<

PHASE 2 8 3

(CAPRICORN 13*):

A FIRE WORSHIPER M E D I -

TATES ON T H E ULTIMATE REALITIES OF EXISTENCE.

The subjective quest for ultimates beyond the
interplay of life and death processes.

KEYNOTE:

Beyond cultural enjoyment and the passionforaccumulation of
often-unusable data of sense knowledge stands the willful and
determined "adventure in consciousness" of the occultist, the
yogi, the mystic. The mystery of fire has always captured man's
imagination because it is the mystery of all transformations
wrapped in the enigma of death. In times when collective,
perhaps total, death could be in store for mankind, the process
of subjective meditation is fascinating an ever-greater number
of people.
This is the third symbol in thefifty-seventhsequence. It brings us to
a stage beyond life itself. Are we ready to take this step which the
masters of yoga claim to have taken: to experience death and return
to the same body? Are we ready to demonstrate man's WILL TO TRAN-

SCENDENCE?

PHASE 2 8 4

(CAPRICORN 14*):

A N ANCIENT BAS-RELIEF

CARVED I N GRANITE REMAINS A WITNESS TO A LONGFORGOTTEN CULTURE.

The will to unearth, in our culture as well as in
any culture, what has permanent value, and to let go
of nonessentials.

KEYNOTE:

A t a time w h e n i n nearly every land m e n are questioning a n d
c h a l l e n g i n g t h e v a l i d i t y o f t r a d i t i o n a l beliefs a n d c u s t o m a r y
a t t i t u d e s , i t b e c o m e s necessary t o separate p e r m a n e n t values

238 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
and great principles or symbols from the many individual habits
and the socio-political developments which more often than not
have perverted or even negated the original ideals of the cul­
ture. We must strive to free these ideals from the wild growth
of personal and class selfishness, from the greed and ambition
so prevalent in human nature, and learn to appreciate the excel­
lence of what is the immortal seed-foundation, as well as the
spiritual harvest, of any culture—and by extension of every
sustained and complete work produced by a man's indomitable
effort to achieve creative perfection.
In this fourth stage symbol we are shown the procedure which enables
us to gain a deep and thorough appreciation of sociocultural processes
in their most enduring forms. What is needed is a penetrating and
courageous insight founded upon a valid HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE.
This applies to the past of an individual's life as well as to the history
of a nation or a group.

PHASE 2 8 5 (CAPRICORN 15*): IN A HOSPITAL, THE CHILDREN'S WARD IS FILLED WITH TOYS.
KEYNOTEt The responsibility of society to ensure the welfare and total health of the new generation.
The sociocultural process must look to the future as well as to
the past. It has created conditions which may harm the children
who will carry forward its work, and it must try to repair these
negative conditions through love as well as through physical
care. In personal life, the individual should take great care of his
fresh intuitions and his dreams of future growth. They are often
fragile developments which the pressures of everyday life can
easily distort or destroy.
This is the last stage of Scene Nineteen, which began with a powerful
claim for socio-political power. The exercise of such a power can in­
deed produce social conditions which endanger the healthy and
spiritual unfoldment of a community, and especially of its children.
There is therefore constant need for TENDER CARE as well as skill to
neutralize the destructive tensions of social living.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 839
GROUP-PERFORMANCE
(Capricorn iff to Capricorn 30V

SCENE TWENTY:

FIRST LEVEL: A C T I O N A L
P H A S E 286 (CAPRICORN l6*)t SCHOOL GROUNDS FILLED
W I T H BOYS A N D GIRLS IN GYMNASIUM SUITS.

The need for physical activity and play, especially in adolescence.

KEYNOTE:

Society has learned that a balanced combination of intellectual
study and physical activity is necessary for the harmonious de­
velopment of the human personality. Adults often forget this
under the pressure of money-making and other duties, and this
symbol reminds us of it.
This is thefirststage of thefifty-eighthfive-foldsequence which begins
Scene Twenty of the cyclic ritual. It shows how we normally depend
upon physical stimulation and EXERCISE for the maintenance of our
health, and therefore of an equally healthy society.

P H A S E 287 (CAPRICORN 17*): A REPRESSED WOMAN FINDS
A PSYCHOLOGICAL RELEASE I N NUDISM.

The escape from bondage to social inhibitions
and a reliance upon the wisdom of the body.

KEYNOTE:

Under the pressure of religions that have created a sharp and
unwholesome division between soul and body, society has pro­
duced strict codes of values regarding the play of natural in­
stincts, and has glorified them under the name of "decency" and
"modesty." The growing trend toward nudism—which of
course has nothing to do with the "pornographic" display of
one's body—is a welcome protest against the depressing and
neurosis-generating puritanism of the past. Men and women are
demanding a psychologically as well as physically healthful free-

240 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
dom of the body as a means of overcoming the hypocrisy and
constrictions of social behavior.
In this second stage symbol we see how our society has been able to
repress and distort the natural activity of the human body and its
sensitivity to the elements. Thus a contrast is established between
healthy youth at play and the neurotic subservience to a socio-religious tradition. The symbol is a callforRELEASE FROM INHIBITIONS.

P H A S E 2 8 8 (CAPRICORN L8 9 ): T H E U N I O N JACK FLAG FLIES
FROM A BRITISH WARSHIP.

The protection afforded to individuals and
groups by powerful institutions in charge of maintain'
ing order.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol reflects conditions prevailing in the past when
Great Britain's fleet was policing the seas under the interna­
tional principle of the freedom of the seas. Times have changed,
but the concept remains valid. Power is required to maintain
social order and relatively peaceful interpersonal as well as in­
ternational relationships. Alas, this power can easily be misused
under the pretext of preserving "law and order." Justice and
compassion must balance social power, and especially the
power of privileged groups. Where this symbol appears, the
needforprotection may be in evidence—or it may be a warning
against using power for selfish advantage.
This is the third symbol in thefifty-eighthfive-foldsequence. It brings
to us a realization of the ambivalence of POLITICAL POWER, its value
and its dangers.

P H A S E 2 8 9 (CAPRICORN 19*): A FIVE-YEAR-OLD CHILD CARRYING A BAG FILLED W I T H GROCERIES.

Rising to the occasion when asked to assume
social responsibilities ahead of one's normal development.

KEYNOTE:

What seems to be implied at this stage of the cyclic process is
the value of early conditioning in teaching one how to fulfill the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 241
responsibilities of everyday life in our modern society. This
twentieth scene of the complete process has been entitled
"Group performance," and today it is evident that children at
an early age are expected to assume a family role which at times
will strain their natural capacities. This is part of the accelerat­
ing pace of our technological society.
This fourth stage symbol evokes the possibility of meeting a certain
type of social opportunity which normally may seem premature. A
pattern of ACCELERATED GROWTH can thus be established, with both
positive and negative aspects. Rushing ahead of one's natural develop­
ment may be damaging; yet we are living in a particularly dynamic
period of man's evolution.

PHASE 290 (CAPRICORN 20*): A HIDDEN CHOIR IS SINGING
DURING A RELIGIOUS SERVICE.
KEYNOTE: The fulfillment of the individual's creative

function through his participation in a group performance consecrated to a transcendent realization of
unity.

In great cathedrals and other religious edifices the choir is nor­
mally hidden behind the altar or above the nave. It symbolizes
thus more perfectly the supernal harmony of "heaven"—or the
music of the spheres. The ideal of social participation is exalted
to its highest manifestation, for the choir also represents the
multifaceted and polyphonic unity of the communiry in its tran­
scendent state of perfect harmony. Within this harmony the
individual who has overcome his egocentric separativeness and
developed his higher consciousness finds fulfillment in superpersonal togetherness.
This is thefifthand last symbol of thisfifty-eighthsequence. It presents
us with the purest form of group-harmony, the most basic yet most
difficult fulfillment of the social state. At the level of the individual
person this "hidden choir" would refer to the polyphonic integration
of all faculties in their most spiritual manifestations: the ideal of PLENI-

TUDE of being.

242 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
P H A S E 291 (CAPRICORN 21°): A RELAY RACE.
KEYNOTE: The value of competition in developing

consciousness.

group-

Here we are no longer dealing with competition between in*
dividuals, but with competition between groups of individuals
who take turns sucessively in order to maximize the group effort
and the possibility of outstanding results. The whole of dvilization is a vast kind of relay race in which groups of people and
generations carry the torch of what we call "progress." Major
achievements result from the sum total of human strivings.
This first symbol of the fifty-ninth sequence stresses one especially
dynamic aspect of "group performance." Wherever this symbol ap­
pears, it emphasizes the value of group cooperation and of necessary
give-and-take. One must seek to relate and adjust one's strength to the
challenge presented by competitors in DYNAMIC INTERCHANGE.

P H A S E 2 9 2 (CAPRICORN 22*): B Y ACCEPTING DEFEAT
GRACEFULLY, A GENERAL REVEALS NOBILITY O F
CHARACTER.

The realization that one may grow through defeat as well as, and perhaps more than, through success.

KEYNOTE:

While the preceding symbol referred to the drive toward suc­
cess in culturally organized collective endeavors, this one pre­
sents us with the possibility of turning apparent external defeat
into an inner spiritual achievement. We have recently seen how
totally vanquished nations (Germany and Japan) have leaped
forward and achieved great economic success. Much depends
on the quality of the will and the inner integrity of the person.
At this second stage we find what seems to be a paradox, but the
spiritual life is always paradoxical. The great sinner can become the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 243
most renowned saint, and a medieval Pope a criminal. What matters
most always is INNER STRENGTH.

P H A S E 2 9 3 (CAPRICORN 23*): A SOLDIER RECEIVING T W O
AWARDS FOR BRAVERY IN COMBAT.
KEYNOTE: The reward offered by society for the fulfillment

of individual

responsibility.

The fact that "two" awards are emphasized makes us believe
that this may refer subtly to the recognition by the community
that, whether he succeeded or failed, an individual who dis­
charged his duty nobly under unusual circumstances is entitled
to the respect and appreciation of the collectivity he served so
well. What is implied here is a constant give-and-take between
society and the individual person. Each one should be able to
trust the other.
This third symbol of thefifty-ninthfive-foldsequence extracts, as it
were, a common element from the two preceding scenes. The Key­
word here is RECOMPENSE, i.e. a compensation for a well-done perfor­
mance—a balancing of accounts.

PHASE 294 (CAPRICORN 24*): A WOMAN ENTERING A CONVENT.
KEYNOTE:

Total commitment to a transcendent

goal

A convent is a place made available by a community which
believes in the possibility of reaching a world-transcending state
of consciousness. It is made available to individuals who may be
variously motivated. To some it is an escape from the intoler­
able pressures of family and society; to others it represents the
possibility of pursuing in peace a spiritual ideal to which the
whole being aspires and is totally dedicated. The important
point, in this phase of the cyclic process, is that the existence of
a convent expresses another aspect of the relationship between
the society (its religion and culture) and the individual. I n the

244 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
preceding symbol society rewarded the individual for a noble
performance in its service; here society accepts the fact that
beyond its daily normal patterns of behavior and commitments,
another way of life exists which, in a higher sense, also has social
value. In the old Hindu society dominated by a rigid caste sys­
tem, the ideal embodied in the sannyasi—the wandering holy
man or yogi meditating in a forest or a cave, who had entirely
given up all that caste implied—was seen to be the very culmi­
nation of the social process.

In this fourth stage symbol we see the paradoxical nature of the social
process operating more strongly than ever. This derivesfromthe fact
that man's nature contains in seed the possibility of overcoming and
transcending itself in acts of complete denials and of surrender to a
"higher" Law or quality of being. All spiritual techniques are indeed
paradoxical. Rigid discipline conditions pure innerfreedom.The final
goal is the attainment of TRANSCENDENT SECURITY.

P H A S E 295 (CAPRICORN 25*): A STORE FILLED WITH PRECIOUS ORIENTAL RUGS.
KEYNOTE: The use of cultural and artistic processes as a

means to enhance personal comfort and appreciation.

Coming after the preceding symbol this one brings us back to
the material, yet esthetic, aspect of the benefits a society can
bring its members. A "rug" always implied to some extent some­
thing on which a person stands or sits. It is a foundation for
cultural "under-standing," and as such it can have a magical or
sacred meaning, as in the case of prayer rugs. The "woman in
a convent" probably knows only the bare floor, because her goal
is one of transcendence, of surrendering comfort as well as
cultural patterns. But to the social elite, or even to the oriental
devotee praying to his god, society offers the relative comfort
of beautiful rugs so he may meet the universe, not merely in
terms of the support the natural soil gives, but protected by and
securely established on the mental-spiritual as well as manual
achievements of those who keep the cultural symbols alive.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 245
This is the last symbol in thefifty-ninthfive-foldsequence. It shows the
beautiful products of dedicated and inspired group performance at
the level of tradition. It emphasizes the value of RELIANCE ON TRADI-

TION.

T H I R D LEVEL: INDIVTDUAL-MENTAL
PHASE 296 (CAPRICORN 26*): A NATURE SPIRIT DANCING
IN T H E IRIDESCENT MIST O F A WATERFALL.

The ability to perceive the hidden and creative
spirit of natural phenomena*

KEYNOTE:

The Sabian symbols make several references to nature spirits.
Here we are dealing with the revelation of the spiritual or
psychic forces related to the element water. Water binds all
living cells in a wholesome interplay. It symbolizes the constant
flow of vital energies, the fluidity of a consciousness which finds
itself stimulated by change. The great cycle of water within the
earth's biosphere (oceans, clouds, rain, river) symbolizes the
basic phases of universal life processes, the ascent and descent
of emotional energies and of love. We can personify these
phases and speak of "the soul of nature," and at a cosmic level
of "the World-Soul," anima mundi. Water is the substance of
the telluric manifestations of this soul. It is a magical substance,
and modern chemists are rediscovering in their study of its
unusual behavior in certain situations what old Alchemists i n
their own way no doubt understood.
This is thefirststage of the sixtieth subcycle, and it presents us with
a deep intuition of superphysical energies which at the end of this
five-fold sequence we will see fully mastered (Phase 300). The con­
sciousness here becomes sensitized to the downwardflowof OCCULT
ENERGY in its bountiful natural aspect.

246 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 2 9 7 (CAPRICORN 2*7*)l PILGRIMS CLIMBING T H E
STEEP STEPS LEADING T O A MOUNTAIN SHRINE.

The ascent of the individualized
consciousness
to the highest realizations reached by the spiritual
leaders of its culture.

KEYNOTE:

We hear a great deal now about "peak experiences," but this
symbol tells us that they depend to a very great extent upon
following a path which many have trod before, under the inspi­
ration of the great Teachers and Sages of our race. The shrine
is built by the unceasing dedication of perhaps generations of
men. The pilgrimage is hallowed by the devotion of many, even
though each personfindson his own mountaintop what to him
seems a unique and transcendent revelation.
In this second stage symbol we witness the rise of the human con­
sciousness; the preceding symbol spoke of what one may picture as the
"descent" of the energies of nature which, like water,flowdown
toward a lower level of intensity. It is man's supreme task toriselike
fire, impelled by a vision he shares with his companions. The Keyword:

UPREACHING.

P H A S E 2 9 8 (CAPRICORN 28*): A LARGE AVIARY.
KEYNOTE: The enjoyment of spiritual values by

able to familiarize itself with their

the soul
implications.

Birds symbolize spiritual forces, and the aviary presents us with
a picture of these forces or desires contained within a mind
open to the light of psychic or Soul realities* and bringing joy
and harmony to the consciousness. The strenuous ascent repre­
sented by the preceding scene changes into a picture of
familiarity with inspiring experiences. Yet this familiarity may
also suggest a lack of spontaneity and of the thrill of discovery.
To use modern terms, the peak experiences have become those
of a high plateau, at which level one may lose one's sense of
direction at times.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 247
This is the third stage in the sixtieth sequence of phases which lead to
group mastery of cosmic energies. The youthful effort to reach the
summits of cultural and spiritual attainment has settled down into a
complex state of inspiration—a state which at times may bring confu­
sion because of the multiplicity of the voices to which one has become
open. One may speak here of CLAIRAUDIENCE, meaning a capacity for
being responsive to many inner voices.

PHASE 2 9 9 (CAPRICORN 29*): A WOMAN READING TEA
LEAVES.
KEYNOTE: The ability to see the Signature of hidden meaning in every occurrence drawing one's attention.
Man has always sought to interpret the meaning of events or
situations which baffle him in terms of specific omens or "Signa­
tures." The reading of tea leaves is only a commonplace modern
version of a certain type of procedure used by priests of all
ancient religions. The practice is based on a realization of "the
relation of everything to everything else"—a definition of as­
trology given by Marc Jones. Dream interpretation i n depth
psychology belongs to the same category, as it is based upon the
establishment of a close connection between the unconscious
and the conscious. But in dream analysis the individual uncon­
scious, at least at first, is mainly referred to, while in omens (or
modern fortunetelling at its best) one relies upon the power of
occult forces or entities to convey the information that will
clarify confusing situations.
This fourth stage symbol can be referred to a specific "technique" of
understanding or evaluation. What is implied is the ability not only to
perceive the facts of everyday existence, but to see through these facts
and discover how they are related to the realm of basic meanings or
archetypal processes. This is essentially what is meant by true CLAIRVOYANCE, the capacity to see in everything the Signature of deeper
realities.

248 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 300 (CAPRICORN 30*): A SECRET MEETING O F MEN
RESPONSIBLE FOR EXECUTIVE DECISIONS IN WORLD
AFFAIRS.
KEYNOTE: The power to assume responsibility for crucial

choices arrived at after mature discussions with those
who share this power.

We are all aware now of the work of secret committees in the
White House and at all levels of the government. The student
of esoteric philosophy believes in the existence of what has been
called an "inner Government" which has the power to direct or
guide the evolution of our planet and of mankind. Some people
speak of "occult Hierarchy," or of the "White Lodge." Here
again what is at stake is a "seeing through" the facts of telluric
processes and human history—assuming that these facts are at
least in part the outcome of the decisions of a supreme Council
of quasi-divine Beings. Obviously the symbol can also refer to
what occurs at the more ordinary level of business and politics.
At any level, it refers to the highest form of social interaction.
This is the last symbol belonging to Scene Twenty and related to the
zodiacal sign Capricorn. We see in it the culmination of social responsi­

bility and a reference to EXECUTIVE POWER.

SCENE TWENTY-ONE:

(Aquarius i* to Aquarius

ig)

CONTRIBUTION

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L

PHASE 301 (AQUARIUS l'): AN OLD ADOBE MISSION IN CALIFORNIA.
KEYNOTE: The power inherent in all great human works to
endure far beyond the workers' life spans.
The works and spirit of the Spanish priests who directed the
building of the California missions have had a lasting influence

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 249
on the development of this land; these remain as a monument
to the men who were able to make their mark upon this alien
environment. While the zodiacal sign Capricorn begins with a
symbol of socio-political power, Aquarius at its start presents a
more spiritualized and idealistic or creative picture of the social
forces at work. Moreover, it stresses the enduring character of
human achievements ensouled by a great vision. At least within
the frame of reference of our Western civilization, the symbol
speaks of the projection of a noble ideal into concrete forms of
beauty and significance, thus of the radiation of a "civilizing"
power into an institution offering to primitive men the oppor­
tunity to reach a higher, more organized and productive, level
of activity.
This is the first stage in the sixty-firstfive-foldsequence. It speaks to
us of THE CONCRETIZATION O F AN IDEAL. This also implies the "im­
mortalization" of an individual within a great collective and cultural
enterprise.

P H A S E 3 0 2 (AQUARIUS 2*): AN UNEXPECTED THUNDERSTORM.

The need to develop the inner security which
will enable us to meet unexpected crises.

KEYNOTE:

An interesting connection can be made between the symbols
for Taurus i * and 2*—"A clear mountain stream" and "An elec­
trical storm"—and those for Aquarius i* and 2*, two hundred
and seventy degrees apart (a "waning" square, i n terms of a
cycle of relationship such as the lunation cycle). In the first case
we deal with energies or activities that can be related to the
natural development of the individual. But here we are
primarily concerned with social, collective processes and the
function of the individual within them. The symbol itself—"An
unexpected thunderstorm"—could be given a very positive
meaning in an arid environment, but the emphasis on "unex­
pected" tends to accent the sudden and dangerous character of
the event. Such a thunderstorm in a region of dry hills can cause

250 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
a devastating flood. At any rate, it refers to an event for which
one is not prepared—*, menace to men's works.
Seen as a second stage symbol—thus in contrast to the preceding one
—this scene stresses the fact that nature may reduce to impermanence
the seemingly most permanent endeavors and constructive activities
of men. Under a downpour of rain, adobe brick can return to mud. All
human institutions and their achievements can be washed away, even
in their day of great glory. "Dust you were, dust you must become.**

This is NATURE'S CHALLENGE.

PHASE 303 (AQUARIUS 3*): A DESERTER FROM THE NAVY.
KEYNOTE: The individual's self-realization through a crucial repudiation of a collective status which has hecome unbearable.
This symbol recalls the one for Scorpio 21*, but the fact that
actual "desertion** is emphasized and reference is made to "the
Navy" suggests that the crisis symbolized here is one implying
an irrevocable change of status. Man refuses to accept the type
of cultural patterns derived from his society's specific approach
to local circumstances and to the universe as a whole, and in
another sense, from its particular relationship to the all-human
collective Unconscious. (The Navy refers to the ocean, symbol
of primordial and unconscious evolutionaryforces.)He not only
refuses to obey orders, he deliberately turns his back on his
collective social status; he becomes an outcast, and through this
decision he may definitely individualize his consciousness.
This is the third stage of the sixty-firstfive-foldsequence. Something
with collective social value is being potentially destroyed, but nature
is not the destroyer (as in the preceding symbol). Man, the individual,
steps out of his bondage to collective patterns and ideals. He may thus
"find himself' by means of a sharp renunciation of his social birthright,
i.e. by a crucial process of DESOCIALIZATION.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 251
P H A S E 304 (AQUARIUS 4'): A H I N D U YOGI DEMONSTRATES
HIS HEALING POWERS.

The disciplined use of spiritual energies in restoring the natural harmony disturbed by man's inharmonic attempts to transcend nature through mind.

KEYNOTE:

Gvilization implies a process of transcending compulsive and
rigid biological drives while making use, in a refined and mentalized way, of what it cannot control. The goal of a true civiliza­
tion—Western civilization being to a large extent a caricature
of it—is the development of a humanity composed of selfmotivated and responsible individuals freely associating accord­
ing to harmonic patterns in order to produce a vast spiritual
chord of consciousness fully actualizing the potentialities inher­
ent in the archetype, MAN. The process of individualization and
civilization is full of dangers, and for a very long time it is
obsessed by karmic shadows, the results of individual and collec­
tive deviations and perversions. Such results most often lead to
disease. It is the spiritual duty of individuals who have been able
to tap the vast reservoir of spiritual forces pervading our planet
to use these energies for healing their less-fortunate comrades.
This fourth stage symbol refers to a technique which not only can be
used for the healing of physical illnesses but for the "making whole**
of whatever has lost its natural root integration and has not yet
reached the holistic state of perfect harmony and identification with
the "divine" whole. Self-discipline, purity of motive, compassion, faith
in the divine order are required—and the FOCUSING OF SPIRITUAL

ENERGY.

252 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 305 (AQUARIUS 5*): A COUNCIL OF ANCESTORS IS
SEEN IMPLEMENTING THE EFFORTS OF A YOUNG
LEADER.
KEYNOTE: The Root foundation of past performances
which power and sustain whatever decision is made in
a crisis by an individual.
The whole past of mankind stands behind any individual effort,
especially in times of critical decisions. The endeavor of the
priests who built the California missions had behind it the whole
past of Catholic proselytizing, i.e. the attempt to bring the
"Good News" to all people of the Earth. Every individual is far
more dependent upon the strengh of his ancestors' achieve­
ments—or oppressed by their failures and lack of vision—than
he usually believes. This can mean a hidden foundation of indi­
vidual strength, or the inertia of a tradition unable to transcend
its limited origins.
This is the last symbol in the sixty-firstfive-foldsequence. It suggests
that in many situations RELIANCE UPON PRECEDENTS will enable the
aspirant to greatness to tap the power of his deepest roots.

SECOND LEVEL: EMOTIONAL-CULTURAL
PHASE 306 (AQUARIUS 6*): A MASKED FIGURE PERFORMS
RITUALISTIC ACTS IN A MYSTERY PLAY.
KEYNOTE: The individual's involvement in long-established patterns of activity aiming at the release of
collective power.
The great Mysteries of the past were created by inspired Seers
and Adepts for the purpose of transferring to a mentally con­
scious and humanly significant level of group operation what in
the lower kingdoms of life we call instincts. Biological and cos­
mic energies can thus be used to ensure that social processes do
not lose touch with the deeper realities of planetary and univer­
sal Life. Rituals are binding, and often the performers wear
masks, for they do not act as human persons but as focal points
for the release of transpersonal forces.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 253
Thisfirstsymbol of the sixty-secondfive-foldsequence presents to us
social processes in their deepest occult aspect. The individual is seen

having assumed a TRANSPERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.

PHASE 307 (AQUARIUS f)l A CHILD IS SEEN BEING BORN
OUT OF AN EGG.
KEYNOTE: The emergence of new mutations according to
the great rhythms of the cosmos.
The ancient symbolism of the Cosmic Egg (Hiranyagharba in
Sanskrit) out of which a new universe is born can be interpreted
at several levels. Here we see the appearance of a new type of
human being who is not born from "Ancestors" and who there­
fore is free from the inertia of mankind's past He is a new
product of evolution, a mutant. He constitutes a fresh projection
of the creative Spirit that emanates from the cosmic or plan­
etary Whole, and not from any local culture and racial tradition.
This second stage symbol is in contrast with the preceding one. It can

be said to announce the EMERGENCE OF GLOBAL MANforthe New

Age. The power of the whole is focused within him in perfect freedom
from ancient standards of value based on local conditions.

PHASE 308 (AQUARIUS 8*): BEAUTIFULLY GOWNED WAX
FIGURES ON DISPLAY.
KEYNOTE: The inspiration one may derive from the appearance of Exemplars who present to us the archetypes of
a new culture.
We are dealing here with the fixed symbols upon which a cul­
ture is based, with mental archetypes. They are kept and made
available as patterns to imitate, or at least from which to draw
new motives for inspiration. We are at the stage of vision: new
forms are revealed to the consciousness, as well as new ways of
meeting other people in social relationships.
This is the third stage in the sixty-second sequence offivesymbols. In
a sense the generic human past and the future are implied here. The

254 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

wax figures are impersonal forms. The gowns constitute a static pre­
sentation of ideal patterns; yet they are the PREFORMATION of what
will be experienced in the culture being born. They herald new collec­
tive developments.

P H A S E 309 (AQUARIUS 9*): A FLAG IS SEEN TURNING INTO
AN EAGLE.

The dynamic incorporation of new social values
in individuals who exemplify the spiritual potential
and greatest significance of these values.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol nearly duplicates the one for Sagittarius 12*, but in
this five-fold sequence it has a somewhat different meaning—
especially since the last term of the mysterious transformation
(i.e. the crowing of the eagle in chanticleer's fashion) is omitted.
All that is implied here is the vitalization of a powerful symbol,
its embodiment in a living reality, i.e. in a person able to fly in
consciousness to the highest spiritual realm. The archetype is
given living substance and wings. The Image has become a
Power.
This fourth stage symbol, as usual, gives us a technical suggestion. To
"see" the new archetype, to perceive the new standard of value with
one's mind is not enough. The seer must become the doer. The imper­
sonal is dynamized and brought into focus. We have here the ACTING
OUT of the vision.

P H A S E 310 (AQUARIUS 10 # ): A MAN W H O HAD FOR A TIME
BECOME T H E EMBODIMENT O F A POPULAR IDEAL IS
MADE T O REALIZE THAT AS A PERSON H E IS NOT THIS
IDEAL.

The need to deal with human beings as persons
rather than as screens upon which one projects one's
dream and ideal.

KEYNOTE:

Here we have a final statement on the relationship between
mental-spiritual vision and living reality, between persons and

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 255
the ideal they appear to incarnate, between the "great lover
Image" and one's need for love—a love his presence stimulated
and aroused. The "star" on the movie screen is not the actual
person. The star's popularity fades away, the person remains.
What has this episode of popularity actually done to the person?
This is a question that can be applied to a great variety of
circumstances.
Thisfifthsymbol in the sixty-second sequence brings to our attention
an issue that is basic and may confront us in various forms. Person
versus archetype. This can mean a critical need for SELF-REVALUA-

TION.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
PHASE 311 (AQUARIUS 11*): D U R I N G A SILENT HOUR, A MAN
RECEIVES A N E W INSPIRATION W H I C H MAY CHANGE
HIS LIFE.

The need to rely upon inner inspiration and
guidance at the start of new developments.

KEYNOTE:

What is implied here is the essential value of keeping open to
the descent of spiritual or Soul forces, especially when a new
period of individual activity is about to begin. The individual
should not depend mainly on outer circumstances and on tradi­
tional—and in a sense external, because collectively formulated
—incentives. There is a creative power within, a power that can
be tapped, or rather that should be allowed to flow into the
brain-consciousness or the hands which write or fashion materi­
als into original forms.
This is the first stage in the sixty-third sequence of five phases of
activity. It refers to the OVERSHADOWING of the individual conscious­
ness by an inner, yet transcendent, Power.

256 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 312 (AQUARIUS 12 # ): O N A VAST STAIRCASE STAND
PEOPLE O F DIFFERENT TYPES, GRADUATED UPWARD.

The necessity of recognizing differences of types
and levels of development wherever human beings live
and work together.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol obviously refers to the ascending process of evolu­
tion of life forms and consciousness. It seems to apply especially
to the fact that differences of levels exist among human beings.
The ideal of equalitarianism has to be balanced by a realization
that hierarchy of levels is a fact of nature. Each person should
be aware of the level at which he (or she) stands, even as he
strives to move toward a higher one. He should look up for
inspiration and examples, while helping the human beings of
the next lower level to reach up. This is the great give-and-take
of evolution, and it applies to sociocultural evolution as well as
to the progression of biological species.
At this second stage of the sixty-third sequence we find a symbol of
"ascent," contrasting with the preceding one which implied a "de­
scent" of spiritualforces.It warns us against sentimentally overstressing our Western equalitarianism which essentially applies to the
spiritual core of all individual persons, considered "sons of God" or
spiritual monads. Every human being is potentially divine as an indi­

vidual person, but THE NATURAL PROGRESSION OF STATES OF CON-

SCIOUSNESS is an unavoidable reality to accept at the social-mental
level

P H A S E 313 (AQUARIUS 13*): A BAROMETER.
KEYNOTE: The ability to discover basic natural

allow us to plan in advance for action.

facts that

Here we are no longer dealing with ascent or descent, but with
natural laws which involve causal relationships and the passage
of one natural condition into another. The barometer registers
air pressure, and a change of pressure today gives some indica­
tion of what the weather will be tomorrow. In a sense this is the

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 257
modern scientific equivalent of archaic prognostication through
omens. Likewise, animals grow a more or less thick fur in early
autumn according to whether the winter will be more or less
severe. Planning for the near future is a possibility because the
potential (or seed) of the future is already operating at the core
of the present.
This third symbol of the sixty-third sequence tells us that it is most
important to seek—by whatever means and at whatever level of con­
sciousness—a knowledge of causal progression. In the broadest sense
this implies an awareness of cyclic processes, and this includes as­
trology. The Keyword is ANTICIPATION.

PHASE 314 (AQUARIUS 140): A TRAIN ENTERING A TUNNEL.
KEYNOTE: The ability to short-cut the process of natural
evolution by the exercise of will, mental skill and
physical self-discipline.
In this symbol we see a condensation of what is implied in the
three preceding ones. Man must be inspired by a vision of what
is possible for him to achieve; he has to organize a schedule of
necessary activities if the work is to be done in terms of succes­
sive moves, each requiring a specialized type of skill and
strength (i.e. a hierarchy of functions); he has to find a propitious
time for beginning the work. The end result is an acceleration
of the evolutionary process, whether at the psychobiological
level (that of yoga and other similar disciplines) or at the social
level, i.e. the level at which, in its external aspect, civilization
proceeds.
This fourth stage symbol presents a picture of what can be achieved
by a combination of social and cultural, and even personal, techniques.
It implies the possibility of shortening the length of time needed for
progress by cutting through obstacles and delays. The Keyword is

PENETRATION.

258 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
PHASE 315 (AQUARIUS 15 # ): TWO LOVEBIRDS SITTING ON A
FENCE AND SINGING HAPPILY.
KEYNOTE: The blessing bestowed upon personal achievements by the spiritually fulfilled consciousness of the
Soul
This symbol can be interpreted at various levels of significance,
but it evidently suggests a state of being in which two comple­
mentary aspects of spiritual reality—however we may conceive
them—are united; this union results in happiness or bliss
(ananda). As the two birds are "sitting on a fence," and a fence
separates two fields or gardens, the implication is that the
separative consciousness of the ego can thus be blessed, perhaps
as a spiritual reward for long-sustained and well-done work.
This is the last symbol of the sixty-third five-fold sequence which
completes Scene Twenty-one. Inner happiness is seen to be the re­
ward for all individuals who have made a valuable "contribution" to
their community or to mankind as a whole. In its highest aspect this
happiness is indeed BEATITUDE.

MANAGEMENT
(Aquarius 16 to Aquarius 30V

SCENE TWENTY-TWO:
8

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L
P H A S E 316 (AQUARIUS 16*): A BIG BUSINESSMAN A T HIS
DESK.

The ability to organize the many aspects of an
enterprise involving a large group'of human beings.

KEYNOTE:

A great deal of what is glowingly written about the Aquarian
Age is probably sheer glamor. The New Age should be one in
which man learns to use the power generated by human togeth­
erness and group interplay—that is, to use it harmoniously for

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 259
the welfare of the whole of which all individuals are parts,
humanity and the planet Earth. This has never been achieved
and only very rarely attempted. Mankind today must make a
thorough and irresistible attempt, or be nearly destroyed—ex­
cept for a creative "remnant" of seed-persons who would have
to begin again from new foundations. In the field of big business,
of huge war undertakings (like the Normandy landing in World
War II) or of major national efforts (like the Moon landings)
great results have been achieved, but the motive and the qual­
ity of the human interrelationships involved were neither of
permanent significance nor invested with a truly harmonic
quality. The character of the techniques used were totally un­
satisfactory from a "human" point of view. Nevertheless there
is much to learn from modern large-scale management and
systems analysis, even in terms of personal endeavors of very
limited scope.
This is thefirststage in the sixty-fourthfive-foldsubcycle. It introduces
the concept of management which is basic at this period of the cyclic
life process which the zodiac symbolizes, yet which needs to be totally
reevaluated if mankind is to actualize the spiritual potentialities im­
plied in the evolutionary transformation just ahead. ORGANATION
should be the Keyword, rather than mere "organization"; for
humanity now can and should realize that it is indeed an "organism."

P H A S E 317 (AQUARIUS 17 # ): A WATCHDOG STANDS GUARD,
PROTECTING HIS MASTER A N D HIS POSSESSIONS.

The development of the capacity to protect oneself and to safeguard one's individual rights under
complex social pressures*

KEYNOTE:

What seems to be implied in this symbol, considering its position
in the entire cycle, is that under present-day social conditions
the individual person needs protection against the ever-grow­
ing encroachments of society upon his theoretically recognized
right to lead a private life free from public interference. Seen
in this light the symbol stands in contrast to the preceding one

260 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
depicting the power of big business and the totalitarian implica­
tions of large-scale organization. At a deeper occult level of
interpretation it also reveals the need to protect oneself against
"astral" intrusions and perhaps "black magic," the more s6 as
one ventures into supernormal states of consciousness. It is said
that the Adept trains certain subhuman entities ("Elementals")
to protect him. The Christian religion speaks of Guardian An­
gels in a related sense.
At this second stage we see the individual able to master natural
energies which he enlists in his service, so he may pursue his individu­
alized work of destiny in security. This is another aspect of the rela­
tionship of individual-to-society. Individuals of course do also seek to
rob or injure other persons, but the state of affairs resulting from a
society glorifying competition, ambition and success at any cost is
largely responsible for individual violence. The more creative the

person, the greater his or her NEED FOR PROTECTION.

P H A S E 318 (AQUARIUS 18*): A MAN'S SECRET MOTIVES ARE
BEING PUBLICLY UNMASKED.

The difficulty for the modern individual to keep
secret his private past or his deeper motives.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol logically follows the two preceding ones. Today,
struggle between the power of society and the rights of the
individual leads in the end to the defeat of the latter. The media
and innumerable governmental agencies are nearly always able
to find access to remains or records of past actions; modern
psychologists and psychiatrists are increasingly adept at pene­
trating the deepest secrets of a life through "analysis" and all
kinds of more or less allowed techniques involving drugs and
the subconscious reactions of muscles and nerves. The individ­
ual whose activities have to remain unrecognized is engaged in
a constant struggle; he needs the help of higher Powers as well
as of the protective agencies he may have placed at his service.
This is the third stage in the sixty-fourthfive-foldsequence of archetyp­
al images of the cyclic process. It refers to the UNMASKING of hidden

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 261
motives and personal secrets. It may refer to the publicizing of past
behavior.

PHASE 319 (AQUARIUS 19*): A FOREST FIRE IS BEING SUBDUED BY T H E USE O F WATER, CHEMICALS AND SHEER
MUSCULAR ENERGY.

The skill and courage necessary to bring under
control the destructive potential of carelessness of karmic "visitations"

KEYNOTE:

Forestfiresmay be caused by human carelessness, by bghtning
or by the by-products of modern technology. Every individual
—at least once in his lifetime, if not repeatedly—may perhaps
have to face spectacular reactions to seemingly insignificant
acts. These are to be considered means to test his strength,
ingenuity or emotional stability. Every faculty at his disposal
must be made use of—emotional, mental, physical. He needs
faith in himself and in superior Powers.
At this fourth stage of thefive-foldseries we are shown man in action
in a crucial and potentially devastating situation. There is need for a
total mobilization of energy and a deep sense of INDOMITABIUTY.

P H A S E 320: (AQUARIUS 20*): A LARGE W H I T E DOVE BEARING A MESSAGE.

The answer of spiritual agencies to thorough,
sustained and victorious individual efforts.

KEYNOTE:

This concludes most significantly this series of five symbols. The
individual who has gone courageously and with indomitable
spirit through his crucial crisis receives, as it were, a deep
spiritual blessing from the Soul-realm: "Mission accomplished.
Peace be with you." And in this blessing a secret prophecy of
what is yet to come may be seen by the perspicacious and
spiritually sensitive mind of the recipient. Every real spiritual
step a man takes in his development is the result of a victory

262 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
over forces of inertia or destruction. The Divine is totally "pres­
ent" in the heart of all true victories.
This is the fifth and last symbol of the sixty-fourth series. What the
"message" is depends on the particular situation, but the white dove
always signifies peace; at the very heart of this peace is the CERTIFICATION of individual worth and victory.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
P H A S E 321 (AQUARIUS 21 9 ): A DISAPPOINTED AND DISILLUSIONED WOMAN COURAGEOUSLY FACES A SEEMINGLY
EMPTY LIFE.

The capacity to meet emotionally upsetting experiences in human relationships with strength of
character and personal integrity.

KEYNOTE:

The man who manages vast and complex business enterprises
most often reaches power and achieves success because of his
ability to deal with crises and temporary reverses of fortune. At
the emotional level we now see a "woman" confronted with
sharp disappointment and forced to face the vanishing of cher­
ished illusions, presumably in terms of a close personal relation­
ship. She has to learn to manage such crises, which are really
tests of inner strength and perhaps compassion. We all have
within ourselves the power to learn through emotional crises.
But like any other faculty it needs development.
This is thefirstsymbol in the sixty-fifthfive-foldsequence. It urges us
to develop RESILIENCE under adversity.

P H A S E 3 2 2 (AQUARIUS 22°): A RUG IS PLACED O N T H E
FLOOR O F A NURSERY T O ALLOW CHILDREN T O PLAY
IN COMFORT AND WARMTH.

The warmth of understanding which comes to
those who, early in life, are open to new possibilities.

KEYNOTE:

Man is never left without assistance when eagerly seeking to
grow emotionally and spiritually. Even if he does not con-

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 263
sciously realize the intent and value of what sustains his selfdevelopment and cushions the shocks which life provides his
growth in understanding, still the assistance is there. He may
think: No one understands me. But the understanding is there
if he does not egotistically take for granted that life and society
owe him everything.
This second stage symbol contrasts the kindness inherent in so many
of life's situations with the tragic feeling of disillusionment repre­
sented by the first stage symbol. Through a warm APPRECIATION of
basic opportunities and even small comforts, we can safely and happily
grow into personal maturity.

PHASE 3 2 3 (AQUARIUS 23'): A BIG BEAR SITTING DOWN
AND WAVING ALL ITS PAWS.
KEYNOTE: The self-discipline which results from an intelligent development of individual faculties under proper
training.
What constitutes the proper training of children or animals is a
complex and much-disputed problem. The syn A seems to
state simply that powerful life energies can be trained ade­
quately—the implication or extension of the idea being that no
training is really successful unless it leads to the realization of
the value and power of self-discipline. We are constantly faced
with situations which, whether we are aware of it or not, are in
fact training situations; God or the Soul is the trainer. Much
depends on the attitudes we assume in these situations.
This is the third symbol in the sixty-fifth sequence. We see in it'the
outcome of what is suggested in the two preceding ones. Character
and a warm "under-standing" of what is involved in the process of
growth and overcoming of emotional heaviness can be taught. We can
learn to discipline our natural impulses and to use them for a morethan-personal purpose. This is DISCIPLESHIP in the true sense of the
term.

264 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 324 (AQUARIUS 24*): A MAN, HAVING OVERCOME
HIS PASSIONS, TEACHES DEEP WISDOM IN TERMS O F HIS
EXPERIENCE.

The constructive use to which difficult past experiences can be put as examples for those who are still
striving to overcome their passions.

KEYNOTE:

Every type of experience can be made to serve a spiritual pur­
pose. Every man or woman, however humble his or her status,
can be an example to younger people who are still struggling to
overcome or control the compulsive drives of their emotionalbiological natures. Whoever has managed a difficult perfor­
mance contributes to the collective wisdom of his community
and of mankind. Every achievement is to be passed on to those
who may be inspired by it to greater and more adequate efforts.
At this fourth stage of the sixty-fourth subcycle we are given a neverto-be-forgotten hint: it is the responsibility of anyone who has taken
one step ahead in his evolution to help others to take that step. This
is true education. The Keyword is COMMUNiCABiLrrY.

BTJTTERFLY WITH THE
RIGHT WING MORE PERFECTLY FORMED.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to develop the rational and fully
conscious aspect of the mind ahead of normal evolution.
P H A S E 3 2 5 (AQUARIUS 25'): A

What seems implied is a kind of mutation, and more specifically
the special development of whatever is symbolized by the
"right side" of the organism. Here, however, the spiritual body
(the butterfly) is what the Image represents; A strong process of
conscious individualization is suggested, perhaps at the expense
of the instinctual-emotional aspect of the personality (its "left
side").
This last symbol fittingly concludes this sixty-fifth sequence, which
began with "A disappointed woman..." Thefive-foldset deals with

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 265
the management of human energies at the emotional level; here management means overcoming—this, on the basis of negative or egochallenging experiences. Thisfifthsymbol refers thus to the results of
a TRANSMUTATION OF EMOTIONAL ENERGIES.

THIRD LEVEL: iNDIVIDUALr-MENTAL
PHASE 3 2 6 (AQUARIUS 26*): A GARAGE MAN TESTING A
CAR'S BATTERY WITH A HYDROMETER.
KEYNOTE: Skill in applying knowledge of natural laws to
the solution of everyday problems resulting from life
in our technological society.
Here we see a man using his analytical mind to check up on the
operation of the machines his inventive genius produced. This
simple commonplace operation is used here as an indication of
how deeply technology involves us in small matters, yet matters
which in some circumstances could make the difference be­
tween life and death—i.e. a mechanical failure in a car on a
crowded freeway. The need for "management" therefore is
seen to affect every detail of our individualfives;this applies as
well to the complexities of interpersonal, social or political rela­
tionships, because our modern society is indeed like a huge
machine speeding on dangerous ground. Safety depends on
available power.
This is the first offivedegree symbols in the sixty-sixth sequence. It
tells us that we constantly need the use of our intellectual power of
observation and analysis to check on the effectiveness of the energies

at our disposal. It is a symbol of MENTAL EFFICIENCY.

263 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
P H A S E 3 2 7 (AQUARIUS 27*): A N ANCIENT POTTERY BOWL
FILLED W I T H FRESH VIOLETS.

The importance of traditional skills and artistic
values deeply rooted in man's instinctive feelings as
frames of reference for man's most authentic emotions.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol contrasts with the preceding one just as personal
reticence and a simple love of natural beauty contrast with the
rush, gawdiness and intellectual efficiency characterizing so
much of our modern existence. Violets have often been consid­
ered symbols of modesty and humility—values which were un­
derstood to be the mark of true womanhood.. • long ago, i t
seems!
In this symbol we see pictured the dependence of the purest feelings
of natural living upon the traditions within which theyfindtheir most
adequate and effective setting. It is a symbol of DELICACY OF FEELING.

P H A S E 3 2 8 (AQUARIUS 28°): A T R E E FELLED AND SAWED
T O ENSURE A SUPPLY O F W O O D F O R T H E WINTER,

Knowledge and skill used in its natural surroundings for the satisfaction of vital basic needs.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol combines, as it were, the implications represented
in the two preceding ones. It relates to natural living the human
capacity to prepare for the future and to use both physical
strength and mental ingenuity. In meeting the hardships inher­
ent in an existence close to nature, strength, efficiency and
intelligence are needed, but they are incorporated in a life in
which every act can be part of a harmonic and beautiful ritual
permeated with deep significance.
This is the third in the sixty-sixthfive-foldseries of symbols. It refers
to the efficient use of natural resources for insuring man's well-being.

Such a use is based on INTELLIGENT FORESIGHT.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 267
PHASE 3 2 9 (AQUARIUS 29*): A BUTTERFLY EMERGING
FROM A CHRYSALIS.
KEYNOTE: The capacity to utterly transform the character
of one's consciousness by radically altering the structural patterns of everyday living and the types of relationships one enters upon.
This is the second time within a very short span of the cycle that
the butterfly symbol appears (of. Aquarius 25"). Here what is
emphasized is the process of metamorphosis itself. It is the
fourth symbol of afive-foldsequence and it stresses the essential
character of the activity required at this stage of the cycle; i.e.
nothing short of a complete renewal of all the implications of
being alive as a human individual will do. A radical change is
needed. At this stage, this change is individual and mental, and
it should be seen against the background of humanity as a
whole. What is revealed is the potential ability of every human
being to participate in a higher realm of evolution AFTER his
or her emergence from a critical state of transition.
At this fourth stage of the sixty-fifth subcycle the Keyword is METAMORPHOSIS. In spiritual terms, this implies "Initiation," i.e. entering
a higher realm of conscious existence and mere joining a sacred Com­
pany.

PHASE 330 (AQUARIUS 30'): DEEPLY ROOTED IN THE PAST
OF A VERY ANCIENT CULTURE, A SPIRITUAL BROTHERHOOD IN WHICH MANY INDIVIDUAL MINDS ARE
MERGED INTO THE GLOWING LIGHT OF A UNANIMOUS
CONSCIOUSNESS IS REVEALED TO ONE WHO HAS
EMERGED SUCCESSFULLY FROM HIS METAMORPHOSIS.
KEYNOTE: The ability for the person with an open mind
and a deep feeling for self-transcendence to come in
contact with higher forms of existence.
The originally recorded Sabian symbol stated: "The field of Ardath in bloom," which referred to a scene in an occult novel by

268 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
Marie Corelli centering upon ancient Babylon. The reference
may well have been a "blind" inasmuch as Marc Jones has
stressed his inner contact with a Brotherhood with Babylonian
(or "Sabian") roots. A spiritual Brotherhood consitutes a state of
"multi-unity"—i.e. a multiplicity of individuals, if one thinks of
the paths they trod to reach their final metamorphosis, but a
unity of consciousness and "Soul"—thus unanimity ("anima"
meaning Soul). In this spiritual Whole each unit is a recogniz­
able "form" or entity if one looks at it with the eyes of personal­
ity; but when seen through a unified spiritual vision or from a
distance, the Whole appears to be one single area of radiant
light. Similarly, when studied by the modern physicist, light can
be apprehended either as a stream of identifiable particles (pho­
tons) or as one continuous wave. Whether it is seen as one or the
other depends on the point of view.
This is the last and culrninating symbol of Scene Twenty-two of the
cyclic ritual. This is indeed a fitting symbol, as the number 22 symbol­
izes all forms of mastery. At any level, it is a symbol of spiritual group

fulfillment—of CONSCIOUS TOTALITY OF BEING.

SCENE TWENTY-THREE:

(Pisces i* to Pisces iff)

FEDERATION

F I R S T LEVEL: ACTIONAL

PHASE 331 (PISCES 1*): IN A CROWDED MARKETPLACE
FARMERS AND MIDDLEMEN DISPLAY A GREAT VARIETY
OF PRODUCTS.
KEYNOTE: The process of commingling and interchange
which at all levels demonstrates the health of a com'
munity.
In any twelve-fold division of a complete cycle (for instance the
12 zodiacal signs and the 12 Houses of a birth chart) the twelfth

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 269
section often has been given a negative significance. It can refer
to oppressive conditions as it represents a "closing of accounts,"
a final evaluation of the harvest of the cycle. A very bad harvest
may lead to bankruptcy; a premature revolt may bring the rebel
to jail; the dissolute may end in a hospital. In this section of the
cycle a man reaps what he has sown. But it may also be honors,
social prestige, the interests of well-managed wealth. In this
twenty-fourth scene what is stressed is the coming together, in
a final experience of community, of all factors previously ex­
perienced; this means constructive interaction and an inter­
change of the products of social activity. In a practical sense, the
symbol, whenever it is found, emphasizes that the time has
come to take full advantage of the social opportunities to bar­
gain and to trade.
This is the first stage of the process related to the sixty-seventh five­
fold sequence of symbols. It refers to all that can be gained from social
interplay and especially, in the broadest sense of the word, from COM-

MERCE.

PHASE 332 (PISCES 2*)l A SQUIRREL HIDING FROM HUNTERS.
KEYNOTE: The individual's need both to ensure his future
subsistence and to protect himself from aggressive social elements.
The squirrel not only has to hide and store food for the winter,
but to be on the lookout for the dangers involved in gathering
this food supply. Social processes always cast strong shadows.
The individual is never certain of being safe among his fellowmen, once the process of individualization—with its negative
aspects, competition, social aggressivity and greed—forces the
breakdown of the organic tribal state of mankind during the
archaic ages.
This second stage symbol contrasts with thefirst.It warns of the dan­
gers of life in society during an era of exacerbated individualism, when

870 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

violence is a possibility never to be dismissed The need for SELFPROTECTION and caution is ever present
. PHASE 333 (PISCES 3*): PETRIFIED TREE TRUNKS LIE
BROKEN ON DESERT SAND.
KEYNOTE: The power to preserve records of their achieve*
merits which is inherent in fully matured cultures*
When a vast group of men succeed in building a culture with
strong institutions which express themselves in significant sym­
bols and works of art or literature, such an effort of many gener­
ations is rarely lost altogether. In one form or another, records
of this culture endure or are mysteriously preserved, simply
because they reveal the place and function of this particular
culture in the long process of unfoldment pf the potentialities
inherent in archetypal MAN. It is such a concept that has been
mythified and popularized in the religious idea of the resurrec­
tion of the dead on the Last Day. The symbol of petrified wood
in the Arizona desert, however, tells us that the actual preserva­
tion of the records is never perfect or total. Only fragments
remain, significant enough to reveal the essential archetypal
form.

This third symbol of the sixty-seventh five-fold sequence brings the
promise of social immortality—i.e. the preservation of the enduring
(because archetypally meaningful) factors in whatever man attempts
within his culture. A symbol of INDESTRUCTABILTTY.
PHASE 334 (PISCES 4#): HEAVY CAR TRAFFIC ON A NARROW
ISTHMUS LINKING TWO SEASHORE RESORTS.
KEYNOTE: The mobility and intensity of interchanges
which make possible and characterize complex social
processes*
Here we see the concept of commerce and social interaction in
a new form. What is stressed is the need to establish unceasing

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS S71
dynamic relationships between all aspects and functions of the
social life. The more complex the relationships, the more dy­
namic and restless the society. In this symbol the "isthmus"
refers to a geographic situation found near San Diego, Cali­
fornia, where these Sabian symbols were produced—also in
Florida and elsewhere. A narrow strip of land separates the sea
from a lagoon and on this strip, houses are built and roads are
constantly filled with moving cars. The proximity of the sea
stresses the collective nature of social experiences and of what
may appear to be "individual" achievements.
This fourth stage symbol evokes many aspects of what at several levels
can be called TRAFFIC The technique for achieving social results is
always based on an interchange of ideas and interplay of activities.
Often, however, confusion ensues and traffic jams are ever-present
possibilities.

PHASE 335 (PISCES 5*): A CHURCH BAZAAR.
KEYNOTE: The value of giving a spiritual or transcendent
sanction to even the most commonplace interchanges
between social persons and individual minds.
This is the last of five symbols emphasizing the interaction be­
tween people constituting a social group, small or large. I t
brings in the element of religious sanctions. The purpose of any
organized religion is primarily to meet the need of giving a
more permanent significance to interpersonal relationships
within the framework of a particular way of life and culture. I t
helps to keep the society "whole" by malcing it "holy"—at least
in principle and ideal. It justifies human behavior by blessing it
with a divine Revelation of what is good and valuable. It ideal­
izes biological and social needs by ritualizing them.
This ends the sixty-seventhfive-foldsequence on a note of RITUALIZED BENEFICENCE. It stresses the possibility of the "Presence of God"
in even the most material human activities.

272 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
P H A S E 336 (PISCES 6*): A PARADE O F ARMY OFFICERS IN
FULL DRESS.

The dedication of human beings to the service of
their community, and the assurance that it will be
emotionally sustained by the people at large.

KEYNOTE:

Here we see at work the emotion-rousing appeal of social activi­
ties which demand the surrendering by the individual of his
personal way of life, his opinions and his comfort. The socializ­
ing process is pictured in all its intensity but what is implied
even more is the support that the socialized person can expect
from the collectivity if he is ready to act and to sacrifice himself
for the nation or the group.
This is the first symbol of the sixty-eighth series. It allegorizes the
power generated by a totally accepted and enforced collective disci­
pline, and the exaltation and mass response which he who has
achieved this self-surrender to a social tradition can expect in return.
The Keyword is CROUP-RESPONSreiLrrY.

P H A S E 337 (PISCES 7*): ILLUMINED BY A SHAFT O F LIGHT,
A LARGE CROSS LIES O N ROCKS SURROUNDED BY SEA
MIST.

The spiritual blessing which strengthens individuals who, happen what may, stand uncompromisingly for their own truth.

KEYNOTE:

Men who do not depend upon collective values, traditions or
support but seek at any cost to be true to their individual self
and destiny almost inevitably face some kind of crucifixion.
They are sustained only by the power within them, to which a
light above answers. The symbol tells us: "Be true to thine own
self, and in the midst of the outer confusion displayed by those
surrounding you, you will realize what you really are as an
individual—a son of God."

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS ' 273
This second stage symbol presents us with a realization in polar opposi­
tion to that evoked by the preceding scene. It implies the supreme
worth of a Life guided by an inner voice and manifesting a high degree

Of SELF-ASSERTION.

PHASE 338 (PISCES 8*): A GIRL BLOWING A BUGLE.
KEYNOTE: A call to participation in the service of the race,
as an evolutionary crisis approaches.
This symbolic picture presents another aspect of the emotional
relationship between the individual and the collectivity of hu­
man beings. It can also be related to the old feminist movement
or the present women's liberation. In traditional symbolism the
woman refers more specifically to the biological and psychic
aspect of human life; she is seen primarily as the mother, and/or
the intuitive or "psychic" type of person. A new race of human
beings may well be slowly unfolding some of its potential of
consciousness and fulfillment. The individual who envisions this
evolutionary development "sounds the call." He or she is both
seer-herald and mutant. In that sense such a human being is
both an individual true to his original nature and a dedicated
person—dedicated to the future he or she holds in latency as
does a seed in mutation.
At this third stage of the sixty-eighth five-fold sequence the two
preceding phases blend in a new form of consecration of the individ­
ual to the Whole. Tomorrow acts through today; it SUMMONS men to
rebirth.

PHASE 339 (PISCES 9°): A JOCKEY SPURS HIS HORSE, INTENT
ON OUTDISTANCING HIS RIVALS.
KEYNOTE: Intense mobilization of energy and skill in the
drive for success in any social performance affected by
the competitive spirit
Since the end of the archaic ages and the stressing of individual­
ism, especially in our American society which worships the
material images of "success," the desire to win any land of

274 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
"race" engenders an often-feverish release of energy controlled
by technical skill and long practice. Wherever this symbol is
found, it indicates the need to spur one's total being toward
speedy attainment of whatever goal it may be.
This is the fourth symbol in the sixty-eighth series; its technical signifi­
cance is quite evident. Every superflous "weight," every unnecessary
consideration is to be dismissed in the one-pointed attempt to reach
one's social goal, SELF-QUICKENING may be the Keyword.

P H A S E 340 (PISCES 10*): A N AVIATOR PURSUES HIS JOURNEY, FLYING THROUGH GROUND-OBSCURING CLOUDS.
KEYNOTE: Man's ability to develop powers and skills which

by transcending natural limitations allow him to operate in mental-spiritual realms.

This symbol in a sense synthesizes the implications of the four
preceding ones: the dedication to the community of men (pres­
ent and future), self-assertion and the ambition to reach a social
goal. Man is seen mastering difficulties implied in a type of
operation transcending his organic limitations and the narrow
boundaries of a localized "living space." He does so as an indi­
vidual in command of powerful energies, but also as heir to the
industry of countless innovators and managers.
This is the last symbol of the sixty-eighthfive-foldsequence of evolving
stages of consciousness and human activity. It evokes the achievement

Of MASTERY.
T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V T D U A L - M E N T A L
P H A S E 341 (PISCES 11*): M E N TRAVELING A NARROW PATH,
SEEKING ILLUMINATION.
*
KEYNOTE: The capacity inherent in every individual to

seek at whatever cost entrance to a transcendent
of reality.

realm

This refers to the ancient and eternal symbol of the Path of
Discipleship. The greatness of man is that he can always be

A REFORMULATION O F T H E SABIAN SYMBOLS 875
greater; and the belief—deeply rooted in men's inner nature—
that i f he fulfills the necessary conditions he can find "Elder
Brothers" who have already attained a higher level of conscious­
ness and will transfer their attainment and light to him. The
Path is always open to the pure in heart, the mentally aware, the
conqueror of emotions and the spiritually self-mobilized.
This symbol opens the sixty-ninthfive-foldsequence and a new level
of consciousness. Man is always in the making and remaking. He can
always go further, reach beyond. But he has to take the first step.
Someone can show him the Path, but he alone can do the walking.
Thus the Zen injunction: WALK ON.

P H A S E 342 (PISCES 12*): I N T H E SANCTUARY O F AN OCCULT
BROTHERHOOD, NEWLY INITIATED MEMBERS ARE B E ING EXAMINED A N D T H E I R CHARACTER TESTED.

The ever-repeated challenge presented to the in¬
dividual by the group in which he has claimed acceptance—the challenge to prove himself and his ability to
assume responsibility effectively.

KEYNOTE:

At any level of activity, sooner or later life itself demands of the
individual that he or she stand up clearly and unequivocally to
the ideal he himself has declared publicly his own. At the occult
level the testing seems to be controlled and irrevocable. The
"initiate" has become a constituent part of an integrated field
of mental-spiritual activity. He is therefore controlled by the
structural order of the group. He is no longer seeking; having
found his place, he must prove himself able to fulfill the function
associated with it. He is no longer "free" as an individual, for he
has become a part of an integral Whole operating under struc­
tural principles of immense antiquity.
This second symbolic stage of unfoldment stands in contrast to the first
in that the individual is now bound by collective laws and traditions.
At a mundane political or business level he is the junior executive
incorporated in a hierarchical institution. He has at all times to prove
his worth, QUALIFICATION is an apt Keyword.

276 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 343 (PISCES 13*): A N ANCIENT SWORD, USED IN
MANY BATTLES, IS DISPLAYED IN A MUSEUM.

Through the effectual use of his will a consecrated man can become a symbol of courage for all
those who follow in his footsteps.

KEYNOTE:

Will power is the ultimate spiritual weapon, and its undeviating
use is the certification of individual worth. Wherever found, this
symbol emphasizes the imperative need to make use of the will
in meeting the basic challenges of the inner life as well as outer
adversaries.
With this third symbol of the sixty-ninth sequence we see singled out
and strongly emphasized the one power in man which is an assurance
of victory in the contests generated by social (or occult) processes in
which he has become an active part. The individual must use that
WILL POWER, yet it is not really his own once he operates at a spiritual
level. It is God's will operating through his mind which focuses its
thrusts. It is, occultly speaking, the power of the Brotherhood—the
energy of the Whole operating through the one-pointed individual
who has made this Whole aware of the need for its use in a particular
situation.

P H A S E 344 (PISCES 14*): A LADY WRAPPED IN A LARGE
STOLE O F FOX FUR.

The use of intelligence and mental subtlety as a
protection against storms and trials*

KEYNOTE:

Coming just after the preceding symbols and as the fourth stage
of a five-fold sequence, which is usually related to some kind of
technique, this symbol may at first seem irrelevant. The key to
its interpretation, missed by the commentators, is fox fur. In
symbolism and mythology the fox is always a clever and subtle
animal. It represents the intellect at its early stage of "cunning'';
in a broader sense, it also refers to "intelligence," considered as
the ability to adapt to any and all life situations. Spiritual will
and the ability to stand in facing tests are necessary in any

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 377
crucial or challenging situation that an individual meets within
a power-oriented group. But the sword-like will often has to be
shielded, and intelligence or acumen can be the most precious
help in danger. It is a personal (i.e. "animal" or instinctual)
shield, perhaps evèn a camouflage. It hides the central will, but
it keeps the individual from unnecessary hardships.
What we see symbolized here is a self-protective way of meeting the
inclemencies of weather, actual or psychic, which abound as one leads
a life consecrated to a vaster Whole;forthis very consecration arouses
strong enmities. Unnecessary risks areforbiddento the initiate,forthe
security of the Brotherhood might be endangered. The needforPROTECTIVE SHIELDING is imperative, and glamor can be an effective
shield.

PHASE 345 (PISCES 159): AN OFFICER INSTRUCTING HIS MEN
BEFORE A SIMULATED ASSAULT UNDER A BARRAGE OF
LIVE SHELLS.
KEYNOTE: The need for thorough rehearsing before any
complex and inherently dangerous social ritual in
which power is used or evoked.
In this fifth symbol of a series dealing with the confrontation
with superpersonal group or occult power we see a picture
which once again synthesizes what the four preceding symbols
have implied, rather than stated. In social life, as well as occult­
ism, conflict is always to be expected; one must prepare for i t
At the close of the great cycle—in the zodiac, the sign Pisces—
a deep-seated struggle is inevitable at least to some extent. I t
can be a struggle against the ghosts of the unfulfilled past, the
"unlived life," or a confrontation with accumulated and ofteneluded karma. Indeed, Pisces refers to a period in the year
during which many generals and admirals have been born. The
rules of the game, at least in traditionalformsof warfare, can
be known. One may have to rehearse the dangerous play, just
as our astronauts endlessly rehearsed every step in the moon

278 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
landings. Individual rashness cannot be tolerated. Even a delib­
erate sacrifice must play a well-conceived part—like the sac­
rifice of an important piece in a game of chess.
This is the last symbol in Scene Twenty-three. The entire scene dealt
in various ways with the process of integration of the individual into
a social Whole, a community, an occult Brotherhood. A concluding
Keyword could be VALORIZATION. The concept of group-value domi­
nates the entire scene.

SCENE TWENTY-FOUR:

(Pisces iff to Pisces 30V

PERPETUATION

F I R S T LEVEL: A C T I O N A L

PHASE 346 (PISCES l6#): IN THE QUIET OF HIS STUDY A
CREATIVE INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCES A FLOW OF INSPIRATION.
KEYNOTE: Reliance upon one's inner source of inspiration
or guidance.
In this last scene of the great ritual of cyclic existence we are
dealing with various aspects of the process that enables man to
"con-firm," formulate and perpetuate the original creative im­
pulse which has become self-actualized in a myriad of ways
throughout the cycle, short or long as the cycle may be. This first
symbol strikes the keynote of truly significant creative proc­
esses: their source is above, beyond, but also around the individ­
ual creator. The inspiration, original and individual though it
may be, is given a form which is conditioned by the cultural,
social and religious background of the creative person. In a
sense, every genius merely records an answer to the needs of
his time. The hands that write, play an instrument, or mold a
plastic material are his own; the urge or drive back of the flow
of inspiration has arisen in the vast collective mind of Man.

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 279
This is thefirstof the seventieth series offivesymbols. The individual
aspect of the creative process is emphasized as is the individual's need
for concentration and at least inner quiet. He must have faith in his

OWn SUBJECTIVE STRENGTH.
»

P H A S E 347 (PISCES 17*): AN EASTER PARADE.

The capacity inherent in all great sociocultural
Images to unite the members of a community in a
display of excellence.

KEYNOTE:

Here we see, by contrast, the unifying power of great myths and
symbols in truly organic and self-perpetuating culture. The Im­
age of the Resurrection spurs all men within the pale of Chris­
tendom to appear at their very best, and to dynamize
themselves in some kind of self-renewal in response to the
Christ mythos, and to the call of nature's springtime as well.
Wherever found, this symbol emphasizes the value of attuning
one's life activities and moods to the ritualistic patterns of so­
ciety or Earth-nature, rather than acting in complete independ­
ence from the group.
At this second stage of thefive-foldsubcycle the Collective dominates
the Individual, Yin overpowers Yang. It is a time for conformity to
what constitutes the highest ideals of one's culture and for PARTICIPA-

TION IN COLLECTIVE PEAK EXPERIENCES.

P H A S E 348 (PISCES l8 ): I N A GIGANTIC TENT, VILLAGERS
WITNESS A SPECTACULAR PERFORMANCE.
#

The collective appeal of a well-staged and exciting display of skill and/or oratory.

KEYNOTE:

At first, Marc Jones interpreted the "gigantic tent" as the locale
for a revivalist's meeting; later he suggested a circus tent in­
stead. In a sense, the basic meaning is the same. Whether it is

280 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

the traditional performance of skilled clowns, acrobats or animal trainers, or that of a religious fundamentalist dramatizing
an old religious imagery, what takes place is the use of personal
achievement and conviction to bring a crowd to a state of enthusiasm sufficient to make it forget its boredom with everyday
routine or its familiar sins of commission or omission.
At this third stage of the seventieth five-fold sequence, the individual
person and the collectivity are brought together in a significant performance which subtly strengthens the communal spirit directly or indirectly. The implication of the symbol, whenever it is found
operating, is that the time has come for the individual to dare to
present himself and his works to his community for applause, or for
the purpose of attracting a following. What is suggested is PUBLIC
SELF-DRAMATIZATION.

P H A S E 349 (PISCES 19*): A MASTER INSTRUCTING HIS DISCIPLE.

The transfer of power and knowledge which
keeps the original spiritual and creative Impulse of the
cycle active and undeviated.

KEYNOTE:

The Hindu ideal of the sacred relationship between guru and
chela (disciple) has of late become familiar to a vast number of
young and not-so-young people. The doctrine of "the Apostolic
succession" in the Roman Catholic Church has a similar signifi­
cance. The Power and archetypal knowledge released "in the
teginning" of any cycle (or at "Creation") must be perpetuated
until the very Last Day—the Omega state of which Teilhard de
Chardin glowingly speaks. This Power is the "self* of the cyclic
manifestation, the unchanging Tone (AUM) of all existences
within this cycle. It can be transmitted from master to disciple
at the latter's "Initiation." It must be so transmitted for when
the line of transmission (in Sanskrit, guruampara) is discon­
tinued, the cyclic process begins to collapse in futility and
spiritual darkness.

A REFORMULATION OF THE 8ABIAN SYMBOLS 281
This fourth stage symbol gives us a clue to the supreme technique
necessary for the continuation of all manifestations of power and
spiritual understanding. The transmission is from person to person; it
follows a general, unchanging pattern, yet it operates in terms of
particular and individual circumstances. Keyword: INVESTITURE.

PHASE 350 (PISCES 20°): A TABLE SET F O R AN EVENING
MEAL.

An indication that in the end and at the appointed time the individual's needs will be met among
those to whom he is linked by a spiritual (or biological)
web of energies*

KEYNOTE:

The significant element in this scene is not only the meal, but
the fact that it is an "evening" meal. To use traditional symbol­
ism, after a long chain of personal existences the Soul returns to
its spiritual home at the close of the day-of-nianifestation. There
it finds that which renews and amply sustains; the happiness of
the "beyond of existence" is experienced—if all has gone well.
This last symbol of the seventiethfive-foldsequence promises a satisfy­
ing or fulfilling end to whatever one has been undertaking. As the life
closes, the Soul-consciousnessfindsNOURISHMENT in the harvest of
whatever, during the whole life, has been relevant to the archetypal
purpose and destiny of the Soul—one of the myriad of aspects of the
divine creative word which began the cycle.

SECOND LEVEL: E M O T I O N A L - C U L T U R A L
PHASE 351 (PISCES 21 # ): U N D E R T H E WATCHFUL AND KIND
EYE O F A CHINESE SERVANT, A GIRL FONDLES A LITTLE
W H I T E LAMB.

Growth in consciousness in its earliest tactile
awareness of the wonders of unsophisticated living.

KEYNOTE:

This symbol recalls the one for Phase 174 (Virgo 24*)—"Mary
and her little lamb"—but it occupies a different position in the

282 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
five-fold sequence and a new factor is added: the "Chinese
servant." According to the occult tradition, the original Chinese
race was an extension of the humanity (or "Root Race") preced­
ing ours—thus the stress upon the biological factors of family
and ancestors, and also on the dualism of the Yang and Yin
interplay. The "Chinese servant" represents the past as a serv­
ant of the new evolution. (The "white lamb" suggests the sign
of all beginnings, Aries.) This new evolution is just about to
begin during the late Pisces phase of the year cycle. It is as yet
an ideal, a white loveliness. The girl discovers the new feeling
of the touch of wool and of animal warmth. The preceding
five-fold sequence began with a symbol suggesting the inspiring
revelation of new truths or facts which the creative person is
seeking to formulate. Now we witness another kind of discovery
—a sensuously emotional discovery, perhaps a presentiment of
the mother-feeling.
This is thefirstsymbol of the seventy-first sequence. It brings together
past and future, an overlapping of levels. The Chinese kindly watching
the white girl; the girl fondling the white lamb. There is charm and
ingenuousness in the scene— a vision of WHITE HOPE, a hope for a
future that can only be felt, almost naively.

P H A S E 3 5 2 (PISCES 22*): A P R O P H E T CARRYING TABLETS O F
T H E N E W L A W IS WALKING DOWN T H E SLOPES O F
M O U N T SINAI.

The need to bring down to the level of everyday
existence the clear realizations made manifest in a
great
"peakexperience"

KEYNOTE:

The symbol obviously refers to Moses after he received from the
God of his people the basic principles upon which a new reli­
gion, and even more a new ritual of living, should be founded.
This basic "Law" has to be "brought down." I t represents a
descent of formative and structuring power, a divine Revela­
tion. This type of revealed knowledge contrasts with the kind
of knowing born out of the experience of touch, offeeling,of
warmth of contact

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 283
This second stage symbol pictures a process to which a religious Godgiven character has been attributed in the past, but which today is
being investigated at the personal and psychological level. The impor­
tant point here is: what do you do after you have a peak experience,
an inner revelation? ^The Keyword MANDATE is appropriate; but the
basic problem is how to fulfill it in the right spirit.

PHASE 353 (PISCES 23 0 ): A "MATERIALIZING" MEDIUM GIVING A SEANCE.
KEYNOTE: The ability to give of one's own vital energy to
substantiate one's conscious ideals or unconscious
desires.
The person who believes he or she has a mission or mandate, or
any special gift that can be of value to his community, must
substantiate this belief. He has to produce results. Sometimes
this involves difficulties and special conditions or circumstances;
it always demands to some extent the gift of some power of
value which is deeply one's own. The thought of sacrifice was
suggested by the "white lamb" in the first symbol of this five­
fold series. Something precious involved in a deeply personal
experience has to be surrendered, offered to others. The medi­
um's psychic substance provides the materials made visible in
the phenomena, if the latter are genuine. After the seance, the
medium is usually exhausted. The performer gives of his very
life to the performance.
This refers to the third stage in the seventy-firstfive-foldprocess. The
display of psychic power that the symbol depicts can be interpreted
positively or negatively according to the motives that induced the
"medium" to give the seance. In its most constructive aspect it sug­
gests the Keyword: SUBSTANTIATION. The shadowy aspect of the proc­
ess is "deception."

284 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 354 (PISCES 24 # ): O N A SMALL ISLAND SURROUNDED
BY T H E VAST EXPANSE O F T H E SEA, PEOPLE ARE SEEN
LIVING IN CLOSE INTERACTION.

The need to consciously accept one's own personal limitations in order to concentrate one's energies
and to live a centered and fulfilled life.

KEYNOTE:

Every individualized person is a small island in the vast ocean
of mankind. The ego fulfills a necessary function, as it sets
boundaries and gives a specific character to the consciousness.
Within these boundaries a complex interplay linking and inte­
grating the various aspects of the personal life can operate con­
structively. In time, these ego-boundaries can not only expand,
but can become a zone of intense interchange between the
inner and the outer, between the individual and the commu­
nity, between man and the universe.
This fourth stage symbol tells us that the first duty of any man or
woman is to be truly what he or she is as an individual. But this
individual has a particular dharma, i.e. a place and function in a vaster
whole. The island's inhabitants get subsistence from the sea, and in
time learn to navigate this sea and interact with other islanders—and
all eventually will come to realize their oneness within the whole
Earth, which includes everything. An appropriate Keyword would be

CENTRALIZATION.

P H A S E 3 5 5 (PISCES 25*): A RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION SUCCEEDS IN OVERCOMING T H E CORRUPTING INFLUENCE
O F PERVERTED PRACTICES AND MATERIALIZED
IDEALS.

The power of the Soul to intervene in the personal life and to induce necessary catharses.

KEYNOTE:

The necessary centralization of the conscious attention and will
symbolized by the preceding picture most often bring negative
results—exclusivism, pride, jealousy, greed for power and
wealth. Every man is a Church that has the Soul as its god, but

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 285
most men forget the Soul and live according to dogmatic rules
and habits which not only have become empty of inner mean­
ing, but very often have been perverted by the demands of the
senses and the emotional nature, and by the ego with its ration­
alizing intellect. A purging or catharsis is needed to restore not
onlyfreshand creative spontaneity, but even more the contact
with the Soul and the God-ordained dharma.
This is the last stage in the seventy-first subcycle. It leads significantiy
to the series offivesymbols which concludes the vast cycle, because
thefinalconsummation of the process of actualization of the potency
inherent in the original Creative Act requires moments of crisis and

PURIFICATION.

T H I R D LEVEL: I N D I V I D U A L - M E N T A L
PHASE 3 5 6 (PISCES 26 0 ): WATCHING THE VERY THIN MOON
CRESCENT APPEARING AT SUNSET, DIFFERENT PEOPLE
REALIZE THAT T H E TIME HAS COME T O GO AHEAD
WITH THEIR DIFFERENT PROJECTS.
KEYNOTE: A

keen appreciation of the value of individualized responses to any challenge of life.

The rather obscure original notation for this zodiacal degree, "A
new moon that divides its influences," when translated into
practical terms refers to the fact that, confronted with the op­
portunity to expand their energy along new lines, modern in­
dividuals will react according to their own personal characters.
One basic cosmic-spiritual impulse will lead these varied per­
sonalities to take equally varied steps. In any society that glo­
rifies individualism, everyone should therefore accept this fact
and not try to compel other individuals to conform to a single
pattern of response.
Thisfirstsymbol of the seventy-second and last series offivestresses
the essential nature of the cyclic process of actualization of human
potential, i.e. the emergence of the individual (cf. symbol for Phase 1).
This should lead to a realization of THE FALLACY OF TOTALITARIAN-

286 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

ISM; at times we can all act like despots, demanding that others react
to any situation exactly as we do.

P H A S E 3 5 7 (PISCES 27*): THE HARVEST MOON ILLUMINES A

CLEAR AUTUMNAL SKY.
KEYNOTE: The light of fulfillment
done.

that blesses work well

For astroriomical reasons the full moon of early autumn, the
harvest moon, appears slightly larger than all other full moons.
In our temperate Northern Hemisphere, these are the days
when the green of summerfieldsand woods has turned gold and
warm brown—days for the reaping of the good harvest, if all has
gone well. This symbol brings us the message that the time has
come to reap what we have not only sown, but also cultivated
—or failed to cultivate.
This second stage symbol once more stands in opposition to the one
for the preceding stage—new moon having now become full moon,
indeed the fullest of all full moons. The Keyword is CONSUMMATION.
But in this consummation—this "karmic" moment—the seed of the
new cyclic manifestation is already latent.

P H A S E 3 5 8 (PISCES 28*): A FERTILE GARDEN UNDER T H E
FULL MOON REVEALS A VARIETY O F FULL-GROWN
VEGETABLES.
KEYNOTE:

needs.

The full satisfaction of the individual's

basic

This symbol would seem a duplication of the preceding one, but
i f it is related to the first of this five-fold séries (Phase 356) its
meaning becomes clear. What is stressed now is not the full
moon itself or its light, but the moon's power to call forth the
instinctive urge for growth; many things respond in many diff­
erent ways. The symbol refers to a typical garden, not to a field.

4

A REFORMULATION OF THE SABIAN SYMBOLS 287
Such a garden contains a variety of plants» herbs and vegetables
grown specifically to fill an equal variety of human needs and
tastes.
In this sense the third symbol of this seventy-second sequence com­
bines the meanings of the first two. It is a symbol of ABUNDANCE, an
abundance fitted to individualized requirements and wants.

PHASE 359 (PISCES 29*): LIGHT BREAKING INTO MANY COLORS AS IT PASSES THROUGH A PRISM.
KEYNOTE: The analytical power of the mind necessary for
the formulation of life processes in their many aspects.
Cycles of existence begin in unity and end in what I have called
"multi-unity." At the stage of consummation the many individ­
ual differences are totaled; they constitute a sum. Within that
sum—a unified total—the inevitability of the future process of
differentiation is implied, because every cycle leaves a mass of
waste products slowly returning to the unconscious state of
chemical matter, of "humus." What the symbol tells us is that
unity will always break again into multiplicity. The "prism" is
always there. There is no abolsute unity; if anything could be
called "absolute" it is the relationship between the One and the
Many.
This fourth stage symbol of the concluding five-fold sequence of
phases points to the fundamental type of operation in all modes of
existence. The most beautiful and seemingly everlasting experience of
unity will in time be superseded by the need to attend to a multiplicity
of details. Existence implies DIFFERENTIATION.

1

288 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

P H A S E 360 (PISCES 30*): A MAJESTIC ROCK FORMATION
RESEMBLING A FACE IS IDEALIZED BY A BOY W H O
TAKES I T AS HIS IDEAL O F GREATNESS, AND AS H E
GROWS UP, BEGINS T O LOOK LIKE IT.

The power of clearly visualized ideals to mold
the life of the visualizer.

KEYNOTE:

Nathaniel Hawthorne's story "The Great Stone Face" is used
here in an allegorical sense to show the capacity for self-trans­
formation latent in man. This power can be developed through
visualization, when the emotions and the will are poured into
the visualized mental image. At the highest spiritual-cosmic
level this is the power used by the God-like Beings at the close
of a cosmic cycle in projecting the basic Formula (the Word)
which will start a new universe. In a biological sense, it is the
power latent in all seeds—the power to produce and guide the
growth of the future plant. A most fitting symbol for the last
phase of the cyclic process. Within the end of the cycle the seed
of a new beginning exists in potency—unless the entire cycle
has proven to be a failure.
This is the last stage of the last scene of the great ritual play of cyclic
transformations. It brings to us a realization of the power of archetypes
as factors conditioning life processes. Thus we could use as a final

Keyword: ARCHETYPAUZATION.

Part T h r e e
THE NUMERICAL
STRUCTURE OF THE
Z O D I A C A L SERIES

!

l. B i n a r y Relationships
B e t w e e n Z o d i a c a l Signs

®

NOW THAT I HAVE REFORMULATED AND INTERPRETED STN-

gly and in terms of sequential order, the 360 symbols produced
by the remarkable revelation in which Marc Edmund Jones and
Elsie Wheeler participated in 1925,1 shall devote my attention
to the various ways in which these symbols are geometrically
interrelated. First, however, let me remind the reader that the
symbols were visualized by the clairvoyant in a completely alea­
tory manner and at extraordinary speed, with no knowledge of
what zodiacal degree the clairvoyantly visualized pictures re­
ferred to—a point discussed at length in the second chapter of
Part One.
Because these symbols actually represent 360 phases of a
complete and self-fulfilling process, they are interrelated and
their sequence has an essentially functional character. This may
not be obvious at first sight, and often it has not been under­
stood. In order to become aware of this functional character i t
is necessary first to accept the idea that the entire set of 360
symbols is a whole, with a complete geometrical structure as
well as a specific rhythm of unfoldment—and that the cyclic

292 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
process which the set pictorializes has a basic purpose.
This purpose is at least suggested by the primary symbols,
which are a holistic key to the meaning of the process. These
symbols refer to the three essential moments in all cyclic proc­
esses: the beginning, the middle and the end. These moments
are often represented by the Greek letters alpha, mu and
omega. They correspond to Phase I (Aries i°), Phase 180 (libra O
and Phase 360 (Pisces 30°).
The symbol for Aries i* states two things: (1) Every new
cycle of activity implies an emergence from the infinite Ocean
of potentiality—the "great Waters of Space," according to oc­
cult terminology; (2) Every new beginning finds itself sur­
rounded by the at least relative failures of past cycles; it there­
fore has to overcome the backward, or "seaward," pull (or
karma) of the past. The overcoming is made possible by the use
of an objective, detached outlook (symbol for Aries 2°), and
thereafter by the realization that every individual whole is not
only part of a "greater Whole," but a microcosm of this mac­
rocosm (Aries 3 0 ). A polarization of energy (Aries 40) is required
to actualize this realization. Out of this polarization a "capacity
for self-transcending" should be developed which will enable
one eventually to reach a higher level of consciousness (Aries 5°).
This five-fold sequence of symbols constitutes the alpha
statement at the origin of cycles, at least of those pertaining to
the development of man's consciousness and his potential of
being, first as an individual, and presumably also in terms of the
entire evolution of mankind. What is potential should be actual­
ized at the omega stage of the cycle. This stage is symbolized
in various ways by the pictures relating to the last degrees of
Pisces. The entire Scene Twenty-four should be carefully stud­
ied, but the symbol for Phase 360, under the cover of an allegory
taken from Hawthorne's story "The Great Stone Face," is quite
explicit. What emerged instinctively and subjectively in Phase
1 has reached the point at which it becomes completely iden­
tified with the very purpose of the emergence. Potentiality
becomes actuality, the creative Impulse (the Logos, the Wordin-the-beginning) is embodied in an individual person who has
been transformed into the likeness of his ideal.

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 293
How can such a transformation be accomplished? Once

they are clearly interpreted the symbols that stand at the mid­
point of the cycle tell the story in a very significant manner. The
symbol for Virgo 3 0 ' (Phase 180) tells us that as a person reaches
the midpoint of his evolution—which in a human life may be the
age of thirty-five or forty-two, depending on one's level of evolu­
tion—he must be "totally intent upon completing an immediate
task" and "deaf to any allurement." This concentrated attention
can lead to "Initiation." Having surrendered the fleeting and
unessential pursuits of human existence, the individual becomes
fully aware of what he archetypaUy is—therefore, of the place
he occupies, or could occupy, in the permanent record of Man.
The symbols that follow (Libra 2*, 3*, 4*, 5*) bring more light
to the somewhat mysterious symbol for Libra i*. The metamor­
phosis which leads to the revelation of one's permanent seedarchetype (butterfly) demands a "repolarization of inner ener­
gies." This repolarization throws a transforming fight upon
everything that has so far been seen only in the relative dark­
ness of the mind-consciousness. Moreover, the light should be
sustained not only by the efforts of the individual alone, but by
a group of companions; their joint dedication inevitably brings
the Teacher-Exemplar who transmits to them knowledge and
power.
Of course in considering these symbols, one can get only a
glimpse of what is at stake in the cyclic process of transforma­
tion. The internal structure of the cycle—and therefore the
character of time itself, at least in terms of human experience
—becomes apparent when the annual sequence of seasonal
changes is used as a model. This model reveals that all life
processes—at least on this Earth—imply the existence of two
opposite and complementary forces, called Yang and Yin by
Chinese philosophers. In relation to man's seasonal experience
of light and darkness I have spoken of them as the Day-force and
the Night-force.* The hemicycle in which the Day-force is
dominant (spring and summer) witnesses the actualization of
the potential of individualization, the formation and growth of
•Cf. The Pulse of Life.

294 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
specific forms and individual responses to life situations. The
hemicycle in which the Night-force is dominant (fall and winter)
emphasizes collective values and ideals in order that single units
may coalesce and become integrated into larger wholes.
In the interplay of Day-force and Night-force, four charac­
teristic moments are observed: the equinoxes and the solstices.
In the zodiacal sequence they correspond to Aries r, Cancer i*,
Libra i* and Capricorn i*. They constitute critical phases of
adjustment, and ancient astrologer-philosophers symbolized
these four critical states of consciousness and modes of substan­
tial existence as Fire, Water, Air and Earth. In studying the basic
structure of cyclic time we are therefore dealing with a quater­
nary pattern that reveals the constant interaction of two pola­
rizing principles of activity. When the astrologer refers to Fire
and Water, he should have in rnind the operation of two types
of activity and consciousness required for the full process of
individualization. This process operates at several levels: biolog­
ical, psycho-mental and spiritual—the latter being, with a very
few exceptions, beyond the comprehension of mankind in its
present state.
At the biological level, Fire refers to all that makes possible
the growth of organisms from the germinal state (alpha state);
Water refers to whatever makes possible the steady, rhythmic
maintenance and propagation of the organism. At this same
level, Air refers to processes of interaction between single organ­
isms living within a particular environment—an interaction of
whose purpose living organisms are unconscious until a particu­
lar state in human evolution is reached. This state at first exists
at a local-regional level; this leads to the formation of a variety
of cultures upholding a few characteristic archetypes or para­
digms. Then mankind slowly and often tragically evolves to­
ward—and eventually will reach—the level of global-planetary
interaction. The fourth "element," Earth, refers to the process
of consolidation of the patterns produced by the interactions
which have proven most adequate for the purpose of life.
The attribution of the characteristics of Fire, Water, Air and
Earth to the noncritical zodiacal signs (i.e. the fixed and mutable
signs) has only a secondary meaning when we consider the

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 295
process in terms of a succession of cyclically repeated steps. But
the cycle as a whole can be studied as well in terms of the
space-relationship between its many phases; it is this approach
that has been emphasized in the teaching of astrology. What is
done, therefore, is, to consider the cyclic process as a circle
divided into 12 sections—the zodiacal signs. These sections—
and their subsections, the decanates and the degrees of the
zodiac—can be related to one another geometrically. These
relationships are called "aspects." By analyzing the aspects we
study the internal structure of the whole. This is an "archetyp­
al" structure. In actual existence every phase follows another in
time-relationship. Yet a consciousness that can embrace an en­
tire time cycle at once—earlier I called this an eonic conscious­
ness^—can "geometrize" the existential process. It can operate
at the level of archetypes.
The distinction between archetypal (also called structural)
knowledge and existential (or empirical) knowledge has often
been obscured by semantic and epistemological discussions
among philosophers. There is nothing mysterious about it; the
mystery arises only when it is spoken of as the distinction be­
tween Being and Becoming, and emotionally metaphysical
meanings are given to those terms which glorify the former
(permanence) and downgrade the latter (change).
It is not possible here to discuss the complexities introduced
into what should be a simple concept by warring ideologies, but
I mention this because it is essential for us to understand how
all forms of symbolism, and astrology more than any other,
make use of two opposite, yet complementary approaches—the
time-approach (existential) and the space-approach (archetyp­
al). We shall see at once what this involves when we refer to the
concept of polarity in astrology.
When an astrologer speaks of Aries being a "masculine"
• sign, and Taurus a "feminine" sign, he applies the concept of
polarization (or in general of dualism and binary relationship) to
two signs mainly, if not exclusively, in terms of sequence in time:
Taurus follows Aries. But when the astrologer speaks of Aries
and Libra as "polarities," he refers to the division of a circle into
two semicircles—a geometrical space-fact.

296 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
The two approaches are equally valid, but they refer to
different levels of experience or to two kinds of concepts. If one
considers astrology an empirical science based on traditional
rules to be memorized and applied—rules the relative value of
which could be determined by statistical research—the differ­
ence between the geometrical and the sequential points of view
is of no great significance. On the other hand, anyone thinking
of astrology as a symbolical language whose purpose is to reveal
the essential meaning of life situations of all kinds should try to
understand the philosophy behind the symbolism. An under­
standing of the distinction between time-values and space-val­
ues, between the existential and the archetypal approaches to
knowledge, is most important here. The conceptual ambiguity
found in practically every field of astrology is very often due to
a lack of differentiation between these two approaches.
The type of geometrical polarization resulting from an op­
position aspect—as between Aries and Libra—is not a matter of
immediate experience in natural living. Mental objectivity and
some degree of abstract thinking are required. The two factors
in opposition (i.e. 180 degrees apart) complement one another
within the larger scheme of the cyclic process, in the same way
that Yang and Yin complement each other. But while every
moment of life and every cyclic phase witness the interaction
of these two cosmic factors, the relative victory of Yang over Yin
during springtime is not experienced at the same time as—nor
can it be immediately related to—the autumnal ascendancy of
Yin over Yang.
On the other hand, Aries needs Taurus (the following sign)
to "confirm*—i.e. to give substantial firmness to—its "fiery"
impulse toward individualized existence in a clearly bounded
and well-defined field of activity. Aries needs Taurus as a male
needs a female—as a highly projective type of activity requires
a bending of its straightforward expansivehess along a circular
path which establishes the boundaries of personalized living
and experiencing. In the same way, Gemini needs Cancer just
as the multidirectional curiosity for knowledge and varied ex­
periences demands the eventual establishment of a center and
the conscious acceptance of limits; and without the sobering

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 297
critical factors related to Virgo, the emotionally creative ego,
strong in Leo, would be lost in empty dramatics.
The "masculine" signs need to be confirmed by the "femi­
nine" ones that immediatley follow them. In any experience the
future acts upon the present, just as the regressive or karmic
pull of the past affects the fleeting now. The two signs in se­
quence therefore constitute an operative coupling. Aries and
Libra, and all opposite signs, do not: they refer to activities that
can be seen to be complementary only in terms of the harmony
of the zodiacal Whole.

I F THESE BASIC CONCEPTS A R E W E L L UNDERSTOOD I T IS E A S T
to see how the Sabian symbols for the first degrees of all twelve
zodiacal signs fit into the pattern. Each first-degree symbol es­
tablishes a keynote (or potential of meaningful development)
for the entire 30-degree span of the sign. I call the symbols for
the six so-called masculine signs (Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra,
Sagittarius, Aquarius) "root symbols"; those for the six feminine
signs "symbols of confirmation."
The Aries i * root symbol (A woman just risen from the sea.
A seal is embracing her.) is confirmed by the symbol for Taurus
(A clear mountain stream.). In the first symbolical scene we
see a human being just emerging from the vast ocean of uncon­
scious potentialities—the regressive pull toward a past of failure
still surrounding the woman's emergence into the field of con­
scious and individualized activity, i.e. the dry land. Will this
emergence succeed? Will the "trans-formation" represented in
potentiality by the Aries i# symbol actualize itself? Will the
"land" support life, the foundation for individualized conscious­
ness? The Taurus i * symbol "con-firms" this possibility of suc­
cess; the pure mountain stream will become the great river on
whose banks will develop a rich vegetation, then a tribal cul­
ture, and later a city. The river is an individualized form of
water. The water was drawn up from the sea into clouds, and
fell as rain or snow upon the mountain. In time the river will
return to the sea, its water charged with the impurities and
waste products of the creatures of the biosphere—especially

i*

298 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
human beings whose consciousness today operates in terms of
destruction of matter (which inevitably implies waste products)
and of intellectual analysis (which produces an enormous
amount of psychic waste).
Because the emerging human being needs the reassurance
that on land there will be water to support life, the symbol for
Taurus i* confirms the operational chances of success for the
process beginning with Aries i*. In the same way, the symbol for
Cancer i * (On a ship the sailors lower an old flag and raise a new
one.) "con-firms" what was only a potential beginning in Phase
61 of the cycle, Gemini i * (A glass-bottomed boat reveals undersea wonders.). This Gemini i * symbol refers to the first conscious
realization of the existence of a world of hidden ("occult") forms
and energies by the individualizing mind. At a more ordinary
level, the youth born on a remote farm finds as he reaches
college age that his mind is inspired (and possibly bewildered!)
by the contents of thousands of books and unfamiliar experi­
ences. Can he act constructively in terms of this vast and so far
unsuspected knowledge? The Cancer i * symbol confirms this
possibility. He can choose to operate in terms of new ideals and
a new sense of value. As a conscious individual he can transfer
his allegiance to a more-than-local or more-than-biological type
of activity.
This in turn can lead to results symbolized by the picture
accompanying Leo i (Phase 121): Blood rushes to a man's head
#

as his vital energies are mobilized under the spur of ambition.

This symbol was noted on the original Sabian cards in a pecul­
iarly negative manner; indeed the process of "mentalization" of
the body's biological energies can be seen in a destructive light
It is a dangerous process, as is civilization itself! The transmuta­
tion of energies requiredforthe development of an individually
creative mind, even if centered in the true self, tends at first to
disrupt the harmony of nature, both within* the individual per­
son and in his society. This has been responsible for the preva­
lence of heart disease, and the incapacity of the body to dispose
of the toxins and waste materials produced by the tense activity
of the ego seeking to control and use biological energiesforits
own purposes—which usually means self-aggrandizement But

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 299
the symbol for Virgo i (In a portrait, the significant features of
a man's head are artistically emphasized.) confirms the possibil­
#

ity of success, because a portrait reveals the interior transforma­
tion produced by the will to individual self-expression, a trans­
formation most characteristically seen in the features and the
expression of the face.
If we now turn to Libra i* and its enigmatic symbol (In a

collection of perfect specimens of many biological forms, a butterfly displays the beauty of its wings, its body impaled by a
fine dart.), we enter the second hemicycle of the process of

transformation. This hemicycle deals essentially with the trend
to collectivization—i.e. the domination of the Yin principle, or
Night-force. The Libra i* symbol implies that if mankind is to
become one organized global whole it has to act in accordance
with the archetype of Man. In other words, group-action is
needed to actualize the full potential of human nature—one
might say the entire "Idea" God had of Man. Conversely, if a
collectivity of human beings is to be successful, it has to model
its structure and behavior upon the divine Idea. Divine Manifes­
tations, or Avatars, come to reveal the character and implica­
tions of this Idea both to individuals, who become "initiated"
through the sacrifice of their fleeting ego-life, and to "seedgroups," who, growing through many crises and purgings, bring
forth a new culture and society.
The symbol for Scorpio i (A crowded sightseeing bus on a
city street.) suggests that the transition from the narrow sur­
roundings of an ego-consciousness ruled by earthly biological
patterns of activity to the wider field of the group-life of "citi­
zens" animated by a broader sense of interhuman relationship
is possible. Our modern cities and their alienated, competitive
citizens offer but a caricature of what the "Holy City" (the New
Jerusalem or Shamballah) is to be; yet the process of expansion
goes on, even though it may be through the glorification of
negative reflections of the archetypal Idea.
With Sagittarius i* we come to a picture of a more cohesive
type of collectivity, one which is based upon the sharing of
struggles and hardships (Retired Army veterans gather to reawaken old memories.). The group-life has produced what
#

300 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

theoretically

could be an elite of men whose characters and
wills have been tempered by the overcoming of collectively
met dangers. But what is the use of the long struggle? The
symbol for Capricorn i* (An Indian chief claims power from the
assembled tribe.) confirms the validity of this struggle and of the
special training it entails. These efforts make it possible for man
to demand and gain social power—a type of power which re­
sults from social interplay and organized activity at the "politi­
cal" level (Polis is the Greek word for "city/*).
The symbol for Aquarius i (An old adobe mission in California.) refers to the institutionalized results of efforts on the
part of a collectivity of men driven by an ideal, or a national and
religious goal. A society demonstrates its ability to expand sig­
nificantly as it leaves a permanent social, religious and cultural
impress upon a foreign land. But is it really worth the struggle?
The symbol for Pisces i* (In a crowded marketplace farmers and
middlemen display a great variety of products.) confirms that
it is, at least at the level of the community. Institutions may last
or they may crumble away but the impulse from them has
established a continuing commerce or commingling of human
beings which makes life richer and more comfortable for a
community of people. The level of human consciousness has
been raised through the expansion of viewpoints and interests.
A circulation of values is produced which is gradually building
"the Universal Community of Man" (in the words of Thomas
Jefferson).
Thus the cyclic process has gone from the insecure individ­
ual emerging from the unconscious expanse of being to the
greater social organism of a culture inspired by ideals and tran­
scendent goals. The implication for the individual person is a
transformation of his consciousness and a development of his
mind and its powers, for it is only through complex relationships
—complex and varied, yet within a structured field of group
activities—that the consciousness of man can expand and reach
a higher level of understanding.
#

F R O M T H E FOREGOING I T IS EVIDENT T H A T T H E ZODIACAL
cycle is to be divided into six pairs, rather than into twelve signs

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 301
more or less independent of one another. The wholeness of the
cycle differentiates itself naturally into a six-fold pattern; there­
fore the number 6 plays a basic role in life, at least at the level
at which consciousness reaches objectivity. We speak of such a
type of consciousness as "self-consciousness" (or as Teilhard de
Chardin called it, "reflective consciousness") because the im­
pressions that constitute the raw data of consciousness are, at
this stage, referred to a "center"—i.e. to an experiencer able to
say " I " and " I experience... therefore I am" (a more significant
statement than Descartes' famous " I tliink, therefore I am.").
The I Ching sequence of 64 phases symbolizes the cyclic
interactions of two Principles, Yang and Yin; but there is no
evident center to the great Tai Chi symbol. The hexagrams
themselves, as geometrical forms, have a rather square shape.
On the other hand, where the six-fold nature of the differentia­
tion process is emphasized, the circular geometricalfigureal­
ready mentioned on page 3 2 naturally comes to mind: that is,
one which shows 6 contiguous circles of equal sizes surrounding
a central circle of the same size. The central circle refers to
"self' in the word "self-consciousness." It is the individual per­
son at the center of his birth chart—the individual and not the
Earth-globe!—at least from the point of view of a person-cen­
tered and "humanistic" astrology.
This central self is the experiencer. The six surrounding
circles in the geometrical symbol represent the basic powers of
this experiencer, the six essential ways he can not only experi­
ence his environment at all levels, psychic and spiritual-mental
as well as physical and biological, but can respond to the impacts
made upon him by this environment.
The capacity consciously to respond to an impact, and not
merely to react chemically and electrically to it, is the mark of
the self-conscious man. Physiological reactions are automatic
and instinctive, but strictly speaking, "responses" carry the
stamp of the individual experiencer. "Reactions" in plants and
animals—and many times indeed in ordinary human beingsare "programmed" by a power that is generic but not individu­
alized. Real "responses" are self-directed; they reveal and ex­
press a person's individuality.
There is always a degree of uniqueness in the responses of

302 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
an individualized person, but even more important is the fact
that the individual consciously uses power (in Sanskrit, shaktf)
rather than merely releasing energy. "Power" comes from a
center; "energy" may be released from any place at which an
impact has been registered by appropriate senses and nerve
centers. This is a very important, yet rarely stressed, distinction.
Where there is a center, an experiencer, there also is the
capacity to use power, and to use it meaningfully, for different
purposes and, as evolution proceeds, at different levels. During
the "vitalistic" Ages, early man used power mostly at the biolog­
ical level. He was a cultivator and a breeder of cattle, occupied
with controlling the power of multiplication in the vegetable
and animal seed. He dealt with the energies of "life," and he
worshiped all that related to this power of seed-multiplication,
which is the basic characteristic of life. He enthroned the power
of life in the sky, identifying or symbolizing it by "the Lights"
—the Sun and the Moon. And because' he realized that this
power was fluctuating and operating cyclically according to a
regular sequence of modes of activity, he correlated these sea­
sonal changes with the positions of the Moon and the Sun plot­
ted along the background of the apparently changless patterns
made by what came to be known as "fixed stars"—and in some
specific instances with the first appearance of a star at the hori­
zon at a certain time of the year.
Archaic astrology, which no doubt preceded by thousands
of years the great periods of the Egyptian and Chaldean soci­
eties, dealt with the use of life power for the purpose of groupsurvival and expansion. But as the early tribes increased in size
and larger social units and cities developed, a new level of
consciousness and activity was added to the purely biological
aspect of life. Social power can be used as well as the power of
organic life. Wealth and other social advantages can be multi­
plied as well as physical seed. The level of activity to which our
word culture refers can parallel that of biological cultivation,
but the former is far more susceptible to differentiation and
expansion than the latter, even if sociocultural activities must to
a large extent depend on the satisfactory operation of biological
processes.

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL S! 28 303
Yet while the bipolar life power, symbolized by the lights,
remains the foundation of power for man, the many overtones
of the sociocultural life and their varied and ever-changing com­
binations present a new field for the development of the indi­
vidual. This is the field of the mind and of the infinite complexity
of patterns of feeling-response which arise in answer to ever
more varied experiences resulting from interpersonal and intergroup relationships. This new field was related by the astrolo­
gers of old to the planets and their rhythmically interconnected
cycles.
There is an important distinction between the primordial
bipolar power of life (Sun-Moon) and the differentiated second­
ary powers born of interpersonal and group relationships at the
sociocultural level (the planets). Unfortunately, this distinction
has been largely forgotten or played down by modern astrolo­
gers. It is important in terms of this present study because we
are confronted here with two kinds of differentiation of the
central Power of the universe, and the difference can affect the
interpretation of the Sabian symbols and their most significant
application to varied types of situations.*
The "root symbols" discussed in preceding pages refer to
six fundamental modes of operation of the one life power. To­
gether with the "symbols of confirmation" they characterize
broadly the pairs of signs (zyzygies) which divide the whole
zodiacal process into six periods. That is to say, as the entire
"cycle of transformation" proceeds, six great purposes are being
worked out in sequence. There must be, first of all, EMER­
GENCE from the Unmanifest—the "great Waters of Space," or
•I cannot discuss here the manner in which the planets differentiate the
central and undifferentiated power of the Sun. I have dealt with the matter
in several ways in three earlier books, The Practice of Astrology, New Mansions for New Men, and Triptych. The planets up to and including Saturn
refer to five basic centers of activity or levels of consciousness in the human
being: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The planets beyond Saturn do
not essentially "belong" to the solar system per se. They symbolize the processes of transformation operating during the transition between the lesser
cosmic whole (the solar system or "heliocosm") and the greater cosmic whole,
the galaxy.

304 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
Chaos in the metaphysical sense. This refers to the Aries/Taurus
pair. What has emerged has to pass through a period of UNFOLDMENT of its original potential of being (Gemini/Cancer).
Then follows a period of EXPRESSION of this potential in its
most characteristic aspect (Leo/Virgo). Self-expression, both in
its creative and its structural-technical aspects, leads to a new
level of realization and experience, and we reach the stage of
REORIENTATION in terms of the values and the basic facts of
that new level (Libra/Scorpio). The next step implies a new type
of operation or of mode of power, and COORDINATION is the
Keyword of the zyzygy Sagittarius/Capricorn. Then comes the
symbolic COMING TO SEED which refers to the Aquarius/¬
Pisces pair.
If one considers such a sequence, and perhaps meditates
upon its meaning, it can be seen how the key words can be.
applied to many kinds of situations and cycles. We can state
briefly how the Sabian symbols for the first degrees of the two
signsfitin with the keynote of the period of the zodiacal process
which they constitute.
ARIES symbolizes all beginnings at the level of life power. I t
represents the start of the process of individualization, which
leads to the establishment of stable forms of existence. Every
new birth constitutes an "emergence" from an enveloping ma­
trix—also a germination process, with all the struggle that en­
tails. The symbol for Aries 1* implies not only a rising from the
sea, but entrance to the new field of existence, the dry land. The
symbol for Taurus i* reveals an opposite or polar direction of the
life power. "The pure mountain stream" flows down to the
plains. It vouches for the possibility of life on land. The two
symbols taken together evoke the well-known cycle of water:
ocean, clouds, rain, river, ocean.
In the occult philosophy of India, this mode of operation of
the universal Life-power (the shakti of the Supreme Being and
Consciousness) relates to Parashakti, which is defined by Subba
Row as "the great or supreme force or power. I t means and
1.

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 305
includes the power of light and heat."* It can be said that "light
and heat" are the two primordial aspects of the cosmic power
which is behind the will-to-be of any living organism. "To be"
means also "to radiate"; the quality of any being is demon­
strated by the character of its radiations.
2 . With GEMINI we come to a phase of revelation of potentiali­
ties of existence previously hidden to the consciousness. Thus
the sign represents an avidity for experiences and knowledge of
all kinds. The symbol for Gemini i* is relevant because the
consciousness of an individual is like a boat floating upon the
immense expanse of possible realizations. What is to be known
is infinite. But a part of the boat is made transparent and many
hidden things are revealed, especially if the pilot (theoretically,
the Teacher) leads it over most significant areas of the as-yetunknown-but-knowable. The individual consciousness which
once emerged from the sea of the Unconscious is now able to
discover objectively some of its oceanic mysteries.
This period of "unfoldment" corresponds to the power
called Gnanashakti in Sanskrit. According to Subba Row, this
power has two aspects:
1. When under the influence or control of material conditions, it mani­
fests particularly as (a) the power of the mind in interpreting our
sensations; (b) its power in recalling past ideas (memory) and raising
future expectations; (c) its power as exhibited in what are called by
modem psychologists "the laws of association" which enables it to
form persisting connections between various groups of sensations and
possibilities of sensations, and thus to generate the notion or idea of
an external object; (d) its power in connecting our ideas together by
the mysterious link of memory and in thus generating the notion of
self or individuality.
2. When liberatedfromthe bonds of matter, some of the manifesta­
tions of this shakti are real clairvoyance and psychometry.

•Subba Row, "The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac" (in A Collection of Esoteric Writings of Subba Row, Bombay, 1917). Quotations from this article are
also included in H. P. Blavatsky's Secret Doctrine, original edition, Vol. I, pp.
292-93.

306 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
At man's average level of consciousness today, this Gemini
power deals with the interpretation, association, and classifica­
tion of sensations and, at a later stage, of concepts. Then comes
the Cancer phase, the basic purpose of which is the establish­
ment of persisting and permanent connection between sensa­
tions and between ideas. In the case of sensations these
connections produce the notion of objects; in the case of ideas,
the notion of a permanent identity or self The symbol for Can­
cer i * pictures sailors ready to hoist a new flag. This symbol
reveals the progressive unfoldment of the potentialities of the
human individual as he seeks periodically to re-form the stand­
ards upon which he has built his sense of self and his orientation
toward life in general. A man is what he "thinks in his heart,'*
says the Bible. Gemini "tliinks," but Cancer establishes a certain
category of tliinking in the "heart," and makes it a "persisting"
and "permanent" keystone for the personal life. There is no
unfoldment of being except through these two phases of indi­
vidual existence: the creation of thought categories and of per­
sonal standards. Knowledge and self-realization are forms that
this power takes.
3. With LEO we come to man's characteristic capacity for selfexpression. In terms of the six-fold differentiation of the one
original Power, this is in Sanskrit Ichchashakti, "the power of
will." According to Subba Row, "It's most ordinary manifesta­
tion is the generation of certain nerve currents which set in
motion such muscles as are required for the accomplishment of
the desired object."
"Ich-cha" is literally the energy of self (Ich). I t is the con­
scious, deliberate will of the " I " in contradistinction to the
mostly unconscious bio-cosmic or spiritual impulse which com­
pels the would-be child to emerge out of the womb, or any new
begirming to occur out of the closing of a cycle. Aries is essen­
tially life-expression, or God-expression (through new Ideas or
creative Impulses), while Leo is self-expression. Thus the sym­
bol for Leo i * reveals the result of the wiU-full and determined

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL 81

307

concentration of the individual upon reaching the level of the
creative mind.
The symbol for Virgo i* complements this picture by stress­
ing the idealized features of a man in a portrait drawn by means
of the artist's skill. Human evolution requires not only the exer­
cise of the power of self-expression (Leo), but of the power of
selective self-expression (Virgo). It requires, once more, a
"standard." But while the Cancer symbol spoke of a "flag"
raised on a ship—a social declaration of allegiance and purpose
(of "nationality")—the Virgo symbol depicts an artist's "por­
trait"—thus an idealized expression born of creative vision and
of an individualized piercing through appearances. Virgo deals
with the establishment of a conscious and individual standard
of values—thus with the mscrirninatory faculty. Self-expression
(Leo) must always be united with ^crimination (Virgo) if the
individual is to fulfill the basic meaning/of Man.
4. With the zyzygy of LIBRA and Scorpio we reach a period of
reorientation. This literally means to find a new Orient, a new
East, a new Source of Power; the rising Sun in the east always
symbolizes the source of power and vitality. This new power is
the power generated by permanent patterns of interpersonal
sociocultural relationships. But as I have already stated, in order
to be of permament value and to carry a more-than-personal
meaning, any communal enterprise must be the "incorpora­
tion" of an archetype, i.e. of an idea and ideal that is part of the
evolutionary structure and purpose of the cycle in which it takes
form. Thus the basic need is to visualize the archetype. There
are many ways this process of visualization can take place—for
instance, the semi-unconscious and inspirational way of the
great creative artist, or the more consciously directed way of
some occult meditations. (This refers to the Libra i * symbol of
the butterfly.)
The Sanskrit term for this power is Kriyashakti: "The mys­
terious power of thought which enables it to produce external,
perceptible, phenomenal results by its own inherent energy."

303 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
And Subba Row adds: "The ancients held that any idea wiU
manifest itself externally if one's attention is deeply concen­
trated upon i t . . . A yogi generally performs his wonders by
means of Ichchashakti and Kriyashakti." And this is also what
New Thought practitioners claim to be able to achieve.
The effective visualization of an archetype (Libra) requires
not only concentrated attention, but a deep feeling-urge. This
is where the Scorpio phase of the process comes in. The symbol
for Scorpio 1* may not at first glance seem adequate, but in a
deeper sense it is significant. The new step must be experienced
in the depth of one's being, physically and emotionally. One
may tmnk of the ideal of "civilization" in all its complexity of
interpersonal relations, or at a higher level of the ideal of the
true occult Brotherhood and the "White Lodge," but one has
to be there in some deeply personal experience—perhaps a very
vivid, unforgettable dream—if the ideal is to become an irrefu­
table reality for the consciousness and a steady, indestructible
commitment.
5. SAGITTARIUS, with its operative polarity, Capricorn, re­
veals to us the need to achieve a stable and organic coordination
of all the elements of the personality, starting with the most
basic. In order to build an at least relatively permanent whole,
the interactions between all the interdependent parts of this
whole—whether they are cells and nerve centers in a human
body, or individuals in a national State—must operate on a har­
monious and steady basis. The symbol for Sagittarius (a gathering ofArmy veterans) may not seem adequate, but again if we
look at what is implied in it we can see how it refers to the
results of a strongly "coordinated" relationship between social
units—a coordination which in most cases acquired its crucial
experiential strength in a stark struggle for survival.
This symbol is confirmed by the Capricorn i* symbol, for
coordination has to lead to a centralization of power through
some form of leadership. The occult power related to this period
is the much talked about and not too often understood Kundalinishakti. Subba Row speaks of it as

i*

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL 8ERIES 909
[The] power orforcewhich moves in a serpentine or curved path. It
is the universal life-principle which everywhere manifests itself in
nature. This force includes in itself the two great forces of attraction
and repulsion. Electricity and magnetism are but manifestations of i t
This is the power orforcewhich brings about the continuous adjust­
ment of internal relations to external relations which is the essence of
life according to Herbert Spencer, and that continuous adjustment of
external relations to internal relations which is the basis of the rein­
carnation of souls according to the doctrine of the ancient Hindu
philosophers.*
At the social level we can see how this definition of Kundalinishakti has a significant reference to the army of a nation,
for the power of an army is the basis on which a nation relates
effectively to other nations in terms of power, at least at the
present stage of human evolution. Sagittarius refers to an innate
yearning for expansion through an ever-wider "hving space." I t
is a "Jupiterian" sign related to the lumbar region of the spine
and the muscles and nerves controlling the pelvis and the legs.
However, Saturn "rules" over the very root of the spine and the
pelvic bones, and Capricorn over the knees, on which the func­
tion of the legs depends. Thus the two signs, Sagittarius and
Capricorn, and their planetary rulers are involved.
In Yoga, Kundalini is referred to as a force coiled at the
base of the spine within the Root chakra (center) named Muladhara and controlled by Saturn. This means that "the universal
life-principle" (Subba Row), after having expressed a particular
aspect of itself in a human body, exists in this chakra still in its
universal nature, but "asleep." When it is fully reawakened it is
said to rise along the central channel of the spine (sushumna),
drawing to itself the vital energies of every cell and organ of the
body, which then appears to be lifeless. The rising of life cur­
rents to the head center (Ajna) polarizes the descent of a
spiritual Force; Shiva unites with Shakti and the individualized
consciousness is said to become universalized, at least to some
degree. This "divine marriage" within the head releases a mys*Op.cit, p. 7, footnote.

310 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
terious "ambrosia" which in flowing down through the cere­
brospinal fluid is said to regenerate the whole organism.
6. We finally reach AQUARIUS. In a more mundane sense, the
"ambrosia" can be related to the cultural products that are
created during the great period of a society whose collective
rhythms of existence and ideals have become stabilized, and
that give concrete expression to the archetypes of that society.
Works of art and literature immortalize the culture which pro­
duced them, thus establishing its meaning and function within
"the Universal Community of Man." A society experiences its
"coming to seed."
The symbol for Aquarius (a California mission) needs no
further explanation. We can easily visualize in it the seed of a
society and a religion sown in a new land, perpetuating itself
and its ideals. The symbol for Pisces 1* brings the process of
coming to seed or harvesting to the level of vivid and vitalizing
socioeconomic interchange. "A "public market" is a place for
the exchange of "seed values," whether actual produce or
money.
Hie power related to this phase of activity is Matrikashakti.
In the words of Subba Row, this means "literally the force or
power of letters or speech, or music. The whole of the ancient
Mantra Shastra has this force or power in all its manifestations
for its subject matter. The power of the Word which Jesus Christ
speaks of is a manifestation of this shakti. The influence of music
is one of its ordinary manifestations. The power of the mirific
ineffable Name is the crown of this Shakti."
The Word-m-the-begiiining (Gospel of St. John) is the ger­
minating seed—a seed which was the product of the previous
cosmic cycle and which is sown in a new field of Space, creating
the matrix for a new universe (thus Matrika-shakti). A creative
word or tone, a mantra, produces, as it were, a new field of
Space in which a new spiritual Impulse can have its germinal
beginning. At the sociocultural level, this power of the creative
word refers to the symbol-releasing utterances and acts of
"seed-men" in whom a cycle reaches its own omega state.

i*

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 311
THE COMPLEMENTARY CHARACTER OF OPPOSITE SIGNS AND

degrees of the zodiac which I spoke of early in this chapter—
the second form of a binary relationships—has been stressed by
Marc Jones in his book, The Sabian Symbols in Astrology. Jones
states that "the degrees which He face to face across the circle
will be found to complement each other in a fashion that is
mutually iUuminating, and this fact has been of the greatest
assistance in working out the detailed symbolism." Personally I
find it difficult to recognize the validity of a great many of the
very abstract correlations worked out by this eminent pioneer
in the reformulation of astrology. This no doubt comes from the
fact that he and I approach symbols and the problem of inter­
pretation from very different points of departure and with diff­
erent types of mind. As he hrmself wrote: "There are unlimited
ways in which these Sabian symbols can be interpreted; and the
practiced student or professional astrologer need not confine
himself to any one mode of approach."*
My approach is not only holistic, but mostly in terms of the
potentiality of concrete experience. The zodiac, with its signs
and symbols, is a symbolic expression of a cyclic sequence of
archetypal types of experiences. It is existentially lived at all
times by human persons who have feelings, doubts, social prob­
lems, aspirations, and yearnings for transcendence. The symbols
themselves deal with very concrete scenes, usually everyday
experiences of Americans. I have attempted to extract from all
the elements of these scenes or images their vital significance
in terms of the transformation of seemingly haphazard events
into significant and purposeful phases of a process. We five this
process constantly, in small cycles or in larger ones. But it is a
whole process. It has direction. Real time is one-directional, and
I see it as purposeful. A great occultist and a healer with a most
compassionate heart, Dr. D. J. Bussell, once said that "Time is
the working out of God's Plan." Symbols are units of cyclic time.
They flow in an experience of duration toward a conclusion,
*The Sabian Symbols in Astrology, p. 37.

J

312 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
which is also the seed of a new beginning. It is the living that
is significant, and the direction in which this living is moving.
For these reasons, in relating Aries to Libra, for example,
I seek to evoke the dynamic meaning that libra should have to
the "woman just risen from the sea"—the meaning of a goal
estabfishing a direction. When using the term "goal," I do not
mean what it might suggest to the life-insurance salesman or to
the man ambitious to become his company's executive—i.e. not
a rigidly set and particular, therefore limiting, achievement. I
mean the fulfilling consummation of a central life ideal, which
essentially implies the actualization of one's individual potential
of being, of what one has been born for.
If one assumes such an attitude when interpreting the rela­
tionship between opposite zodiacal symbols, the interpretation
takes on a teleological (i.e. purposive) character. We ask the
symbol what the matter we are investigating is for. This im­
mediately brings to mind a further question: What will it lead
to? Thus the meaning of what occurs in the Aries i* symbol
becomes elucidated by considering the symbol for Libra i \ Li­
bra is already potentially present in Aries i*—and as we saw at
the beginning of this chapter, Pisces 30*, the end of the cycle,
is potentially present in Aries i \
But two more basic questions are bound to arise: How can
one best reach that end? and What is the essential meaning of
the whole process? In other words, we are dealing with four
fundamental issues the very moment a process begins; these can
be most simply expressed by four little words: what, whereto,
how and why.
It is on this basis that I understand the term complemen­
tary. It is not only a matter of two polar opposites, but rather of
four elements of significance. This four-foldness brings us to the
concept of the mandala, which has recendy become quite pop­
ular. Indeed the usual mandala is the hieroglyphic expression of
the four-fold character of the life cycles. It is clear that an astro­
logical birth chart is a mandala—the mandala of the incarnation
of a particular individual revealing the archetypal character of
the human potential having emerged from the womb at a par-

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 313
ticular moment and in a particular place, and for a particular
purpose.
The primary structure of a birth chart is defined by two axes
perpendicular to each other, the horizon and the meridian.
Here also we have a duality. I have spoken of it as the duality
of consciousness and power.* Each of the two factors has two
essential aspects. Thus we have the four Angles of the chart. The
entire zodiac of 360 degrees is also a mandala whosefour"An­
gles** (or critical phases) are the equinoxes and the solstices. By
using this concept of four-foldness we can establish significant
interconnections between Sabian symbols. This will prove par­
ticularly fruitful when, in Part Four, we will deal with the prac­
tical application of the symbols.

•Cf. my most recent book The Astrological Houses: The Spectrum of
Individual Experience (Doubleday, 1972).

2 . The Cross and
the Star
®

T H E CROSS FORMED BY THE HORIZON AND THE MERIDIAN—
the axes of consciousness and power—has given rise to varied
interpretations at several levels of meaning. When we are deal­
ing with the Sabian symbols and their interpretation in terms
of cyclic process, we have to give a somewhat special but highly
significant meaning to the two ends of the axis of consciousness.
Consciousness results from activity, even if we have to realize
that the character of this activity, in its creative aspect, depends
upon a prior, but transcendent aspect of consciousness. Symboli­
cally speaking, the process of germination that is the starting
point of activity in the vegetable kingdom brings out what is
latent in the seed. Every action can be said to come out of some
kind of seed; at the highest metaphysical level the universal
seed is Space.*
Universal space has often been symbolized by an ocean, an

•During periods of existential cosmic "manifestation/' Space is extended
in many dimensions because there are a great many levels of cosmic activity.
But in terms of "non-manifestation," Space can be said to have withdrawn
inward in the dimensionless mathematical point

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 315
irifinite ocean of potentiality. In the Sabian set of symbols, the
emergence of activity—and therefore of consciousness, as con­
sciousness is implied in this activity—is represented by the Aries
l * symbol, because Aries i represents the beginning of a cycle
of activity. A new form of existence is emerging, surrounded by
the karma of the past (the seal embracing the woman). In the
subsequent symbols we see this activity gaining objectivity (2"),
gaining a deep intuition of its wholeness (3*), achieving a feeling
for the polarized energies on which it depends in order to oper­
ate (4*), and revealing a latent capacity to transcend its nature
(5*, the triangle with wings). This emergence leads to a condi­
tion in which the creative impulse, after having passed through
many maturing experiences,findsitself essentialized in the full
revelation of the archetypal Seed-form that had called it into
being for a particular purpose.
This archetypal form is symbolized by the perfect "but­
terfly" of the Libra i* symbol. The form is perfect. The conscious
mind, on the basis of the revelation of the archetype, is able to
participate in a group as an equal among equals, because it has
had the "vision" of its inherent archetypal perfection. For the
American Indian, to have a vision of one's archetype (or totem)
is an essential phase of the process at the end of which a boy is
able to assume the responsibilities of manhood. As one medicine
man stated: "A man who has not had his Vision does not know
what his place in the world is. How can he five, then?" In the
zodiac, Libra has little to do with "balance"—a most superficial
interpretation of the symbol of the Scales—but it refers to the
realization of one's value in terms of one's place and function
in a larger community. Whether the community is small or
large, it represents a "greater Whole" within which the con­
scious person can and indeed must operate. In Libra an individ­
ual learns the basis on which such an operation can significantly
proceed.
Interpreted in this way, the relationship between the sym­
bols for Aries i* and Libra i can theoretically be applied to that
between any two opposite symbols or phases of the cyclic proc­
ess. In many instances, however, it is not easy to establish the
meaning of such a relationship on this primary basis. The situa#

#

r

316 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tion is usually elucidated by introducing the second axial rela­
tionship; that is, by studying the two symbols which are in
square aspect with those being considered. In the cycle of the
year the solstitial degrees, Cancer i* and Capricorn i*, are in
cross-relationship to the equinoctial degrees, Aries 1* and
Libra i \
The equinoctial phases of the year cycle represent the prin­
ciple of consciousness because the two interacting energies
(Yang-Yin, or Day-force and Night-force) being of equal
strength, the power principle is neutralized. At the solstices of
summer and winter one force, being almost totally dominant,
normally makes a great show of power. The two primary types
of power are (1) the power to be effectively what one is as a
particular form of existence, and (2) the power to use what one
is within a "greater whole" in which one is called upon to func­
tion. Thus, Cancer i* (sailors raising a new flag) stabilizes with
fully available Yang power and determination the form of life
and consciousness that emerged at Aries i*. On the other hand,
Capricorn i* pictures an "Indian chief able to use social proc­
esses to make concrete and acceptable to his community the
vision he had of his essential being. At this Capricorn stage we
see public and official power in action.
The four-fold sequence linking the equinoctial and solstitial
symbols is clear, and it stands as the prototype* of all similar
quaternary or cruciform relationships between the 360 phases
of the cyclic process and their symbols. The first degree symbols
of the four "fixed" signs can be interpreted as follows: The
"clear mountain stream" of Taurus i* refers to the initial phase
of the planetary cycle of water, seen from the level of life in the
biosphere which depends on available water. When the moun­
tain stream becomes the large river, men can build cities on its
banks; today the rapid descent of the water to the plains can be
used to produce electrical power. In the same way human be­
ings are able to "dam" their life energies and transmute them

•A "prototype" is thefirstand basic concrete manifestation of an archetype. One might say it is a projection of the archetypal idea into earth
substance as an "Exemplar."

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 317
into mind-power. That power is focused in the head (cf. the
symbol for Leo i*). The Scorpio i* symbol shows people who
perhaps have lived close to the land they have cultivated
becorning fascinated by the big city. Clear at its source, life has
become the ever-flowing interaction of men participating in the
daily rhythm of city living, with its poisons as well as its cultural
achievements. The stabilized and relatively permanent power
of culture is then evoked by the symbol for Aquarius (a Cali-

fornia

mission).

i*

The four "mutable** signs of the zodiac can be seen related
in a still more significant manner by the symbols for their first
degrees, which strike the keynote of their respective periods in
the cycle, (^rnini i * (A glass-bottomed boat reveals undersea
wonders.) shows the nascent individual consciousness expand­
ing through contact with the vast amount of knowledge gath­
ered by mankind and now inherent in the collective Uncon­
scious as well as embodied in millions of books. The symbol for
Virgo i* (a portrait) reveals, on the one hand, how mental ac­
tivity leaves its mark upon and individualizes a face, and on the
other, the creative power of a mind trained to discern and
reproduce the salient characteristics of any living being or situa­
tion.
The contact with the accumulation of collective values
which constitute the substratum of a culture (Gemini i*) leads
to the type of activity which in our world of conflicts is necessary
to preserve and expand a "culture-whole**—a way of life and its
great Images, a way implied in Sagittarius i*. Lastly, society,
which has been sustained by those who have risked their fives
in upholding its standards, expresses its health and vitality
through the complex rituals of the marketplace (Pisces i*).

I F WE DIVIDE THE CIRCLE OF WHOLENESS GEOMETRICALLY

by 4, we obtain the square, a figure whose symbolic meaning is
stability, solidity and resistance to change. At the social level it
is the bourgeois, the "square.** Number 4 refers basically to the
material world. In the universally emphasized seven-year cycle,
the fourth year represents the bottom of the cycle. The first

318 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
three years refer to the descent of spirit into matter (or of the
Idea into concrete form) and the last three to the gradual evolu­
tion and refinement of the form and the spiritualization or dematerialization of the consciousness which at the begirining of
the fourth year had become identified with the form and the
energies of matter. The fourth year is therefore the turning
point of the seven-year cycle. The consciousness now imbedded
in a material form can either descend deeper into matter and
lose altogether the spiritual momentum of the initial cyclic im­
pulse, or it may progressively free itselffromthe pull of material
energies and ascend to the "omega state" of conscious and
individualized spiritual fulfillment.
Occult traditions everywhere refer to the present stage in
the large cycle of our planet's existence and of mankind-as-awhole as the fourth stage. It is the "fourth world," or according
to theosophy, the "fourth Round." Numerologically speaking,
the Vibration 4 dominates the collective consciousness of every­
thing belonging strictly to the Earth's biosphere, the realm of
life (using the term life in its strictest sense as the power that
draws together, organizes, sustains and multiplies a collection of
material units). From the point of view of the ascending process
of development and the eventual spiritualization of human con­
sciousness, the "Great Work"—to use an alchemical term—is

the raising of the Vibration 4 to the level of the 5.

In its broadest sense this "raising" process is what is really
meant by "civilization"—that is, civilization as a process of
transformation of unconscious biological drives into the con­
scious and individualized structures of a mind pervaded by the
"Light" of the spirit (the "Sur^rmind," in Sri Aurobindo's ter­
minology). When fully in control of a mind organized into a
self-perpetuating system (a superphysical and superbiological
organism), this spiritual Light takes the place that Life and its
energies had occupied at the level of the biosphere, i.e. within
physical bodies.
Such a Light has substance and power; it pervades the
subtle and more spiritualized realm of mind-activity (Sri Auro­
bindo's "overmind*'). The Light is esoterically symbolized by
the Number 6, while Mind, as a form of activity which can, yet

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 319

need not, become independent

of biological impulses, answers
to the Vibration 5. At the present stage of the evolution of
mankind as a life-species, the Vibration 4 is dominant; yet the
Vibration 5 of mental activity has been strongly developing for
some 2500 years (since about 600 B.C.). Unfortunately, at this
first stage of its development as a potentially autonomous mode
of operation, the mind remains closely attached to, and in­
fluenced or controlled by, the biological needs and emotional
drives of the body. It acts as what has been called the "lower
mind," placing itself at the service of biological imperatives
which, translated into psychic states (hunger, sex, aggressive­
ness, possessiveness, will to power, ambition, etc.), permeate
most mental activities. The result is our present Western civili­
zation with its monstrous cities, its holocausts and its everincreasing perversions and psychoses.
Trying to separate himself from these bio-psychic emo­
tional drives, Western man has glorified and overemphasized
what he calls "Reason" and the intellectual and analytical
power of the mind. He has idealized objectivity, at least in
theory. But by trying to emphasize the mind alone no "vital"
or "spiritual" results can be obtained that stand the test of time
or avoid becoming the tool of forces operating in terms of
material entropy.
The five-pointed star is the symbol of Mind as a mode of
universal activity. The star can either point upward or down­
ward. It is the symbol of Man; and a man can evolve his con­
sciousness in the direction of Light (i.e. Spirit), or follow the path
of "devolution" and be drawn eventually to the realm of uncon­
scious absorption in undifferentiated matter, the "humus"
which will feed the growth of seeds in a future cycle.
Symbolically stated, the issue is whether the emergent
Number 5 will remain attached to the vibration (Number 4) of
the biosphere and of generic mankind, or will become not only
sensitive to, but eventually an operative agent for, the universal
Love and Light represented by Number 6. This is the crucial
issue. It is a cosmic issue which, one may assume, is to be met
on every planet in which Man exists in one form or another as
the focal point for Mind. The five-pointed star symbolizes this

r

320 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
issue; it points to the character of the forces operating at the
mental level. I must stress that the activity of Mind includes far
more than what we today call "intellect"; neither should it be
equated with intelligence per se—that is to say, the faculty
inherent in all living organisms, but in a much more evolved
form in human beings, which allows them to adapt to, make the
best of, and eventually control the environment, whether natu­
ral or sociocultural.
Number 5 is a very special number, even from the point of
view of arithmetic, a fact which has been discussed by several
scientists. It is of particular interest to the biologist because
five-fold structures appear in nature—at least on our planetonly when living forms have evolved. It is not found in crystals
but it is featured in the growth of many plants, the disposition
of leaves and the shape offlowers.Human anatomy also particu­
larly displays this pentarhythmic type of structuring. It is as if
the most advanced forms of life in nature were being prepared
to become the foundations upon which the activity of mind
could be developed.
We certainly cannot understand, and much less experience,
what pentarhythmic patterns in the vegetable kingdom may
support in terms of consciousness, but plants are essentially
working with light; their chlorophyll captures the energy of the
sun's rays and thus produces food for the animal kingdom and
for man. At last in a symbolic sense, the man whose mind has
become attuned to a supernal form of the Universal Light is also
capturing Light-energy to feed the consciousness of men opera­
ting almost exclusively at the level of Vibration 4. All great,
inspired works of philosophy, religion, art and literature can be
considered instances of a transcendent type of photosynthesis.
They bring down the 6 into the 5 of the mass-mentality of any
culture.
If we return now to the Sabian symbols we will find that
those which, beginning with Aries 1*, are singled out through a
pentarhythmic process (the dividing of the whole zodiacal cir­
cle into five) form a five-fold sequence which is remarkably
significant. These five symbols for degrees 72* apart are as fol­
lows:

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 321
ARIES I*: A woman just risen from the sea. A seal is embracing her.
GEMINI 13*: A famous pianist giving a concert performance.
LEO 25*: A large camel is seen crossing a vast and forbidding desert.
SCORPIO 7*: Deep-sea divers.
CAPRICORN ip/: A five-year-old child carrying a bag filled with groceries.
In order to understand how they refer to the mental proc­
esses in their essential nature .we must "pierce through" the
superficialities of the allegorical scenes and uncover the sym­
bols' archetypal implications. We are dealing here with a cyclic
process, and with five characteristic phases of it; we might also
say we are dealing with a type of activity that implies five types
of operation.
The first (Aries O is the emergence from the unconscious
and compulsive tides of the biosphere. There had been previous
and in a sense preliminary evolutionary emergences which led
to regressive developments (the seal), but now with the human
species we see outlined before our vision the Star of Victory, the
magic Pentacle of the human mind.
The second step or principle of operation brings to us the
picture of a man who has been individualized to the extent that
he can successfully perform a social role—that is, he is able to
help human beings to feel intensely, even though they might
be leading routine or uninspired lives. He can help them to
vibrate at a new speed of emotional response, and perhaps to
become more sensitive to a more spiritual type of inspiration.
The third step or principle refers to the quality of selfreliance and independence from an always hostile and spiritu­
ally barren environment. This correlates with the most
important aspect of the process of individualization of con­
sciousness, a process requiring a mind able to demonstrate selfsufficiency and endurance under all adverse circumstances.
The fourth step can be most significantiy understood by
relating it to the first. What the mind emerged from and left
behind has to be courageously faced in terms of consciousness.
The individualized mind must dare to return to the realm of
compulsive life-tides and instinctual biological urges, and to

322 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
extract from it an individual meaning. Without this, the con­
scious individualized mind, which is ruled by the ego, must
always lack deep, vital and powerful foundations. Mind should
emerge from the compulsions of life, but once formed and selfreliant it must return to objectively face and assimilate the
contents of the depths of the Unconscious.
The fifth stage is symbolized by an apparently trivial scene.
We are confronted with a five-year-old child, who is proving
herself and asserting her innate potential of being by perform­
ing an act of service, and by assuming a role ahead of the normal
evolution of the mass of human beings. This is a very good
symbol for the often-mentioned "Path of discipleship." The per­
son who can tread this path successfully must have reached
stage 5 of his development as an individual—i.e. he or she must
have developed a self-reliant and courageous mind. This person
has become truly an "apprentice." He learns how to perform
the alchemical Great Work, which in a sense means the trans­
formation of the raw materials of the biosphere into the assirnilatable stuff of knowledge. From this assimilated knowledge
will rise wisdom, which in turn will become the foundation for
a new emergence at a higher level of consciousness.
We should note that the second symbol (Gemini 13*) and the
fifth (Capricorn 19*) refer to what one might call social roles. The
first of these means that once the individual mind has emerged
from the collective mentality of its culture it has to prove itself
by demonstrating its capacity to move and inspire others. I t
does this, however, in terms of the ego (as a "virtuoso," often
dramatizing himself on a public stage). Moreover, the cultural
material he uses (i.e. the compositions he performs) is not his
own. The performance often implies or suggests an act of egoglorification.
This is a necessary phase, but sooner or later it leads to a
period of spiritual barrenness which is a test of both self-reliance
and the determination to persist, using only whatever one pos­
sesses within oneself (the camel crossing the desert). Another
kind of test follows. Deep-sea diving originally demanded that
the diver develop a masterful control of the breath; this degree
symbol might be related to certain forms of yoga practice, or to

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 323
the Tantric approach to the process of spiritualization of basic
forms of human bondage, such as sex and hunger.
The fifth and last principle is that of utterly dedicated and
efficient service—the service of one's spiritual family, group or
guru. The ego-dramatics of the "virtuoso performance" are left
behind. The ego has been cleansed by harsh trials and tempered
by the fire and heat of the desert sun; it is now filled with the
assimilated contents of the psychic and biospheric depths. It has
begun to vibrate to the 5 (i.e. a five-year-old child). The individ­
ual may experience the Star of Victory within his heart.
It is popular today to speak of "creativity" and of having a
creative mind. What this means is the capacity to give form to
raw and undifferentiated materials or to transform what has
already been given a particular shape or structure. It is this
capacity that operates in terms offivedifferent types of activity.
Above, by relating the symbols of a five-pointed star pattern
beginning with the first degree of Aries, I presented the basic
prototype of all such processes—just as the relationship be­
tween the four cardinal points of the zodiac establishes a proto­
type theoretically applicable to all similar quaternary relation­
ships between zodiacal degrees and their symbols. The Cross
and the Star are geometric archetypes that can give a general
meaning to all existential processes operating according to the
Vibrations 4 and 5. Any degree of the zodiac can thus become
the head of a Cross, or the upper point of a Star—and, I might
add, of the Star's negative reversed form.
This concept can be applied to the interpretation of every
basic astrological factor in a birth chart, and theoretically to any
complex cyclic activity. In practice, however, such applications
are often more confusing than revealing, for they demand the
skill to interpret symbols in terms of their innermost essence of
meaning. The Sabian symbols are certainly not totally adequate
for some refined types of analysis. Nevertheless, there is a way
in which the pentarhythmic pattern can be very significandy
applied in interpreting these symbols, and I have made use of
it in Part Two when dividing the symbols into seventy-two
sections, each containing five degrees.
This procedure was originally used by Marc Jones, but I do

r

324 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
not believe he saw certain features common to all these fivedegree sequences. Moreover, I cannot quite agree with his char­
acterization of physical, social and spiritual for the succession
of threefive-degreesequences; the examples he gives on page
146 of Sabian Symbols in Astrology do not seem to me at all
convincing. The characterizations I have used are: actional,
emotional-cultural and individual-mental The difference in
terms is not essential. Besides it is not always easy to find con­
vincing reasons why a symbol refers more to the actional than
to the emotional-cultural or the individual-mental. Indeed, I
have had some doubt as to the validity of establishing these
three levels of activity, but in a great many instances the prac­
tice seems significant.
What, however, is very evident is the five-fold rhythm re­
vealed in every one of the seventy-two sequences. Particularly
significant are the contrast between the first and the second
beat of the rhythm, and the character of the fourth beat. The
third and fifth symbols are often more difficult to fit into a
general category. Nevertheless, each of the five steps of the
process can be made to correspond to a phase of development
related to a fundamental principle operating in every sequence.
Moreover, it should always be kept in mind that the whole set
of symbols deals with the universal Principle of Transformation,
and that in these seventy-two five-degree sequences we deal
primarily with the operation of such a principle at the three
levels of the human personality. The process is directional and
teleblogical. It goes somewhere—or if negative it falls away
from the dimly envisioned goal.
1. The symbol for the first degree of the five-fold sequence
suggests an evolutionary purpose or the essential character of a
new phase of activity. I will discuss here the sequence which
begins with Cancer 16* (cf. p. 120) because it is one that is not
easy to interpret. In Cancer i* we saw the individual opting for
a change of allegiance, which implied a new set of values. At the
second half of the zodiacal sign such a decision requires im­
plementation. "Decision" (seventh scene) requires the "Con­
solidation" (eighth scene) of the position taken. Fundamentally
all reliable forms of consolidation are internal: the individual

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 325
himself must become stable and well integrated-—thus the man­
data symbol of Cancer i6*.
2. Then the "God-seed" within (the mandala of individual
selfhood) germinates. Action follows meditation. The energy
that was inwardly oriented in the first step is now directed
outward. This is the Principle of Contrast. The second degree
of all five-fold sequences presents in some way a contrast with
the first. This is not, however, to say that it expresses the "an­
tithesis'* to a stated "thesis," as we find in the usual dialectical
process, which contain three stages. We are here dealing with
a different type of dialectic, which operates in five stages—a
type which, according to Count von Durkheim, has a definite
place in Zen Buddhism.*
3. The symbol for the third degree of the sequence refers
to the need to "feed" any germinal activity. In a sensé it means
relating what has been started to its environment, or to some
larger frame of reference. For instance, the Aries 3* symbol
» relates the emergent individual (Aries i°) to a wider field which
he visualizes in his own image—a micro- to macrocosm relation­
ship, or the imaging of God in man's image. In another sense,
it suggests a kind of reconciliation between the two contrasting
phases that came before. The subjective factor is now becoming
involved in the objective world, and this leads to specific results,
which of course take different forms in every sequence. One
could speak here of the Principle of Sustainment, which implies
some sort of interaction between the new development and
what can support it in the greater Whole of which it has become
apart.
4. The fourth stage always defines or at least evokes a cer­
tain type of method, procedure or technique which can be used
to make the process work effectively. In this sequence the sym­
bol for Cancer 19* pictures A priest performing a marriage ceremony. Meditating on a mandala should reveal the possibility of

•I outlined the concept of a pentarhythmic type of process in terms of
socio-political organization in a memorandum sent in 1926 to Colonel Wetherill, then president of the Philadelphia Art Alliance. While in Paris in 1962,
I heard Durkheim give a splendid lecture on Zen, in which he mentioned "la
dialectique à cinq temps."
;

326 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
integrating two polarized forces; in the mandala of the year (the
zodiac), the Day-force and Night-force are constantly active,
one waxing in strength as the other wanes. The consciousness
seeking integration and the consolidation of its individualized
character must be ready to perform a mystic marriage which
will provide a field for the relatively permanent interpénétra­
tion of the polarized life energies. We see the teginning of such
a process in the symbol for Aries 4*. In Taurus 4* the rainbow
symbolizes a way of uniting the sky and the Earth. In the Cancer
4* symbol we find another way of dealing with the outcome of
one's acts—the method of "rationalization." The Cancer 9* sym­
bol presents a variation on the theme of union between the self
and some other attractive element of experience (i.e. the desire
to possess and assimilate knowledge). Cancer 14* introduces a
more transcendent approach: the consciousness seeks, beyond
the relativity of ever-elusive truths, the absoluteness of a wis­
dom that has forgotten what it knew, as it faces the ever-hidden
Source of all knowing.
What is at work at this fourth stage of thefive-foldsequence
is the Principle of Effective Self-expression—but here "self* can
mean any form of integration, from the most possessive ego to
the universal Self. In many instances a technique is suggested
that will enable the mind to deal constructively with the new
issues implied in the first stage.
5. Theoretically this phase brings to a new dimension, po­
tency or level of consciousness the developments related to the
four preceding stages. It usually suggests the workings of a Prin­
ciple of Transformation, and here we witness the prelude to a
new cycle or level of activity. In the symbol for Cancer 20*, the
serenading gondoliers represent the ritualization of a social
process of integration of two human polarities. The pattern of
a particular culture—and Venice, built on the sea, is quite sig­
nificant—brings social solidity and effectiveness to the search
for integrating action. We shall see the same type of symbol, but
more socialized and ritualized, as we reach the "emotionalcultural" level (Cancer 210)—the operatic prima donna. In some
instances, transformation requires the exaggeration of certain

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 327
traits, which by compensation leads to a new level of experience.
EVERY FIVE-FOLD, SEQUENCE OF DEGREE SYMBOLS COULD BE

analyzed in a similar manner. Some of them, like the sequences
for the sign Pisces, outline a clear and at times dramatic story;
others require a more penetrating interpretation. It should be
evident that when a symbol is interpreted in terms of the place
it occupies in several types of relationships with other symbols,
each type will demand a slight change of emphasis in the interpretation. This should not affect the fundamental meaning of
the symbol.

3- T h e Four E l e m e n t s
in Z o d i a c a l S y m b o l i s m
®

ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS A STUDENT OF ASTROLOGY LEARNS
is that each sign of the zodiac is related to one of the four
Elements: Fire, Water, Air and Earth. I have already spoken
briefly of these, referring them to the four cardinal or "critical"
moments of the year cycle: spring equinox (Aries O, summer
solstice (Cancer 1"), fall equinox (Libra O and winter solstice
(Capricorn
When we speak of "Elements" we tend to think of material
substances, or at least states of matter—solid, liquid, airy and
fiery—and thus of different ways in which various types of parti­
cles are related to each other and in which they affect our senses
—the solidity of a rock, the liquidity of water, the ubiquity and
elusiveness and invisibility of the atmosphere, the dynamism
and ever-changing aspect offlames.In a deeper sense these four
Elements constitute different modes of operation of the One
Power which, for us inhabitants of the solar system, has its pri­
mary source in the Sun. This One Power becomes bipolar the
moment it is activated. Its two polarities Pay-force and Nightforce, or Yang and Yin) constantly interact, alternatively waxing

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 329
in strength and waning. Thus four phases in the cyclic activity
of the One Power, the equinoxes and the solstices, stand out as
moments of special significance. The One Power differentiates
itself into four "cardinal" types of energies. Each type of energy
has its own characteristic rhythm, and as any steady rhythm
develops a form which appears to our senses as "matter," we
can speak of four basic states of matter.
We should think of the Elements as modalities of power
when we refer them to the zodiac because the zodiac symbol­
izes the cyclically changing relationship of the Earth to the Sun.
Each Element is thus to be conceived of primarily as a mode
of power release (that is, a certain type of energy), and only
secondarily as a state of matter. The Chinese astrologer gives
different names to the Elements, relating them to different
kinds of substances, but they too refer to modalities of power.
In my early book, The Astrology of Personality, I spoke of Fire­
power, Water-power, Air-power and Earth-power,* and I
added that three basic operations dealing with the manifesta­
tion and use of power should be considered: the generation, the
concentration and the distribution of power.
Power is generated in "cardinal" signs of the zodiac (Aries,
Cancer, Libra, Capricorn). It is concentrated in "fixed" signs
(Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius) and distributed in "mutable"
signs (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces). Thus each of the four
Elements appears in the zodiacal cycle under three forms and
a triangular or trinitarian relationship can be established be­
tween the three signs that express the three aspects of the same
Element. Such a relationship constitutes the astrological "as­
pect" called trine.
The trine is considered the most "benefic" or "fortunate"
type of relationship just because it brings out the full manifesta­
tion of one of the four modalities of power. It is thus an aspect
of completion. Symbolically speaking, repeating an action three
timesfinalizesit. All mythologies and occult traditions agree on
this point, which is the basis of the divine trinitiesfoundin most
cultures. I f three planets form what is called a "grand trine"

•See original edition, p. 261.

i

330 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
they activate an Element in three different ways: the activation
is total, and the character of the planets indicates the three
paths along which the process of activation should (or will natu­
rally tend to) proceed.
To call a trine "good" has meaning only in terms of what
to us, normally and in most circumstances, is estimated to be
favorable and productive of happiness or comfort. It is thus a
matter of ethical or value judgment. The real fact is simply that
the Element animated by this trine relationship between two or
more planets is being stressed—it can be for better or for worse
depending on the circumstances. There are many circum­
stances in which a combination of several modalities of power
is required for effective action.

THEORETICALLY, THE SYMBOLS OF THE DEGREES OR CYCLIC

phases that are in trine relationship (i.e. 120 degrees distant)
should tell a consistent symbolical story. In actual practice, this
presents difficulties. It is evident that if the same symbol has to
be interpreted in relation to a two-fold, three-fold, four-fold,
five-fold and six-fold relationship with other symbols, one has to
extract from all these scenes or images a very general and ab­
stract kind of significance. Nevertheless, the attempt is often
very revealing, and it is an excellent exercise in the training of
the interpretative faculty, i.e. the capacity to see through ordi­
nary facts and to reach their essential meaning. This is "clairthinking," if not clairvoyance.
Let us consider each sign's first degree and its symbol. The
usual role of thefirst-degreesymbol is as prototype of the entire
sign's characteristics.
FIRE SIGNS*. These signs deal with the three aspects of the
basic power released at the start of all cyclocosmic processes—
that is, the power to induce a structured series of transforma­
tions. Occult tradition in India speaks of threefires:electric fire,
solar fire and fire by friction. These correspond respectively to
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius.
Electricity in its multiplicity of aspects is primary, and
seems to be found wherever there is motion and the beginning

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 331
of new life. Broadly interpreted, the symbol of Aries i* refers to
the emergence of new potentialities of existence. This emer­
gence takes place at the level of biogenesis, i.e. under the com­
pulsion of "Life." All living processes require electrical energy.
Solar power is related to the solar sign Leo. What had
emerged biologically and instinctually in Aries, driven by the
desire-to-be, is now ready for a "second birth": birth in individu­
ality. This implies a transmutation of life energies into mental
processes which at first express the ego's will-to-power. Leo
personalizes the pure, unconditioned desire-to-be of Aries fire.
It stresses the " I am" and the ego-will. Suns are great autocrats
of the universe—glorious and radiant in the assertion of a new
type of power, but also essentially ambitious and desirous to
show this power, their own, to all their planets. Sunlight is an
individualized form of galactic energy. The symbol for Leo i*
lets us witness the rushing of the blood to the head, a throne for
the ego and his intellectual processes of rationalization. Yet a
Sun is also a star, one of billions within the immense galaxy,
which symbolizes the spiritual realm.
Fire by friction is related to Sagittarius, for here we find at
work the power that builds up, sustains and expands civilization,
and that energizes all social processes. These processes are im­
plied in the union of man and woman, once human beings
develop a conscious sense of responsibility for their progeny—
that is, the lasting realization that they are parents and educa­
tors whose primary task is to teach the child what they have
inherited from the past, as well as to attempt to make for him
a safer and happier future. As I have already stated, in our era,
the root process of social survival and expansion is warfare, in
the broadest sense of the term (which includes competition in
all its forms). The symbol for Sagittarius i* refers to the develop­
ment of human fellowship and particularly of a comradeship
based on the experience of total group-dedication to a social
Cause.
WATER SIGNS: These deal with the power required to sus­
tain, and to integrate through the stabilization of basic life
rhythms, whatever has emerged as an organized system of ac-

332 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tivity. "Water"-power is the capacity

an organic whole.

to feel and to respond as

In the symbol for Cancer i* we see "sailors lowering an old
flag and raising a new one." The Day-force (Yang), which in
Aries began to overpower the Night-force, here reaches its max­
imum strength. Cancer refers not only to the home, but also to
the concretely established and stabilized person. In a deeper
sense it suggests the realization by the microcosm—the person
—that it is a cosmos, that it is analogous to the whole universe.
Without the Water element there would be no circulatory proc­
esses and no feeling of wholeness; this feeling is at the very root
of the ego-consciousness. What emerged rather passively and
hesitantly in Aries i* is now definitely "above the sea" (the ship)
and able to display its own determination-to-be, its course of
action and the direction it will follow.
The symbol for Scorpio i* suggests that this second aspect
of Water-energy now operates in the linking of the individual
to a larger social whole, the modern city. This individual can feel
and respond to a wider sphere of relationship. In a sense he is
proclaiming his new allegiance to a wider and more dynamic
state of group-consciousness.
The symbol for Pisces (a crowded marketplace) reveals
the individual's total and effective participation in an organized
society and its complex rhythm of production and distribution.
Thus from the personal realm of feeling-response to new pos­
sibilities (Cancer i°) we have come to the sphere of all-absorbing
social interchange (Pisces i°), through the transition process
evoked by the symbol for Scorpio (A crowded sightseeing bus

i*

on a city street.)

i*

AIR SIGNS: The Element Air refers to all pervasive and

stimulating means of communication. It brings separate in­
dividuals together in group-activity. Indeed, the air that fills the
lungs and cells of the most proud isolationist or racist inevitably
links him, whether he is aware of it or not, with those he may
refuse to befriend or the existence of whom he may not even
acknowledge. In a few days the winds carry the same air all
around the globe, as if to mock our national sovereignties and
exclusivenesses. We all breathe it and throw the wastes of our

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 333
bodies into it. I t circulates as oxygen within the depths of all
human beings, and without it there could be no life. It is a
dynamic force—archetypally, an equinoctial Element, Libra—
but unlike Fire, it does not transform. Instead, it gives human
individuals a new spiritual-social dimension. In many languages
the words which at first referred to "air" or "breath" later on
lose their earlier meaning and take on the meaning of spirit

(pneuma, atma).

The sign Libra is popularly connected with the concept of
"balance" because of the symbol of "the Scales" used to charac­
terize the whole sign, but this is a very superficial interpreta­
tion; people in whose charts Libra plays an important role are
no more psychologically balanced than any other human be­
ings. At the fall equinox the Day-force and the Night-force are
of equal strength, balancing each other but the same situation
exists at the spring equinox in Aries. The difference is that Aries
begins the hemicycle of "Individualization," while Libra begins
that of "Collectivization." The first process depends on Fire­
power, the second on Air-power.
The symbol for Libra i* (the impaled butterfly) at first does
not seem to fit the concepts associated with the Element Air,
but we can give profound meaning to the relationship if we
realize that an archetype is the unity-aspect of all the particular
and diverse existential forms that can be referred to it. Thus the
archetype Man relates all human beings to each other. Reli­
giously speaking, the Element Air (which in its highest sense
becomes the Holy Spirit) makes all men Brothers, and thus Sons
of the archetypal Father. The perfect butterfly is the archetype
Man. Every man can identify himself with it, not only when his
spiritual metamorphosis is completed, but when he is totally
willing to surrender all that he is as an individual to the perfect­
ing (i.e. archetypalizing) of mankind-as-a-whole.
Every organized society has its own cultures based on a few
archetypes or "prime Symbols" (Spengler). It is the archetype
that, spiritually speaking, brings the group together at a time
and in a locality where the vital need to which the archetype
is a cosmic, superpersonal answer is a dominant feature of hu­
man existence—or we might say of the group's collective

334 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
karma. In the second Air sign, Aquarius, we see the image of the
archetype concretized and made relatively permanent in the
collectivity. Thus the symbol for Aquarius i*: An old adobe mission in California, or any ancient Temple or Medieval Cathe­
dral that embodies not only a religious but a social and protec­
tive function.
The symbol for Gemini i pictures man operating at a rela­
tively sophisticated cultural level and able to build "glass-bot­
tomed boats" which allow him to come into contact with occult
powers and transcendent forms of existence. Libra-Air generates collectively acceptable archetypal values. Aquarius-Air
concentrates these values within cultural institutions. GeminiAir distributes as knowledge what such institutions have pro­
duced.
EARTH SIGNS: Thanks to atomic physics we know that mat­
ter in the solid state is not really a mass of heavy materials, but
mostly empty space within which atoms and their constituents
whirl at terrific speed, separated by distances that are enormous
in relation to the atom's incredibly small size. Powerful forces
hold these swirling atomic and subatomic entities within defi­
nite patterns of organization. The strong cohesive links be­
tween billions of electrical particles present our senses with the
feeling of solidity. At another level solidity becomes solidarity,
the foundation upon which lasting socio-political and cultural
institutions are built.
The physicist speaks of a 'l^inding force" within the atom,
or of gravitation. The psychologist, if his vision were penetrat­
ing enough, would see similar forces operating at the level of
the psyche and leading to the formation of the ego—the stabil­
izer of what we call "character." Some egos are massive and
resist splitting or disintegration; others can only loosely relate
the different drives and conscious interests of the psyche and
the mind, thus making possible personality splits or possession
by elemental-astral forces.
The symbol for Capricorn i* (An Indian chief claims power
from the assembled tribe.) emphasizes the will to integration
under a centralized control, i.e. the demand for a power that
can hold the group together, especially in critical circum#

335
NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SI
stances. The symbol for Taurus i * (a clear mountain
stream)

refers to the descent of a power which will enable man and all
living organisms to participate healthfully in an ecological
whole, in which every participant has a more or less definite
biological role. The symbol for Virgo i* (a portrait) reveals the
intellectual and creative capacity to extract from a biological
and psychic type of integration (the face of a person who has
become individualized within a particular culture) what is most
characteristic and significant in the person, and thus most re­
vealing. We see the Earth Element at work in the social (Ca­
pricorn), the biological (Taurus) and the individual-personal
(Virgo) realms of activity.*
By relating the four Elements to the equinoctial and solsticial points we obtain holistic and archetypal sequences showing
the relation of the Elements under three aspects within the
whole zodiacal cycle. But the more ordinary way of interpreting
the sequence of these Elements is to study it at the existential
level—that is, as one sign follows another in time. Then AriesFire is followed by Taurus-Earth, Gemini-Air and Cancer-Water
and the four-beat series of Fire, Earth, Air and Water repeats

•There is much rather negative talk in astrological circles today about
people having no planet in signs related to one of the four Elements. Where
a planet is located, there the person's attention normally will tend to, and
should, be focused. But this does not mean that the qualities (or the mode of
operation) symbolized by an Element, if not stressed by a planet, necessarily
< will be lacking in the person's nature. It may mean that these qualities need
not be stressed, because they are innately well developed, or only of secondary
importance in the present life cycle. They might have been too strongly relied
upon in a past life, or they may be dominant in the family or culture within
which the person is born. Other qualities now must be emphasized. In late life
there may be a reversal, just as men in old age tend to become more feminine
and women more masculine. Also, the type of activity represented by a
nonemphasized Element may take place at a transcendent level. In popular
practice, too much is made of the four Elements. The interrelationships of the
planets, wherever they are located in the zodiac, and the positions in the
Houses are far more important. (See my book, The Astrological Houses: The
Spectrum of Individual Experience.) Astrology does not depend primarily on
the signs of the zodiac, important and basic as the concept of the zodiac is as
a symbol of operative wholeness and cyclic activity.

336 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDAIA
itself, beginning with Leo, and then later with Sagittarius.
From such a point of view the entire cycle is divided into
three periods, each beginning with an "emergence." Each
emergence takes place at a specific level of activity and con­
sciousness: the bio-psychic level, the personal-individual ego
level, the social-collective level. We see then the possibility for
a human being to experience a birth in the body, a birth in
individuality, a social (and in some instances, truly spiritualoccult) birth. These three periods, referring to the cycle of the
year when the zodiac is considered, can be studied as well in the
cycle of an archetypal human life, once man has reached the
stage at which it is possible for him to become truly an "individ­
ual," independent of his racial-cultural matrices, and self-reli­
ant. These are the three 28-year periods in a life span of 8 4 years
—the cycle of Uranus. An individualized life is infused with the
Uranian power of self-transformation, while man in the tribal
state (which many human beings today have not yet tran­
scended!) remains an example of racial-cultural pattern, a
"specimen" only superficially characterized by personal reac­
tions to a particular set of circumstances, and the archetypal life
span for him is 7 0 years.*
From the existential point of view of succession in time, the
element Fire is polarized by Earth, within the pairs (or zyzygies)
discussed in the first chapter of this section. In the same way Air
is polarized by Water. We are dealing thus with pairs of opposites and actually with a six-fold division of the cycle. We witness
the differentiation of the One Power into the six great creativetransfonning energies, or shakti. In Sanskrit this One Power is
called Daiviprakriti, and in some other Hindu systems, Vach—
the Voice of the Creative God. It corresponds broadly to the
Holy Ghost of the Christian Trinity, in which the Son has the
astrological Sun as his counterpart.
*
A seven-fold division of the circle of wholeness leads us to
the "irrational," because dividing 7 into 360 does not produce
a whole or rational number. Geometrically, and therefore ar-

*These three 28-year periods have been discussed in both my books, The
Astrology of Personality (1936) and The Astrological Houses (1972).

NUMERICAL STRUCTURE OF THE ZODIACAL SERIES 337

chetypally, speaking, 7 refers to the fact that six circles com­
pletely surround a seventh circle—all circles being of the same
size. Existentially, we constantly deal with cycles divided into
seven periods (and four times 7 equals 28); but what the geomet­
rical fact tells us (if we are ready to listen) is that "the seventh"
occupies a special place in the existential sequence. It is the
"seed" of the six-fold life development. This seed synthesizes
the 6, and at the same time leads to a new cyclic process, hope­
fully at a higher level of growth.
The discussion of further divisions of the circle would lead
to unnecessary complexities, though significant relationships
could be established between the first and the sixteenth degree
symbols of each sign, and the eight-fold division is no doubt a
very significant one if we refer it to the actual release of power
in electromagneticfields(45-degree angle). It may also be that
the 40-degree angle will receive more attention in the future.
It refers to a nine-fold scheme, and the number 40 has great
significance in occult symbolism.
What I sought mainly to show in this part of the book is the
very remarkable manner in which the Sabian symbols can be
related to one another according to several structural schemes,
geometrical and sequential—schemes which have meaning in
terms of number and the release of basic life energies. The
structural interconnections of the Sabian symbols according to
various modes of division of the whole cycle is, I believe, unique
in the field of symbolism—especially considering the aleatory
manner in which the symbols were obtained. It gives them a
kind of validity which is until now unparalleled. This does not
mean that a more perfect set of symbols cannot be produced,
but it establishes a very important criterion of validity.

Part Four
THE ORACULAR
AND ASTROLOGICAL
USE OF T H E SYMBOLS

W h y M o d e r n Individuals
S e e k A n s w e r s from
'Oracles*
®

A PERSON SEEKS ADVICE FROM A CLAIRVOYANT CONCERNING
whom he or she has heard glowing reports; another person
attends a spiritualist meeting in the hope of receiving a message
which might solve an emotional problem or give a clue to a
disturbing mystery; still another consults an astrologer or learns
to erect and interpret horary charts; and thousands of young
and not-so-young individuals throw Chinese coins or yarrow
sticks to seek from the I Ching answers pointing to a way out
of their difficulties or revealing what is the best way to face their
anxieties and decide between alternative courses of action. All
these people are eager and ready to consult one kind of "oracle"
or another. They have problems they feel unable to solve ration­
ally and intellectually on the basis of what they know, and their
traditional religious leaders seem unable to provide them with
satisfactory answers.
Why do these people not go to scientific experts—to psy­
chologists or psychiatrists, to doctors, to college-trained and offi­
cially certified men and women who have studied many new
techniques? Many do go to these specialists; but just as many do

342 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
not believe that they can rely on the type of modern intellectual
and empirical knowledge taught in our universities—a knowl­
edge based on a multitude of data and completely lacking in an
all-embracing philosophy of life. Moreover, because a great
many persons today—especially i f quite young—tend to look
with disfavor upon any and all personal intermediaries between
themselves and whatever they may call God, Life or the uni­
verse, they may not completely trust the many self-proclaimed
spiritual Teachers whose personalities often reflect some of the
unpleasant features of our competitive way of life. Neither do
they completely trust themselves as they face the often-bewil­
dering complexities of modern life.
What then can they do? Hardly any alternative is left ex­
cept to learn how to use impersonal intermediaries. This means
learning a "language" which transcends the analytical and ra­
tional level of knowledge at which our scientists operate. Scien­
tific knowledge has brought an immense increase in comfort
and in power. But in a great variety of circumstances, it cannot
tell us which one, of many, is the most significant course of
action; it cannot tell us what will make us more fully what we
deeply, yet dimly, feel we are, but find ourselves unable to
actually become.
There is a great difference between knowledge and under­
standing. We may know an immense number of facts and
recipes, equations and formulas that enable us to perform acts
which will have important results. But we may not understand
the value of these results. Do we understand where modern
technology is leading mankind? Can we understand, by the use
of mere factual and rational knowledge, why we should choose
between two or more courses of action, when the possible re­
sults of these actions obviously depend upon many unknown
and to us unknowable factors?
„
Modern scientists may proudly feel that they have im­
mensely reduced the number of such unknowns, and they seem
to have done this spectacularly within certain well-defined
fields. Yet our science-based civilization has produced new and
more complex problems for every one it has solved. It has left
the basic problem more acute and anxiety-producing than ever

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 343
—the problem of the meaning of human existence, and particu­
larly the meaning and purpose of each individual person: the
meaning and purpose of my life, or your life.
How can this meaning be discovered when, as is the case
in all but a very few instances, it is neither clear nor unquestion­
ably valid to the individual? How can we be sure that the alter­
native we choose is the one that will help us live more purpose­
fully, more significantly? How can we be sure that the attitude
we take in meeting a difficult situation involving an interper­
sonal relationship or a career opportunity is the most valid, the
most fruitful one? How frustrating and anxiety-producing it is
not to know!
For these reasons, men and women are consulting oracles
today more than they ever have in the past (except perhaps
during the slow decadence of the Greco-Roman society). And to
consult an oracle means either to implicitly trust an intermedi­
ary, or to learn an oracular language—a language of symbols.

IN THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THIS ROOK I TRIED TO EXPLAIN
what symbols are. I shall now attempt to restate in a somewhat
different way what I said there, for not only does it bear repeti­
tion, but it can be stated in many ways.
Any language is a coherent, consistent and traditional set of
symbols. What we ordinarily call "language** is made up of
words. Religion, art and mathematics are also complex and sys­
tematized organizations of symbols. Astrology, when properly
understood and freed from either superstition or the scientific
approach of many recent researchers and statisticians, is also a
language that uses symbols to communicate basic facts related
to the organization of any living organism, and particularly of
human individuals.
All languages communicate not only facts, but at least inti­
mations of the meaning of these facts. These facts can refer to
various levels of existence; their meanings may be related to
several frames of reference, depending on the scope and quality
of the consciousness seeking understanding and the solution of
personal or social problems.

344 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
A very simple example may help to clarify the preceding
statements. I see something moving across the street and I ex­
claim, "A dog!" I am using a symbol. This symbol—the wordsound "dog"—was created by my distant ancestors and has been
used by billions of human beings to communicate to other hu­
man beings the knowledge they had acquired concerning bil­
lions of animals of a certain kind with which they had intimate
dealings. As I say the word "dog," I tell my friend, who has not
seen the dog, that a kind of animal is approaching from which
we may expect a very general, but characteristic, kind of experi­
ence. The word "dog" signifies the possibility of such an experi­
ence.
If I say, "A mad dog!" this general possibility becomes limi­
ted to a smaller set of experiences with which the sense of
danger and the emotion of fear are associated. As I add more
words to the original—for instance, "A black police dog whose
mouth is foaming!"—I limit the field of possibilities even more,
and I define more precisely the knowledge I am imparting to
my friend. The symbol becomes not merely a vague picture of
a four-legged animal with very general dog-like characteristics,
but a clear-cut scene with dramatic, actional implications, in
which the main actor presents us with a definite challenge to act
in a definite manner.
If my friend or I have been bitten by a dog before, and a
serious illness resulted, the challenge becomes very vivid; i t
calls up memories of past experiences and stimulates glandular
activity in our bodies, arousing direct emotions. But even if we
have not had such a personal experience, the word-symbol will
be sufficient to evoke for us a condensed form of the essential
experiences of our ancestors. Thus the symbol will make us feel;
it will also give us some knowledge of how best to act. We will
meet the particular situation confronting us, not as surprising,
isolated and unrelated to anything that has ever happened, but
as something already experienced by countless men.
The situation, then, acquires a "meaning," one which is
commonly accepted by millions of people who have gained
knowledge from the experience. Because I can identify the
experience with a symbol, and can give it a name, there is much

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 345
less chance of my becoming overwhelmed by i t I know that
there is an effective way to meet it, a traditional way. I am no
longer facing the difficulty or danger alone. The strength of
multitudes of men is behind me. What they done with it, I can
do—and better. Because of them, I know more about the mean­
ing and purpose of the event or challenge confronting me.
Symbols integrate the separate experiences of a vast num­
ber of men. They take events, from the realm of the fortuitous,
the unprecedented and the incomprehensible, and put them
into the realm of "universals." The logical sequence of symbols
which one finds in all languages, in all scientific theories, in all
traditional art forms and i n all religiousritualsmakes the myr­
iads of seemingly chaotic, unpredictable and senseless facts of
life fall into patterns of order and meaning. A thousand events
or personal situations come to be seen as mere variations on a
central theme. The symbol depicts this one significant theme.
And the theme is part of a coherent sequence of similar chal­
lenges, which acquire purpose through their relationship. Ex­
pressed through symbols, life becomes condensed into a rela­
tively few, inter-related units of experience. Each unit is a
concentrate of the experiences of millions of people.
While these symbols filled with meaning are the "seedharvest" of the past experiences of a whole collectivity, they are
also powerful in molding the feelings, thoughts and behavior of
future generations. All children absorb these symbols, emotion­
ally and mentally, throughout their formative years. From them
the child learns to give definite meaning to whatever confronts
him, and to feel "one with" all the people who accept these
meanings as valid.
If instead of saying the words, "A mad dog approaching
your house where your children are playing," I was able to
project into the mind of my distant friend a picture showing the
dog entering her garden and attacking her children, I would
also be communicating the meaning of an approaching event
In this case the projection of the image would refer to a clearcut concrete event that my friend could identify at once. But if
such a literal and precise image could not be projected I might
still perhaps send a danger signal, something that might suggest

r

346 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDAIA
that the children were in danger and quick action was needed.
The suggestion could take the form of a more general symbol
that might require some knowledge of how to interpret i t
If a person feels himself faced with a confusing and poten­
tially dangerous situation, he might attempt to gain a deeper
understanding of what is involved in it by throwing Chinese
coins. The I Ching hexagram he obtains might imply some dan­
ger and the best way to face it. This person is actually receiving
a communication that increases his understanding and might
save him serious trouble, just as in the preceding case the
woman with children in danger received a communication
from a friend or perhaps from a police officer warning people
in a city block about a mad dog. Now, however, it is the I Ching
that gives the warning. But what is the I Ching, or the Tarot
cards, or the set of Sabian symbols? This is the puzzling ques­
tion; and it so puzzles the mind trained in the intellectual and.
rational procedures of our classical Western mentality that i t
usually dismisses the whole matter as nonsensical. Yet oracles
work! The problem is that they require interpretation. They
also usually require certain procedures to ensure the validity of
their answers, and above all they demand of the inquirer a
certain frame of mind, an open attitude and even more a real
need for an answer. This need exists when the person seeking a

communication from the oracle has already earnestly tried to
find a way to meet his baffling problem and has been unable to
come to any logical or rational solution, perhaps because so
many unknowns were involved.

In periods during which a particular society and its culture
and religion flourished, the members of this society find in the
traditional cultural structures basic answers that readily can be
applied to most personal problems. A culture is founded upon
archetypes or paradigms—that is, on great images and symboli­
cally valid scenes of the life of greatly respected exemplars who
constitute embodiments of values accepted by all the members
of this particular society. There are men who, having been
trained in the understanding of all that these values imply, are
easily available for help and guidance. But today we are facing
a world situation characterized by the near-breakdown of all

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 347
traditions, and the great images of the past seem empty of
meaning. Where can one find new images, or symbols which are
valid beyond all cultural hmitations—"transcultural" symbols

rooted in the common experience of all human beings?

The search for such symbols inevitably leads to astrology,
because astrology originated in the most basic, most primordial
experience of mankind—the majestic pageant of the stars across
the darkness of the night sky, and the experience of seasonal and
biological rhythms so obviously synchronized with the cyclic
motion of the Sun and the Moon. The dichotomy of celestial
order and earth-surface chaos has been fundamental in all reli­
gions. The sky became the one great symbol of order and of the
rhythmic unfoldment of biopsychological functions and activi­
ties. The sky was "the creative"; the earth, "the receptive"—
natura naturans and natura naturata. The whole problem of
the meaning of existence could be solved if there could be a way
to interpret the ever-changing pictures made by the Creative
on the background of celestial space.
Out of this need astrology was born. All great civilizations
of the past used its symbols. An oracular language of symbols
was gradually developed, in which planets and their intercon­
nections became vowels and consonants, and charts were made
which revealed meaning and purpose to those who had care­
fully learned the celestial language.
It is a complex language, and like all languages it can be
used at different levels. Ordinary English can serve to make
possible clear-cut and entirely factual business transactions—
and now we have an even more concrete and bare form of it in
computer language. But English words can also be used in po­
ems to evoke complex feelings and spiritual insights. In the
same way, dance music or military marches employ a language
intended to move bodies and arouse biological emotions, while
the great devotional music of old India and the music of Scriabin
aimed at inducing mystical experiences.
Words can state facts, but in poetic combinations, they can
also evoke images that act upon the deepest feeling and con­
sciousness of the reader or listener. The astrology that deals
simply with the planets (including the Sun and Moon) and the

348 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
patterns they make in terms of this or that frame of reference
(zodiacs, Houses) in most cases has been event-oriented—
whether at the biological, social or psychological level. But
there is also an astrology that attempts to go beyond, or through,
concrete events, and to evoke a deeper, less particularized
mode of consciousness. This more transcendent kind of con­
sciousness deals with the essence of events and the quality of
being which undertones the functional activity of the planets.
It seeks to transcend the usual kind of astrology by dealing
directly with the phases of all cycles—one might say, with "cyclicity" itself.
Somehow the old Chinese wise men realized this possibility
and developed the mysterious, but extremely potent, patterns
of the I Ching. The cyclic series of the 6 4 hexagrams no doubt
developed against the background of the seasonal cycle of the
year, but they transcend this frame of reference. They lead us
to a world of archetypes, which subsumes or undertones sea­
sonal changes and therefore can be applied, theoretically at
least, to any cycle. Because of this they have universal validity
—universal, yet referring essentially to the level of conscious­
ness at which the Yin-Yang dualism controls every existential
manifestation, and the unfoldment of cyclic activity can best be
identified by a 64-fold rhythm.
As already stated in the first chapter of this book, it is logical
to believe that our complex society with its involved patterns of
interpersonal relationships calls for a greater number of arche­
typal phases. The archetypal sequence of 360 symbols is an
attempt to meet this need—the number 360 refers cosmically
to the abstract relationship between the period of rotation of
the Earth around its axis and the period of its revolution around
the Sun (cf. page 16).
The Sabian symbols, like the symbols of the I Ching, consti­
tute a foundation for oracular pronouncements. But these sym­
bols have to be adequately interpreted, and this interpretation

naturally has to vary with the level of consciousness of the
interpreter. Many commentaries have been written in the past

about the I Ching; no doubt there already have been and there
will continue to be many different interpretations of the Sabian

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 349
symbols. I make no claim that the Sabian symbols are perfect or
universally valid. The images and scenes they present are the
products of a sensitive American mind operating shortly after
World War I . But the symbols have a very real oracular potency
—that is, they can communicate to the questioner valid answers
to questions asked in great earnest about real personal or inter­
personal needs.
Why they can do this will no doubt puzzle many people
accustomed to find rational and "scientific*' explanations for
everything. Many will say that if valid answers are given by the
oracle it is purely by chance. But what is "chance**? What kind
of "scientific proof* could be produced in matters so personal
and so susceptible of subjective interpretation, either by the
inquirer himself or by some intermediary more skilled in the
interpretation of the oracular language? Many Christians in mo­
ments of confusion or sorrow have turned to the Bible, opened
it at random and with closed eyes have selected a line of the text
which was interpreted by them as an answer to their inquiry or
a solace to their grief. They established a communication with
what they believed to be a divine source of wisdom, the very
word of Cod.
But it seems obvious that, in any literal sense, "God** did not
write the Bible, nor the Angel Gabriel, the Koran. At the time
the Sabian symbols were visualized and recorded, some super­
human or masterful intelligence may have been present, some­
how inspiring (or in-spiriting) the process of formulation. But
the actual images were obviously conditioned by the mind of
the clairvoyant, and the wording of the brief statements by that
of Marc Jones. Still, if on one hand we consider the aleatory and
amazing speed of the process of formulation, and on the other
the remarkable structural organization of the symbols when '
reduced to their essential meanings, we cannot avoid deducing
that some transcendent intelligence must have been operating
behind the scenes.
"God,** too, operates behind the scenes of the universe and
through the immensely varied complex, yet ordered and amaz­
ingly organized and interdependent phenomena we observe
and from which we forever learn. It has been said that the works

r

350 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
of God prove His existence. This is a specious kind of proof.
Nothing can be "proven" by the scientific mind except in the
sense that a certain sequence of events is thoroughly consistent
with some basic assumptions. No intellect can objectively prove
the absolute validity of these assumptions or postulates. We
cannot really prove the existence of God, and even less disprove
it; we can only observe what the belief in God as a supreme
Person with whom a dialogue can be pursued does psychologi­
cally to men and women who need the experience of contact
with a divine Being. We can observe as well what the lack of
such a belief can produce in many individuals who psychically
require this kind of experience. The experiences are real to
those who have them. Reality is that which satisfies the vital,
essential need of a person or a collectivity. Any other definition
of this much abused word results from the subjective illusion,
and perhaps pride, of a mind which seeks-self-glorification by
asserting that its own values and concepts are "absolute"-—i.e.
true for all people at all times. But even such an assertion may
meet the very real need of insecure minds, so it too is "reality"!
We may dismiss as "pure chance" the way the Chinese
yarrow sticks fall, gradually determining the shape of the one
I Ching hexagram that is relevant to the situation of the ques­
tioner. We can speak of "synchronicity," (a word that actually
only adds to the mystery) or we can place the responsibility
upon the "unconscious"—another word that is simply a modern
and totally unclear substitute for the old concepts of a daemon
within the soul, of the Higher Self or a guiding Angel. The
simple fact is that when a person's need is real, some power or
intelligence either withui the person or mtimately connected
with him is able to use a language of symbols in order to com­
municate valuable information and directives for action. What
this power and/or center of intelligence "is" can never be fully
ascertained by our own conscious mind, simply because it must
transcend the conscious mind if the oracle is to be at all effective
in meeting the person's need. Perhaps it is simply the polar
aspect of this need, as light polarizes shadow, and Yang pola­
rizes Yin. The principle of universal Harmony requires that for

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF T H E SYMBOLS 351
every need there is a corresponding answer potentially neutral­
izing the need.*
I repeat that oracular communications may take a multi­
tude of forms. They may be "dreams" remembered on awaken­
ing (a very special kind of dream), or words heard within the
head, or "omens" one meets along the path to a goal. They may
be Chinese hexagrams, or Sabian symbols, or Tarot cards i f the
person has attuned himself to the reception of guidance
through these specialized means. The I Ching and the Sabian
symbols are particularly significant as "specialized means" be­
cause, first, they constitute some guarantee against self-deceit
and subjective giving in to biological or psychological com­
plexes, and second, they reveal how the individual's problem
relates to universal issues—or at least to issues that are signifi­
cant to, and faced by, a vast number of people because they
represent specific phases in the unfoldment of human con­
sciousness at a particular level of evolution.
•Cf. "The Gifts of the Spirit" in my book, Triptych, pp. 1&-30.

T

i

H o w t o U s e the S a b i a n
Symbols a s Oracles
®

THERE ARE MANY WAYS IN WHICH A PERSON SEEKING INFOR¬
mation or guidance can discover the Sabian symbol that will
significantly meet his need. Perhaps the simplest method is to
use an ordinary deck of cards.
It will be apparent at once that the deck contains twelve
figure cards—that is, king, queen and jack in four suits. From
this it logically follows that the four kings can represent the four
cardinal signs of the astrological zodiac, the queens the fixed
signs, and the jacks the mutable signs. As I see it, Hearts stands
for the spring quarter, fountainhead of life-rhythms; Diamonds
for the summer quarter, the squaring of life, the "Diamond
Soul"; Spades, whose shape has a polar connection with the
Hearts, for the fall quarter, the darkening of the lifeforce,and
the emergence of the the collective mind stressing the Nightpower; Clubs for the winter quarter, their three-fold shape
symbolizing the fulfillment of mind and all institutionalized
power.
All one need do to find the relevant degree of the sign is use
the number cards of three suits: Hearts can be used to corre-

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 353
spond to the numbers 1 through 10, Diamonds to refer to num­
bers n through 20, and Clubs to numbers 21 through 30.
The simplest procedure is first, to hold face down in one
hand (normally the left hand) the twelve figure cards, and to
select one of the cards at random with the other hand. This gives
the relevant zodiacal sign. Then the same procedure is repeated
with the pack containing the thirty number cards to give the
degree numbers. The two packs, of course, should be
thoroughly shuffled. If, for instance, the jack of clubs is taken out
of the pack of twelve figure cards, and the seven of clubs is
selected from the pack of number cards, the zodiacal symbol for
the degree Pisces 27—or Phase 3 5 7 of the cycle—is the one to
be read and interpreted.
Various procedures can be devised to help the inquirer to
concentrate upon what he or she is doing. But simplicity makes
involvement in ritualistic forms unnecessary. What is essential
is: (1) that the problem should be clearly formulated in the in­
quirer's mind, and (2) that the intent of the inquiry should be
sincere, and the gestures of card selection made in earnest. Any
oracular procedure based on curiosity, or merely for fun, is
doomed to failure—even though occasionally the intellectual
curiosity may really hide a deep-seated need, and the oracular
answer may prove startlingly revealing. A clear formulation of
the problem is essential, for in this as in all kinds of problemsolving (including laboratory experiments in science), the formulation conditions the answer one gets. It has been said, "Ask
and you shall receive," and we must be very careful of what we
ask, for we must live with what is received. Moreover, we
should never ask the same question repeatedly, even if the
answer obtained seems irrelevant or a poor solution. In such
cases the oracle often has very irritating ways of apparendy
mocking us or showing us our weakness.
There is another method, less concrete and very often less
reliable, for obtaining a symbol which answers to a personal
need for discovering the archetypal meaning of a complex or
difficult situation. In a sense, this method is better suited to the
mentality of individuals who are familiar with oracular proce­
dures and have a deep faith in what can be called inner guid-

354 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
ance. It may have definite drawbacks for people whose con­
sciousness is not open to the validity of such practices, and i t
should therefore be used with care and common sense.
This method is simply to focus attention upon the problem
whose meaning one seeks to understand better so as to be able
to act wisely, while at the same time concentrating on whatever
one feels to be the transcendent source of the desired guidance
—whether it be God, one's higher Self, a more-man-human
Being, or even "the unconscious." Then as the mind is kept still,
one should ask that a number be revealed vividly to the con­
sciousness. This number will be that of the phase of the cycle
whose symbol constitutes the oracular answer to the clearly
formulated question. If a number does not rise inside the mind
almost at once, vividly and authoritatively, the issue should
never be forced, and the card method of selection should be
used.
Sometimes a number larger than 3 6 0 may come to mind.
In such a case 3 6 0 should be subtracted from it until it is reduced
to afigurebelow 360. But if this happens, the symbol most likely
refers to a situation involving transcendent features which the
questioner may not be ready as yet to understand, or to a trend
which has not come yet to maturity.

I N ORDER T O CLARIFY A L L T H I S , I S H A L L M E N T I O N O N E
actual incident. Quite a few years ago, a man came to me be­
cause he was unable to understand the meaning of a personal
tragedy which was bringing confusing changes to his life. The
testimony of the astrological charts which he knew well did not
seem very clear-cut or convincing to him. There were many
ways of interpreting Uranian transits and "difficult" progres­
sions. The man kept asking, "But what does it mean? How am
I to take it?"
After a while Tasked him to be quiet for a moment, and
with his mind at rest, to see if a number would intrude into his
consciousness. He looked astonished, hesitated for a moment,
closed his eyes, then suddenly said, "Yes, I quite definitely feel
something in my head saying 342. What does it mean?"
I explained briefly the value and purpose of the Sabian

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 355
symbols, and we read the description of the symbol for Phase
342, or Pisces 12*. It is the second symbol in the five-degree
sequence which begins with Pisces n*. In this sequence, a per­
son is making some sort of claim for a new spiritual-mental
status.
If the reader refers to pages 2 7 4 through 2 7 8 he will find
the symbols for thisfive-degreesequence, which begins with a
picture of "Men traveling a narrow path, seeking iUumination."
The symbol for Phase 3 4 2 reads: In the sanctuary of an occult

Brotherhood, newly initiated members are being examined and
their character tested. This was the oracular pronouncement

which reached my client's mind through the intermediary of
the Sabian symbols. I f he had been conversant with this sym­
bolic language my presence as an interpreter would not have
been necessary; yet the presence of an interpreter who has
gained the special ability to see through and concretize the
oracular statement can be of great value, just as a psychologist
can be of immense importance to a person seeking to uncover
all the implications of an evidently significant yet unusual
dream.
The implication of the symbol referring to Phase 3 4 2 was
that something had happened to this man which brought him
in touch, at a deeper level of his being, with a totally new and
demanding situation, probably involving a new type of relation­
ship. He was being "tested" to reveal his reaction to this situa­
tion. Who or what it was that made the testing matters little.
The words "sanctuary of an occult Brotherhood" need not be
taken literally—as a general principle, no oracular statement or
dream should be taken literally, even though in some instances
it indeed may appear to apply in a most precise sense to a
situation. The symbol nevertheless suggested that my client was
entering a new phase of his inner development, though in some
cases it could also refer to corning into new responsibilities at a
strictly social or business level.
My client had asked what the meaning of a tragedy he had
experienced was. The symbol answered by pointing out that the
tragedy itself could be considered a test of character—a test
made necessary because he had already taken a definite step in

356 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
his individual development, even though he might not be aware
of this in his everyday consciousness. He had been "seeking
iUumination" (Phase 341). He had "entered the Path," spiritu­
ally speaking. Now he was being tested—by life, God or "the
Master"—to prove his worth, i.e. his "qualifications."
I repeat that the term "initiated" in the symbolic statement
was not necessarily to be understood in a strictly occult sense.
Initiation simply means entrance into a new field of activity, a
field in which one is to act in the company of beings who have
already mastered the requirements of that field, at least to some
extent. A new kind of cooperation is therefore implied, and the
group of which one has become a part demands a probationary
period of testing. This is true at any level at which groups of men
operate in an organized manner.
This was what the oracle , told my client; if he were open
to the "revelation" his entire approach to the tragedy he had
experienced would be changed. Instead of feeling beaten
down by an inscrutable fate and meaningless events, he
would realize that these events indicated his having taken a
major step in his life, a step necessary for further growth, as
the grinding of the coarse material surrounding a diamond is
necessary in order to allow the pure stone to reveal its
beautiful translucency.
WHAT, WHERETO, HOW AND WHY

IN PART THREE I DISCUSSED THE STRUCTURAL RELATION¬
ships between Sabian symbols that reveal how the entire set
constitutes an organized and integral whole. In the chapter
'The Cross and the Star" I showed that a basic—though some­
times not easily perceptible—pattern of meaning can be estab­
lished between symbols opposed to each other and forrning a
perfect cross. The simplest manifestation of this type of struc­
tural patterning can be seen when relating the symbols refer­
ring to the four cardinal points of the year cycle, the solstitial
and equinoctial points. I stated that when confronted with any
important event and basic change, four questions should always

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 357
arise in the mind: What is the nature and meaning of the event?
To what is it leading (i.e., What is its potential outcome?)? How
can I best handle the situation? and What is the ultimate pur­
pose of this entire process of development?
In an astrological chart these four questions can be related
to the four Angles: Ascendant (WHAT), Descendant
(WHERETO), Nadir (HOW), Mid Heaven or Zenith (WHY). We
will see in the next chapter that such an analytical approach in
a great many cases can be significantly applied to a birth chart,
the more validly perhaps the more the person is consciously in
touch with the realm of archetypal meanings—even though one
certainly cannot make this a general rule.
In me case of the person who drew to his mind the symbol
related to the number 342, this symbol was to be taken as the
WHAT of the situation. The oracle told what the situation
meant in the total life span of the inquirer. But any such answer
in turn poses many questions. The first is, " I f this is so, then
where will this lead me? What kind of result can I expect, or at
least work for?"
The answer to the WHERETO of the situation is theoreti­
cally to be found in the symbol for the phase of the cycle in
opposition to the first symbol. Astrologically speaking, if Pisces
12* is the basic symbol referring to the inquiry, then Virgo 12*
will give the symbol answering the WHERETO question. This
symbol is: After the wedding, the groom snatches the veil away
from his bride. I have interpreted it as indicating penetrating
beyond the "veil" of natural appearances to the essential reality
of existence.
What we see, therefore, is that if the inquirer succeeds in
passing through the testing process, and thus is accepted as a
full-fledged participant in the type of group-relationship operat­
ing at the new and normally higher field of activity, he will
develop the mental ability to tear away the "veil of Isis" and to
come in contact with hidden realities. He may be able to deal
forcefully and creatively with occult energies. Or if the inquirer
operates only at the social or business level, he should be able
to reach some "inner sanctum" of power and wealth.
I said */the inquirer succeeds in passing the tests. The next

J

358 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
question inevitably follows: "HOW can I best act in order to
succeed?" For an answer to this question we turn to the symbol
for Gemini 12*, because this degree is 9 0 degrees ahead of Pisces
12*. In a "solar" chart, in which each House contains thirty
degrees, if the Ascendant Pisces 12*, the Nadir point (Imum
Coeli or cusp of the fourth House) is Gemini 12*, which means
phase 7 2 of the cycle (342 plus 9 0 equals 432, which reduces to
7 2 when 360 is subtracted.)
The symbol is formulated thus: "A Negro girl fights for her
independence in the city. "The keynote is: "Liberation from the
ghosts of the past."
This symbolic scene is elucidated by the preceding one,
which refers to newly opened lands offering the pioneer new
oprwrhinities for experience. The man who has "entered the
Path" leading to a new field of relationship and new powers is
indeed a pioneer. But the tragedy of all pioneering ventures is
that the pioneers too often bring to the new land or any new
opportunity "the ghosts" of their past—their old habits and
prejudices, their fears and insecurities. Pioneers along any new
lines of social or group activity have to fight not only against
whoever occupies established positions in the social environ­
ment, but against their own past. They often have to overcome
a basic uncertainty and lack of faith in their own ability to
succeed. The symbol therefore tells the inquirer that he must
stand for what he knows is right against all opposition. And here
we can note that according to occult traditions the testing of the
aspirant to a new status includes the materialization of illusory
shapes of frightening appearances and a sort of condensed
precipitation of the candidate's basic weakness now confronting
him and barring his way. He needs courage and a keen grasp
of what is happening. He must claim what is his due. He must
"liquidate" the past by strong, persistent and wise action.
The fourth question that calls for an oracular answer is,
"WHY all this? What is the ultimate goal that I am to reach, the
essential purpose of the struggle?" The answer is to be found in
the symbol for Sagittarius 12', which is the point opposite
Gemini 12*, and thus completes the "cross" begun at Pisces 12*,
the original symbol selected by the inquirer.

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 359
The symbol for Sagittarius 12* reads: "A flag turns into an
eagle; the eagle into a chanticleer saluting the dawn." This

peculiar symbol is susceptible of various interpretations, but in
reference to the situation occupying our attention the most
important meaning seems to be that the purpose of the events
which had so disturbed the inquirer was to impel him to trans­
form his ideals from the abstract (the flag) to the spiritually
concrete (the eagle). His ideals had to become alive and able to
withstand the intensity of a "solar" illumination at the highest
level reachable by Earth-nature (the high-soaring eagle), so he
could act as a herald of the New Day (the crowing chanticleer
announcing the rising of the sun).
This was what was implied in the oracular appearance of
the number 342 in the man's quieted consciousness. The four
symbols which formed a crosslike constellation of meanings
quite clearly gave the crisis which so confused him a positive,
creative value. The test he was experiencing was real and dan­
gerous, but it was a test, and if he could summon the courage
and strength to face it and to overcome his karmic handicaps
and the obstacles placed in his path, the results would be im­
mensely valuable and would make him one of the pioneering
spirits of the coming Age.
In short, what the oracle said in answer to my client's ques­
tion was something like this: "You personal crisis means that you
are being tested as a result of a deep interior phase of growth
of which you may not have been aware. Provided you firmly and
persistently demand your freedom from past conditioning, you
can be given a new revelation of the power of life, a new sense
of your own worth as a creative person. But do not just think
of what you will be able to reach as being an abstract ideal. Do
not either merely look at it or experience it ecstatically in high
flights of imagination. Act it out among your people. Let your
vision be known. Become a heralding agent of the creative
Power of the universe."

IT SHOULD BE CLEAR FROM THIS EXAMPLE THAT THE ORACU¬

lar pronouncement did not refer to any particular future event.

360 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
The inquirer was seeking meaning, not fortunetelling. He
might have asked whether or not he should sign a contract with
a new firm, or marry someone with whom he had fallen in love.
But any inquirer wise in the ways of the oracles would never
ask; "Should I do this or that?" The only sensible way of phras­
ing a question to an oracle is: "What would be the meaning, or
the results, of such an action?" What the oracle can tell the
questioner refers essentially to the quality of the results of the
action; it has to do with the relationship between the per­
former, the performance and the results of this performance.
And we shall now see how this character of all oracular pro­
nouncements applies to an interpretation of each of the basic
factors in a birth chart; how one can use the symbols of the
degrees on which the ten "planets" and the four Angles are
located in order to reach a new dimension of astrological inter­
pretation—the dimension of qualitative
meaning.

The Use of Degree Symbols
in the Interpretation
of a Birth C h a r t
®

THE PLANETS IN A BIRTH CHART (ALWAYS INCLUDING SUN

and Moon) represent the basic functions which can be seen
operating in all organized systems of activity. Such systems may
be galaxies, solar systems, cells and atoms as well as plants,
animals and human beings. All these systems are organized
wholes, and we may use the adjective "organic" (some writers
have said organated) instead of organized, if we are willing to
say that the universe and all its component wholes are "living"
organisms. We may even extend the concept of organized
whole, if not organism, to a nation or a more or less permanent
and self-perpetuating institution.
Whether we use the term "life" in a universal or in a more
restricted biological sense, the fact is that wherever there is a
whole the constituting parts of which are definitely structured
and in a relatively steady state of constant interaction, we can
isolate a certain number of essential functions which operate
interdependently. The particular genius of astrology is to be
able to significantly refer all interrelated modes of operations
within any organized whole to ten fundamental functions, each
represented by a planet.

362 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
These functions have basically the same character in all
organized systems, from atoms to men as well as from nations
to galaxies, but they operate at many different levels; they deal
with an infinite variety of substances (physical or superphysical)
and produce an immense multiplicity of actual results. But as
varied as these results may be, Jupiter always stands for the
functional ability to expand, and Saturn for the capacity to
define clearly and to maintain the original structure of the organ­
ism. The Sun will always refer to the fountainhead of power
from which flow the energies used in the activities of all or most
parts of the organism, and the Moon will always symbolize the
organism's power to adjust to its environment and its capacity
to distribute the "solar" energies to any part in need of them,
whenever and in whatever form they are needed. Mars repre­
sents the ability to mobilize the organization's energies in order
to achieve desired results, while Venus establishes the value of
what is to be striven for, or feared and avoided—thus what
attracts or repels. Mercury always stands for all means and
methods of internal and external communication, everything
that establishes links and patterns of association.
Then there are the three trans-Saturnian planets—Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto—which refer to a more mysterious capacity
inherent in life-species, particularly in man, but also perhaps in
all forms of cosmic and microcosmic organizations—the capac­
ity to transform oneself and to transcend one's limitations, a
capacity which should almost certainly be considered a re­
sponse to the challenge of the "greater Whole" within which
the lesser whole operates as an organic part capable of respond­
ing to changes in the greater Whole. A living organism may
experience a mutation in its seed because its species is either
adjusting to new planetary conditions and some basic changes
in the biosphere or taking a new and preordained step in its
evolution. An individual man is even more able to transform his
ancestral nature or animal background when aroused by the
vision and example of an Avatar (divine Manifestation) herald­
ing a new phase of human and planetary evolution. Uranus
refers to the revelation of the new goal or archetype; Neptune
refers to the dissolution of the old structures, personal and so-

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 363
cial; and Pluto stands for the chaotic stage which already con­
tains the latent promise of future reorganization.
The ten planets represent functional activities, each of
which has a definite character. Each symbolizes an essential and
typical mode of operation, somewhat as each organ of the body
(heart, lungs, stomach, sex organs, nervous system and brain,
and so fort) performs definite biological operations. The astro­
logical aspects between these planets in a birth chart tell us how
these ten basic functions are related to one another in a particu­
lar person, at both the biological and the psychological levels;
or alternatively from the standpoint of the "humanistic" type of
astrology I have promoted, the aspects indicate what kinds of
interplanetary relationships are most fruitful, so that the process
of actualization of the individual's birth potential might be able
to take place effectively and creatively.
But how can we gain at least intimations of the special
quality of any one planet's operational activity? If Jupiter repre­
sents the function of expansion and the ability to increase the
scope of a person's power and authority, what are the implica­
tions of this expansionistic or managerial drive which every
living organism possesses to some extent?
The traditional astrologer will try to measure the strength
of a planetary function according to the system of "dignities"—
a system based on the old concept of rulership, exaltation, and
strength or weakness due to position in a particular natal House.
But strength is not quality! A type of activity may be strong in
a coarse, heavy or self-defeating manner; it may display an exu­
berant, aggressive strength, or it may achieve its end in subtle,
gentle, persuasive ways. What appears to be "weakness" in spe­
cial circumstances may lead to success if it implies being sensi­
tive and attuned to higher Powers.
When he uses the simpler traditional means, what the as­
trologer sees is in a sense two-dimensional; and much of as­
trology is based on either-or judgments. A third dimension of
meaning is necessary once astrology ceases to be almost exclu­
sively "events-oriented" and attempts to guide individuals in
choosing the most significant way (it may not be the most "suc­
cessful" in a conventional sense) of actualizing their innate po-

364 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
tential. Some special techniques—for instance, the so-called
Arabian Parts—have been used to uncover the subtler charac­
ter of planetary activities in relation to a particular individual.
But I personally feel that in many cases—though perhaps not in
all—a consideration of the symbols of the degrees on which each
planet is located adds a type of information which nothing else
can quite give—provided one uses this kind of information
wisely and understands its limitations.
There are undoubtedly limits to what can be learned in this
way, and above all one should realize that such information
should be used not so much as a means to know what a person
is, but what he is meant to be. This is where humanistic as­
trology differs from the astrology that is so often only a glorified
form of fortunetelling (which all predictive methods actually
are, scientific or not). The humanistic astrologer is not trying to
find out "how a person ticks," or to discover his strengths and
weaknesses. He is not attempting to "analyze" a client or a
friend, or his wife and children. Instead he seeks to act as an
intermediary, a focusing agent and interpreter, whose only
function is to help another person to realize himself more fully
and to become a "whole person," an integrated and multifaceted individual able to fulfill the essential purpose of his having
been born (his individual destiny) at a particular time and in a
particular social-planetary environment.
Thus the symbol of the degree on which a natal planet is
located should be used not so much to tell someone, "This is the
special way in which your Mars function operates. You had
better know it and perhaps do something about it." Instead, the
humanistic astrologer will say, "This is the type of quality of
consciousness and behavior you can best demonstrate when this
particular function operates. It may of course already operate
in this manner, if you let it work spontaneously. But perhaps this
quality is only latent in your nature. It needs to become more
mature, richer, more expressive, more conscious—provided
that consciousness does not mean intellectualization or pride, or
in a negative sense, fear and moral confusion."
In many instances the symbol points to a quality which the
individual has not been able to apply in the exercise of the

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 365
planetary function to which it refers; and if the reader refers to
the beginning of Chapter Three, "The Positive and Negative
Approaches to Individual Experiences," he will note the follow­
ing statement (page 36): "To live is to consume energy. There
are two basic ways in which this consumption of energy can be
said to take place: the purposeful use of power, or the automatic
operation of forces. In either case energy is consumed, but the
meanings given to this consumption differ; that is, the type of
consciousness arising from the living and experiencing of life is
positive in the first instance and negative in the second."
Let us take as an example the symbols associated with the
natal Sun of several personages whose birth charts were given
in my booklet, "First Steps in the Study of Birth-Charts."* A
rather typical case of negative approach is shown by the Sun's
zodiacal degree in the chart of the unfortuante czar Nicholas I I
of Russia, who was killed by Bolsheviks at Ekaterinberg. The
Sun is on the 28th degree (27*46') of Taurus in the ninth House,
but practically conjunct the Mid Heaven. The formulation I
have offered (page 87) is: A woman, past her "change of life,"
experiences a new love, and the commentary speaks of the need
for the individual to "freely open his or her mind to the possibil­
ity of always new rebeginnings," to "rise above biological limita­
tions," etcetera. The word "biological" should be replaced by
"cultural" or "traditional," because here we have the chart of
a man who was also the national symbol of the old aristocratic
Russia. He represented an entire culture and its ruling class, a
ruling class that, when confronted by the challenge to transform
itself, was unable to revitalize its basic approach to life, to "rise
above" obsolete tradition that held captive its capacity to use
power in a spiritually positive manner.
The position of the retrograde Saturn in the fourth House,
opposing Mercury in the tenth House (Mercury being the ruler
of the Ascendant Virgo) may show why a negative approach was
taken. Saturn stands alone in the chart's lower hemisphere, and

•This is now a section of the volume entitled: Person-Centered Astrology:
A New Approach to the Meaning and Use of Birth-Charts (GSA. Press, Lakemont, Georgia, 1972).

366 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
there is also a tense square relationship between a VenusUranus conjunction in Cancer and a triple grouping of Jupiter,
Moon and Neptune. Yet some man may have been born with
the same or nearly the same chart who could have used the
implied tensions to release the positive potentiality of this natal
Sun's degree. We also find a ninth House Sun in Henry Ford's
chart (Leo 7°6'), and the symbol is interesting because it shows
how one must go beyond the literal statement and extract the
essence of the symbolic scenes: A communist activist spreading
his revolutionary ideals. Henry Ford assuredly was no commu­
nist, but he revolutionized the ways of mankind all over the
globe by the introduction of cars which new techniques of mass
production made available to a very large section of the popula­
tion. The Keyword given at the end of the commentary, "catabolic action," is certainly not inappropriate, for the popular car
has been responsible for much, of the breakdown of the old way
of life, of American mores and morality.
In Ford's chart the Moon on the uth degree of Aquarius is
just past its Full Moon phase and on a degree symbolized as
follows: During a silent hour a man receives a new inspiration
which may change his life. Whatever inspired Henry Ford
certainly changed his life, and billions of other lives as well.
Perhaps he experienced some kind of "overshadowing" (cf.
page 255). The quintile aspect of the Sun to Jupiter at Libra 20*
2 6 ' was a good omen for social success. It could have told Ford
he should expand socially in a creative manner and use the
energy implied in the square between this Jupiter and a seventh
House Uranus. Jupiter's symbol is very fitting for it pictures A
Sunday crowd enjoying the beach, an enjoyment made possible
by the family car.
In a totally different field of existence and consciousness we
can appreciate the significance of the Sun's degree in Sri Aurobindo's birth chart. The great Hindu leader, yogi, poet and
philosopher, whose centenary has very recendy been cele­
brated all over the world, sought throughout forty years of in­
tense and daring inner concentration to bring down into physi­
cal manifestation a new type of transforming spiritual energy.
His Sun's symbol reads: In a circus the bareback rider displays

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 3G7
her dangerous skill, a symbol of audacity and perseverance in

controlling the powerful energies of what he called the "vital
level in man's existence. [The Sun was about to rise in Sri Aurobindo's chart, with Jupiter (Leo 13%°) practically on the As­
cendant's degree (Leo 12*27'. The Jupiter symbol tells of "The
yearning for self-actualization" and of the attempt to let the
spiritual Being fully manifest his power.] The Ascendant's de­
gree (see page 139) may not seem so justified, yet there was a
time when Aurobindo was a pioneer in the political movement
which freed India from the English, and it took a crisis (a year
in jail) to show to the uncompromising leader that his work of
destiny was not in such a tempestuous field of activity but in­
stead in the intense concentration of the room in which he
passed the last forty years of his life, talking to only a handful
of people. In other words, this solitary concentration on inner
experiences was the way of destiny for him, and he had to learn
this.
The Moon symbol in Aurobindo's chart is also significant:

An old bridge over a beautiful stream is still in constant use.

Aurobindo sought to go back to the sources of India's greatness
and spirituality by reinterpreting the ancient Vedas, the sacred
books of several thousand years ago. The ancient tradition had
helped to bridge the chasm between the human and the divine.
Aurobindo thus linked the future to the past, formulating a
philosophy and a way of life which, above the stream of the
ever-flowing spiritual life of India, established a direct approach
to what man should become as he actualizes the full potential
of his being. The Moon symbol evokes a certain quality of mani­
festation in Aurobindo's capacity to adjust to his environment
and to distribute his "solar" audacity and courage.
In the chart of the great German occult philosopher, educa­
tor and creative artist, Rudolph Steiner, the Sun at Pisces 9*20'
is located on a degree symbolized by An aviator flying through
ground-obscuring clouds (page 274). Implied here is a potential
destiny of masterful control of energies which allows one to
penetrate into a cloudy realm of existence and, relying on inner
powers of direction, to go on toward a definite purpose. The
opposition of this Sun to Saturn retrograde in square to Uranus

368 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
suggests that much self-transforming strength and courage will
be needed if the life goal is to be reached.
We have an interesting problem of symbolic interpretation
in the chart of the promoter of Italian Fascism, Benito Mus­
solini. In his chart a conjunction of the Sun and Mercury occurs
on the 6th degree of Leo. The symbol (page 135) pictures A

conservative old-fashioned lady confronted by a "hippie" girl

What does this mean? Mussolini's Fascism was a return to the
ancient archetype of the Roman Empire, which he dreamt to
reconstitute. In a more general sense, the rise of Fascism was—
and remains today, in one form or another—the result of a
collective fear of the new political development, Conmiunism.
At first a highly neurotic young man, Mussolini overcame his
inferiority complex by an overcompensative type of aggressive­
ness. In the symbol, the "old-fashioned lady" anchored in the
glory of her past is both frightened and enraged by the ultra­
modern and aggressive young girl facing her. This is, alas, the
normal reaction, the line of least resistance based on pride and
insecurity. Mussolini followed that line, but the positive implica­
tion of the symbol is that in such a situation the old order and
the new dream should reach some sort of understanding. This
proved difficult; Mussolini adopted the negative way, and was
destroyed.
This example shows that the commentary I have written for
the symbol does not always exactly fit a particular situation. If
Mussolini could have accepted the fact that all social fashions
and ideologies have only a "relative value," he might not have
indulged in his coarse and totalitarian use of power. He repre­
sented a return to an obsolete Image to which he gave an abso­
lute value. The fact that his natal Saturn stood on a degree
symbolized by Aroused strikers surrounding a factory points to
the deep character of his (and many of his contemporaries')
insecurity, for wherever Saturn is located in a birth chart we
find the area of maximum weakness. Anything occurring at this
point tends to make a person panic and resort to aggression or
to a self-defeating retreat into traditional forms of security. Mus­
solini's Moon on the gth degree of Gemini, very close to Saturn,
further emphasizes the pressure exerted by this panicking Sat-

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 369
The Moon's symbol (A quiver filled with arrows) evokes a

urn.
return to primitive forms of aggressivity; yet this image of "con­
quest" need not reveal a destructive use of power. It may refer
to an ability to survive in the midst of natural predators and a
constructive alertness to danger. It is a symbol of preparedness.
Another interesting case is that of the tragic philosopher,
Friedrich Nietzsche, whose natal Sun was Libra 22*7', a degree
symbolized by Chanticleer's voice heralds sunrise. In the oncefamous play of the French poet, Edmond Rostand, the rooster
who is the main personage not only salutes the dawn in ringing
tones, but is possessed by the belief that it is he whose voice
brings about the rise of die sun. Nietzsche was one of the first
poet-seer-philosophers to dream of the rise of a type of human
being who would bring forth a new civilization. His was a tragic
life ending in what we call insanity, and his passionate, hammer­
ing words have aroused destructive forces in many people; yet
through and beyond this destructiveness he nevertheless acted
as a herald of much that has taken more positive form since his
death near the turn of this century.
Nietzsche's natal Mars culminating in his tenth House and
ruler of his Scorpio Ascendant is located on the 28th degree of
Virgo. The symbol, A baldheaded man who has seized power,
stresses the "Power of the Will" in times of crises. Interestingly
enough, when I wrote those Keywords for the degree I was
unaware that Nietzsche's ruling planet, Mars, was located at this
place; and one of his most famous books is entided The Will to

Power.

ONE COULD GIVE COUNTLESS EXAMPLES, THOSE I HAVE Dis­

cussed may be sufficient to show how the use of symbols re­
quires that we go to the very root of the symbol's meaning and
in many cases ignore the superficial features of the commentar­
ies, mine or anyone else's. The most important symbols are
those referring to the Sun, the Moon and the Ascendant, unless
one has to focus one's attention upon definite problems related
to a particular function within the total person of the inquirer.
Moreover, I should state once more that what the symbols indi-

370 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA

cate is not so much what is as what should be developed in order
that a person be fully able to actualize his birth potential.
Thus, if Nietzsche in youth had consulted an astrologer able
to use the Sabian symbols, he should have been told that being
a herald for a new type of social or personal development was
inherent in his essential temperament and individual destiny.
The opposition of Pluto (not yet discovered) to the Sun tells us
in retrospect how deep-seated and relentless this "solar" com­
mitment of Nietzsche's essential nature was, and how expecta­
ble its tragic or sacrificial implications. Yet this was Nietzsche's
destiny, potentially schizophremc as it may have been when
seen from a commonplace and normative point of view; This
was his dharma. The oppositions of Mars to Jupiter, Mercury to
Uranus, and Pluto to the Sun posed a tough problem of what
Jung called "personality integration"—-one not made easier by
the square of a ninth House Venus to a rising Sagittarian Moon
(on the interesting gth degree of Sagittarius—a degree of "social
concern" and assistance to the less evolved). But these aspects
generate power, and Nietzsche obviously needed a deep source
of power within himself to hammer at prejudices and taken-forgranted social and intellectual values. The Hindu god Shiva is
both destroyer and regenerator; he is said to absorb into his
body the poisons released by his catabolic activities. This is the
fate of the true pioneers in times of social crystallization and
vulgarization, for such historical periods not only invite, but
demand disintegration.
If one has the time to study a birth chart in depth, the
consideration of the symbols of the degrees on which all the
planets are located is certainly worthwhile. In many instances
by looking attentively at all these symbols—to which should be
added those of the four Angles and at least of the Part of For­
tune—a total feeling may emerge, although it may be abstract
and difficult to describe. This is not likely to be a picture of
scenes or potential events, but something more like the total
resonance of a complex chord, of which the qualities implied in
all these symbols would be the separate notes. When one meets
a person for the first time, one often gets a clear "feeling-intui­
tion" of what this person stands for, vibrates to, and perhaps
may mean in one's life i n days or years to come. I n the same

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 371
way, out of all the degree symbols in a chart an overall quality
of heing-ness may impress itself upon our consciousness. This is

what I have called a "holistic" response to a situation. It may
come by simply looking at the chart as a whole with an "inner
eye," and without ever thinking of degree symbols; yet the
latter can add a new dimension to one's intuitive response—one
might almost speak of a particular "flavor."
I spoke in the preceding paragraph of the value of consider­
ing the symbols for the four Angles of the chart. The problem
here, of course, is that we are not always sure of the exact
moment of a person'sfirstbreath. The "rectification" of a birth
chart rarely leads to absolute certainty, for there are many ways
in which we may attempt such a rectification, and none is either
foolproof or acceptable to all reputable astrologers. Each Angle
characterizes in an essential or archetypal manner one of the
four basic psychic functions (or modes of being) of which Carl
Jung speaks, particularly in his book Psychological Types: that
is, intuition, sensation, feeling and thinking. I have related these
functions respectively to the Ascendant (intuition), the astrolog­
ical Nadir (feeling), the Descendant (sensation), and the Zenith
or Mid Heaven (triinldng).
In view of the uncertainty about the exact degrees of the
four Angles I shall use my own birth chart as an example, al­
though in general I am strongly opposed to making public one's
birth chart, or at least the precise moment of one's first breath,
i.e. one's Ascendant. However, in my case these Angles have
been made public in several places in spite of my request that
the information be not publicized, and at my age and in my
situation the matter is of relatively little importance.
I was born with the 14th degree of Sagittarius rising, and the
12th degree of Libra at the Mid Heaven. (The Sun was on the
3rd degree of Aries and the Moon on the 25th of Aquarius.) The
reader should now turn to pages 51 and 264 where the symbols
are described and commented upon. What I shall attempt to do,
as an example of what can and (if possible) should be done, is to
interpret the interrelationships between the four symbols of the
Angles and the basic four-fold character of psychic activity (i.e.
intuition, feeling, sensation, thinking) in my own case. I shall try
to be as fully objective as one should be toward the close of an

372 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
already long and full life—a life lived in terms of the discovery
of meaning.
There are two ways in which the interpretation can be
approached. The first is simply to refer each of the four basic
modes of psychic activity to a degree symbol. Thus my intuitive
processes should be referred to the symbol of The Great Pyramid and the Sphinx. This suggests a rootedness in whatever
these immensely old Egyptian monuments can mean to the
interpreter. For me, it means an ancient wisdom which had
been able to formulate its attunement to the cosmic order and
incorporate it in massive and totally symbolic structures. It
means having some sort of cryptic and therefore "occult"
knowledge as an intuitive "background." But what the symbol
really implies is not the existence of such a background as much
as the indication that I should attempt to develop my intuition
along lines that have at least a general reference to a type of
wisdom in the possession of a group of men such as the builders
of the Egyptian edifices.
The Ascendant, more than any other astrological factor,
points to the type of experiences through which one may best
realize one's individual uniqueness of being and destiny. Thus
the symbol of my Ascendant gives me the message that, if I
want to discover who I really am, my archetypal self, I should
seek to gain experiences that are in some way related to a
quality, of knowledge, wisdom or power symbolizable by the
Pyramid and the Sphinx. This is really all that the symbol sug­
gests; no special glamor should be attached to it and it would be
unwise to deduce from it a literal connection between my in­
dividuality and the Egyptian tradition or those who may still be
its depository. It should be clear that this degree of the zodiac
must be found in numerous birth charts, and many of the in­
dividuals with such an Ascendant very likely have (or have had
in the past) no conscious relation to ancient wisdom or what now
is called esotericism. Yet even in such cases today the symbol
may be valid, and significantly points to a direction, should
the person experience a deep-seated urge to reach beyond
the superficialities of his social-cultural environment and its

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 373
strictly normal and average responses to life.
The Nadir point (fourth House's cusp or I.C.) in my birth
chart (Aries 12th degree) carries a symbol which I have ex­
plained at length on pages 57-58 because I believe that so far
it has been inadequately interpreted. In the symbol A flight of
wild geese the emphasis should not be on the wildness of the
geese, but on the deeper factors to which such a flight refer, i.e. the
regular seasonal nature of the flight attuned to planetary
changes and the geometrical pattern outlined by the flight. The
symbol of the "wild goose" is a very ancient one, and in old India
the name hamsa referred not only to the wild goose but to the
human soul as well. Interestingly enough, I chose this name,
Hamsa, for a magazine I started in 1920-21 before I ever knew
that it referred to the symbol of my fourth House cusp.
This cusp, the astrological Nadir, is the point of personal
foundations. In a deeper sense it is also the center of the globe
on the surface of which we live. It is at this point and through
the fourth House that an individual can best experience his
rootedness in whatever to liim represents soh'dity and security
—his land, his home and all that contributes to the concrete
integration and strength of his personality. What therefore does
this "flight of wild geese" symbol have to say about my feelingprocesses and my sense of personality integration?
The rather obvious implication is that whatever can give
me a concrete experience of rootedness and security does not
relate to—and should not be sought in terms of—a particular
land, soul or home. Instead, it should be found in a kind of
earth-transcending instinct attuned to the rhythm of planetary
or seasonal factors. The feeling-processes should also be con­
trolled by some sort of "group formation" rather than operating
on a strictly individualistic basis. They should perhaps operate
in a way symbolized by a triangular wedgelike shape and on the
background of an impersonal celestial order. In my commentar­
ies, I wrote: "The symbol therefore refers to the Soul-conscious­
ness, as visualized by the heaven-oriented mind"; but in this
particular birth chart what is especially at stake are the feelingprocesses. What most people call "soul"—at least without a capi­
tal letter—is based on the feeling-nature; this is accurate be-

374 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
i
cause the feelings are the direct, more or less spontaneous ex­
pressions of the whole person's spontaneous evaluation of his
experiences. Thus the soul refers to the wholeness of the person,
to his consciousness of being a whole, an " I . "
The symbol quite evidendy fits me well, for I never had the
sense of being rooted in a particular land or home. I left all that
referred to my ancestral tradition, culture, and language as soon
as the opportunity arose at the age of twenty-one, and afterward
I moved a great deal across America following what often were
seasonal rhythms. Any sense of security I have ever experienced
has been a feeling of "center" and of being an organic part of
a group operating in terms of an ineluctable superpersonal or
"cosmic" necessity—a spiritual instinct which could not be diso­
beyed.
The symbol for my Descendant (Gemini 14*) is formulated
as follows: Bridging physical space and social distinctions, two
men communicate telepathically. The basic interpretation is
given as a reference to the capacity to transcend the limitations
of bodily existence.
How this symbol can throw light upon the aspect of psychic
activity usually called "sensation" in my life may not seem clear
at first. But here again we have a symbol thatfitswell in the total
picture already begun by the symbols of the Ascendant and the
Nadir. Sensations result from contacts between one's body and
various other physical objects, or at least the emanations from
them. On the other hand, the symbol of telepathic communica­
tion pictures what is essentially a nonphysical contact. Of
course no one as yet knows precisely how telepathy operates,
but in terms of symbolic meaning, it should be evident that
what is at stake is a transcendent type of interaction between
minds rather than bodies. Therefore, what is implied here
seems to be that a process of mentalization of physical relation­
ships is, and should be, at work—a process giving more impor­
tance to mental communication than to the data provided by
physical senses. One could even say that there is a suggestion
that the development of subtie senses and mind-rapport with
individuals I may never have physically seen is something for
me to work on.
The symbol of course does not say whether I have been

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 375
successful in the attempt! The fact that Neptune is located on
that same degree stresses the transcendental potentialities im­
plied in this Descendant symbol. It also suggests other elements
concerning the close associations I have made and maintained
which need not be discussed here, but which could give added
significance to the "flight of wild geese" symbol. It may relate
to the emphasis I have placed on the need for "nonpossessiveness" in human relationships if a new order of society is to be
built. It may also explain my attraction for music and for as­
trology, for it seems obvious to me in spite of a carelessly trans­
mitted nineteenth-century tradition, that astrology (with all its
so often imprecise and confusing symbolism, and its universal
mystical appeal so unlike the sharp-iUuininating and revolution­
ary character of Uranus) is "ruled" by Neptune and not by
Uranus.
The symbol for the Mid Heaven (Libra 12°) is also signifi­
cant: Miners are surfacing from a deep coal mine. Coal has been
the main source of energy and heat in our Western society for
a long time, at least before oil came into wide use. Both coal and
oil are products of the remains of what was once a multitude of
living organisms. The coal miner symbolically descends into the
depths of the collective Unconscious and releases from its dark
and potentially dangerous passageways what will produce
warmth, power, and electric light for his fellow-men.
This symbol stands in polar opposition to the one for Aries
12 —but the "public life" (tenth House) is also in polar opposi­
tion to the "private life" (fourth House). The personal feelings
of transcendence and instinctive reliance upon cosmic order
have to be polarized by a sociocultural commitment to the task
of un-earthing from the depth of an ancient human past materi­
als suitable for the generation of collective power and an en­
lightened mentality. The Mid Heaven refers to an individual's
"achievement"—i.e. to the coming to a head (caput means
head, and from it the word "chief* is derived) of a whole cycle
of personalized activity.
A definite picture should emerge from this consideration of
the four symbols of the Angles in my birth chart. Again let me
say that it is a picture of the way of destiny which has been mine
to follow, i.e. the way to the actualization of my birth potential.
#

376 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
No astrologer could definitely state from a study of my birth
chart whether or not, or to what degree, I have been successful
in achieving these innate potentialities—at least not on strictly
astrological grounds. But the determination of success or failure
is not the business of any truly wise astrologer. All that he should
be asked to do is to help his clients—and himself, of course—to
be more aware, more certain, more objective (and thus "imper­
sonal") in their approach to the ever-renascent problems they
face. The most important and most crucial problem, which al­
ways seems to take new forms, is that of realizing—^intuitively,
feelingly, concretely through personal relationships, and within
a lucid and unafraid mind—who you are, and what life, destiny,

God expects of you.

IN CONSIDERING THE SYMBOLS FOR THE FOUR ANGLES OF A

birth chart, one can also use the four-fold type of questioning
discussed in the preceding chapter: WHAT, WHERETO, HOW,
WHY. In this case it seems best to go first from the Ascendant
(WHAT) to the Descendant (WHERETO), for the veryfirstques­
tion that comes to mind—at least to most minds—when a situa­
tion begins to take on clearer features is: WHERE will this lead?
A birth chart refers to a "situation," because it is condi­
tioned by a particular birth time and birthplace, and it occurs
within a social-cultural-national organism—in my case, France.
Somehow there must have been a meaning to this birth situa­
tion—the first breath of a physical organism which was to de­
velop individual features. In a very real sense, lam this meaning. I f there is no awareness of this meaning in the
consciousness that says " I , " then there is no concrete working
knowledge of who or what " I " is. There is consciousness, of
course, but no consciousness of who is being conscious, because
the essential character of any human "who" is that it is poten­
tially conscious of being conscious—and secondarily of being
conscious of why it is what it is. The innate urge to search for
this "why" in all circumstances is what makes a living organism
"human"; otherwise it remains only a specimen of an animal
species with unused potentialities.

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 377
Returning now to my birth chart: the answer to the WHAT
question is the symbol of The Great Pyramid and the Sphinx.
It is not too clear an answer perhaps to most people, yet it
implies a great deal that can become explicit if the proper type
of individualizing experiences occur. And I must emphasize
here that it is not the astrologer's task to do all the interpreting
for his client, for this would rob him of the opportunity to dis­
cover, in a vivid intuitiveflashof awareness, what the meaning
of the Ascendant symbol is—the meaning to him, the client, at
a particular time of his life and in a particular situation.
Everyone may give his own meaning to the symbol for the
14th degree of Sagittarius, and the meaning will likely change
as one grows in understanding and interpretative skill. For
some people the Pyramid is still thought of as the tomb of a
proud Pharaoh; for most occuldy-inclined persons it stands as a
witness to an ancient system of "Initiation." The Sphinx hid the
entrance to the symbolic "Path" (of trials and tests) which led
to a great experience of psychic transformation and repotentialization while lying in trance in the Sarcophagus at the center
of the King's Chamber.
But here again the WHAT symbolized is only the potential­
ity of a certain type of life unfoldment. It does not say: "You are
that," but instead: "This is the way that is divinely or cosmically
determined; this is the birth situation the potentiality of which
may or may not unfold and be fulfilled." It also may be partially
fulfilled. Above all, no glamor is implied. No "is-ness"; only
potentiality. If there is fulfillment, then to the extent that there
is, it will lead to what the Descendant's symbol indicates: i.e. the
capacity to communicate at a superphysical level, to establish
conscious contacts with other minds. Nothing is told about what
the other minds may be, or how adequate the communication.
There can be many disturbing factors! What matters is that
some kind of end results are suggested which give added mean­
ing to the "Pyramid and Sphinx" situation.
The next question is a very crucial one: HOW can these
results be achieved? Here, the "wild geese" symbol may not
seem too helpful, yet it contains a basic key and an implied
directive: "Follow the cosmic order of your own nature. Keep

378 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
in close formation with your companions. Trust your own
spiritual instinct—and be careful if you come to rest on a lake
on the earth's surface. Watch for huntersl"
Then comes the final question: WHY have I to struggle
through life? Of what use would my achievements be if I should
be successful? In other words, what part or role am I supposed
to play in the great drama of human existence? The Mid Heaven
symbol clearly implies the answer: "Be like a coal miner de­
scending in the depth of the Unconscious to bring back to your
society, or to generations to come, that which may warm and
iUumine their lives."
When these four answers of the oracle given by the birth
sky are related to each other, the picture of an individual des­
tiny should emerge. The meaning one gives to it will naturally
depend on the level and the quality of the interpretative con­
sciousness. Symbols deal with the quality of living, not with
events. They focus universal meanings upon particular situa­
tions. It has been said that life should be lived sub specie aeternitatis, which may be translated as "in the consciousness of
eternity." But our Western thinkers have misunderstood the
word eternity. Eternity means the wholeness of a cycle. What
I have called, according to the Gnostic tradition, the Eon is the
cycle in its essential unity—which includes a vast series of
phases, symbolized in this book by the 360 symbols of the Sabian
set. He who does not really "transcend" time, but rather in­
cludes in his gready extended perceptions the whole of the
cycle of his living as a person—and ultimately, as a spiritual
Buddha-like being, as the Soul-source of a long series of per­
sonalities—has developed eonic consciousness. He understands
the meanings of and the unfolding interconnections between all
the phases of his evolution as a center of consciousness and of
power. He is truly "awakened," truly wise.
Concentration on symbols and the living of a symbolic life
constitute a way—but not the only way—to the attainment of
at least some degree of eonic consciousness.

T h e Symbolic Life
®

THE LIVES OF GREAT SPIRITUAL PERSONAGES—AND THERE
may be some in fields not commonly associated with "spiritual­
ity," including statesmanship—are truly rituals. Every major
event in these fives should be understood as a ritualistic act
whose archetypal character can be revealed to the conscious­
ness able to see through the existential facts and perceive the
place these facts occupy within the life of the person considered
as a significant whole. The life is significant because it brings the
individual person and his sociocullural environment into a rela­
tionship which clearly fulfills an evolutionary or historical need
of mankind, or of some portion of mankind. The more basic this
need and the more important the function of the great person­
age, the more perceptible the archetypal character of the
events of his life.
In the lives of human beings who have rightfully been
called Avatars or Divine Manifestations^—men like Gautama the
Buddha, Jesus Christ, Baha'u'llah, or even St. Francis of Assisi—
every event has a symbolical meaning in terms of the special
character of these persons who fecundated the collective mind

3

380 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
and aroused the Will-to-Transformation-and-Transcendence in
millions of people. Their lives were rituals in the sense that
whatever the superficial biographical facts may have been, all
major events had a "transpersonal" significance as specific
phases of a process unfolding according to structural, cosmic
and eonic principles.
We can believe that every move in such ritual lives was
preordained—as Jesus is reported to have said, "in order to
fulfill the Scriptures." But we have to be careful in defining the
meaning we give to the term preordained. The "order" is not
an imposition from the outside, a pattern forced upon an individual person—thus, what is usually understood as "fate." The
Avatar is not an individual in the ordinary ego-sense of the
word. He is the order that ritualistically gives structure to the
life span of his body and determines the function and meaning
of his responses to the actions and the "thinking-feeling" of his
community. He is the emrjodiment or incarnation of a principle
of activity, a quality of being, impersonally—or rather transpersonally—determined by the needs of his time. In a still broader
sense, what he is and does is the spontaneous, superinstinctive
answer to the fundamental requirements of human nature
when the time has come for it to surrender to the transforming
power of cyclic evolution—or some would say, to the Will of
God.
In lesser men a conflict is nearly always in evidence be­
tween the transpersonal order—their "destiny"—and the reac­
tions of a personal ego-will still responsive to biological and
psychic urges. However, in the great spiritual personage what­
ever is left of this conflict—the Temptations of Jesus, for in­
stance, or Buddha's initial unwillingness to teach others what he
had experienced—takes on forms which in themselves are ar­
chetypal; i.e. they are characteristic manifestations of the very
nature of generic man, Homo sapiens, when faced with the
possibility of consciously becoming more than he is as a species
in the earth's biosphere. The events that can be related to these
inner conflicts or temptations are "symbolic." Every human
being can experience them in analogous circumstances.
At the beginning of this book I discussed the difference

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 381
between facts and symbols. We must always deal with facts,
with elements of actual experience, personal and collective. But
we should not stop at perceiving, registering, associating and
classifying these facts. We can go through them to a level of
perception and understanding at which a multidude of facts can
be directly (not merely intellectually) referred to a relatively
small number of archetypes.
This "transfactuai" process of the intuition and, at a more
perfect stage, of the iUumined mind enables the consciousness
to grasp the essential meaning of all facts, and particularly the
events of a human life dedicated to the process of transforma­
tion. Such a self-dedicated life is especially transparent to mean­
ing. The events that fill the years of that life are "translucent";
they allow the light of meaning to go through them. The life is
a symbolic life.
Essentially, all lives are to some extent symbolic. Outer
events reveal their purpose and function to the mind able to
pierce through appearances and to intuit the underlying order
and meaning of the whole. I f the whole universe is a "theophany"—a manifestation of divine Harmony and Power—then
- every human being potentially is a manifestation of one particu­
lar aspect of the Soul that sought embodiment at a particular
moment of our universe in order to establish a specific relationship with conditions prevailing then and there. He is or can be
a "hierophany"—literally, a "sacred" manifestation.
Much has been written concerning the realm of the sacred
in contrast to that of the profane. Mircea Eliade's book The
Sacred and the Profane is particularly well known but its analy­
sis of time suffers from the Western thinkers' inability to diffe­
rentiate adequately between the archetypal structure of a cy­
cle, and the existential events that fill the life span of that cycle.
The genetic structure of, let us say, the Lilac, and the meaning­
ful place it occupies in the biosphere are revitalized every
spring, but a particular lilac bloom of this year is not actually the
same flower that appeared last year or may appear next year.
There is archetypal identity, but there are existential differ­
ences. The essential structure may return cyclically, but the
actual events are never the same. There is an infinite possibility

382 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
of solutions to the fundamental problems of existence.
To live a symbolic life is to live a transpersonal life, a life in
which every event can be referred to an archetype, thereby
acquiring a "sacred" character. What we call a mythos* is a
sequence of events clearly embodying an archetypal series of
phases referring to a fundamental life process, including the
process of metamorphosis involving a radical change of level or
mutation. The life of a Gautama or of a Jesus is a mytkos.
Through the actual events which tradition records—and these
need not be exactly "true," existentially speaking—the sacred
character of the mythos is clearly perceptible. When the great
Persian Baha'u'llah, who his followers consider a divine Mani­
festation, indeed the Avatar for the new era of man's evolution,
was thrown into a deep, nearly airless and filthy cistern, with
heavy iron chains around his neck and feet, in the midst of some
one hundred and fifty criminals, that event had a deep symbolic
meaning. That this underground dungeon was reached by three
steep stairs, and that it was while in this dreadful state for four
months that this son of a minister in the Persian government
received the inner revelation of his world mission in the form
of a Maiden who brought to his consciousness "the remem­
brance of the name of my Lord" (his own words) are all full of
symbolic significance. These were sacred "events," as was Jesus'
crucifixion, because they bring to the mind able to pierce
through the tragic facts a realization of what these facts will
mean for mankind during the historical cycle to which they
were a prelude.f
Historians today claim that it is often impossible to know
where "real facts" end and "the myth" begins. But the existen­
ţi use the Greek word mythos in order to guard against the popular

meaning of the word myth: "This is only a myth!"
f Baha'u'llah was born in Teheran at sunrise on November 12,1817. When
his father died, twenty-two years later, he refused to assume his governmental
position. He espoused the Cause of the Bab, in his twenty-eighth year, which
led to his imprisonment. The Bab was a Persian youth (a descendant of Mohammed) who in 1844 proclaimed the end of the cycle of Islam and the coming
of a great personage who would open a new era. The Bab was executed and
thousands of his followers were tortured and killed.

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 383
rial facts of the past have meaning for us today only insofar as
we may discover that archetypal principles of operation are
embodied in their interrelationships. Jesus' crucifixion, seen as
a sacred event or mythos, throws a revelatory light on the
meaning of this entire "Piscean Age" now about to close. The
life of the Buddha iUiimines the development of the civilization
of most of Asia since 600 B.C.—even where Buddhism was repu­
diated and India's old religious attitudes were capped by an
upsurge of intense devotional fervor (bhakti cults) compensat­
ing for the overobjective impersonality of many of the followers
of the Buddha. And today, 2,500 years later, at the start of one
of four "seasons" in the vast 10,000-year cycle which seems
related to Buddha's appearance, many American and European
youths are being re-sensitivized to the still-vibrant call of the
great Meditator, the Awakened One.
The kind of history that is now being taught mostiy in our
universities is a fundamentally meaningless pursuit. It deals
with the minutiae of strictly profane events and refuses to admit
the existence of structural and cyclic patterns in the collective
"organic" growth and decay of societies. Because, as Arnold
Toynbee points out in his monumental Study of History, human
societies and their cultures are organic and cyclic, studying
them should imply an attempt to reveal the mythos which they
embody. Any significant mythos should certainly be founded on
existential facts, but facts are only the raw material from which
meaning should emerge. Without such an emergence of the
archetype out of the existential, life is meaningless and empty,
if not "absurd"—to use a term dear to so-called existentialist
thinkers whose minds are prisoners of the chaotic and the pro­
fane.
The significance of astrology is that it can transform the
profane into the sacred, the facts of astronomy into the revela­
tion of a cosmic order manifest in the cell and the human person
as well as in the solar system and the galaxy. To try to make
astrology a "science" based on empirical facts and statistics is to
deny its essential and ancient nature. Astrology deals with the
mythos of the Sky. The elements it uses are archetypes. There­
fore, to live one's life in terms of the revelatory message sym-

384 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
bolically implied in one's birth chart is to live a life in terms of
the "sacred" character of existence. It does not mean to feel
oppressed by "bad" aspects or elated by "good" ones. It does
not mean to avoid confrontation with existential facts and to
escape into fanciful dreams of pseudo-occult transcendence. It
demands instead that life be lived strictly on the basis of nonescapism—that is, an attitude of acceptance of what is, but an
"is" that remains transparent to the "eternal."
Alas, the words "eternity" and "eternal" have been made
to refer to an escape from minds haunted by a desperate urge
to transcend biological and intellectual compulsions, just as nir­
vana in its popular sense has been equated with a concept of
negation and annihilation. These perversions are at the root of
the deepest tragedies that mankind is now experiencing. An
eternity is a complete cycle of time. The consciousness which
can perceive things and events in their eternal nature is one
which sees every happening as definitely related to a particular
phase of some more or less vast cycle of existence.
It is on the basis of such an attitude of life that this study of
the Sabian symbols and of their possible use really makes sense.
I do not claim that this cyclic series of 360 symbols is a com­
pletely adequate expression of universal archetypal principles.
I simply say that under the conditions in which these symbols
were obtained and at the time they were obtained, the set is of
unusual and indeed quite startling significance. Its study and
application may well lead to a revelation of values filled with
transforming potency. It leads to such a revelation when a per­
son approaches it in an adequate philosophical spirit and with
a keen sensitivity to the ever-present possibility of discovering
the "eternal" at the core of the particular, and the sacred under
the fleeting shapes of the profane.
Our Western society, witnessing the disintegration of the
great Images which once gave archetypal value to its so often
tragic enterprises and its fanatic crusades and revolutions, finds
itself hypnotized today by the chaotic contingencies of an al­
most totally profane collective living. References to archetypal
values are mocked by our middle-aged and so often obsolescent
intelligentsia. Yet during the last years a remarkable surge of

ORACULAR AND ASTROLOGICAL USE OF THE SYMBOLS 385
interest in at least what passes for "eternal" values, and in many
techniques of personal or transpersonal transformation, has oc­
curred. A growing number of individuals are seeking, often
desperately, to restructure lives disjointed and disconnected
from the now-profaned sanctuaries of man's inner life. They
attempt an often*naive "return to source"—a return to what
they hope will resemble the original creative spirit of our so­
ciety, or of still more ancient societies, before perversions set in.
This is wonderful, even if chaotic and confused. But arche­
typal principles are not to be discovered by returning to a myth­
ical, sacred past. The "eternal" is now; the cycle—the Eon—
surrounds us. We live in it, just as the space of the galaxy per­
vades every cell of our bodies. It is not to be sought in glamorous
Aboves or Elsewheres. There is no essential difference between
the sacred and the profane, the symbolic and the real, nirvana
and samsara. What differs are our attitudes to events, inner or
outer. What we must change is our frame of reference—and to
avoid accepting or refusing to believe in any frame of reference
is still to have a negative one. The atheist who denies God
merely affirms in reverse. It is all a question of inner attitude.
To the consciousness that has realized the existence of cycles
and is able to shift gears from the profane to the sacred, the
whole of living becomes imbued with the magic of eternity.
Every event is accepted as a necessary phase in the ritual proc­
ess of existence radiating at every moment the significance and
inner peace that wells out from the security of knowing oneself
to be an essential and operative part of a vast cyclic whole.
This is the symbolic life. It is also the life of wisdom, for to
be wise is to know with unimpeachable knowing that the Whole
is fulfilling itself at every moment through and within every act
of life, once this life, iUumined by nonpossessive love, is rooted
in the certainty that order, beauty, rhythmic interplay and the
harmony of ever-balanced opposites are here and now, inde­
structibly.

Appendix

AN EXCHANGE OF LETTERS WITH
MARC EDMUND JONES
In the September 1944 issue of the magazine American Astrology, in
the section "Many Things," pp. 27-29, the following exchange of let­
ters appeared: a letter I had written to the editor-founder, Paul
Clancy, then his comments, and then a letter sent to Clancy by Marc
Edmund Jones, presumably in answer to one which Clancy had writ­
ten to him. These letters are reprinted here because of their historical
significance. I might add that a copy of this September 1944 issue was
very kindly sent to me by Joanne S. Clancy, now editor of the maga­
zine, after I had ascertained it contained Marc Jones's letter.

Los Angeles,

California

I have been thinking for some time about the possibility of
a series of studies dealing with the Sabian Symbols, as I have
found these symbols of the zodiacal degrees, in the main, amaz­
ingly significant and accurate. Not only have they proven of
great practical value, but I am very much interested in the

388 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
general structure of the sequence of meanings and images they
display. Here is a whole of meanings with definite structural
characteristics, and as such this series of symbols is quite a re­
markable phenomenon in Western tliinking—one which could
be compared, for instance, with some ancient Chinese equiva­
lent. I understand that the Yi King translation by Wilhelm
(translated by Baynes, with a commentary by C. G. Jung) will be
at last published very soon in New York. And therefore a study
of these Sabian Symbols would seem particularly well-timed this
year.
I would not discuss every symbol, or follow them in their
sequence, but I would rather study the general structure of the
series as a whole—starting with the symbols for the equinox
degrees, establishing relationships between the symbols, etc. I
have mentioned the idea to Marc Jones and his reaction to my
project was very favorable. I feel that it is the kind of study
which definitely belongs to American Astrology as it represents
a really new departure and you have been the great pioneer in
all these new fields. Thus I am asking you whether you would
like me to go ahead and prepare the first installment of such a
series of studies—to start preferably with the October issue (Fall
Equinox).

RUDHYAR

COMMENT: This new series on the Sabian Symbols will com­

mence in our next (October) issue of American Astrology Maga­
zine. The Sabian Symbols were compiled and interpreted by
Marc Edmund Jones and published by him under the tide
"Symbolical Astrology." Mr. Jones furnishes the following infor­
mation on the origin of the Sabian Symbols, the details of which
have never before been released:
During many years in experimenting with horoscopic in­
terpretation, I had found that the symbolical degrees worked
out by John Thomas, the Welsh seer, and published under his
pen name of Charubel, were remarkably suggestive as far as
their ideas were concerned, but that they suffered from the fact

APPENDIX 389
that they had been moralized; in other words, some were put
down as bad, some as good, and so on. On the assumption that
good and bad are relative terms and assuming that the meaning
of each degree has as much a constructive as a destructive
function, I found that these degrees were exceedingly valuable.
My first idea was to obtain permission to re-interpret them,
describing them in such a fashion that both good and bad points
could be brought out.
At this time, I had a student who was a rather highly gifted
psychic, making her living as a professional medium. She was
greatly distressed by the idea that so much spiritualistic work
was dishonest and cheap, and had wanted for a long time to do
something of enduring worth. She is deceased, and for the rec­
ord her name was Miss Elsie Wheeler, of San Diego, California,
a woman of rather brilliant mind and very interesting to me
because she was hopelessly crippled with arthritis, living in a
wheel chair, and remarkable for her indomitable deterrnination
to make her own way and be dependent upon no one. When I
first met her she accomplished this purpose by dressing dolls of
a rather unusual sort and I perhaps am somewhat responsible
for encouraging her in facing the world professionally as a
medium, which was her deepest desire, and at which she was
very successful up to the time of her death. I asked her if she
would be interested in participating in an attempt at gaining
360 fresh symbols for the degrees on the pattern of the work of
John Thomas.
Two factors were responsible for my making this sugges­
tion. The first of these was the fact that during investigation
quite a number of years before in New York, I had experi­
mented with the idea of a series of 5 2 symbols for the playing
cards, in the construction of a special form of the Tarot which
I then used and still use as a psychological training device for
students under occult discipline. A New York woman of high
psychic gifts had insisted upon attempting this and so I had tried
it with rather striking results. For the record, this woman, who
never did any professional psychic work, was Miss Zoe Wells,
who passed on quite a number of years ago. At the time of
working with Miss Wells, she made reference to a certifying

390 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
symbol which she saw at the beginning and end of the project
I paid no attention to this at the time and do not know its nature.
I was not interested in what gave her assurance as to the worth
of what she was doing because to me, the test was how well the
symbols worked, and I didn't expect them to work very well,
although they proved quite remarkable.
The second factor in these symbols is something which
carries out the boundary of knowing to thresholds where any
assurance of truth is impossible and the investigation is beyond
any kind of control as yet evolved by science. Many of the basic
factors leading to the work I had done in the clarification of
Astrology were gained by me out at and beyond this threshold,
but I have only given serious attention to the results based upon
such a foundation which have proved themselves in practice. I
had never given out or passed on any of these suggestive things
of themselves, but have checked carefully and shared the re­
sults when the results proved their value by the fact that they
work. If the symbolical degrees were possible, they would have
to rely for their origin upon these same materials. I decided that
what had been done in a smaller way with Miss Wells might be
done in a larger way with Miss Wheeler. I gave myself the task
of watching or checking these factors of suggestiveness, using
Miss Wheeler's mind for the visualization of an acceptable pic­
ture. I have no way of knowing the truth of the matter, but I
am inclined to believe that I have been tapping in on a mine of
old Sumerian culture or establishing some sort of psychological
rapport with that forgotten civilization which first perfected
Astrology. What I was trying to do was to re-create the same
basic matrix used by John Thomas.
I knew from a considerable amount of research work done
in Spiritualism, almost as much as I have done in Astrology, that
certain physical factors were necessary. I took Miss Wheeler out
in my car, arranging to keep her alone with me all day. We
worked in four sections, doing a quarter of the degrees each
time. We parked the car at a place in Balboa Park, San Diego,
where we were cloistered as far as any chance of being spoken
to or interrupted was concerned and at the same time were
within a stone's throw of a very busy intersection of city streets

APPENDIX 391
and life. I used a series of blank cards of a size permitting them
to be shuffled constantly, each of which was marked on the back
with a sign and degree, and with 360 to cover the zodiac. Nei­
ther Miss Wheeler nor myself ever knew what degree was dealt
with when she described the pictures she saw which I wrote
down hurriedly as I selected the picture. At times, I would
reject and sometimes she would correct. The cards were
shuffled constantly so that a law of random selection in statistics
could work, and I gave continual attention to checks of an occult
sort. After an approximate quarter of the cards were done we
rested, driving around the park and then returning to the loca­
tion, where another quarter were done. Then I drove her well
out of town to a place where we could have lunch with little
chance of meeting anyone we knew. We finally returned for the
last two quarters, which were done in the same fashion.
With this much accomplished, I put the cards away in a
trunk carefully, deciding that this was stepping too far afield
from the kind of scientific work in which I was interested, and
thinking that I would keep in the realm of spiritualistic investi­
gation. One day someone asked me if it were true that if the
cards were lost it would be impossible to repeat the feat, grant­
ing it had any merit, and so I had the symbols that were roughly
penciled on the cards copied in a typed script, giving the car­
bons to several of my students who did considerable astrological
work and asking them as a matter of interest to check the
pictures and see how they worked. Their reports were on the
enthusiastic side so that I was encouraged to take the next step
in putting down the mathematical structure of the whole and
issued them for the research group in mimeograph form along
with the other astrological mimeograph series.
The next step in the story was that Dane Rudhyar, with
whom I shared all this mimeographed material at the time he
was beginning his public astrological work in writing, became
so interested in these symbols that he asked permission to incor­
porate them in an abridged form in his The Astrology of Personality. He was really instrumental in awakening a countrywide
interest in these degrees. I am starting at the present time to
prepare them for book publication and I am trying to find

392 AN ASTROLOGICAL MANDALA
enough validated charts so that if possible, an example can be
given of every planet in every degree in the horoscopes of
well-known people. I figure that I have at least a two- or threeyear task and I am afraid I may not be able to get enough charts
to give the amount of illustrated application I would like. I may
issue a general appeal for help in getting charts for this purpose.

MARC EDMUND JONES

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dane Rudhyar is probably the most widely respected astrologer today, but he is also a philosopher,
poet, novelist, composer, painter and aesthetic
theoretician. Born in Paris in 1895, be came to America late i n 1916. The next year his musical compositions were performed in New York along with works
by Erik Satie and other French composers in the first
performance of dissonant polytonal music i n America. He became interested i n astrology i n 1920 and
combined this interest with studies of Oriental philosophies and, after 1930, the psychology of Carl
Jung. His widely acclaimed book The Astrology of
Personality was originally published i n 1936 and reissued i n paperback in 1970. Since 1933 Rudhyar has
written extensively for astrological publications and
has published more than a dozen books i n which he
has developed a "humanistic" approach to the ancient science. In March 1972, radio station KPFA i n
San Francisco celebrated Rudhyar's seventy-seventh
birthday with a retrospective of his work. His piano
compositions have recentiy been performed from
coast to coast and are now available i n records. He is
a popular lecturer and maintains an energetic schedule of appearances throughout the country.

