Uniform	Edition	of	the	Writings	of	James	Hillman
Volume	5:	Alchemical	Psychology
Copyright	©	James	Hillman	2010
All	rights	reserved.
	
eISBN	978-0-88214-586-0	(Kindle/iBooks	Edition	2013,	v.	2.3)
	
Published	by	Spring	Publications,	Inc.
Putnam,	Conn.
www.springpublications.com
	
Cover	illustration:
James	Lee	Byars,	Untitled,	1960.	Black	ink	on	Japanese	paper.	Estate	of	James	Lee	Byars;	courtesy	Michael	Werner	Gallery,	New
York,	London,	Berlin
	
	
The	Uniform	Edition	of	the	Writings	of	James	Hillman	is	published
in	conjunction	with	Dallas	Institute	Publications,
Joanne	H.	Stroud,	Director
The	Dallas	Institute	of	Humanities	and	Culture,	Dallas,	Texas
as	integral	part	of	its	publications	program	concerned	with	the	imaginative,	mythic,	and	symbolic	sources	of	culture.
Additional	support	for	this	publication	has	been	provided	by
The	Fertel	Foundation,	New	Orleans,	Louisiana,
and	by	the	Pacifica	Graduate	Institute	and	Joseph	Campbell	Archives	and	Library,	Carpinteria,	California.

	

	

JAMES	HILLMAN
	
	

ALCHEMICAL
PSYCHOLOGY
	
	
	
	
	
	

SPRING	PUBLICATIONS,	INC.
PU TNAM ,	CONNECTICU T

	

Author’s	Preface
	
The	following	pages	were	written	for	different	occasions	and,	except	for	Chapters	2,	5,	and	6,	were
delivered	as	lectures.	I	called	the	early	attempt	to	present	my	way	of	grasping	this	material,	in	the
1960s	at	the	C. G.	Jung	Institute	in	Zurich,	“Alchemical	Opus/Analytical	Work.”	My	intention	then	as
now	is	to	give	psychoanalysis	another	method	for	imagining	its	ideas	and	procedures	by	showing
how	alchemy	bears	directly	on	psychological	life,	more	clinically	immediate	and	less	spiritually
progressivist.
Lectures	in	New	York	City	and	notes	for	semester	courses	to	university	students	in	1968	(Chicago),
1973	(Yale),	1975	(Syracuse),	and	1979	(Dallas)	expanded	the	sources	and	the	insights	they	prompted,
which	are	compacted	where	relevant	into	these	chapters.
All	along	my	work	has	derived	from	the	extraordinary	scholarly	achievements	of	C. G.	Jung	who
opened	the	field	to	psychological	understanding.	Tho’	following	his	footsteps,	I	have	worn	my	own
shoes,	that	is	I	try	to	abjure	a	grand	narrative	that	encompasses	alchemy	within	an	explanatory	theory,
such	as	Jung’s	conjunction	of	opposites	and	the	realization	of	the	Self,	eschewing	the	temptation	to
give	meaning	by	translation	into	universal	symbols	and	noble	metaphysics.	Instead,	I	have	tried	to
obey	one	of	Jung’s	own	principles,“stick	to	the	image”	–	to	the	colors,	the	chemicals,	the	vessels,	the
fire	–	images	of	the	sensate	imagination	as	it	presents	states	of	soul.	“Stick	to	the	image”	recovers	the
ancient	Greek	maxim,	“save	the	phenomena”	(sozein	ta	phainomena),	and	the	phenomena	of	alchemy
present	a	chaos.	“Every	other	science	and	art	is	closely	reasoned,”	says	a	basic	text	attributed	to
Bonus	of	Ferrara, [1]	“the	different	propositions	follow	each	other	in	their	logical	order;	and	each
assertion	is	explained	and	demonstrated	by	what	has	gone	before.	But	in	the	books	of	our	Sages	the
only	method	that	prevails	is	that	of	chaos;	there	is	everywhere	studied	obscurity	of	expression;	and	all
the	writers	seem	to	begin,	not	with	the	first	principles,	but	with	that	which	is	quite	strange	and
unknown	to	the	students.	The	consequence	is	that	one	seems	to	flounder	along	through	these	works,
with	only	here	and	there	a	glimmering	of	light	…”
Obscurity	of	expression	is	natural	to	the	psyche.	Prime	example,	our	dreams;	mere	glimmerings.
Saving	the	psyche’s	phenomena	calls	for	an	alchemical	method	of	chaos,	a	method	which	indulges	the
soul’s	surprising	beauty	and	inventive	freedom,	and	speaks	both	of	the	psyche	with	psychology	and	to
the	psyche	with	imagination.
In	preparing	this	book	I	received	help	from	and	am	grateful	to	Mary	Helen	Sullivan,	the	late	Gerald
Burns,	Stanton	Marlan	for	valuable	suggestions	and	keeping	me	at	the	task,	and	Klaus	Ottmann	for	his
intelligence,	taste,	and	labor.
… upon	this	simple	system	of	many	colors	is	based	the	manifold	and	infinitely	varied	investigation	of	all	things.
– Zosimos	of	Panopolis	(ca.	250	CE)
1 Bonus,	113–14.	Who	“Bonus”	was,	where	and	when	he	lived	remain	uncertain.	Cf.	J.	Ferguson,	Bibliotheca	Chemica,	2	vols.
(Glasgow:	James	Maclehose	and	Sons,	1906),	1: 115.

1
The	Therapeutic	Value	of	Alchemical	Language:
A	Heated	Introduction
	
Jung's	alchemical	work	has	been	relevant	for	analytical	psychology	in	two	main	ways.	I	shall	be
suggesting	a	third	way.
The	first	way	has	been	excellently	presented	by	David	Holt	in	his	lecture	on	“Jung	and	Marx.” [1]
There	Holt	shows	that	Jung	imagined	his	work	to	be	theoretically	and	historically	substantiated	by
alchemy,	and	that	Jung	spent	a	great	part	of	his	mature	years	working	out,	in	his	own	words,	“an
alchemical	basis	for	depth	psychology,” [2]	particularly	the	opus	of	psychological	transformation.	As
Holt	indicates,	it	is	to	alchemy	we	must	turn	to	gain	the	proper	placing	of	Jung's	entire	endeavor.	We
need	alchemy	to	understand	our	theory.
The	second	way	has	been	profoundly	elucidated	by	Robert	Grinnell	in	his	book	Alchemy	in	a
Modern	Woman. [3]	There	Grinnell	demonstrates	the	incontrovertible	parallels	between	the	psychic
processes	in	a	modern	Italian	patient	and	those	that	go	on	in	the	alchemical	opus.	Where	Holt	stresses
alchemical	theory	as	background,	Grinnell	stresses	alchemical	phenomenology	in	practice.	We	see
from	Grinnell	the	continuity	or	archetypality	of	alchemical	thematics	in	case-work.	Thus,	to	work
with	the	psyche	at	its	most	fundamental	levels,	we	must	imagine	it	as	did	the	alchemists,	for	they	and
we	are	both	engaged	with	similar	processes	showing	themselves	in	similar	imagery.	We	need
alchemy	to	understand	our	patients.
The	third	angle,	which	I	shall	now	essay,	has	to	do	with	alchemical	language.	In	brief	I	want	to
make	this	one	point:	Besides	the	general	theory	of	alchemical	transformation	and	besides	the
particular	parallels	of	alchemical	imagery	with	the	individuation	process,	it	is	alchemical	language
that	may	be	most	valuable	for	Jungian	therapy.	Alchemical	language	is	a	mode	of	therapy;	it	is	itself
therapeutic.
To	talk	about	therapy,	we	must	first	talk	about	neurosis,	and	here	I	follow	Jung's	general	theory	that
neurosis	is	a	“one-sided	development	of	personality”	(CW	16: 257),	which	I	take	to	mean	the
unavoidable	one-sided	development	of	consciousness	per	se.	I	read	Jung	to	mean	that	neurosis	resides
in	the	patterns	of	our	conscious	personality	organization,	in	the	habitual	way	we	go	about	our	days.
Whatever	we	do	here	requires	repression	somewhere	else:	I	do	because	I	repress	or	I	repress	because
I	do.	As	Jung's	own	formulation	states:	“One-sidedness	is	an	unavoidable	and	necessary	characteristic
of	the	directed	process,	for	direction	implies	one-sidedness”	(CW	8: 138).	Neurosis	can	be	cognitive,
conative,	or	affective,	introverted	or	extraverted,	for	we	can	be	one-sided	in	any	direction	of
personality.
Jung's	is	a	beautifully	limiting	idea	of	neurosis,	keeping	it	to	what	some	might	call	“egopsychology.”	I	wouldn't,	couldn't,	call	it	such	for	reasons	we	shall	come	to;	but	at	least	Jung's	idea	of
one-sidedness	keeps	neurosis	from	complicated	explanations	in	terms	of	socio-adaptive	processes,
developmental	historicisms,	intropsychic	dynamisms,	biofeedback	mechanisms,	and	other
jabberwockies.	Neurosis	is	located	right	in	one's	conscious	framework	(CW	16: 12).	I	am	neurotic
because	of	what	goes	on	here	and	now,	as	I	stand	and	look	and	talk,	rather	than	what	went	on	once,	or
goes	in	society,	or	in	my	dreams,	fantasies,	emotions,	memories,	symptoms.	My	neurosis	resides	in
my	mental	set	and	the	way	it	constructs	the	world	and	behaves	in	it.

Now,	the	essential	or	at	least	an	essential	component	of	every	mental	set,	of	every	personality,	is
language.	Thus	language	must	be	an	essential	component	of	my	neurosis.	If	I	am	neurotic,	I	am
neurotic	in	language.	Consequently,	the	one-sidedness	that	characterizes	all	neuroses	in	general	is
also	to	be	found	specifically	as	a	one-sidedness	in	language.
An	important	implication	of	this	I	will	merely	brush	in	passing.	This	implication	is:	to	discover	the
specifics	of	any	neurosis,	I	must	examine	the	specifics	of	the	language	essential	to	it,	the	styles	of
speech	in	which	the	neurosis	is	couched.	Jung	began	on	this	path	with	his	studies	in	word	association;
Charles	Osgood's	semantic	differential	and	George	Kelly's	psychology	of	personal	constructs	could
take	us	into	further	detail	and	practicality.
There	is	much	to	learn	in	regard	to	the	rhetorics	of	the	neuroses.	For	we	psychologists	listen	to	the
style	of	speech	and	not	only	to	the	contents	of	that	speech,	and	to	the	tone	and	body	of	its	voice.
Archetypal	psychology	has	already	begun	to	examine	the	language,	especially	the	rhetorical	styles	of
manifest	speech,	whether	in	the	hour,	in	dream	reports,	or	written	works,	and	within	words
themselves.	But	all	this	we	leave	aside	today.
The	main	implication	of	the	proposition	that	the	one-sidedness	of	neurosis	occurs	essentially	in	the
one-sidedness	of	language	will	lead	us	directly	to	the	goal	of	this	introduction.	To	get	there	quickly
let	me	clear	the	ground	in	a	hop,	skip,	and	jump.	The	hop:	since	language	is	largely	social,	the	onesidedness	of	my	language	reflects	society's	collective	language.	Then,	the	skip:	Jung	has	already
defined	collective	language	as	“directed”	(”directed	process,”	“directed	thinking”	[CW	5,	chap. 2]),
and	I	have	attacked	it	in	various	places	under	its	guises	of	“nominalism,”	“rationalism,”
“psychological	language,”	“Apollonic	consciousness,”	and	“day-world	concepts.”	Last,	the	jump:
conceptual	language,	which	is	nominalistic	and	thus	denies	substance	and	faith	in	its	words,	is	the
usual	rhetorical	style	of	“ego,”	especially	the	psychologist's	“ego,”	and	is	the	chronic	locus	of	our
collective	neurosis	as	it	appears	in	language.
You	see	that	I	am	claiming,	as	have	Freud	and	Jung	in	other	ways,	a	general	Western	cultural
neurosis	of	one-sidedness.	However,	I	am	locating	this	in	our	directed-process	language,	which	is
directed	from	within	(for,	after	all,	who	or	what	directs	our	directed	thinking?)	by	its	inherent
syntactical,	grammatical,	and	conceptual	structures	resulting	in	conceptual	rationalism.	Horrible
dictu,	this	neurosis	is	reinforced	by	the	academic	training	we	must	each	have	to	become	members	of
the	psychotherapeutic	profession.	By	conceptual	rationalism	I	mean	writings	such	as	this	that	account
for	events	in	concept-terms	rather	than	thing-words,	image-words,	craft-words,	and	also	I	mean	our
habitual	use	of	identity	verbs	(such	as	“is”),	which	unconsciously	substantiate	the	very	terms	we
consciously	assert	to	be	only	nomina.	Hence	we	hypostasize	our	hypotheses.	A	rift	develops	between
theory	and	practice,	even	a	theoretical	delusion	about	practice.	Like	Jung,	we	assert	our	conceptual
statements	are	only	heuristic;	but	because	of	language	we	cannot	avoid,	in	practice,	substantiating
what	our	theory	asserts	is	only	heuristic,	only	hypothetical.	We	simply	are	caught	in	the	literalism	of
our	own	language.
We	speak	in	concepts:	the	ego	and	the	unconscious;	libido,	energy,	and	drive;	opposites,
regression,	feeling-function,	compensation,	transference			When	working	with	these	terms	we
curiously	forget	that	they	are	concepts	only,	barely	useful	for	grasping	psychic	events,	which	they
inadequately	describe.	Moreover,	we	tend	to	neglect	that	these	concepts	burden	our	work	because	they
come	freighted	with	their	own	unconscious	history.
Not	only,	then,	as	Jung	says,	are	psychological	concepts	“irrelevant	in	theory,”	but,	as	he	also	says,
the	psychologist	“must	rid	himself	of	the	common	notion	that	the	name	explains	the	psychic	fact	it
denotes”	(CW	8: 223–25).	Yet	we	psychologists	imagine	these	concept	terms	to	be	thing	words,	for	as
Jung	continues:	“Psychology	…	is	still	afflicted	with	a	…	mentality	in	which	no	distinction	is	made
between	words	and	things.”	What	is	this	mentality,	this	affliction?

Is	Jung	speaking	of	literalism,	that	one-sidedness	of	mind	that	experiences	only	singleness	of
language?	In	such	a	consciousness,	there	is	no	“as	if”	between	the	word	and	whatever	it	is	conceiving.
Then	the	subjects	in	our	sentences	become	existing	subjects	and	the	objects	become	objectively	real
facts.	Then	such	concepts	as	the	ego,	the	unconscious,	the	feeling-function,	the	transference	become
literally	real	things.	Substantives	become	substances.	So	much	so	that	we	consider	these	concepts	able
to	account	for	personality	and	its	neuroses,	whereas	I	am	arguing	that	these	very	same	substantialized
concept	terms	–	ego,	unconscious,	transfeence	–	are	the	neurosis.
As	Freud	began	by	deliteralizing	the	memory	of	sexual	trauma	into	its	fantasy,	and	as	Jung	began
by	deliteralizing	incest	and	libido,	we	need	to	deliteralize	a	host	of	other	substantialized	concepts,
beginning	with	“the	ego”	and	“the	unconscious.”	I	have	personally	never	met	either	of	them,	except	in
a	psychology	book.
Enter	alchemy	–	thing-words,	image-words,	craft-words.	The	five	supposed	sources	of	alchemy
are	each	a	technology.	Each	is	a	handwork	physically	grappling	with	sensate	materials:	(1)	Metallurgy
and	Jewelry:	mining,	heating,	smelting,	forging,	annealing;	(2)	Cloth	and	Fiber	Dyeing:	dipping,
coloring,	drying;	(3)	Embalming	the	Dead:	dismembering,	evacuating,	infusing,	preserving;
(4)	Perfumery	and	Cosmetics:	grinding,	mixing,	distilling,	diluting,	evaporating;	(5)	Pharmacy:
distinguishing,	tincturing,	measuring,	dissolving,	desiccating,	pulverizing.	To	these	traditional
sources	must	be	added	food	preparation	and	conservation,	the	daily	acts	of	transforming	raw
materials	into	tasty	and	nourishing	edibles.
To	a	mind	that	has	not	severed	conceptual	denotations	from	metaphorical	inference,	all	these
activities	with	the	hands	and	senses	carried	meanings	about	nature,	life,	death,	and	the	soul.	A	smith
had	to	know	how	to	manage	fire	and	regulate	heat;	a	pharmacist	must	make	mixtures	in	the	right
proportion,	else	a	remedy	could	kill	rather	than	cure.	(The	very	word	pharmakon	means	both	poison
and	remedy.)
The	basic	stuffs	of	personality	–	salt,	sulfur,	mercury,	and	lead	–	are	concrete	materials;	the
description	of	soul,	aqua	pinguis	or	aqua	ardens,	as	well	as	words	for	states	of	soul,	such	as	albedo
and	nigredo,	incorporate	events	that	one	can	touch	and	see.	The	work	of	soulmaking	requires
corrosive	acids,	heavy	earths,	ascending	birds;	there	are	sweating	kings,	dogs	and	bitches,	stenches,
urine,	and	blood.	How	like	the	language	of	our	dreams	and	unlike	the	language	into	which	we
interpret	the	dreams.	When	alchemy	speaks	of	degrees	of	heat,	it	does	not	use	numbers.	Rather,	it
refers	to	the	heat	of	horse	dung,	the	heat	of	sand,	the	heat	of	metal	touching	fire.	These	heats	differ,
moreover,	not	only	in	degree	but	also	in	quality:	heat	can	be	slow	and	gentle,	or	moist	and	heavy,	or
sudden	and	sharp.	As	well,	the	heat	of	horse	dung	imparts	to	the	heated	material	properties	of	horse
dung	itself.	Heat	is	not	abstracted	from	the	body	that	gives	it.
The	words	for	alchemical	vessels	–	the	shapes	of	soul	in	which	our	personality	is	being	worked	–
contrast	with	the	concepts	we	use,	concepts	such	as	inner	space	or	internal	object,	or	fantasy,	or
patience,	containment,	suppression	or	relationship.	Alchemy	presents	an	array	of	different	qualities	of
vessel,	different	fragilities,	visibilities,	and	forms:	condensing	coils,	multiheaded	alembics,	pelicans,
cucurbits,	flat	open	pans.	One	uses	copper	or	glass	or	clay	to	hold	one's	stuff	and	cook	it.
Finally,	the	words	for	the	operations	–	that	which	one	does	in	crafting	the	psyche	–	are	again
concrete.	We	learn	to	evaporate	away	the	vaporousness,	to	calcine	so	as	to	burn	passions	down	to	dry
essences.	We	learn	about	condensing	and	congealing	cloudy	conditions	so	as	to	get	hard	clear	drops
from	them.	We	learn	about	coagulating	and	fixing,	about	dissolving	and	putrefying,	about	mortifying
and	blackening.
Compare	these	craft	words	of	alchemy	with	the	words	used	for	the	operations	of	psychotherapy:
analyzing	the	transference,	regressing	in	the	service	of	the	ego,	developing	the	inferior	function,
managing	anger,	syntonic	identifying,	showing	hostility;	improving,	denying,	resisting,	identifying

…	Not	only	is	this	language	abstract,	it	is	imprecise.	Because	of	this	imprecision	in	our	equipment,
our	concepts	for	grasping	the	movements	of	the	soul,	we	have	come	to	believe	the	soul	itself	is	an
ungraspable	flux,	whereas	actually	the	psyche	presents	itself	always	in	very	specific	behaviors,
experiences	and	sensuous	images.
Before	Jung's	thought	had	been	touched	by	alchemy,	he	raised	doubts	about	the	sensuous	language
that	alchemy	so	relishes.	In	1921	he	writes	in	his	Psychological	Types:
The	rational	functions	are,	by	their	nature,	incapable	of	creating	symbols,	since	they	produce	only	a	rational	product	necessarily
restricted	to	a	single	meaning,	which	forbids	it	from	also	embracing	its	opposite.	The	sensuous	functions	are	equally	unfitted	to
create	symbols,	because,	from	the	very	nature	of	the	object,	they	are	also	confined	to	single	meanings	which	comprehend	only
themselves	and	neglect	the	other. [4]

I	read	him	to	be	claiming	that	sensuous	perception	is	as	one-sided	as	conceptual	understanding,
therewith	implying	that	sensate	language	clings	to	its	referents	(alchemy's	concrete	stuffs	and
operations)	so	that	no	further	connotations	emerge.	Here,	I	believe,	Jung	is	confusing	the	concrete
with	the	literal.
Alchemy	took	Jung	away	from	the	systematic	rationalism	of	the	Types.	We	can	see	now,	as	Holt
quoted,	how	necessary	alchemy	was	for	providing	a	basis	for	his	depth	psychology	because	alchemy
leaves	unilateral	literalism	completely.	No	term	means	only	one	thing.	Every	alchemical	phenomenon
is	both	material	and	psychological	at	the	same	time,	else	alchemy	could	not	claim	to	be	salvific	of
both	the	human	soul	and	material	nature.	It	is	all	metaphor	(”symbolic”	in	Jung's	1921	sense	of	that
word).	All	analogy.	All	a	poiesis	of	the	hand.
Our	minds	still	retain	this	alchemical	propensity	for	transferring	technology	into	psychology.
Psychotherapeutic	slang	betrays	how	we	truly	imagine	long	before	the	profession	arrives	at
sophisticated	concepts.	The	language	of	handwork,	of	technical	grappling,	now	emerges	from	the	car
repair	shop.	There,	in	that	garage,	metaphors	abound	for	our	psychic	life:	realignments,	tune-ups,
tightening	the	brakes,	refilling	the	tank	so	as	not	to	run	out	of	gas,	never	stalling,	never	misfiring,	and
never	going	flat.
Ever	since	Jung	opened	the	door	to	alchemy	for	psychologists,	we	have	tended	to	go	through	it	in
only	one	direction:	We	apply	our	directed	thinking	to	its	fantasy	thinking,	translating	its	images	into
our	concepts.	White	Queen	and	Red	King	have	become	feminine	and	masculine	principles;	their
incestuous	sexual	intercourse	has	become	the	union	of	opposites;	the	freakish	hermaphrodite	and
uniped,	the	golden	head	with	silver	hair,	red	within	the	black	without			these	have	all	become
paradoxical	representations	of	the	goal,	examples	of	androgyny	symbols	of	the	Self.	You	see	what
happens:	sensate	image	disappears	into	concept,	precision	into	generality.	Even	the	peculiar	images	of
the	Rosarium	Philosophorum	(CW	16)	which	call	for	perplexed	contemplation	are	asked	instead	to
serve	as	a	handbook	for	a	general	psychology	of	transference.
We	could	go	through	the	door	differently.	We	might	try	translating	the	other	way			the	actualities	of
psychotherapy	and	the	language	we	use	to	conceive	those	actualities	put	into	imaginatively	precise
alchemical	words:	thing	words,	image	words,	craft	words.	Grinnell's	book	does	just	this	–	and	so,
conceptually	addicted	minds	find	it	hard	to	read,	heavy.	It	is	hard	and	heavy	precisely	because	it
speaks	in	the	concrete	words	of	the	opus.
We	could	also	not	go	through	the	door	at	all.	For	if	we	see	through	the	concepts	to	begin	with,	we
do	not	need	translations.	Then	we	would	speak	to	the	dreams	and	of	the	dreams	as	the	dreams
themselves	speak.	(By	“dream”	here	I	mean	as	well	the	dream,	or	fantasy,	within	behavior.)	This
seems	to	me	to	follow	Jung's	dictum	of	dreaming	the	myth	along.	To	do	this	we	must	speak
dreamingly,	imagistically	–	and	materially.
I	have	introduced	“materially”	at	this	juncture	because	we	are	close	to	the	crunch,	and	the	crunch	of

alchemy	is	matter.	It	is	the	crunch	of	our	practice	too	–	to	make	soul	matter	to	the	patient,	to
transform	his/her	sense	of	what	matters.
Holt,	following	Jung,	has	shown	that	alchemy	is	essentially	a	theory	of	the	redemption	of	the
physical,	of	matter.	If	so,	then	this	redemptive	process	must	also	take	place	in	our	speech,	where	the
absence	of	matter	is	most	severe,	and	especially	because	this	deprivation	is	so	close	that	it	is
unconscious	to	us	even	as	we	speak.	We	can	hardly	expect	therapy	–	so	dependent	upon	speech	–	to
work	on	this	massive	curse	of	Western	consciousness,	our	tortures	over	matter,	if	the	tool	with	which
we	work,	our	speech,	has	not	itself	resolved	the	curse.	Our	speech	itself	can	redeem	matter	if,	on	the
one	hand,	it	de-literalizes	(de-substantiates)	our	concepts,	distinguishing	between	words	and	things,
and	if,	on	the	other	hand,	it	re-materializes	our	concepts,	giving	them	body,	sense,	and	weight.	We
already	do	this	inadvertently	when	we	speak	of	what	the	patient	brings	as	“material,”	look	for	the
“grounds”	of	his/her	complaint,	and	also	by	trying	to	make	“sense”	of	it	all.
Re-enter	alchemy.	Its	beauty	lies	just	in	its	materialized	language	which	we	can	never	take	literally.
I	know	I	am	not	composed	of	sulfur	and	salt,	buried	in	horse	dung,	putrefying	or	congealing,	turning
white	or	green	or	yellow,	encircled	by	a	tail-biting	serpent,	rising	on	wings.	And	yet	I	am!	I	cannot
take	any	of	this	literally,	even	if	it	is	all	accurate,	descriptively	true.	Even	while	the	words	are
concrete,	material,	physical,	it	is	a	patent	mistake	to	take	them	literally.	Alchemy	gives	us	a	language
of	substance	which	cannot	be	taken	substantively,	concrete	expressions	which	are	not	literal.
This	is	its	therapeutic	effect:	it	forces	metaphor	upon	us.	We	are	carried	by	the	language	into	an	asif,	into	both	the	materialization	of	the	psyche	and	the	psychization	of	matter	as	we	utter	our	words.
Alchemical	texts	are	monstrously	arcane.	They	are	compacted	with	entangled	layers	of	references
and	analogies.	It	seems	deliberately	cultish,	supposedly	to	hide	its	secrets	from	the	common	mind	and
dogmatic	authorities.	But	there	is	a	more	profound,	psychological,	intention	behind	alchemy's
obscurantism.
The	sages	did	not	give	a	name	to	any	of	their	things	nor	compare	them	with	anything	unless	there	is	an	aspect	which	requires	the
contemplation	of	the	observer	about	it	and	his	thinking	it	over	…	They	did	not	coin	examples	or	descriptions	except	in	order	to
point	by	them	to	their	hidden	stone.	They	did	not	coin	them	for	fun	or	for	amusement. [5]

The	language	itself	has	a	psychological	effect:
Man's	language	consequently	must	strain	to	capture	the	density	of	meaning	[”the	hidden	stone”]	conveyed	by	the	signs.	It	is	this
very	fact	which	makes	Paracelsian	texts	themselves	difficult	to	interpret.	Their	fantastic	vocabulary	is	not	designed	to	define
unique,	singular	characteristics	of	phenomena;	rather,	it	is	constructed	to	reveal	as	many	depths	of	meaning	as	possible	–	their
words	are	intended	to	reverberate	in	the	imagination	with	meanings. [6]

Conceptual	language,	however,	is	not	self-evidently	metaphor. [7]	It	is	too	contemporary	to	be
transparent;	we	are	living	right	in	its	midst.	Its	myth	is	going	on	all	about	us,	so	it	does	not	have	a
metaphorical	sense	built	in	it.	I	do	now	know,	cannot	see,	that	I	am	really	not	composed	of	an	ego	and
self,	a	feeling	function	and	a	power	drive,	castration	anxiety	and	depressive	positions.	These	seem
literally	real	to	me,	despite	the	experience	that	even	as	I	use	these	terms,	there	is	a	haunting
worthlessness	about	them.	Nominalism [8]	has	made	us	disbelieve	in	all	words	–	what’s	in	a	name?	–
they	are	mere	“words,”	tools,	any	others	would	do	as	well;	they	have	no	substance.
But	our	psychological	language	has	become	literally	real	to	us,	despite	nominalism,	because	the
psyche	needs	to	demonize	and	personify,	which	in	language	becomes	the	need	to	substantiate.	The
psyche	animates	the	material	world	it	inhabits.	Language	is	part	of	this	animating	activity	(e.g.,
onomatopoeic	speech	with	which	language	is	supposed	to	have	“begun”).	Unless	my	language	meets
the	need	to	substantiate,	then	the	psyche	substantiates	anyway,	unawares,	hardening	my	concepts	into
physical	or	metaphysical	things.

May	I	insist	that	I	am	not	proposing	to	cancel	our	concepts	and	restore	the	archaic	neologisms	of
alchemy	as	a	new	esperanto	for	our	practice	and	our	dealings	with	one	another.	That	would	be	to	take
alchemical	language	only	literally.	I	do	not	mean:	let	us	start	off	now	talking	alchemy;	I	mean	first	let
us	talk	as	alchemists,	as	if	we	were	talking	alchemically.	Then	we	can	talk	alchemy,	even	the	old	mad
terms,	because	then	we	will	not	be	using	them	as	literal	substitutions	for	our	concepts,	employing
them	as	a	new	set	of	categories.	It	is	not	the	literal	return	to	alchemy	that	is	necessary	but	a	restoration
of	the	alchemical	mode	of	imagining.	For	in	that	mode	we	restore	matter	to	our	speech	–	and	that,
after	all,	is	our	aim:	the	restoration	of	imaginative	matter,	not	of	literal	alchemy.
I	said	that	the	one-sidedness	of	neurosis	perpetuates	in	our	psychological	language,	its	conceptual
rationalism.	One-sidedness	–	that	general	definition	of	neurosis	–	now	becomes	more	precise.	It	can
now	be	seen	to	refer	to	the	grasping	nature	of	our	grasping	tools,	our	concepts,	which	organize	the
psyche	according	to	their	shape.	Our	concepts	extend	their	grasp	over	the	concretely	vivid	images	by
abstracting	(literally,	“drawing	away”)	their	matter.	We	no	longer	see	the	clay	funeral	urn	or	the	iron
pot-bellied	stove,	but	“the	Great	Mother”;	no	longer	the	sea	just	beyond	the	harbor,	the	sewer	blocked
with	muck,	or	a	dark	pathless	forest,	but	“the	Unconscious.”
How	can	we	have	faith	in	what	we	do	if	our	words	in	which	we	do	it	are	disembodied	of	substance?
Here	again	I	join	Grinnell	and	Holt	who	take	faith	to	be	the	key	to	the	entire	psychological	and
alchemical	opus.	But	I	would	locate	this	faith	in	the	words	that	express,	operate,	are	this	endeavor.
Again:	abstract	concepts,	psychological	nomina,	that	do	not	matter	and	bear	weight,	willy-nilly
accrete	ever	more	hardening,	leaden	immobility	and	fixation,	becoming	objects	or	idols	of	faith
rather	than	living	carriers	of	it.	When	we	talk	psychology,	we	cannot	help	but	become	adamantly
metaphysical	because	the	physical	imagination	has	been	emptied	out	of	our	words.
According	to	Jung,	neurosis	is	splitting,	and	therapy	is	joining.	If	our	conceptual	language	splits	by
abstracting	matter	from	image	and	speaking	only	from	one	side,	then	the	as-if	of	metaphor	is	itself
psychotherapy	because	it	keeps	two	or	more	levels	distinct	–	whether	words	and	things,	events	and
meanings,	connotations	and	denotations	–	joining	them	together	in	the	word	itself.	As	the	coniunctio
is	an	imaged	metaphor,	so	metaphors	are	the	spoken	coniunctio.
Especially,	our	one-sided	language	splits	immaterial	psyche	from	soulless	matter.	Our	concepts
have	so	defined	these	words	that	we	forget	that	matter	is	a	concept	“in	the	mind,”	a	psychic	fantasy,
and	that	soul	is	our	living	experience	amid	things	and	bodies	“in	the	world.”
As	Jung	grew	older,	he	became	ever	more	occupied	with	this	particular	split	–	matter	and	soul,
attempting	to	join	them	with	ever	fresh	formulations:	psychoid,	synchronicity,	unus	mundus.	Even	if
defined	as	embracing	both	sides	and	even	if	presented	ambiguously	and	symbolically,	these	words
(unlike,	for	instance,	the	alchemists’	own	“soft	stone,”	“hermaphrodite,”	or	“Royal	Wedding	in	the
Sea	of	the	Indians”)	only	reinforce	the	splitting	effect	inherent	in	such	one-sided	language	itself.	For
they	too	are	concepts,	without	body	or	image.	Thus	psychology	remains	neurotic:	we	describe	a
nominalistic	psyche	without	matter	(and	therefore	fantasy	and	image	do	not	“really”	matter,	are
“only”	in	the	mind	or	must	magically	connect	to	matter	in	synchronicity),	and	a	de-souled	matter	that
seeks	redemption	through	body	therapies,	consumer	hedonism,	and	Marxism.
We	end	with	a	cultural	statement	about	neurosis	and	its	therapy,	similar	to	ones	made	by	Freud	and
by	Jung.	Our	neurosis	and	our	culture	are	inseparable.	After	political	doublespeak,	spin,	jargonism,
and	Pentagonese,	after	sociological	and	economic	scientism	and	media	management	of	speech,	and
all	the	other	abuses	–	even	those	of	Lacan	and	Heidegger	and	communications	theory	performed	in
the	very	name	of	language	–	that	have	drained	words	of	their	blood,	brought	into	our	day	a	new
syndrome,	childhood	mutism,	and	made	us	in	psychology	lose	faith	in	the	power	of	words	so	that
therapy	must	turn	to	cries	and	gestures:	after	all	this	I	am	passionately	urging	a	mode	of	recuperating
language	by	returning	to	speech	that	matters.	I	am	also	harkening	back	to	Confucius	who	insisted	that

the	therapy	of	culture	begins	with	the	rectification	of	language.	Alchemy	offers	this	rectification.
Delivered	in	1977	at	the	7th	International	Congress	for	Analytical	Psychology	in	Rome	and	first	published	in	Methods	of	Treatment	in
Analytical	Psychology,	ed.	I. F.	Baker,	(Fellbach:	Adolf	Bonz	Verlag,	1980),	118–26.
1 D.	Holt,	“Jung	and	Marx:	Alchemy,	Christianity,	and	the	Work	Against	Nature”	(lecture	given	at	the	Royal	Society	of	Medicine,
London,	21	November	1974,	under	the	auspices	of	the	Analytical	Psychology	Club,	London),
http://davidholtonline.com/articles/1151738827_Holt_Marx_Alchemy.pdf	(accessed	February	2,	2009).
2 “My	encounter	with	alchemy	was	decisive	for	me,	as	it	provided	me	with	the	historical	basis	which	I	had	hitherto	lacked,”	MDR,	200.
3 Alchemy	in	a	Modern	Woman:	A	Study	in	the	Contrasexual	Archetype	(Zurich:	Spring	Publications,	1973).	See	also	his	“Alchemy
and	Analytical	Psychology,”	in	Methods	of	Treatment	in	Analytical	Psychology,	ed.	I. F.	Baker	(Fellbach-Oeffingen:	Adolf	Bonz
Verlag,	1980).
4 C. G.	Jung,	Psychological	Types	or	The	Psychology	of	Individuation,	trans.	H. G.	Baynes	(New	York,	Pantheon,	1923),	141–42.
5 Muhammad	Ibn	Umail,	Book	of	the	Explanations	of	the	Symbols	(Kitāb	Ḥall	ar-Rumūz),	Corpus	Alchemicum	Arabicum,	vol.	1,	ed.
T.	Abt,	W.	Madelung,	T.	Hofmeier,	trans.	S.	Fuad	(Zurich:	Living	Human	Heritage	Publications,	2003),	73.
6 O.	Hannaway,	The	Chemists	and	the	Word:	The	Didactic	Origins	of	Chemistry	(Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1975),
61.
7 “Every	modern	language,	with	its	thousands	of	abstract	terms	and	its	nuances	of	meaning	and	association,	is	apparently,	from
beginning	to	end,	but	an	unconscionable	tissue	of	dead,	or	petrified,	metaphors.”	O.	Barfield,	Poetic	Diction:	A	Study	in	Meaning
(Middletown,	Conn.:	Wesleyan	Univ.	Press,	1984),	63.
8 Cf.	the	discussion	of	Nominalism	in	my	Re-Visioning	Psychology	(New	York:	Harper	and	Row,	1975),	5–8.

	

2
Rudiments
	
I.	FIRE
Fire	of	all	things	is	the	judge	and	ravisher.
– Heraclitus
Would	you	know	the	perfect	Master?	It	is	he	who	understands	the	regulation	of	the	fire,	and	its	degrees.	Nothing	will	prove	to
you	so	formidable	an	impediment	as	ignorance	of	the	regimen	–	of	heat	and	fire.
– Thomas	Norton

Desire	is	not	enough;	in	fact,	ignorant	desire	frustrates	itself	or	burns	itself	away.	For	desire	to	be
consummated,	for	the	opus	to	come	to	fruition	–	in	art,	in	love,	in	practice	of	any	sort	–	learn	all	you
can	about	its	fire:	its	radiance,	its	flickering	instability,	its	warmth,	and	its	rage.	Fire	as	element	below
and	above	the	range	of	human	reason	requires	a	“psychoanalysis	of	fire”	–	the	very	title	of
Bachelard’s	exemplary	study. [1]	The	art	of	the	fire	and	the	key	to	alchemy	means	learning	how	to
warm,	excite,	enthuse,	ignite,	inspire	the	material	at	hand,	which	is	also	the	state	of	one’s	nature	so	as
to	activate	it	further	into	a	different	state.
Of	course,	the	laboratory,	the	stove,	the	curcurbits	and	alembics,	the	co-workers	are	imaginary
figments	as	well	as	materialized	phenomena.	You	are	the	laboratory;	you	are	the	vessel	and	the	stuff
going	through	the	cooking. [2]	So,	too,	the	fire	is	an	invisible	heat,	a	psychic	heat	that	clamors	for
fuel,	breathing	room,	and	regular	loving	consideration.	How	to	build	the	heat	that	can	dry	up	the
soggy,	soggy	dew,	melt	the	leaden	oppressions,	and	distill	a	few	precious	drops	of	intoxicating
clarity?
In	Greece,	in	the	Asklepian	temples	where	“patients”	went	to	find	healing	by	dreaming,	they
incubated	for	a	period	of	time	devoting	themselves	to	focused	brooding	and	right	procedures	in
order	to	be	blessed	by	a	beneficent	dream.	In	the	Bible,	Jonah,	abandoned	by	his	shipmates,	had	to
remain	for	a	time	in	the	belly	of	a	great	whale	sunk	in	the	depths	of	the	sea.	In	that	darkness	he
generated	heat,	lost	his	hair.	Solitary	confinement;	utter	internality.	This	is	the	Nekyia, [3]	the	night	sea
journey	through	the	underworld	made	also	by	Odysseus,	Aeneas,	and	Hercules,	and	by	Eurydice,
Inanna,	Persephone,	Psyche,	by	Orpheus,	by	Christ.	Whether	this	underworld	is	frigid	and	ghastly	or
burning	with	the	hots	of	hell,	it	is	a	realm	characterized	by	temperatures	suitable	only	for	demons,
ghosts,	heroes	and	heroines,	goddesses	and	shades	who	are	no	longer	altogether	of	the	upper	world.
Outsiders.	Marginals.	Alchemy	is	a	profession	of	marginals;	those	at	the	edge.	Those	who	live	from
their	own	fires,	sweating	it	out,	self-sustaining	their	own	temperatures	which	may	be	at	variance	with
the	collective	climate.	Tapas:	the	ardor	of	internal	heat.	In	India	the	sage	sits	in	the	Himalayan	snow
and	with	his	own	body	heat	melts	a	place	to	be,	contained	by	his	own	containment.
Nature’s	fire	is	both	celestial,	descending	from	sun	and	stars	and	lightening,	and	arising	from	the
earth	out	of	thermal	springs,	gases,	geysers	and	volcanoes.	The	alchemist	works	with	both	kinds,
those	coming	from	beyond	into	the	human	sphere,	the	flashes	and	fevers,	explosive	manias	and	starstruck	blindings,	as	well	as	the	interior	culinary	fires,	the	metabolic	heats	of	the	body	that	stew	and
digest	and	melt	the	loins	in	lust.	“The	greater	the	spiritual	stature	of	a	person,	the	greater	the	sexual

passion,”	says	the	Talmud	(Tract.	Sukkah).	As	fire	licks	and	clings	to	the	logs	it	burns,	so	passion
clings	to	the	bodies	of	life.	“The	Clinging”	describes	the	trigram	of	the	second	daughter	of	the	I
Ching.	Like	the	claws	of	a	cat,	the	paws	of	a	lion,	sulfuric	fire	attaches	to	the	object	of	its	desire	or
attaches	itself	to	its	desire.	Intense	internal	heat	as	the	moment	of	fertility.	The	bitch	is	in	heat:	“Solo
aestu	libidinis,”	the	heat	alone	of	the	libido	releases	Mithras	from	the	stone.
If	alchemy	is	the	art	of	fire,	and	alchemists,	“artists	of	fire,”	as	many	texts	repeat,	then	the	alchemist
must	be	able	to	“know”	all	the	kinds	of	fire,	degrees	of	fire,	sources	of	fire,	fuels	of	fire.	And,	the
alchemist	must	be	able	to	fight	fire	with	fire,	using	his	own	fire	to	operate	upon	the	fires	with	which
he	is	operating.	Working	the	fire	by	means	of	fire.	Nature	works	on	nature.	Alchemy,	an	art	of	nature,
a	natural	art	that	raises	the	temperatures	of	nature.	“Nature’s	time	is	extremely	long,	and	the	fashion
of	her	concoction	uniform,	and	her	fire	very	slow.	That	of	Art,	on	the	other	hand,	is	short;	the	heating
is	controlled	by	the	wit	of	the	artist,	as	the	fire	also	is	made	intenser	or	milder.” [4]
Where	science	measures	heat	with	degrees	of	temperature,	alchemy	observes	the	different	kinds	of
heat,	the	qualities	of	fire.	Heat	increases	as	the	work	proceeds,	rising	through	four	classic	stages.
“Each	of	these	is	twice	as	great	as	the	preceding,”	says	Mylius. [5]	Different	texts	describe	the	four
with	different	images	but	the	following	occur	frequently:	a	brooding	hen, [6]	slow	and	mild	as	of	the
flesh;	the	sun	in	June;	great	and	strong	calcining	fire;	burning	and	vehement;	able	to	melt	lead	or	fuse
iron.	Another	lists	the	four	as	water	bath,	ash	bath,	sand	bath,	and	naked	flame.	Ruland’s	Dictionary
fills	out	the	four	stages	with	rich	descriptions. [7]	“The	first	grade	is	very	slow,	and	it	is	like	an
inactive	lukewarmness;	it	is	called	the	heat	of	a	tepid	bath,	of	excrement,	of	digestion,	of	circulation
…	likened	to	the	warmth	generated	by	a	fowl	when	hatching	its	young.”	Evidently	this	fire	is
generated	by	brooding,	digesting	and	holding	within	the	lower	body,	its	fermenting	bowels	and	silent
womb.	Attitudes	are	lukewarm,	diffident.	Slowness	and	the	restraint	of	activity	all	by	themselves	are
able	to	develop	heat.
“The	second	grade	is	fiercer,	yet	such	that	it	is	safe	to	touch,	nor	does	it	injure	the	hand.	They	call	it
the	heat	of	ashes	…	Cinders	on	account	of	their	fineness	do	not	produce	much	air.”	Chapter	9,	below,
discusses	the	role	of	air;	here	we	can	note	that	this	second	stage	is	fed	very	little	fuel.	It	has	little
inspiration,	no	heavy	breathing.	Instead	a	stifling	dullness,	dusty,	ashen,	dried	out.	“I	kept	nothing	of
myself	but	the	ashes.” [8]	“Ash	on	an	old	man’s	sleeve	/	Is	all	the	ash	the	burnt	roses	leave.” [9]	This
heat	can	be	touched,	handled,	coming	perhaps	from	sifting	residues,	a	heat	rising	from	the	warmth	of
reminiscences,	“mixing	memory	and	desire.” [10]	Read	Eliot,	Proust;	read	Akhmatova:	the	fierce	heat
of	fine	ashes,	unstirred	by	the	breezes	of	fantasy.
Why	fierce?	Because	ash	is	the	ultimate	reduction,	the	bare	soul,	the	last	truth,	all	else	dissolved.
“The	ash	is	all,”	said	Zosimos	of	Panopolis, [11]	the	“first	alchemist,”	the	discipline’s	patron
authority.	The	Rosarium	Philosophorum	(CW	16)	says	ash	“endures,”	and	Muhammad	Ibn	Umail,	the
tenth-century	Arab	alchemist	known	to	the	Latin	West	as	Zadith	Senior,	writes	in	his	Tabula	Chemica:
“Burnt	ash	and	the	soul	are	the	gold	of	the	wise.”	Fierce?	Because	we	are	roasted	in	our	own	base
nature.
“The	third	grade	will	burn	the	hand,	and	is	compared	to	boiling	sand	or	iron	filings.”	Desiccation,
a	condition	of	soul	known	in	the	Middle	Ages	as	siccitas,	acedia,	the	dry	depression	of	the	soul
forced	by	willful	resolve	to	do	its	duty.	The	iron	of	Mars,	angry.	The	time	in	the	endless	desert	under
a	relentless	sun.	This	fire	“will	burn	the	hand,”	so	it	cannot	be	handled.	It	is	out	of	your	hands.	If	the
first	stage	was	held	in	the	body	and	the	second	in	memory,	this	is	the	heat	of	desperate	determination,
an	isolating	anger	that	drives	the	work	ever	more	hotly.
“The	fourth	is	the	highest	grade,	and	is	generally	the	most	destructive	…	a	living	flame	is	produced
from	wood	or	coals.”	Bernardus	of	Treviso	says	the	fourth	is	“in	iron,	or	in	the	flame.” [12]	Besides
the	obvious	association	of	iron	and	flame	with	the	smith	and	the	forge,	there	is	a	warrior-of-the-spirit

implication	in	the	third	and	fourth	degrees.	The	desert	saint,	ascetics;	“it	is	death	to	soul	to	become
moist,”	said	Heraclitus,	for	whom	Fire	was	the	primal	principle.	All	the	soul’s	stickiness	is	up	in
flames,	vanished	into	thin	air,	and	the	smoky,	oily,	smelly	worldliness	of	sulfuric	desires	have	been
purified.	It	is	a	change	from	“ordinary”	sulfur	to	“clear-burning	sulfur	(ignis	clare	ardens)	or
“extinguished	fire”	(ignis	exstinctus),	“Sulfur	deprived	of	its	virtue.” [13]
The	two	hottest	fires	are	intended	for	the	operation	called	calcination:	“The	reduction	of	bodies
into	Calx	by	burning.” [14]	Calx = “any	powder	reduced	by	the	separation	of	superfluous
moisture.” [15]	Reduction	of	confusion	to	an	essence,	of	moisture	or	a	solid	to	“a	fine	powder,” [16]
of	misty	remembrances	to	a	poignant	image,	of	a	stubborn	blockage	to	lightweight	fantasy.	Epitome 
= Epiphany.	The	essential	realization.	Moments	in	memory	or	a	weave	of	sensations	(odors,	tastes)
debrided	of	personal	associations,	leaving	but	a	calx,	an	objective	correlative	of	the	overdetermined
issue.	No	long-winded	account	of	circumstances,	only	the	hot	core.	No	causality.	No	context	or
conditions.	The	truth	of	what	is	because	of	only	what	is	–	unalloyed.	Utter	reduction	through	heat.
“Your	material	can	be	cooked	only	in	its	own	blood,”	say	the	texts.
These	powders	work	on	other	bodies	as	catalysts	and	activators,	entering	into	compounds,
absorbed	and	disappearing.	Or,	like	a	powdery	pigment	which,	when	touched	by	a	living	drop	of
moisture	(a	pang	of	grief,	a	freshet	of	lust,	a	flush	of	hope),	can	color	an	entire	scene.	The	alchemist
works	with	these	essences,	this	treated,	cooked,	conquered	nature,	not	with	nature	in	the	raw.	The
calcined	body	is	the	body	that	has	been	through	the	fire,	a	twice-born	body,	a	subtle	body,	no	longer
attached	to	what	it	once	was	and	so	can	become	wholly	absorbed	by	the	work.
Heat	measured	in	numbers	on	a	thermometer	has	no	palpable	qualities,	only	higher	and	lower,
more	or	less.	Two-dimensional.	Heat	qualified	by	a	brooding	hen,	melting	lead,	by	seasons,	ashes
brings	the	operator ’s	imagination	directly	into	relation	with	the	fire.	Moreover,	these	heats
particularize	the	fire.	Warmth	given	by	a	bath	feels	different	from	warmth	radiating	from	glowing
coals	much	as	the	heat	from	a	desert	wind	differs	from	jungle	humidity.	The	source	of	the	heat
qualifies	the	heat,	carries	over	into	the	heat	its	virtues	of	ash,	water,	dung,	flame.	When	alchemy	uses
terms	for	fire	such	as	“Persian	fire”	(ignis	persicus)	(“an	Ulcer	torturing	with	a	fiery	heat” [17]),
“belly	of	the	horse”	(venter	equi),	or	“fire	of	the	lion”	(ignis	leonis),	it	stimulates	the	careful	attention
to	images,	a	practice	similar	to	careful	scientific	observation	of	the	thermometer.	Poetic	terms	take
the	measure	of	imagination.
Figulus	judges	degrees	of	heat	by	the	hand. [18]	“The	first	degree	is	that	which	permits	of	the	hand
being	held	to	it	…	A	second	degree	is	that	which	permits	the	hand	being	held	to	the	fire	but	a	short
time.”	Notice	that	it	is	the	fire	that	“permits.”	Fire	is	the	agent,	the	master	of	the	work.	Knowledge	of
this	master	must	come	firsthand;	it	is	not	learned	from	books	or	lectures	on	desire.	The	good	cook
has	burnt	a	dish	or	two,	and	her	hand	as	well.	We	learn	heat	from	chefs,	smiths,	potters,	embalmers,
from	curing	tobacco,	smoking	hams	and	fish,	baking	pizza,	drying	tea,	fermenting	beer,	distilling
bourbon.	Boiling	sugar	alone	requires	a	subtle	language	of	many	shadings,	consistencies,	degrees.
The	hand-knowledge	of	intensities	applies	to	other	disciplines.	Like	writing:	leave	the	chapter	on
the	desk	untouched	for	three	days.	Pick	it	up	again	only	to	find	it	has	congealed	like	cold	mutton.	The
boxer	lays	off	roadwork	awhile	and	his	legs	lose	their	dance	in	the	ring.	The	patient	comes	to
analysis	only	every	two	weeks,	takes	a	month	off,	so	the	heat	never	builds	and	the	sessions	become
sluggish,	trivial,	diffident.
We	can	be	misled	by	turning	the	pages	of	the	old	alchemy	tracts	with	woodcuts	or	the	many	detailed
depictions	by	the	Flemish	painter	David	Teniers	the	Younger	(1610–90)	of	the	alchemist	at	work,	that
the	fire	is	external	to	him.	No;	the	alchemist	brings	his	own	caloric	participation;	he	is	with	the	fire,
in	the	fire.	That	old	man	in	the	laboratory	concocting	solutions	with	his	apparatus,	kneeling	by	the
fire,	is	the	old	man	in	the	mind,	his	hands	in	the	furnace	of	his	own	body,	sweating	over	the

transformation	of	his	own	nature	–	our	own	acids	and	sulfurs,	our	own	putrefications,	our	own	bitter
salts.
Fire	of	the	Gods
Fire	as	an	infant	ever	hungry,	fire	as	a	child	quickly	growing,	young	and	blazing,	fire	as	a	virgin
ever-renewable.	Hearth	as	womb,	cradle,	embracing	the	center	around	which	the	opus
circumambulates.	We	are	back	with	Hestia [19]	who	sat	in	the	middle	of	the	ancient	house,	of	the
King’s	palace,	of	the	town	hall	–	not	as	a	statue	or	personified	figure,	but	simply	as	the	fire	in	the
hearth.	Just	that.	Hestian	fire	asks	for	care-taking.	She	is	a	domesticating	fire	of	culture;	a	severe
restriction	of	passion;	a	quiet	yet	fierce	warmth	of	attentiveness.	This	fire	is	the	mystery	of	focused
consciousness	itself.	Hestia	came	first	in	the	declination	of	divine	hierarchy	in	prayers,	and
sometimes	in	processions,	because	before	all	else	comes	the	ability	to	attend,	to	be	aware.	We	see	the
dark	and	into	the	dark	by	grace	of	her	light.	Task-mistress,	disciplinarian,	pure	intention,	dignity	–
such	are	the	demands	she	places	on	the	worker	in	fire,	and	alchemy	is	threaded	through	with	this	sort
of	stern	advice.
Other	gods,	other	fires.	Or,	rather	as	the	master	mythographer	Karl	Kerényi	said	of	polytheism,
not	many	different	worlds	but	the	same	world	styled	according	with	a	variety	of	divinities.	Thus
alchemists	are	also	children	of	Hephaestus	because	their	ancestry	goes	back	to	smiths	and	their
forges;	and	children	of	his	wife,	Aphrodite,	because	of	their	ancestry	in	the	arts	of	jewelry,
perfumery,	cosmetics	and	the	coloring	of	cloth;	and	of	Ares/Mars,	her	paramour,	because	of	the	red
fiery	heat	whose	emblems	in	alchemical	shorthand	were	sword,	arrow,	knife,	lance,	instruments	that
pierce	and	slay	and	bring	about	separations;	and	of	Hermes	because	of	the	subtle	transformations	and
secret	formulations,	the	sleight-of-hand	manipulations,	the	mercantile	impetus	and	mountebank
pretensions;	of	old	Saturn	because	the	arduous	work	begins	in	lead	and	ends	in	lead,	said	Michael
Meier,	a	via	longissima,	a	labor	of	fire-tending	fueling,	ash-hauling,	sleeplessly	watching;	or	of
Hades	because	of	its	language	of	cruelties	and	a	heat	that	putrefies	as	well	as	the	hell-fire	of	dried-out
death [20]	and	because	of	alchemy’s	origins	in	embalming	and	the	supposed	Egyptian	source	for	the
root	word	khem = black,	this	“black	art,”	as	it	was	called,	which	like	Hades	operates	in	hiding,	away
from	daily	human	sight.
Yet	among	all	these	it	is	the	fire	of	Hestia,	and	of	Venus/Aphrodite,	that	draws	us	to	the	work	with
both	duty	and	love,	and	a	sensual	pleasure	in	colors,	smells	and	textures	of	the	mixtures.	Alchemy	as	a
passion,	a	devotion,	a	bhakti	yoga.	“The	fire	is	the	love	fire,	the	life	that	flows	forth	from	the	Divine
Venus	…	the	fire	of	Mars	is	too	choleric,	too	sharp,	and	too	fierce	…	” [21]
Many	gods	and	goddesses,	including	references	to	Diana/Artemis	and	the	moon;	Zeus’s
thunderbolts;	Eros;	the	wine	and	dismemberment	of	Dionysus.	But	one	figure	whom	we	moderns
think	of	first	with	fire,	Prometheus,	is	missing!	Prometheus	does	not	belong	in	the	alchemical
devotio,	and	the	work	must	always	be	on	guard	against	the	“promethean	sin,”	stealing	the	fire	for
human	use.	According	to	Plato,	Prometheus	stole	fire	from	Hephaestus,	(Aeschylus	says	from	Zeus;
Hesiod,	from	the	sun).	Plato’s	version	suggests	a	basic	clarification. [22]	Hephaestus	works	with	fire
for	the	sake	of	the	work;	love,	says	Plato,	prompts	him.	Prometheus	wants	the	fire	for	the	“good	of
mankind.”	The	first	is	aesthetic,	even	religious;	the	second	ideological.	But	then	Prometheus	was	a
Titan	and	a	dominant	of	the	Industrial	Age’s	titanic	capitalism,	nationalism	and	ideological
humanism,	and	the	final	mutation	of	alchemy	into	chemistry	(see	Chapter	9	below).
Hastening	Nature

Since	nature	has	its	own	heat	and	works	slowly	at	its	own	improvement,	the	alchemist’s	fire	intends
mainly	to	aid	nature’s	own	efforts.	“Nature’s	own	efforts”	–	that	gives	the	clue	to	the
misappropriation	of	fire	by	Prometheus	and	by	alchemists	who	sought	actual	gold	and	actual	cure.
Jung	recognizes	the	Promethean	sin	as	it	appears	in	Christianity,	although	he	does	not	make	the	link
back	to	the	Greek	myth.	There	is	a	“parting	of	the	ways,”	writes	Jung,	between	the	Christian	opus	and
the	alchemical.	The	alchemist	“may	play	a	part	in	the	perfectio,	which	brings	him	health,	riches,
illumination	and	salvation;	but	…	since	he	is	not	the	one	to	be	redeemed,	he	is	more	concerned	to
perfect	the	substance	than	himself.” [23]
The	furthest	alchemical	vision	goes	beyond	the	human;	it	would	redeem	nature,	achieve	its
perfection,	and	fire	is	the	means	to	this	end.	As	one	of	the	four	elements	that	grounds	the	being	of	the
cosmos,	fire	belongs	not	even	to	the	gods.	No	more	may	fire	be	stolen	and	put	to	human	use	than	may
earth,	air	and	water	be	appropriated	for	the	benefit	of	one	species	alone.	The	Promethean	impulse,
and	as	it	became	human-centered	Christianity,	is	hardly	environmental.	Any	student	of	alchemy,	any
borrower	of	its	tropes	for	one’s	own	art	or	practice,	doing	the	work	for	one’s	own	nature,	remains
Promethean,	a	secular	humanist,	a	gold	digger.
If	alchemy	stands	behind	the	natural	processes	going	on	in	deep	psychotherapy,	as	Jung	has	shown,
and	also	in	the	arts,	then	these	activities	must	also	have	an	aim	beyond	Prometheus.	Soul-making	of
the	individual	or	even	of	the	collective	still	remain	human.	Deep	psychotherapy	is	obliged	like
alchemy	to	be	focused	on	“perfecting	the	substance,”	not	the	subject,	else	it	remains	morally	at	fault,
like	Prometheus	for	stealing	from	the	gods,	and	practitioners	of	therapy	will	find	themselves	chained
to	a	rock	of	dogmatic	person-centered	humanism.
How	do	we	conceive	this	service	of	nature?	How	does	the	alchemical	paradigm	enliven	a	practice,
an	art,	so	that	the	practice,	the	art,	serves	nature?	Quite	simply:	by	recognizing	the	stuffs	and	tools,	the
places	and	constructions	having	each	their	enlivening	spirits;	by	recognizing	the	w	–	that	all	things
are	ensouled,	with	their	own	intentions,	their	own	habits	and	pleasures.	Treating	things	with	regard
for	their	properties.	Alchemy	is	animism.	Materials	entrust	themselves	to	us	for	their	improvement.
Nothing	may	be	used	without	their	willing	cooperation.
By	treating	the	materials	as	ensouled,	by	invoking	the	spirits	of	the	metals	and	speaking	of	their
emotional	qualities,	alchemy	found	gods	in	nature,	and	soul,	or	animation,	in	the	physical	world.	The
devotion	to	alchemy	was	not	quite	a	branch	of	then-contemporary	humanism;	less	the	study	of	human
works	of	culture	and	language	than	a	focus	upon	the	non-human	mystery	of	things,	their	innate
potentials,	their	liveliness.	All	the	pious	counsels	and	moral	admonitions,	which	fill	the	texts,	seem
laid	on	to	counter	the	dehumanizing,	perhaps	demonic,	experimentation	with	that	which	lies	outside
human	measure.	Today’s	science,	investigating	similar	inhuman	powers,	omits	similar	moral
counterweights.
Fire	produces	and	permits	differing	effects	on	different	substances	on	different	occasions.	St.
Augustine	notes	that	fire	blackens	wood	yet	whitens	stone,	producing	contrary	effects	on	materials
that	are	more	akin	than	contrary. [24]	Each	thing	heats	in	its	own	style.	Know	your	fire,	but	know	your
material	as	well.	For	instance:	A	husband	and	wife	are	akin,	a	couple.	They	consider	entering	the
vessel	of	therapy	and	turning	up	the	heat	on	their	difficulties.	The	fire	may	whiten	her,	yet	blacken
him	or	vice	versa,	and	they	come	out	as	contraries.
When	we	hasten	nature	by	applying	heat,	we	adapt	the	heat	to	the	qualities	of	the	substance.	Even
more,	the	heat	we	apply	externally	by	fire	must	aim	at	kindling	and	reinforcing	the	calor	inclusus
within	the	substance.	Amount	and	kind	of	heat	are	determined	by	the	stuff	we	are	working	with.	Not
too	much,	not	too	little.	Dosage.	Therefore,	the	hastening	of	nature	has	no	formula,	no	clear
foreknowledge	of	hours,	days,	years.	“How	long	will	it	take?”	asks	the	patient	of	the	doctor,	the
singer	of	his	coach,	the	novelist	of	his	schedule	to	get	this	outline	into	submissable	shape.

Bonus	of	Ferrara	replies:	“The	time	required	for	the	whole	work	is	stated	by	Rasis	to	be	one	year.
Rosinus	fixes	it	at	nine	months;	others	at	seven,	others	at	forty,	yet	others	at	eighty	days.	Still,	we
know	that	as	the	hatching	of	a	chicken	is	always	accomplished	in	the	same	period,	so	a	certain	number
of	days	or	months,	and	no	more,	must	be	required	for	this	work.	The	difficulty	connected	with	the
time	also	involves	the	secret	of	the	fire,	which	is	the	greatest	mystery	of	the	Art.” [25]
A	more	subtle	passage	compares	the	opus	with	an	embryo	that	requires	nine	months	to	mature,	each
trimester	ruled	by	an	element. [26]	First	the	opus	is	nourished	by	water,	then	by	air,	and	finally	by	fire.
The	transition	from	water	to	air,	from	flooding	and	dissolving	to	drying	and	distance	is	familiar
enough	to	artisans	in	any	work	of	concentration.	Then,	the	work	is	“quickened	by	fire.”	It	lives	on	its
own.	The	desire	or	impetus	that	has	impelled	the	work	exhausts	itself,	all	intentions,	expectations,
ambitions	burnt	out	in	the	sheer	passion	of	the	doing.
II.	FUEL:	CHARCOAL	AND	AIR
In	the	woodlands	and	forests	of	old	Europe	and	still	today	in	parts	of	Central	Asia	and	Africa,	and	in
Brazil,	Japan,	India	and	China	the	charcoal	workers	gather	their	sticks	and	branches	for
manufacturing	the	fuel	that	was	essential	to	alchemy. [27]	The	Roman	naturalist	Pliny	the	Elder	(23–
79	 )	laid	out	carefully	the	sorts	of	wood	that	make	the	best	charcoal	and	for	what	particular
purposes.	Fir,	he	wrote,	takes	the	bellows	better;	less	smoldering	so	it	suits	smiths	at	their	forges.	For
iron,	charcoal	of	chestnut;	for	silver,	pine.
To	an	alchemical	mind,	the	purest	fire	will	be	fueled	with	the	purest	substance.	You	get	from	the
fire	only	what	the	fire	is	fed.	Charcoal	is	the	most	desirable	fuel	because	its	matter	has	already	been
purified.	Or	died.	That	is	why	it	is	black	and	so	light	in	weight.	All	superfluities	have	been	burnt	out.	It
has	been	through	the	fire,	a	twice-born	fuel,	first	as	natural	wood,	then	as	the	essence	of	that	wood.
Charcoal:	an	opus	contra	naturam.	Also,	charcoal	signals	in	its	lifetime	the	colors	of	the	alchemical
opus:	black	lumps,	white	ash,	yellow	flame,	red	coals.	Most	mysterious:	even	the	origin	of	the
English	word	is	unknown.
Born	in	fire	and	dying	in	fire,	charcoal	is	fire’s	devoté.	The	selfless	servant,	dried	of	moisture,
with	no	desires	of	its	own	for	transformations.	Therefore	it	serves	so	well	as	cleanser,	absorber,
purifier,	letting	other	stuffs	pass	through	its	porous	body	without	participation.	Neither	reagent	nor
catalyst,	charcoal	is	the	fuel	that	does	not	interfere,	a	giver	of	energy	asking	nothing	for	itself	in
return.	This	is	the	quality	of	energy	that	fuels	the	opus.
Even	lighter	than	charcoal	is	the	air	on	which	fire	depends.	It	is	the	primary	fuel,	given	by	the	gods
as	evidenced	by	the	fire	of	lightning.	Pictures	of	alchemists	at	their	ovens	and	stoves	and	smiths	at
their	hearths	often	show	a	servant	called	a	“puffer”	working	a	bellows,	maintaining	the	fire	by	a
steady	stream	of	air.	There	are	Egyptian	images	of	these	puffers	working	the	bellows	as	early	as
1450	 . [28]	From	indigenous	blow-pipe	and	primitive	bellows	of	animal	skin	to	the	blast	furnace	in
ironworks,	fire	uses	air	to	intensify	the	heat.	To	kill	a	fire,	cut	off	its	air.
What	is	this	“air,”	and	how	to	manage	it?	Right	at	the	beginning	of	Western	thought	about	nature
and	the	cosmos,	Anaximenes	of	Miletus	(sixth	century  )	proposed	an	elemental	air	to	be	the
founding	stuff	of	the	cosmos.	The	idea	of	an	invisible,	transparent	element	that	rarefies	and	condenses
and	on	which	fire	and	light	depend,	on	which,	in	fact,	all	life	depends,	continued	to	perplex	human
thinking	with	theories	of	ether,	phlogiston,	aerial	angels	and	winged	demons,	celestial	powers	and
flying	machines,	vapors	and	ghosts,	the	soul	as	breath	–	until	the	chemical	analysis	of	air	during	the
Enlightenment	by	Priestley	and	Lavoisier	and	the	discovery	of	oxygen	(see	below,	Chapter	9).
Fascination	with	air	and	imaginative	inspiration	drawn	from	it	continues	in	the	marvelous	treatises	by
Bachelard	on	the	poetics	of	air	and	by	David	Abram	on	language,	air,	and	the	ruach	or	divine	breath.
CE

BCE

BCE

The	character	of	elemental	air	also	comes	from	medical	and	psychological	astrology,	where	air	is
one	of	the	four	foundational	elements	composing	the	cosmos.	Early	texts	of	psychology	presented	in
the	symbolics	of	astrology	teach	that	air	provides	fire	with	coolness,	even	as	air	increases	its	heat;
with	detachment	so	that	a	fire	does	not	burn	itself	out;	with	jets	of	wit,	lofty	thoughts	and	mobility	of
direction,	even	as	it	blindly	rages.	Also,	air	feeds	fire	with	mental	invisibilities,	with	spirit	and	a
farther,	wider	vision.	A	steady	stream	of	narrowed	attention	quickens	the	inert	charcoal,	bringing
forth	warmth	and	light.
Fire	actually	burns	air,	the	flicker	of	the	flame	is	the	same	oxygen	that	we	combust.	As	we	live,	we
are	burning,	consuming	the	wind,	thereby	generating	the	calor	inclusus	that	sustains	our	days.	Our
death	is	expiration,	the	windbag	emptied,	the	fire	out.	The	act	of	breathing	is	our	first	participation	in
the	cosmos,	circulating	in	our	intimate	interiority.	Fire	lives	on	mind,	and	the	sustaining	heat	of	our
warm-bloodedness	depends	on	inspiration,	on	fantastic	invention,	breezy	wit	and	windy	rhetoric,	on
brain-storming,	rarefied	theories	and	cool	ideas.	The	mind,	a	blast-furnace.	A	breath-soul	of	inflating
words	must	be	continuously	fed	into	the	work.	The	alchemist	with	his	puffer	and	bellows	sucks	into
his	project	inspiration	from	the	nous	of	the	world,	the	archetypal	mind	that	moves	like	the	wind
around	the	whole	earth.	From	its	four	quarters,	the	life-breath	of	traditional	thought	pumps	up	the
work.	And	so	we	find	the	alchemists	referring	ever	and	again	to	other	texts,	inhaling	the	thoughts	of
other	doctors	of	the	Art	and	announcing	this	dependence	as	a	maxim,	“one	book	opens	another,”
much	as	painters	read	philosophers,	composers	look	at	architecture,	philosophers	visit	museums,
poets	translate	from	distant	and	dead	languages	–	their	fires	desperate	for	fresh	currents.	For	the	fire
must	have	words;	and	the	writers	whose	life	is	air	–	Keats,	Stevenson,	Lawrence	–	die	young	of
consumption;	not	burnt	out,	burned	up.
III.	METALS
Although	alchemy	moved	from	forge	to	laboratory,	working	with	metals	was	not	left	behind.	The
elemental	metals	–	iron,	lead,	copper,	mercury,	tin,	or	antimony	–	entered	into	the	compounds,	adding
their	natures	to	the	concocted	product.	Each	of	the	major	metals	corresponds	with	one	of	the	seven
planetary	bodies	that	influence	the	soul	by	means	of	their	exhalations,	the	pneuma,	breath	or
inspiration,	that	give	specific	qualities	to	the	work.
The	Doctrine	of	Correspondence	–	“as	above,	so	below”	–	means	more	than	symbolization	on
earth	of	the	planets	in	heaven.	Correspondence:	“congruence;	friendly	intercourse;	mutual	adaptation;
connection;	letter-writing.”	It	means	keeping	in	touch	with,	receiving	messages	from.	Things	on
earth,	especially	the	metals	in	the	earth,	are	in	touch	with	the	gods;	they	bear	mythical	messages.
There	is	a	spirit	in	the	iron,	in	the	lead,	a	spiritus	rector,	a	guiding	principle	that	teaches	the	artisan.
Lead	instructs	slowness;	copper,	quick	warmth;	mercury,	ungraspability	and	fusibility.
This	spirit	in	the	metal,	its	subtle	body,	and	its	shadow,	rather	than	the	mineral	as	such,	becomes	the
focus	of	alchemy.	Thus,	the	alchemical	work	with	metals	is	called	the	“sophistication	of	the	metals.”
The	alchemist	tries	to	release	specific	qualities	from	the	metal.	As	a	refiner	attempts	to	release	the
metal	from	its	ore,	so	the	alchemist	tries	to	realize	a	quality	in	the	metal	–	the	passionate	vigor	in
iron,	say,	so	that	the	Stone	(that	goal	of	the	work)	be	strong,	penetrating,	purposeful.	At	the	same
time,	alchemy	warns	against	possession	by	the	very	spirit	it	is	seeking,	a	possession	that	can	have	the
artisan	stuck	in	the	shadow	of	iron:	rigid,	martial,	burdened,	and	rusting.
The	process	is	both	one	of	refining,	by	releasing	essence	from	dross,	and	of	transmutation,	by
improving	the	grade	of	the	metal	from	lowest	to	highest,	from	lead	and	iron	to	silver	and	gold,
because	the	metals	themselves	are	filled	with	a	desire	to	return	to	the	higher	condition	from	which
they	have	fallen.	In	each	metal	is	the	slumbering	wish	to	transmute	to	a	nobler	state. [29]	Refining	and

sophistication	aim	for	purity,	a	silver	that	is	“sterling,”	a	gold	that	is	24	carats.	Purity:	the	least
possible	extraneous	admixtures.	Purity:	entirely	self-same.	The	refined	metal	is	unadulterated;	the
sophisticated	metal	has	been	reduced	to	its	essential	qualities.	Refinement	and	sophistication	through
discipline.
Iron	imposes	its	discipline.	Enter	the	forge	of	rage,	melt,	and	coagulate,	submit	to	the	hammer	and
harden,	be	plunged	again	and	again	into	the	fire	and	the	cooling	bath.	These	rigors	resonate	with	the
angers	of	Mars	and	his	choleric	temperament,	the	impatience,	the	toughness,	the	imperviousness	to
malleability,	and	the	need	to	keep	dry	from	rust.
The	Venusian	discipline	of	copper	works	toward	a	more	sophisticated	essence	by	separating	out	–
drying	up,	burning	away	–	collective	idealizations,	traditional	constraints,	and	sentimental	overtones,
so	as	to	achieve	copper ’s	essential	beauty	shown	by	the	metal’s	subtle	patina	of	surface.	(Venus	as
goddess	of	the	skin	of	things	–	their	feel,	their	shine.)
In	Greek,	metalleia	refers	to	an	underground	channel	or	mine;	metalleuontes	is	one	who	searches
for	metals,	a	miner;	and	metallao	means	to	search,	inquire.	A	play	on	words	adds	a	further
significance:	metallasso	means	to	change,	alter	–	perhaps	the	metals	take	pleasure	in	their	alterations
and	enjoy	the	discipline	imposed	upon	them	by	extracting	their	ore-bodies	and	the	smelting.	As	one
book	leads	to	another	in	alchemical	inquiry,	so,	says	Pliny	the	Elder,	one	vein	leads	to	another.
The	adept	provoked	by	the	metal	becomes	a	prospector,	exploring	deep	in	the	psyche’s	elemental
core	for	the	foundational	substances	that	underlie	the	surface	behavior	of	things.	It	is	as	if	the
planetary	gods	in	their	metallic	hideouts	push	the	depths	to	search	further,	ever	gaining	more	and
more	essential	knowledge	and	technical	ability	from	what	the	metals	afford.	They	become	the
teachers,	the	mentors.
The	inherent	perfectibility	of	the	substances	urges	all	things	away	from	the	literal,	undifferentiated,
and	only	natural	as	given	or	found.	The	“only	natural”	may	be	necessary,	but	it	is	insufficient,	since
the	metals	themselves	ask	to	be	sophisticated.	The	given	soul	asks	to	be	worked.	In	its	natural	found
state	the	soul	is	innocent,	ignorant,	and	therefore	dangerous.	That	the	material	itself	asks	to	be
refined,	the	raw	wanting	to	be	cooked,	suggests	an	archetypal	basis	for	the	ideas	of	perfectibility,
progress,	and	as	well,	evolution.
The	primary	material	condition	of	a	substance	conceals	its	essential	nature.	It	does	not	even	know
itself,	seeming	merely	a	symptom	without	worth.	The	adept	works	to	discover	the	value	in	what
appears	as	dull	ore	or	discard	slag.	His	labors	move	the	material	from	its	first	or	primary
presentation	to	a	moment	of	revelation	when	it	becomes	psychologically	intelligible.	The	practitioner
seeks	not	only	to	free	the	metal	from	its	dross	but	to	free	the	meanings	of	the	metal,	their	linkages
with	the	intelligibility	of	the	cosmos.	To	the	alchemist,	the	world	is	signed	by	the	gods	and	we	learn	to
read	their	signatures	and	gain	the	significance	afforded	by	each	thing.
Assumed	here	is	the	inherent	intelligibility	of	the	world.	This	innate	knowledge	does	not	reside	in
God’s	omniscient	mind,	but	is	immanent	in	the	world	of	things,	giving	to	each	its	specific	value	and
allowing	it	to	be	understood.	By	reading	the	world	as	animals	do,	we	adapt	to	it	and	can	better	aid	it
on	its	way	toward	its	aims.	Alchemy	was	not	merely	gold-making	for	the	benefit	of	the	alchemist	and
his	patron.	Within	the	labor	was	the	vision	to	bring	the	world	itself	into	a	golden	age,	fulfilling	its
desire	for	perfection,	a	soul-making	of	the	world	itself.
Nature	is	constantly	at	work	toward	this	end.	Its	own	calor	inclusus	or	innate	heat	slowly	transmutes
the	stubbornly	resisting	primary	matter.	The	alchemist,	however,	by	ingeniously	intensifying	the	heat,
could	hasten	nature’s	own	aims.	In	his	laboratory	and	at	his	stove	the	adept	believed	he	could	bring	to
fruition	in	a	lifetime,	or	sooner,	what	nature	by	itself	takes	centuries	to	accomplish.
Although	the	work	is	always	stated	as	an	opus	contra	naturam	(a	work	against	nature),	it	was	of
course	a	following	of	nature,	guided	by	nature,	instructed	by	the	book	of	nature	which	the	alchemist

diligently	studied.	Thus	the	best	statement	for	summarizing	the	alchemical	attitude	is	from	Ostanes,
whom	Jung	cites	frequently:	“Nature	rejoices	in	nature:	nature	subdues	nature:	nature	rules	over
nature.” [30]
Resistance
Nature	subdues	nature	by	means	of	fire.	Heat	dissolves	the	cohesion	of	a	substance;	that	natural	desire
to	hold	to	itself	as	it	is.	Heat	separates	the	metal	from	the	ore	body	and	can	calcine	the	metal	into	a
more	workable	condition.	In	the	only-natural	state,	the	substances	resist	change.	They	intend	to	stay	as
they	are	and	have	been	for	millions	of	eons,	buried	and	hidden	away.	Yet	the	innate	urge	toward
perfectibility	welcomes	the	fire.	Hence,	they	rejoice	also	in	their	submission,	allowing	themselves	to
be	smelted,	hammered,	and	extracted	from	their	home	ground.
Resistance	of	any	thing	is	given	with	its	essential	nature.	“The	power	or	endeavor,	wherewith	each
thing	endeavors	to	persist	in	its	own	being,	is	nothing	else	but	the	given	or	actual	essence	of	the	thing
in	question,”	wrote	Spinoza. [31]	Resistance	in	the	work	and	to	the	work	is	not	personal	but
ontological.	Being	does	not	move,	said	Parmenides,	to	which	Heraclitus	replied,	all	things	move.
Two	differing	ontologies.	Ontological	ambivalence.	Ostanes’s	maxim	accounts	for	the	inherent
ambivalence	in	the	metals	and	all	through	the	alchemical	art.	Ostanes’s	maxim	sophisticates	the	idea
of	ambivalence	itself.	Nature	does	enjoy	its	natural	state	and	resists	change,	yet	it	also	struggles
against	its	predeliction	for	stasis,	subduing	itself	and	making	change	possible.	Nature	sophisticates
itself,	dividing	its	ambivalence	into	two	aspects	–	the	unchanging	and	the	changing.	It	is	therefore
folly	to	attempt	to	change	the	unchanging.	Or	as	the	alchemists	say:	“You	cannot	make	a	milk-cow	out
of	a	mouse.”
What	changes	and	what	does	not	change?	What	stays	the	same	and	what	becomes	different?	In
philosophical	terms,	the	existence	changes,	but	the	essence	remains	unalterable.	The	natural	body	of
the	metal	may	become	a	liquid,	a	powder,	a	vapor;	it	can	combine,	shift	colors,	submit	to	the	effects
of	other	substances.	The	subtle	body,	however,	persists	in	its	own	self-same	unalterability.
It	takes	heat	to	subdue	the	innate	resistance	of	a	substance,	a	heat	gentle	enough	to	melt	the	stubborn
and	fierce	enough	to	prevent	regression	to	the	original	state.	Only	when	the	regression	to	the	original
“found”	condition	–	the	substance	in	its	symptomatic	presentation	–	is	no	longer	possible,	only	when
it	has	been	thoroughly	cooked	and	has	truly	separated	itself	from	its	historical	and	habitual	mode	of
being	can	an	alteration	be	said	to	have	been	accomplished.	Then	the	substance,	which	psychology
might	call	a	complex,	becomes	less	autonomous	and	more	malleable	and	fusible,	having	lost	its
independence	as	an	intractable	object	that	objects	and	resists.	Only	then	can	the	subtle	body	of	the
metal	–	hardness	of	iron,	the	quick	warmth	of	copper,	the	weight	of	lead	–	join	the	work.	“Only
separated	things	can	be	conjoined,”	say	the	alchemists.
IV.	VESSELS
The	inescapable	paradox	of	fire	–	of	alchemy,	of	psyche,	of	intelligent	living	–	consists	in	this	double
commandment:	Thou	shalt	not	repress	/	Thou	shalt	not	act	out.
On	the	one	hand,	fire	will	act	out.	Fire	spreads;	its	appetite	consumes	whatever	is	combustible.	It
cannot	be	concealed.	“Three	things	cannot	be	hidden,”	says	an	Arab	proverb,	“a	camel	in	the	desert,
someone	in	love,	and	a	fire.” [32]	Fire	insists	on	being	visible.	It	does	not	want	to	be	repressed,	its
sparks	to	be	smothered,	doused.	It	will	smolder	long	after	the	flames	have	died.
On	the	other	hand,	desire	may	not	be	released	straight	into	the	world.	The	work	is	spoiled,	say	the
alchemists,	by	direct	heat.	Do	not	let	flames	touch	the	material.	Direct	fire	scorches,	blackens	the

seeds.	Fire	is	quick,	and	“all	haste	comes	from	the	devil.”	Festine	lente,	“make	haste	slowly,”	advised
a	favorite	Renaissance	maxim.
Do	not	act	out;	do	not	hold	in.	A	paradox.	And	a	double	negative	that	suggests	a	via	negativa,	a	deliteralizing	cancellation	of	both	commandments.	A	mercurial	escape	from	the	exhausting	oscillation
between	them.	Instead	of	holding	in	or	acting	out,	act	in.	Cook	in	the	rotundum	as	one	vessel	was
called,	referring	both	to	a	container	and	to	the	roundness	of	the	skull. [33]	Hold	the	heat	inside	the
head	by	warming	the	mind’s	reveries.	Imagine,	project,	fantasize,	think.
Vessels	both	contain	and	separate.	Separatio	is	one	of	the	main	operations	in	the	work.	Each
substance,	each	quality,	must	be	distinguished	from	the	massa	confusa	of	the	primary	material,	the
original	supporting	confusion.	Although	the	two	operations	of	separation	and	conjunction	are
referred	to	again	and	again	as	basic	to	the	work	all	along	(also	termed	“dissolve	and	coagulate”),	the
separatio	is	the	more	fundamental.	This	again	because	“only	separated	things	can	be	conjoined.”
Any	substance	held	in	a	basket	or	a	jug	has	been	separated	from	the	undifferentiated	bulk	simply	by
virtue	of	a	container.	The	material	stuff	is	no	different,	and	yet	it	is	altogether	differentiated	by	its
form.	Your	beer	in	a	bottle,	my	beer	in	a	can,	are	the	same	and	not	the	same.	Water	in	a	jar	is	jarred
water,	like	bottled	water,	fountain	water,	river	water.	The	moment	the	water	running	from	the	tap	fills
this	vase	or	that	bucket,	the	water	has	taken	on	shape.
We	cannot	handle	all	suffering,	all	evil,	all	ignorance,	all	emotion	–	only	that	particular	part	that
has	been	separated	out	and	given	a	recognizable	form.
Water	itself	comes	in	a	variety	of	conditions,	from	raindrop	to	ocean,	from	stagnant	marsh	to	white
cascade.	The	vessels	which	hold	it	have	edges	and	bottoms.	It	is	not	merely	a	question	whether	you
are	too	wet	or	too	dry,	too	runny	and	sloppy	or	too	parched	and	brittle,	but	how	is	your	moisture
shaped.	Humanity	shapes,	as	birds	shape	their	nests	and	burrowing	animals	shape	their	tunnels.	And
we	shape	our	graves	and	burying	vessels	–	abhorrent	the	bodies	of	the	dead	heaved	into	a	pit,
shapeless.
Whatever	we	deal	with	has	to	be	held	in	some	way.	Even	oceans	have	their	shores.
If	God	had	not	given	us	a	vessel
His	other	gifts	would	have	been	of	no	avail. [34]

Vessels	come	in	every	sort	of	shape	and	size,	made	of	all	kinds	of	materials,	from	river	reeds	and
willow	twigs	to	thick	clay	for	pots,	wood	for	barrel	staves,	metal	and	glass	for	beakers.	Some	vessels
are	quick	to	heat	but	crack	easily.	Some	are	opaque,	others	transparent;	some	flat	and	open	to	allow
evaporation,	others	tightly	sealed	to	intensify	the	pressure.	Vessels:	methods	of	containment.	Can	you
take	the	heat?	Are	you	opaque	and	dense,	slow	to	warm	so	no	one	can	tell	what	is	going	on	inside?
Sometimes	it	is	less	an	issue	what	is	in	the	vessel,	the	nature	of	the	stuff	being	contained,	and	more
one	of	shape:	leaky,	fragile,	brittle,	solid,	full	to	overflowing,	empty,	cracked	…	“I’m	doing	fine,	in
great	shape.”
Vessels	are	the	way	we	embrace	events,	store	them,	style	them.	Prior	to	weapon	and	tool,	the	vessel.
Hunt	the	mastodon;	cook	the	meat;	but	the	leftover	must	be	kept,	and	the	water	brought	from	the	river.
“His	other	gifts	would	have	been	of	no	avail.”	Along	with	the	sharp	flints	and	stone	axe-heads	for
cutting,	the	spear	points	and	fish	hooks	–	instruments	of	killing,	there	are	baskets	and	slings	and
gourds	and	pots	–	instruments	of	keeping.	Since	the	former	lasts	through	time,	while	the	latter	more
easily	fragments	and	decays,	our	picture	of	early	human	life	puts	the	male	hunter	in	the	foreground
and	the	female	gatherer,	keeper,	and	sorter	in	the	background.
Vessels	present	the	style	of	a	culture.	One	image	tells	a	story:	a	chipped,	dirty	toothbrush	glass	for
whiskey	in	a	cheap	bed-sitter	by	Graham	Green;	pop-up	beer	cans,	Styrofoam	cups,	jokey	ungainly
coffee	mugs,	motel	wastebaskets	with	plastic	liners.	The	bruhaha	over	wine-glass	shapes,	stems,

thinness	…	By	their	vessels	ye	shall	know	them.
“Let	your	glass	distilling	vessel	be	round	or	oval	…	Let	the	height	of	the	vessel’s	neck	be	about
one	palm,	hand-breadth,	and	let	the	glass	be	clear	and	thick	(the	thicker	the	better,	so	long	as	it	is	clear
and	clean,	and	permits	you	to	distinguish	what	is	going	on	within	…	The	glass	should	be	strong	in
order	to	prevent	the	vapours	which	arise	from	our	embryo	bursting	the	vessel.	Let	the	mouth	of	the
vessel	be	very	carefully	and	effectually	secured	by	means	of	a	thick	layer	of	sealing-wax.” [35]
Three	observations	to	draw	from	this	passage:	(1)	“To	distinguish	what	is	going	on	within”:
insights	must	be	clear,	not	vague	and	cloudy;	(2)	“Vapours	which	arise	from	our	embryo	[can	burst]
the	vessel”:	the	living	seed	of	the	work	is	not	viable	for	life,	must	not	leave	the	vessel;	and,	while	it	is
germinating,	it	gives	rise	to	fantasies	which	seek	to	escape	into	the	world	(in	programs	and	projects);
(3)	“Let	the	mouth	of	the	vessel	be	very	carefully	…	secured”:	Treat	the	work-in-progress	as	a	secret.
Guard	your	open	mouth.	Watch	carefully	what	and	how	and	to	whom	you	speak	about	what	is	going
on	within.
Within?	Where	is	that?	Within	the	vessel,	whatever	the	vessel	may	be:	wherever	there	is	a	contained
and	separated	focus,	a	holding	zone,	something	cooking.	You	are	not	the	vessel,	nor	is	it	necessary	to
believe	that	“within”	is	within	you	–	your	personal	relationships,	your	psychic	processes,	your
dreams.	Interiority	is	within	all	things	–	the	garden	bed	that	is	in	preparation,	the	poem	that	is	the
focus	of	attentive	emotions.	Keep	a	close	watch	on	these	interiorities;	by	watching	we	are	vesseling,
for	it	is	the	glass	vessel	that	allows	the	watching,	and	watching	provides	the	very	separation	and
containment	expressed	concretely	by	the	glass	vessel.
The	watching	alchemist	is	also	the	observed.	Inside	the	vessel,	creatures	form,	strange	images	of
excited	materials,	Kings	and	Queens,	little	homunculi	–	miniature	figures	with	faces	and	eyes.	The
alchemist	becomes	the	subject	of	interior	observations.	The	human	will’s	intentions	submit	to
imagistic	guidance,	a	kind	of	poetic	influence	of	“others”	as	the	vessel	brings	them	to	life.
Glass
Glass:	like	air,	like	water,	made	of	earth,	made	in	fire.	Blown	glass	melts,	liquefies,	glows,	expands,
takes	on	all	sorts	of	shape,	size,	thickness,	brilliance,	and	color.	It	can	take	the	heat.	Glass	lets	us	see
what	is	going	on	within	it,	behind	it.	Glass,	the	vessel	of	inside	revelation,	capturing	and	transmuting
the	glimpse	or	glance	into	studied	observation.	Inside	the	glass	curcurbits,	depicted	in	the	Splendor
solis	and	the	Trésor	des	trésors,	glorious	figures	go	through	their	alchemical	transmutations.	Glass
holds	precious	blood	in	a	vial,	roses	in	a	bowl,	wine	in	a	decanter.
By	removing	the	opus	from	forge	to	stove,	glass	makes	alchemy	possible,	and	psychological.
Glass	also	makes	the	science	of	chemistry	possible	in	the	laboratory	of	controlled	in	vitro
observation	and	experimentation.
Glass	also	separates	observer	from	observed.	It	is	the	material	of	distancing,	separating	events
from	life	by	means	of	fragile	transparency,	enclosing	them	each	in	its	own	“house”	as	the	glass
vessels	were	sometimes	called.	Because	the	clear	glass	preferred	by	alchemy	is	itself	hardly	visible,
its	invisibility	allows	the	visibility	of	the	opus	–	but	only	when	the	glass	is	shaped	into	a	vessel,	that	is,
affords	containment.	Glass	slide,	glass	countertop,	looking-glass	are	not	enough	for	the	alchemical
work.
The	parallels	with	psyche	are	obvious.	The	psyche	too	is	invisible;	we	grasp	it	only	in	reflection	or
we	identify	it	with	its	contents	–	this	dream,	that	feeling	or	memory.	Psyche	appears	to	be	only	what	it
contains.	Glass,	like	psyche,	is	the	medium	by	which	we	see	into,	see	through.	Glass:	the	physical
embodiment	of	insight.	The	illusion	of	glass	makes	content	and	container	seem	to	be	the	same,	and
because	we	see	the	content	before	we	recognize	that	it	is	held	by	glass,	we	do	not	at	first	see	its	shape,

its	density,	its	flaws	since	our	focus	is	fixed	on	the	contents.	Glass	as	subtle	body	requires	a	subtlety
of	noticing.	The	sophistication	of	the	material	needs	sophistication	of	insight.
The	alchemical	mind	was	occupied	with	noticing	properties.	Which	qualities,	which	attributes,	are
the	“virtues,”	in	Paracelsus’s	terms,	of	a	substance?	Natural	things	could	be	grouped,	even	classified,
by	their	adjectives:	hard,	cold,	bitter,	wintry,	could	bring	together	phenomena	from	all	three
kingdoms	–	animal,	vegetable,	mineral.	Because	the	world	is	inherently	intelligible	we	can	discover
where	each	phenomena	belongs	by	means	of	the	study	of	properties,	care	with	adjectives.
The	Bain	Marie
The	glass	vessel	is	itself	vesseled.	It	can	sit	in	a	pot	of	ash	or	sand,	but	more	often	it	is	inside	a	larger
container	of	water:	the	bain	marie	or	Mary’s	Bath.
Heat	penetrates	the	stuff	in	the	glass	vessel	by	means	of	water.	Both	fire	and	water	cooperate	to
regulate	the	heat,	though	neither	element	touches	the	substance	directly.	An	ingenious	method	of
indirection,	bringing	together	two	notorious	enemies,	fire	and	water,	to	serve	the	opus. [36]	Usually
when	they	meet,	they	hiss	and	spit	and	let	off	clouds	of	scalding	steam,	but	the	bain	marie	protects
them	from	killing	each	other,	and	protects	the	substance	from	elemental	warfare.
The	bain	marie	appears	in	alchemical	tradition	as	an	ancient	invention,	from	Egypt	perhaps,
coming	from	a	practitioner	named	Mary	the	Jewess, [37]	identical	with	or	confused	with	Maria
Prophetessa.	The	bain	marie	supposedly	developed	in	the	kitchen	of	a	Jewish	lady,	mystic,
experimenter,	cook.	Today’s	cooks	still	use	the	vessel	as	a	“double-boiler.”
As	long	as	water	fills	the	bath,	the	substance	cannot	burn,	cannot	even	boil	away.	The	heat	of	the
bath	increases	ever	so	gradually	in	order	to	loosen	and	relax	the	stubborn	resistance	of	the	substance
by	means	of	gentle	warmth.	Like	your	body	in	a	warm	tub,	which	gradually	rises	in	temperature	as
you	draw	in	more	hot	water.	The	warmth	permeating	the	glass	vessel	from	the	bath	is	another	way	of
imaging	sympathetic	attention,	gentle	encouragement,	all-embracing	tolerance.	Knots,	boundaries,
strictures	give	way.
“Perform	no	operation	until	all	becomes	water.”	Before	you	can	do	anything	at	all	psychological,
you	must	dissolve	the	initial	mindset	with	which	you	approach	a	problem.	Problems	themselves	are
fixed	positions.	The	word	“problem”	refers	in	its	primary	meanings	to	chess,	math,	battle	strategy	–
all	very	tight	conditions.	We	yield	and	let	go,	and	the	mind,	set	on	resolutions,	lets	go	of	its	own
mindset	that	seeks	the	resolutions.	Will	power	turns	to	lassitude	in	the	bath.
Perform	no	operation	until	all	has	become	water:	rational	analysis	must	wait	for	emotion	to	flow,
reveries	to	float,	collect	in	pools,	stir,	sink,	find	outlets.	Discriminations	blur.	This	and	that	melt	into
each	other;	right	and	wrong	and	their	guilts	grow	soft	and	mushy;	they	hardly	matter,	no	hard	facts,
no	sturdy	sureties	to	cling	to.	All	yields	to	the	warming	water.	We	become	gentler	with	ourselves.	We
lose	intention	for	arrival,	no	hurry.	A	bath	is	not	a	shower.	We	are	the	substance,	our	body	and	our
mind	enter	the	vessel	of	the	soul,	Mary’s	bath.	We	are	the	cook	and	the	cooked,	unable	to	feel	the
difference.
The	Pelican
The	stoppered	vessel	serves	well	for	sublimation	(raising	a	substance	to	a	higher	level)	and	for
precipitation	(a	substance	at	the	bottom	may	produce	either	drops	or	liquid	at	the	top	or	a	fine	white
precipitate).	But	for	more	subtle	operations	a	special	closed	vessel	is	required:	the	Pelican.
This	glass	container	has	a	fat	round	body	stretching	upward	and	out	of	the	body	into	a	long	neck
that	curves	downward	and	rejoins	by	inserting	into	the	body,	thus	allowing	a	circulation	of	the	same

matter	through	various	stages	from	below	to	above	and	then	back	down	again.
The	Pelican	sophisticates	the	familiar	alchemical	image	of	the	Ouroboros,	the	snake	that	bites	its
own	tail.	The	Pelican,	too,	is	a	tail-eater:	the	lower	end	is	consumed	by	the	upper	end,	the	head,	but	the
process	does	not	stop	there	with	mental	reflection.	The	head	sends	its	product	down	again	into	the
body,	repeatedly.	A	continuing	circulation	ensues.	What	arises	to	the	head	does	not	escape.	As	the
substance	melts,	steams,	sending	vapors	upward,	cloudy	ideas	form,	pressures	increase,	lighter,
uplifting	feelings	swirl.	But	these	inspirations	and	hot	ideas	are	re-processed	down	as	too	unripe,	too
soft-boiled,	too	unreal.	Rather,	they	are	fed	back	into	the	vessel	as	further	nourishment.	It	is	the	opus
that	must	be	fed,	continued	at	all	costs.
Repetition.	Iteratio,	they	called	it.	“But	I’ve	been	here	before;	“I’ve	done	this	already.”	The	same
again	and	again.
The	Pelican	embodies	sacrifice;	it	is	a	sacrificial	vessel.	It	is	the	instrument	of	ritual.	An	essence	of
ritual	is	the	complaint:	“Yet	again.”	Iteratio,	circulatio,	biting	your	own	tail,	eating	your	own	body
that	feeds	your	own	body.	The	process	is	closed	into	itself,	lives	on	itself,	feeds	off	its	own	images,
including	the	images	of	emerging	product,	of	goals,	of	futures.	The	sacrifice	of	non-arrival.	Getting
nowhere,	utopia	as	goal.
Hence	the	term	“Pelican,”	since	that	bird,	according	to	lore,	drove	its	bill	into	its	own	breast	to
draw	the	blood	that	fed	its	young.	Christ	was	this	pelican,	nurturing	his	faithful	with	his	own	lifeblood.	The	pelican	is	thus	a	wounding,	a	repetitive	ritual,	a	sacrifice,	and	a	humiliation	all	at	once.
And,	a	necessary	instrument	for	feeding	the	opus	from	within	itself.
What	arises	during	the	work	belongs	to	the	work,	not	to	the	world.	Before	the	vessel	may	be
opened,	its	contents	must	be	thoroughly	psychologized,	refined,	sophisticated;	its	concretizations
vaporized.	Maintain	the	heat;	stopper	the	vessel;	find	pleasure	in	repetition.	The	soul	is	being
nourished	by	its	wound.
Yet	more	subtle:	the	Double	Pelican.	The	depictions	show	two	pelicans	interlinked,	side	by	side	or
face	to	face.	What	emerges	from	the	body	of	the	vessel	on	the	left	flows	through	its	neck	into	the
body	of	the	vessel	on	the	right,	and	vice	versa,	i.e.,	the	cooking	contents	in	the	vessel	on	the	right
flows	through	its	long	curved	neck	downward	into	the	body	of	the	vessel	on	the	left.	Exchange	of
reveries,	like	lovers	interlocked,	joined	by	mutual	imaginings.	A	model	of	co-generation,	partnering,
intimate	kinship.	Yab / Yum.	Native	Americans	in	some	locales	smoked	their	tobacco	in	similar	ritual
pairings.	By	means	of	a	tube	in	my	nose,	I	inhale	your	exhalations,	and	in	reverse:	as	I	blow	my
smoke	out,	you	breathe	it	in.	Cross-fertilization	of	spirits.
The	soul	requires	psychic	material.	The	residues	of	the	daily	world,	Tagesreste	as	Freud	called
them,	may	fill	the	vessel	but	do	not	feed	it.	Information	and	influences	only	nourish	after	they	are
mulled	and	brewed	a	while.	Think	of	the	soul	as	a	cow	with	several	stomachs;	reflection	as
regurgitation.	Pepsis	was	one	of	the	terms	used	for	what	went	on	in	the	vessel:	pepsis,	Greek	for
digestion;	transubstantiation	of	the	raw	into	the	cooked.	Turning	the	events	of	the	day	into
experiences,	which	is	one	definition	of	soul-making.	Alchemists	warn	against	undigested	material	–
extraneous	comparisons,	borrowed	interpretations,	theories	and	explanations.	They	say	“read,”	and
yet	they	say,	“nothing	found	in	books	is	of	any	use.”	All	that	is	needed	is	already	given,	providing	it
be	properly	cooked.
The	Pelican	offers	an	image	for	the	wounding	that	the	work	causes.	We	feel	the	cost	in	blood.
“Things	must	be	cooked	in	their	own	blood,”	is	an	oft-repeated	admonition.	We	feel	the	draining	in
the	body	for	what	might	come	later	but	is	now	entirely	unknown,	the	Pelican’s	offspring,	children	of
the	imagination,	for	“Imagination	bodies	forth	/	The	form	of	things	unknown.” [38]	The	Pelican:
vessel	of	psychological	faith,	a	phrase	used	by	a	keen	student	of	alchemy,	Robert	Grinnell, [39]	for	an
attitude	or	a	devotion	that	calls	for	nothing	less	than	giving	in,	giving	over	to	the	opus	all	personal

demands	one	has	upon	it,	for	its	sake,	come	what	may.
The	Void	in	the	Vessel
Each	vessel	has	its	particular	shape.	Inside	is	emptiness.	Each	vessel	is	shaped	around	this	emptiness.
Because	our	Western	culture	declared	“Nature	abhors	a	vacuum,”	we	abhor	emptiness.	(“Empty”
from	Old	English	meaning	“at	leisure,	unoccupied,”	that	is,	not	working,	unfunctional.)	For	us,	the
void	in	the	vessel	is	just	that:	empty.	We	regard	vessels	from	the	outside,	admiring	the	glaze	on	the
pot,	the	cut	of	crystal,	the	weave	of	a	basket,	and	handle	of	a	jug.	When	valuing	the	inside,	then	by
measure	only:	how	much	does	it	hold?	A	pint,	a	quart,	a	bushel?
In	Buddhism,	the	void	is	less	a	vacuum	than	a	positive	force. [40]	The	inside	shapes	around	itself
the	outer	visible	form.	The	“stillness”	of	the	Chinese	jar	(T. S.	Eliot) [41]	begins	inside;	the	exquisite
shape	we	see	is	the	stillness	emanating	from	the	void.	Always	this	specific	void	inhabits	this	specific
shape.
Culture	affects	the	shape	of	vessels	and	therefore	they	reveal	mysterious	qualities	of	a	culture	that
its	other	arts	and	written	texts	might	not	as	well	express.	Strange	shapes,	perfected	forms	of	different
Chinese	dynasties,	Greek	pots,	Etruscan,	Phoenician,	French	Roccoco,	Picasso’s	ceramics,	Morandi’s
clusters	of	quiet	bottles.	Barrels	and	casks,	pitchers	and	jugs.	The	long-neck	beer	bottle,	the	old	Coke
bottle,	the	milk	bottle	with	the	bulge	for	yellow	cream.	The	Roman	futile	that	could	only	tip	over,	the
goat	skin	of	wine,	the	metal	canteen	shaped	differently	for	each	nation’s	army.	Vessels	expose	the
invisible	Zeitgeist,	the	visible	formed	by	the	invisible.
Western	phrenology	and	Romantic	medicine	expressed	a	similar	idea,	attributing	the	contours	and
crevices	in	the	human	skull	to	the	force	of	the	brain,	and	within	that	organ,	the	power	of	mind	or	soul.
Phrenologists	penetrated	to	the	“inner	nature”	of	a	person	by	studying	and	measuring	the	palpable
bumps	of	the	skull.	They	claimed	to	read	a	person’s	gifts	and	deficiencies,	the	very	inmost	character,
from	the	hills	and	valleys	of	cranial	topography.
These	ways	–	Oriental	and	Romantic	–	of	considering	inner	emptiness	suggest	that	each	emptiness
has	its	individual	shape	and	is	contained	in	a	quite	particular	manner.	Your	void	is	not	my	void,	and
hers	is	different	again.	The	way	a	person	holds	his	or	her	lacunae	is	already	a	revelation	of	what	is
being	held.	General	terms,	simplistic	diagnostics	–	abandonment,	need,	identity	crisis,	low	selfesteem,	depressive	mood,	dependency,	masochistic	helplessness	–	cannot	adequately	describe,	let
alone	understand,	the	force	of	the	void.
Because	our	collective	Western	natures	abhor	a	vacuum,	we	reach	out	to	fill	the	emptiness	with
anything,	everything	from	junk	food	to	junk	self-help,	from	drink	and	shopping	and	the	novelty	of
games	and	gadgets	to	the	commiseration	of	soul-mates,	or	simply	endless	tears.	Alchemy,	however,
suggests	these	feelings	of	emptiness	are	indications	of	a	vessel	forming.	The	void	is	building	a	shape,
a	particular	shape.	Perhaps	several	vessels.	Modes	of	containing.	Modes	of	measuring.	Modes	of
differentiating.	The	reality	of	the	psyche	is	forcing	its	way	into	life	and	reshaping	one’s	life	by	means
of	the	feelings	of	emptiness.
Sometimes	the	void	can	be	located	physically.	Right	here,	in	my	belly;	just	behind	my	heart	I	feel
light-headed,	dizzy.	Sometimes	it	appears	in	a	dream	as	falling	through	space,	a	pothole,	a	dark	cave,
a	huge	vacant	lobby,	an	egg-shaped	object.
So	long	as	we	do	not	attribute	formative	power	to	the	hidden	inside	of	the	vessel,	we	will	continue
to	read	its	function	in	one	direction	only.	The	pitcher	holds	water,	the	vase	holds	flowers,	the	basket,
fruit.	The	void	inside	is	merely	a	receptacle;	the	water,	the	flowers,	the	fruit	are	what	count.
A	reverse	reading	says	the	jug	is	moistening,	the	vase	flowering,	the	basket	fruiting.	The	master
painters	in	Holland	and	in	nineteenth-century	France	showed	the	poppies	and	irises	and	roses,	the

pears	and	apples	and	grapes	emerging	from	the	hollowness	of	their	containers,	the	void	as	source	of
beauty.	If	you	examine	the	vases	holding	the	flowers,	the	baskets	and	plates	on	which	the	fruit	lies,
these	vessels	are	each	manifestations	of	particularized	shapes,	colors	and	textures,	and	they	are
inherent	to	what	they	display.	“If	God	had	not	given	us	a	vessel	/	His	other	gifts	would	have	been	of
no	avail.”
V.	OVENS	AND	STOVES
Vessels	contain	the	substance,	but	the	fire	itself	must	be	contained.	The	heat	that	charges	through	the
work	and	makes	alchemy	possible	requires	a	container	equal	to	its	burning	force.	Desire	needs
direction.	Clay	cracks,	glass	breaks,	wood	burns,	metal	melts.	What	vessel	can	hold	the	opus	maior?
The	methods	implied	by	the	vessels	–	clay’s	earthiness,	the	reflection	and	lucidity	of	glass,	the
materialistic	naturalism	of	wood,	and	the	disciplined	hardness	of	metal	–	each	fall	victim	to	the	great
heat.	The	soul	madly	burns	for	“gold,”	how	else	account	for	the	insanity	of	alchemy,	the	folly,	the
miserable	privations	and	persecutions	and	the	exalted	ambition	of	those	who	pursued	it	to	their	deaths.
The	elixir	that	would	cure	all	ills,	grant	longevity	and	immortality	of	soul	as	well	as	fame,	fortune,
and	the	company	of	kings	–	these	were	the	visions	of	alchemical	desire.	So	excessive,	so	extreme	that
they	could	only	come	from	the	Gods.	Such	was	the	imagination	of	Zosimos	who	retells	a	Jewish	tale
(Genesis 6: 1–4)	as	if	alchemy’s	origins:
Angels	were	taken	by	passion	for	women.	They	descended	to	earth	and	taught	them	all	operations	of	nature	…	They	were	the
ones	who	composed	chemical	works	…	Their	book	is	called	Khema	and	it	is	from	them	that	chemistry	[kumia]	received	its
name. [42]

Alchemy	starts	in	desire;	desire	needs	direction.	Ethical	suppression	cannot	master	desire.	The
essence	of	fire	is	out	of	our	control.	It	comes	from	the	celestial	region,	from	angels,	from	the	gods
and	the	earth’s	burning	bowels.	Hence	the	shamanistic	aspect	of	the	smith	as	fire	master,	and	the	crime
of	Prometheus’s	humanism.
Furnus,	the	furnace	as	response	to	fire.	The	Furnus	takes	responsibility	for	the	fire.	Equal	to	the
forces	of	fire	must	be	the	rigor	and	fantasy	of	the	stove.	It	must	be	able	to	govern	fire’s	wild
combustibility,	and	a	Chinese	text	refers	to	the	“sacrifice	to	the	stove	(tsao)	and	you	will	be	able	to
summon	‘things’	(i.e.,	spirits).” [43]	Furnus:	a	logic	of	strong,	well-built,	carefully	joined,	enduring
system.	Ground	rules,	bricks	and	mortar	of	the	trade,	iron-clad	discipline	of	the	church	or	school	or
society	which	keeps	the	living	spirit	in	focus,	concentrated,	and	able	to	withstand	the	blaze	of
inspiration,	the	flashes	and	sparks	of	passion	that	would	ignite	grass	fires	and	scatter	the	intensity.
Direction,	aim,	purpose,	concentration,	focus.	Focus,	Latin	for	hearth.	The	fire-resistant	stove	is
ruled	by	its	own	governing	principle:	to	resist	the	fire.	Rules	are	made	to	keep	the	fire	in	bounds.	A
stove	is	constructed;	it	is	a	construct,	a	conceptual	system.	Its	design	has	designs	on	the	fire,
designating	its	direction	and	quality.
Assay	furnaces,	cupelling	furnaces,	silver-refining	hearths,	iron-smelting	furnaces,	glass-melting
furnaces,	furnaces	for	smelting	lead	or	tin	and	for	separating	silver	from	copper,	and	hearths	for	the
production	of	mercury	and	resin. [44]	Back-burners	and	front-burners,	multiple	vents,	multiple	heats,
hideaway	ovens,	warmers,	hot	grills	of	orange	coals.	Some	alchemical	stoves	had	more	than	forty
different	cooking	places.	Multiple	heats	for	multiple	materials	and	concomitant	multiple	operations.
The	stove:	the	discipline	of	multiplicity.	Knowing	where	each	thing	best	belongs;	a	place	for	every
operation	and	each	thing	in	its	place.	Placing	as	the	art	of	cooking.
Again,	Maria	the	Jewess	is	considered,	by	Zosimos	at	least,	to	be	the	source	for	the	early
description	of	furnace	construction,	which	would	logically	necessarily	follow	from	her	invention	of

the	bain	marie. [45]
Kinds	of	cooking,	multiple	operations:	evaporation	in	a	flat	pan	lets	the	steam	dissipate;	distillation
achieves	from	a	messy	mass	a	few	drops	of	clarity;	sublimation	brings	a	material	upward	from	the
sedimentation	at	the	bottom	of	the	vessel;	congelation	allows	matters	to	cool	down	and	solidify	into	a
definite	shape;	fermentation	encourages	the	stuff	to	enrichen	from	within	its	own	obscurity.
Multiple	operations,	multiple	stoves. [46]	Ascending	furnace	drives	the	heat	upward;	descending
furnace	drives	the	heat	downward;	sand	furnace	surrounds	the	vessel	in	ashes,	the	warmth	coming
from	yesterday’s	fires:	soft,	gray,	dry,	burnt	out,	yet	still	giving	off	warmth;	reverberating	furnace	in
which	the	heat	bounces	off	the	interior	walls,	cooking	by	echo,	repetitions	that	build	intensity;
blasting	furnace	increases	the	flame	by	means	of	a	current	of	air	for	liquefying	and	melting	minerals;
bladder	furnace	suspends	material	in	a	bladder	with	its	mouth	protruding	outside	the	oven.	These	are
but	some	described	in	technical	works	on	ovens	and	condensed	in	Ruland’s	Dictionary,	entry	on
“Furnus.”
“Olde	Men	imagined	for	this	Art	/	A	special	Furnace	for	every	part.” [47]	Norton	invented	his	own
furnace	“unknown	to	the	Ancients.”	“I	set	it	up	…	at	a	very	considerable	outlay	…	It	is	so	constructed
that	sixty	different	chemical	operations,	for	which	diverse	kinds	of	heat	are	required,	may	be	carried
on	in	it	at	the	same	time,	and	a	very	small	fire	…	supplies	a	sufficient	degree	of	heat	for	all	these
processes.” [48]	He	goes	on	to	describe	other	stoves	he	is	perfecting,	their	ingenuity,	their	economy
of	fire	(fuel),	their	multiple	service,	their	capacity	for	regulating	degrees	of	burning	intensity	–	and
which	furnace	types	are	best	for	which	particular	operations,	e.g.,	purging	and	drying	for	exaltation.
If	the	stove	disciplines	the	fire	and	directs	the	heat,	it	embodies	rules	and	cautions	that	alchemists
love	to	pronounce.	Hardly	a	text	can	be	found	that	does	not	find	fault	with	other	texts	and	the	errors	in
their	procedures,	or	succumb	to	giving	warnings,	advice,	and	moral	admonitions.
Norton’s	treatise	insists	upon	five	“rules	or	concords”:
The	first	rule	to	be	observed	is	that	the	student’s	mind	should	be	in	perfect	harmony	with	work.	The	desire	of	knowing	this	Art
should	hold	a	dominant	place	in	his	mind;	else	all	his	labors	will	come	to	nothing.	The	second	concord	is	that	he	should	know	the
difference	between	this	Art	and	those	who	profess	it.	The	third	kind	of	harmony	is	that	which	should	exist	between	the	work	and	the
instruments.	The	fourth	concord	assigns	to	the	work	the	place	which	is	most	suited	to	its	execution.	The	fifth	concord	is	the
sympathy	which	should	exist	between	your	work	and	the	celestial	sphere. [49]

Were	we	to	imagine	that	rules	for	the	alchemical	opus	are	equally	valid	for	psychoanalytic	work,	then
these	five	rules	could	be	restated	in	contemporary	terms:	(1)	Knowledge	of	the	psyche	in	all	its
vicissitudes,	rather	than	of	oneself	or	of	the	patient,	should	hold	a	dominant	place	in	the	practitioner ’s
mind;	(2)	The	value	of	psychological	work	is	not	measured	eo	ipso	by	the	examples	of	those	who
practice	the	profession	of	psychology;	(3)	Since	concepts	are	instruments	of	psychological	practice,
they	must	harmoniously	further	the	intentions	of	the	work;	(4)	Your	place	of	practice	shall	suit	your
style	of	practice	and	its	aim;	(5)	Practice	expresses	a	cosmology.	There	should	be	a	harmony	between
cosmos	and	clinic,	between	your	broadest	view	of	the	world’s	ultimate	order	and	the	intimate	work
with	the	suffering	of	souls.
VI.	THE	SPIRIT	OF	FIRE
More	rudimentary	than	the	tools,	stuffs,	and	procedures	used	by	alchemy	is	the	fire	upon	which	all
depends	–	the	element	with	which	this	chapter	began	and	now	ends.	Fire	is	the	first	principle,	the	root
metaphor.	As	the	work	is	governed	by	fire,	dependent	on	fire,	so	is	alchemical	thinking	about	the
work.	Consequently,	the	characteristics	of	fire	archetypally	propel	alchemical	reflection	in	a	specific
direction. [50]
Thinking	requires	language.	The	idea	that	fire	transforms	matter	is	not	only	an	empirical	idea

witnessed	when	a	flame	burns	a	wood	chip	to	a	black	cinder.	That	transformation	was	already	implied
by	the	Greek	term	for	matter,	hyle	(wood,	timber),	which	later	accreted	more	abstract	meanings	of
Aristotelian	potentiality	(able	to	be	transformed)	and	Christian	fallenness	(able	to	be	redeemed).	As
wood	submits	to	fire,	so	material	nature	submits	to	spirit	by	which	it	is	purged,	transformed	and
raised.
Any	worker	in	fire	can	easily	perceive	fire’s	primary	characteristics.	It	rises.	Its	heat	overpowers
and	changes	materials.	It	gives	off	light.	It	cannot	be	touched	directly.	It	cannot	be	satiated.	Ascension,
transmutation,	enlightenment,	intangibility,	insatiability:	these	five	ideas	empirically	witnessed	in	the
laboratory	affect	the	formulations	of	alchemical	texts	and	later	commentators	on	these	texts.	In	brief,
fire	gives	alchemy	its	spiritual	readings.
Ascension:	In	the	fire	of	the	work,	or	on	fire	with	their	work,	alchemists	are	subject	to	fire’s
defiance	of	gravity,	and	they	imagine	their	work	pointing	upward	in	accord	with	the	flames	and	the
heat	they	are	attempting	to	control.	From	lower	to	higher;	from	inert	to	active;	heavy	to	light;	small,
aimless	and	smoldering	to	intense	and	leaping.	A	ladder	of	values	and	stages	of	progress:
imperfection	to	perfection;	disease	to	health;	particular	to	universal;	mortal	to	immortal	–	medicina
cattolica,	panacea,	resurrection,	diamond	body,	gold,	saved	from	hell-fire	by	divine	fire,	the
salamander	who	survives	fire,	the	phoenix	rising	from	the	ashes.
Transmutation:	An	inner	fire	is	at	work	all	through	nature	lifting	it	in	stages	from	impure	to	pure.
Witness	the	accomplished	transmutations	in	particular	pockets	of	rock:	crystals,	precious	jewels,
nuggets	of	gold.	Evolution	is	built	into	the	mineral	body	of	the	earth.	Though	fire	may	calcinate	a
substance	to	powdery	ash,	blacken	it	to	“death,”	nonetheless,	downward	and	disintegrative	effects	are
appropriated	by	the	overall	model	of	improvement.	Light	at	the	end	of	the	tunnel;	darkest	before
dawn;	Gethsemane	and	Golgotha	before	the	Resurrection.	Whatever	fire	touches	it	alters:	All	things
are	subject	to	its	transformative	omnipotence.	Even	water	evaporates,	rock	melts	to	lava,	and	the
strongest	iron	bends	to	its	will.	The	flame	of	the	spirit	overcomes	all	material	resistance.
Enlightenment:	Fire	lights	up	the	dark.	By	means	of	it	we	can	see	in	the	dark,	advance	into	the	dark,
hold	back	the	night.	Yet,	this	same	fire	sharpens	and	deepens	the	dark.	Standing	close	by	its	light,	near
into	the	fire	(lamplight,	candle	flame,	camp-fire),	the	corners	and	shadows	of	the	farther	perimeter
become	pitch,	impenetrable.	The	more	light,	the	more	darkness,	requiring	ever	brighter	enlightening.
Light	and	dark,	contraries	defining	each	other;	eventually,	opposites	warring	each	other.
Enlightenment,	a	via	longissima	because	unconsciousness	increases	in	proportion	to	illumination.
Resolution	of	the	paradox?	An	epiphanic	illumination,	only	an	apocalyptic	fire	of	spiritual	awakening
evacuates	darkness	itself:	“Death	and	Hades	cast	into	a	lake	of	fire”	(Revelations 20: 14];	“O	Death
where	is	thy	victory?”	(1	Corinthians 15: 55).
Intangibility:	Because	fire	cannot	be	touched	directly,	it	must	be	grasped	indirectly,	by	hints,
paradoxes,	analogies,	allegories,	cryptic	ciphers	and	arcane	symbols.	Gnostics,	Rosicrucians,
Kabbalists.	The	“black	art”	of	hidden	knowledge.	Anything	usually	perceptible	to	the	common	eye	is
not	the	alchemical	gold;	all	things,	the	mind	itself,	must	be	initiated,	sophisticated.	Only	an	elite,
initiates	of	the	occult,	a	priestly	caste,	reclusive	and	disciplined,	having	suffered	long	in	the	mystery,
done	their	mortifications	and	their	praying,	can	work	the	fire.
Insatiability:	When	Thomas	Norton	describes	the	qualities	required	by	an	alchemist’s	servants,	his
job	description	could	as	well	cover	a	nursemaid.	Caring	for	the	fire	in	many	indigenous	cultures
belongs	among	the	tasks	of	women	and	the	old.	Like	a	baby,	fire	wants	only	to	grow	and	its	appetite	is
insatiable.	It	must	have	regular	feedings,	enough	air,	and	nothing	indigestible	–	wet	straw,	rotted
wood,	dirt-covered	roots,	clumped	dung.	As	it	grows	it	seeks	to	leap	out	of	the	cradle,	go	off	on	its
own,	and	spread	its	sparks.	Alchemy‘s	insatiability	is	sometimes	disguised,	sometimes	blatant.
Insatiable,	the	expansion	of	terms,	differentiation	of	stuffs,	kinds	of	vessels.	Insatiable,	the	appetite	for

learning:	“One	book	opens	another.”	Insatiable,	the	desire	for	the	golden	goal.	Even	the	last	stages	of
the	opus	major	are	limitless:	exaltatio,	multiplicatio,	rotatio.	And	alchemy	does	not	let	itself	be
reduced	to	simple	formulae	and	normative	rules,	as	if,	because	of	the	fire,	alchemy	cannot	come	to	a
cohesive	system	required	by	its	own	operations	of	coagulation	and	conjunction.	Like	the	spirit,	it
goes	where	it	wants,	follows	its	impulse.	Like	the	spirit,	fire	is	on	a	mission,	to	ignite	fires	ever
further	afield,	converting	the	day	into	combustibles	to	fatten	its	own	flames.
These	five	leading	ideas	so	apparent	to	any	“worker	in	fire”	together	support	an	alchemical
metaphysics.	The	archetypal	ascending	impulse	within	fire	gives	alchemy	its	spiritual	vision,
translating	its	images	and	insights	into	messages	for	the	upward	path.	The	Christianism	of	alchemy’s
main	authors	derives	not	only	from	their	historical	context:	that	they	were	writing	in	a	strongly
Christian	era.	Their	redemptive	metaphysics	is	determined	even	more	by	their	archetypal	context:	the
spiritual	ascensionism	of	elemental	fire.
A	passage	from	Aristotle	can	save	alchemical	psychology	from	this	archetypal	determinism	and
the	spiritual	reading	of	alchemy.	Aristotle	writes:
For	the	growth	of	fire	is	unlimited	while	there	is	something	to	be	burnt,	but	in	all	things	which	are	naturally	constituted	there	is	a
limit	and	a	proportion	both	for	size	and	for	growth;	and	these	belong	to	soul,	but	not	to	fire,	and	to	principle	rather	than	matter. [51]

Since	soul	recognizes	itself	in	its	images	and	since	the	making	of	images	(poeisis)	is	soul’s	primary
natural	activity, [52]	“the	definite	principle”	that	governs	the	“increase	of	fire”	are	images.	They	are
the	essential	rudiments	of	the	entire	work.	They	are	what	the	alchemist	sees	and	smells	and	touches
with	his	hands	–	and	what	he	imagines.	Focus	on	them	limits	the	infinite	metaphysical	speculation
(“the	increase	of	fire”)	to	just	what	is	just	now.	Alchemical	descriptions	in	language	and	pictures	are
coagulations	serving	to	condense	the	volatility	of	the	engaged	psyche	into	actual	presentations.
Alchemy:	a	study	of	presentations	as	these	appearances	portray,	define,	and	affect	the	soul.
Consequently,	alchemy’s	insatiable	spiritual	drive,	its	“fire,”	requires	psychological	limitations,	an
alchemy	of	soul	such	as	this	rudimentary	chapter	and	the	book	as	a	whole	intend.
Previously	unpublished.
1 G.	Bachelard,	The	Psychoanalysis	of	Fire,	trans.	C. M .	Ross	(Boston:	Beacon	Press,	1964).
2 “Both	the	metallic	body	and	the	alchemist	suffer	and	feel	joy	in	the	process.	Not	only	do	the	substances	mate	in	the	alembic,	the
alchemist	also	at	the	same	time	mates	with	nature.”	J.	Lindsay,	Origins	of	Alchemy	in	Graeco-Roman	Egypt	(London:	Frederick	Muller,
1970),	294.
3 CW	12: 6 1n;	CW	5: 3 09–19.
4 Michael	Maier	(1617),	quoted	by	J.	Read,	From	Alchemy	to	Chemistry	(Mineola,	N.Y.:	Dover	Publications,	1995),	37.
5 J. D.	Mylius,	Philosophia	Reformata	(1622),	quoted	by	J.	Read,	Prelude	to	Chemistry:	An	Outline	of	Alchemy	(Cambridge,	Mass.:
MIT	Press,	1966),	264.
6 “The	fire	must	be	light,	mild,	and	moist,	like	that	of	a	hen	brooding	over	her	eggs.”	Lexicon,	s.v.	“Great	Secret	of	Aristeus.”
7 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Ignis	Leonis.”	Norton	describes	fourteen	increasingly	hot	qualities	of	heat	(“The	Chemical	Treatise	of	Thomas	Norton,”
in	HM	2).
8 J.	Cocteau,	The	Difficulty	of	Being	(New	York:	Coward-McCann,	Inc,	1967),	32.
9 T. S.	Eliot,	“Four	Quartets:	Little	Gidding,”	in	The	Complete	Poems	and	Plays,	1909–1950	(New	York:	Harcourt	Brace	&	Company,
1952),	139.

10 T. S.	Eliot,	“The	Waste	Land,”	in	ibid.,	37.
11 Collection	des	ancien	alchimistes	grecs,	ed.	M.	Berthelot,	vol.	2:	Les	Œuvres	des	Zosime	(Paris:	Georg	Steinheil,	1888),	III.lvi.
12 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Ignis.”
13 Ibid.,	s.v.	“Ignis	Extinctus.	”
14 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Combustio.”
15 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Calx.”
16 E. J.	Holmyard,	Alchemy	(Harmondsworth:	Penguin	Books,	1957),	45.
17 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Ignis	Persicus.”
18 Figulus,	267–68.
19 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	“In:	Hestia’s	Preposition,”	in	Mythic	Figures,	UE	6.
20 R. B.	Onians,	The	Origins	of	European	Thought:	About	the	Body,	the	Mind,	the	Soul,	the	World,	Time,	and	Fate	(Cambridge	Univ.
Press,	1951),	288	and	258 n5.
21 John	Pordage	(1607–81),	in	CW	16: 5 07.
22 Plato,	Symposium,	197a,	Protagoras,	321e.
23 CW	12: 4 51.
24 Augustine,	The	City	of	God,	XXI.4.
25 Bonus,	115–16.
26 Aurora	Consurgens:	A	Document	Attributed	to	Thomas	Aquinas	on	the	Problem	of	Opposites	in	Alchemy,	ed.	M.-L.	von	Franz
(Toronto:	Inner	City	Book,	2000),	290.
27 It	is	estimated	that	as	much	as	one	hundred	million	tons	of	charcoal	are	still	being	produced	annually.	S.	Perkins,	“Charcoal	warms
the	whole	world,”	Science	Review 160	(2001),	383.
28 Read,	From	Alchemy	to	Chemistry,	79.
29 Alchemy	ignores	the	modern	distinction	between	organic	and	inorganic	chemistry.	See,	for	instance,	the	major	and	original	work	of
Angelo	Sala	(1576–1637)	on	(organic)	sugar	and	(inorganic)	salt.	Both	substances	embodied	similar	Paracelsian	principles:	the
combustible	(sulfur),	the	fluid	(mercury),	and	the	heat-resistant	(salt).	For	Paracelsians,	and	alchemists	on	the	whole,	metals	and	their
ores	“grew”	in	Mother	Earth	like	plants.	Z. E.	Gelman,	“Angelo	Sala:	An	Iatrochemist	of	the	Late	Renaissance,”	Ambix 41,	no.	3	(1994),
146–60.
30 CW	9.2: 2 44n.
31 Ethica,	part	III,	prop.	VII.	B.	de	Spinoza,	Opera,	ed.	J.	Van	Vloten	and	J. P. N .	Land	(The	Hague:	Martinus	Nijhoff,	1914),	vol.	2.
32 The	Secret	Heart	(1946),	a	film	directed	by	Robert	Z.	Leonhard,	starring	Claudette	Colbert,	Walter	Pidgeon,	and	Lionel
Barrymore,	opens	with	the	following	written	prologue:	“There	are	three	things	you	cannot	hide:	Love	–	smoke	–	and	a	man	riding	on	a
camel	–	an	old	Arabian	proverb.”
33 CW	14: 7 31–32;	13: 113–18.
34 The	maxim	is	attributed	to	Albertus	Magnus	and	quoted	in	“The	Chemical	Treatise	of	Thomas	Norton,”	HM	2: 6 2.	Norton	adds	to
Albertus	“and	that	vessel	is	glass.”	“Moreover,	the	size	and	shape	of	your	vessel	should	be	in	proportion	to	the	quantity	of	your
substance,	and	to	all	other	conditions	of	the	experiment.”

35 Philalethes,	“An	Open	Entrance,”	in	HM	2: 1 82.
36 CW	12,	fig.	72.
37 R.	Patai,	The	Jewish	Alchemists	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1994),	chap.	5:	“Maria	the	Jewess.”
38 W.	Shakespeare,	A	Midsummer-Nights’	Dream,	5.1.
39 R.	Grinnell,	“Reflections	on	the	Archetype	of	Consciousness:	Personality	and	Psychological	Faith,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of
Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought	(1970),	15–39.
40 E. C.	Eoyang,	“	‘Vacuity,’	‘Vapor,’	and	‘Vanity’:	Some	Perspectives	on	the	Void,”	Tamkang	Review 16,	no.	1	(1985),	51–65.
41 T. S.	Eliot,	“Four	Quartets:	Burnt	Norton,”	in	The	Complete	Poems	and	Plays,	121:	“	The	stillness,	as	a	Chinese	jar	still	/	Moves
perpetually	in	its	stillness.”
42 Patai,	The	Jewish	Alchemists,	56.
43 A.	Waley,	“Notes	on	Chinese	Alchemy,”	Bulletin	of	the	School	of	Oriental	Studies,	London	Institution,	VI:	1	[1930],	2.
44 B.	Meitzner,	Die	Gerätschaft	der	chymischen	Kunst:	Der	Traktat	“De	Sceuastica	Artis”	des	Andreas	Libavius	von	1606	(Stuttgart:
Franz	Steiner	Verlag,	1995).
45 Patai,	The	Jewish	Alchemists,	90.
46 Cf.	C. R.	Hill,	“The	Inconography	of	the	Laboratory,”	Ambix 22	(1975),	101–10,	with	numerous	illustrations.
47 Holmyard,	Alchemy,	193.
48 “The	Chemical	Treatise	of	Thomas	Norton,”	HM	2: 6 2.
49 Ibid.,	59–60.
50 The	paradigmatic	figure	for	this	direction	is	the	Belgian	chemist	and	physician	Jan	Baptista	van	Helmont	who	regarded	himself	as	a
philosophus	per	ignem,	a	philosopher	by	fire.	This	mystical,	yet	empirical,	thinker	held	that	God	communicates	“by	means	of	fire	–	the
penultimate	chemical	means	of	inquiry.	Fire	is	a	concentration	of	light,	and	in	its	destructive	power	…	it	is	a	divine	creation.”	B.	Heinecke,
“The	Mysticism	and	Science	of	Johannes	Baptista	van	Helmont	(1579–1644),”	Ambix 42,	no.	2	(1995),	72.
51 Aristotle,	De	Anima:	Books	II	and	III	(with	passages	from	Book	I),	trans.	D. W.	Hamlyn	(Oxford	Univ.	Press,	2002),	19	(416a).
52 CW	13: 7 5;	11: 8 89,	769;	8: 6 18.	Cf.	J.	Hillman,	Re-Visioning	Psychology	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1975),	xvii:	“[Jung]
considered	the	fantasy	images	that	run	through	our	daydreams	and	night	dreams,	and	which	are	present	unconsciously	in	all	our
consciousness	to	be	the	primary	data	of	the	psyche.	Everything	we	know	and	feel	and	every	statement	we	make	…	derive	from	psychic
images.”

	

3
The	Suffering	of	Salt
	
Toward	a	Substantial	Psychology
Alchemical	salt,	like	any	other	alchemical	substance,	is	a	metaphoric	or	“philosophic”	salt.	We	are
warned	in	various	alchemical	texts	not	to	assume	that	this	mineral	is	“common”	salt,	our	table	salt	or
sodium	chloride.	Yet,	as	we	shall	see,	this	alchemical	salt	is	indeed	common	to	us	all	–	and	not	only	as
the	physiological	content	necessary	to	our	blood	and	fluids. [1]	It	may	well	be	that	the	epithet
“common,”	which	is	curiously	attached	only	to	salt	of	all	our	everyday	comestibles,	reveals	that	salt
is	the	substrate	of	what	is	meant	by	“commonly	human,”	so	that	salt	is	the	archetypal	principle	of	both
the	sense	of	the	common	and	common	sense.	Already	you	can	see	how	we	shall	be	working	in	this
chapter:	we	shall	be	activating	the	image	of	salt	(1)	as	a	psychological	substance,	which	appears	in
alchemy	as	the	word	sal;	(2)	as	an	operation,	which	yields	a	residue;	(3)	as	any	of	many	physical
substances	generically	called	“salts”;	and	(4)	as	a	property	of	other	substances.
The	word	sal	in	alchemical	texts,	especially	since	Paracelsus,	often	indicates	the	stable	basis	of	life,
its	earth,	ground,	body.	However,	the	term	also	more	particularly	refers	to	alums,	alkalis,
crystallizations,	bases,	ashes,	sal	ammoniac,	potash,	as	well	as	to	the	sense	qualities	equivalent	to
these	materials:	bitterness,	astringency,	pungency,	mordancy,	desiccation,	and	crustiness,	dry	stings
and	smarts,	sharpness	and	pointedness.
These	qualities	of	human	life	belong	to	the	very	substance	of	character.	Indeed,	bitter	and	mordant
qualities	are	not	only	as	common	and	basic	as	salt,	but	they	are	as	essential	to	the	embodiment	of	our
psychic	nature	as	is	salt	in	our	physical	bodies.	Our	stinging,	astringent,	dried-out	moments	are	not
contingent	and	accidental;	they	are	of	our	substance	and	essence.
This	psychological	approach	to	salt	has	two	major	predecessors:	Ernest	Jones’s	“The	Symbolic
Significance	of	Salt	in	Folklore	and	Superstition”	(Imago 1	[1912]) [2]	and	C. G	Jung’s	richly
condensed	chapter	in	Mysterium	Coniunctionis	(CW	14: 234–348). [3]	The	main	differences	between
their	approaches	and	mine	lie	in	our	different	aims.	Where	they	examine	salt	in	a	scholarly	manner	in
order	to	gain	an	objective	meaning	of	this	alchemical	substance,	I	am	attempting	to	bring	over	to	the
reader	its	substantiality	as	a	commonly	recognizable	experience.	Where	Jung	does	a	metapsychology
of	alchemy,	I	am	trying	to	do	an	alchemical	psychologizing.	Hence	his	chapter	on	salt,	and	Jones’s
mainly	anthropological	amplification,	are	indispensable	backgrounds,	even	though	they	offer	less
experiential	closeness	to	the	material.	I	intend	that	my	speaking	about	salt	will	bear	traces	of	salt	with
it.
Our	model	is	the	microcosm/macrocosm	and	the	doctrine	of	correspondences	between	them.	A
man	or	a	woman	is	a	smaller	arrangement	(kosmos)	which	all	things	in	nature	are	proportionately
represented.	Not	only	is	the	macrocosmic	world	personified	and	alive	with	subjective	qualities	that	we
nowadays	allow	only	to	human	beings,	but	the	microcosm	of	the	human	being,	because	it	is	a
microcosm	of	nature,	is	also	a	mineral,	physical	object,	consisting	of	substances	such	as	salt.	The
difference	between	this	psychological	substantiality	and	that	of	chemistry,	which	too	holds	that
mineral	and	physical	elements	enter	into	the	composition	of	a	human	being,	is	that	the	chemical
model	does	not	require	consciousness	or	soul.	There	is	a	radical	split	between	conscious	subject	and

the	physical	substances.	Whereas	the	alchemical	model	suggests:	as	within,	so	without.	The	physical
world	has	its	interiority	and	subjectivity	because	it	is	a	larger	arrangement	of	the	soul’s	nature.	For
alchemy,	both	human	and	world	are	ensouled.	Intelligence,	meaning,	display	–	these	are	potentially
present	and	afforded	throughout.
The	microcosm/macrocosm	model	requires	a	micro/macro-awareness.	It	asks	that	we	feel	into	the
world	of	matter	with	sensitivity	for	qualitative	differences.	It	asks	that	we	find	in	our	objective
experiences	analogies	with	and	metaphors	of	physical	processes	and	substances.	The	micro/macro
model	works	in	two	directions.	While	endowing	the	world	with	soul,	it	also	indicates	that	human
nature	goes	through	natural	processes	of	an	objectively	mineral	and	metallic	sort.	Our	inner	life	is
part	of	the	natural	world	order,	and	this	perspective	saves	us	from	taking	ourselves	so	personally	and
identifying	what	goes	on	in	the	soul	with	the	subjective	ego.	Thus,	salts	belong	to	the	very	stuff	of	the
psyche.	Sal	describes	one	of	our	matters,	something	that	is	mattering	in	us	and	is	the	“matter”	with	us
–	too	much,	too	little	salt,	or	salt	at	the	wrong	times	and	places,	or	combined	wrongly.
Alchemical	psychology	describes	a	myriad	of	substances.	William	Johnson’s	Lexicon	Chymicum	of
1652	and	Martin	Ruland’s	Lexicon	Alchemiae	of	1612	list	hundreds	of	words	referring	to	materials.
These	can	be	reduced	to	a	system	of	seven	basic	stuffs	deriving	from	metallic	seeds	of	the	traditional
planetary	gods:	all	sorts	of	words	may	refer	to	silver,	for	instance,	and	its	operations,	and	each	of
these	words	connote	as	well	the	planetary	principle	of	the	moon	in	a	particular	phase	or	guise	or
combination.	A	variety	of	the	sevenfold	system	is	that	of	three	substances	plus	a	fourth,	the
“tetrasoma,”	which	in	itself	combines	four	of	the	primary	planetary	metals	(lead,	copper,	iron,	and	tin
or	antimony).	The	threefold	system,	in	which	salt	finds	a	major	place,	derives	mainly	from
Paracelsus, [4]	the	Swiss	radical	philosopher	of	nature,	religious	physician,	and	eccentric	whose
system	of	sulfur,	mercury,	and	salt	was	a	more	subtle	and	chemical	mode	of	imagining	than	the	more
gross	and	metallurgical	model	of	the	seven.
Because	of	the	interrelated	complexities	of	these	substances,	alchemical	models	are	polytheistic,
that	is,	one	cannot	speak	truly	of	any	element	alone.	Whatever	is	said	about	salt	is	always
contaminated,	and	must	be	so	contaminated	by	the	materials,	vessels,	and	operations	with	which	it	is
in	interaction.	Psychic	materials	are	always	in	diffuse	interpenetration,	with	other	materials	and	do
not	remain	singly	self-consistent,	and	so	require	multiple	interpretation.	In	fact,	this	very
contamination	is	part	of	their	definition:	let	us	say	that	alchemy	is	soft-edged.	Lines	between	its
elements	cannot	be	drawn	hard	and	fast	because	these	elements	are	also	elementary	living	natures.
The	technique	of	isolation,	so	essential	to	the	method	of	modern	natural	science,	arbitrarily	forces
nature	to	comply	with	an	isolating	kind	of	consciousness	and	its	epistemology	which	cuts,	separates
and	opposes	in	order	to	know. [5]
Alchemical	salt	is	usually	in	a	tandem	with	sulfur	and	what	is	said	about	salt	is	usually	from	a
sulfuric	standpoint.	For	example	in	Paracelsian	alchemy,	salt	is	frequently	imagined	as	soul	(sulfur	as
body	and	mercury	as	the	spirit	combining	them).	The	illustrative	image	is	the	egg,	whose	yolk
(sulfur)	–	oily,	smelly,	sticky	and	vital	–	is	its	body,	whose	shell	(salt)	–	fixed,	inflammable,	crusty
and	enclosing	–	is	its	soul,	and	whose	white	(mercury)	–	connecting	yolk	and	shell,	mutable,	slippery,
volatile,	changing	its	shape	and	consistency	–	is	the	egg’s	spirit.	Or	the	shell	(salt)	may	be	the	body;
the	yolk	(sulfur),	the	soul.
I	have	found	that	it	is	better	to	consider	each	component	to	have	its	own	sort	of	body	rather	than	to
insist	that	salt	is	always	soul	(or	always	body) [6]	in	a	one-to-one	equation.	We	must	remember	that	a
psychic	substance	does	not	and	cannot	mean	one	thing.	We	find	that	alchemists	shifted	“body”	to	equal
this	or	that	depending	on	the	task	at	hand.	The	same	is	true	in	our	psychic	work	today:	certain
problems	take	on	body	or	cry	for	release	from	body,	or	lose	their	embodiment,	so	that	no	single
aspect	of	our	psychic	lives	can	consistently	be	named	“body.”	As	Robert	Sardello	has	often	said,	body

is	most	elusive.	When	body	is	equated	with	sulfur	what	is	meant	is	the	excitable,	palpable	urgency,	the
body	of	generative	passions	and	will.	When	body	is	called	salt	what	is	meant	is	the	fixed,	consistent,
stable	body	that	encloses	any	existent	as	its	outer	shell.	Paradoxically,	salt	may	mean	the	inner	core:
for	salt	was	imagined	by	Khunrath	as	the	center	of	the	earth.	Perhaps	the	best	way	to	understand
“body”	in	this	context	is	by	the	action	of	a	substance:	that	which	coagulates	or	brings	embodiment
about	therefore	must	itself	be	body.	Sometimes	sulfur	is	the	coagulatory	agent;	sometimes
coagulation	is	attributed	to	the	power	of	salt.
The	tandem	of	salt	and	sulfur	continues	in	modern	lives	and	modern	dreams.	A	woman	in	analysis
oscillates	between	burning	enthusiasms	for	new	people,	projects,	places.	She	is	ready	to	catch	fire	at
any	moment,	bringing	a	richly	fat	imagination	and	vital	energy	to	life.	She	also	has	times	of
depression:	drinking	alone	self-enclosed,	encrusted,	bitter	with	residues	of	what	has	been,	stuck	for
hours	in	a	square	chair	at	a	square	table,	feeling	low	and	base,	sunk	to	the	center	of	the	earth.	There	is
no	direct	connection	between	her	sulfur	and	her	salt.	They	oscillate	in	“mood	swings.”	An	alchemical
therapeutic	approach	would	not	temper	one	with	the	other,	but	would	touch	both	with	mercury,	that	is,
free	them	from	their	alternating	concretism	by	means	of	psychological	insight.	The	first	step	is	to	see
how	impersonally	autonomous	the	swings	are	and	how	they	constellate	each	other,	as	do	sulfur	and
salt.
In	another	case,	a	young	man,	finding	it	hard	to	yield	some	of	his	childish	innocence	and	the	rich
life	in	the	lap	of	the	mother	and	the	gods,	dreams	first	of	walking	with	his	girl	through	a	salt	desert,
then	of	their	sharing	salty	meat	together,	and	then	of	a	strange	man	who	runs	a	stand	on	the	street,
handing	the	dreamer	a	salty	sausage-type	roll	instead	of	what	he	had	ordered	–	a	roll	or	bun	filled
with	yellow,	sweet-cream	custard.	The	dreamer	is	offended.	He	had	wanted	the	savor	and	joy	of	sulfur
in	the	sweet	soft	things	that	slip	down	with	no	effort. [7]	But	the	strange	man-in-the-street	(Mercurius
himself,	perhaps)	hands	him	the	bitter	sting	of	salt	that	can	bring	tears	to	one’s	eyes.	We	shall	now
have	to	explore	the	nature	of	this	salt.
Salt	Mines:	The	Mining	and	Making	of	Salt
But	first	–	where	is	the	salt	to	be	found?	How	do	we	mine	it,	make	it,	prepare	it.	Eirenaeus	Philalethes
replies:	“Descend	into	yourself,	for	you	carry	it	about	with	you	…”	It	is	to	be	found	in	“Man’s	blood
out	of	the	body,	or	man’s	urine	…	Mark	well	that	those	bodies	which	flow	forth	from	our	bodies	are
salts	and	alums.” [8]	As	there	is	salt	in	the	macrocosm,	so	can	it	be	mined	from	within	microcosmic
human	nature.	In	fact,	because	salt	is	“the	natural	balsam	of	the	living	body”	(Paracelsus,	1: 259)	we
descend	into	the	experiential	component	of	this	body	–	its	blood,	sweat,	tears,	and	urine	–	to	find	our
salt.	Jung	(CW	14: 330)	considers	alchemical	salt	to	refer	to	feelings	and	to	Eros;	I	would	specify	his
notion	further	by	saying	that	salt	is	the	mineral,	impersonal,	objective	ground	of	personal	experience
making	experience	possible.	No	salt,	no	experiencing	–	merely	a	running	on	and	running	through	of
events	without	psychic	body. [9]
Thus	salt	makes	events	sensed	and	felt,	giving	us	each	a	sense	of	the	personal	–	my	tears,	my	sweat
and	blood,	my	taste	and	value.	The	entire	alchemical	opus	hangs	on	the	ability	to	experience
subjectively.	Hence	it	is	said	in	“The	Golden	Tract”:	“He	who	works	without	salt	will	never	raise	dead
bodies.” [10]	The	matters	are	only	macrocosmic	and	chemical,	out	there,	dead,	unless	one	works	with
salt.	These	intensely	personal	experiences	are	nonetheless	common	to	all	–	both	intensely	mine	and
yet	common	as	blood,	as	urine,	as	salt.	In	other	words,	salt	acts	like	the	ground	of	subjectivity	(“That
which	is	left	at	the	bottom	of	our	distilling	vessel	is	our	salt	–	that	is	to	say	our	earth.” [11]).	It	makes
possible	what	psychology	calls	felt	experience.	We	must	turn	to	this	same	ground	to	mine	our	salt.
“Felt	experience”	takes	on	a	radically	altered	meaning	in	the	light	of	alchemical	salt.	We	may

imagine	our	deep	hurts	not	merely	as	wounds	to	be	healed	but	as	salt	mines	from	which	we	gain	a
precious	essence	and	without	which	the	soul	cannot	live.	The	fact	that	we	return	to	these	deep	hurts,	in
remorse	and	regret,	in	resentment	and	revenge,	indicates	a	psychic	need	beyond	a	mere	mechanical
repetition	compulsion.	Instead,	the	soul	has	a	drive	to	remember;	it	is	like	an	animal	that	returns	to	its
salt	licks;	the	soul	licks	at	its	own	wounds	to	derive	sustenance	therefrom.	We	make	salt	in	our
suffering	and,	by	keeping	faith	with	our	sufferings,	we	gain	salt,	healing	the	soul	of	its	saltdeficiency.	D. H.	Lawrence	said:
I	am	not	a	mechanism,	an	assembly	of	various	sections.	And	it	is	not	because	the	mechanism	is	working	wrongly,	that	I	am	ill.	I	am
ill	because	of	wounds	to	the	soul,	to	the	deep	emotional	self	and	the	wounds	to	the	soul	take	a	long,	long	time,	only	time	can	help
and	patience,	and	a	certain	difficult	repentance	…	[12]

The	alchemical	substances	offer	distinctions	in	kinds	of	suffering.	Salt,	for	instance,	may	be
distinguished	from	lead,	in	that	the	first	is	sharp,	stinging,	acute:	it	burns	in	on	itself	with	wit	and	bite,
corrosive	acrimony,	making	sense	through	self-accusation	and	self-purification.	It	is	purgative.	Lead,
however,	is	chronic	and	dense,	a	heavy,	oppressive,	gloomy	suffering,	without	specified	focus,
senseless.	It	is	constipative.	Whereas	salt	says	“it	hurts,”	lead	says	“I	can’t.”	Where	salt	tastes	the
details	of	its	pain	by	remembering	precisely	and	with	piercing	agony,	lead	cannot	see,	does	not	know,
remaining	paralyzed	and	sunk	in	a	general,	abstract	obliteration	of	empirical	memory.
The	curing	of	these	conditions	also	differs:	salt	requires	a	pinch,	feeling	the	pinch	of	the	event	that
stings;	lead	seems	to	require	time,	waiting	it	through,	that	patience	Lawrence	speaks	of.	What	results
from	the	salt	cure	is	a	new	sense	of	what	happened,	a	new	appreciation	of	its	virtue	for	soul.	The
result	of	the	lead	cure	is	depth,	weight	and	gravity,	more	fullness	and	the	ability	to	“hold	it”	and	“bear
it.”	The	two	contrast	also	in	two	literary	genres	of	suffering:	irony	(salt)	and	tragedy	(lead).	The	first
tends	toward	common	human	experience	while	the	second	tends	to	give	distance	from	that	experience.
Of	course,	there	are	“leaden	salts”	in	alchemy,	that	is,	conditions	in	which	the	leaden	and	the	salty
aspects	of	suffering	are	so	combined	that	the	distinctions	are	hard	.5to	notice:	usually	that	which	dulls
and	blankets	the	nature	of	salt	is	a	result	of	lead.	The	task	becomes	one	of	separating	lead	from	salt,
black	mood	from	recollection,	poisoned	spirit	from	subjective	experience,	the	fateful	inescapable
destiny	from	the	personally	culpable	wrong-doing.
Salt	may	also	be	mined	from	whatever	is	stable.	As	the	principle	of	stability	whose	alchemical	sign
was	a	square, [13]	salt	can	be	mined	from	the	rocks	of	concrete	experience,	those	fixities	which	mark
our	lives	with	defined	positions.	These	places	are	not	merely	solid	facts	–	my	degree,	my	property,
my	car	accident,	my	abortion,	my	war	record,	my	divorce;	these	are	also	places	where	psychic	body
is	salted	away	and	stored.	These	rocks,	when	recognized	and	owned,	belong	to	the	history	of	my	soul,
where	it	has	been	salted	down	by	the	fixities	of	experience,	giving	a	certain	crystallization	to	my
nature	and	keeping	me	from	inflammations	and	volatilizations.
As	salt	is	not	flammable, [14]	it	seems	not	subject	to	heat:	we	make	salt	less	in	ardor	than	in
recrimination,	less	by	desire	than	by	memory	of	desire.	“Ash	on	an	old	man’s	sleeve	/	Is	all	the	ash
the	burnt	roses	leave”	(T. S.	Eliot,	“Little	Gidding”).	Ash	is	the	memory	of	the	fire;	not	a	burnt-out
cinder,	but	the	fixed	inflammable	essence	of	a	love	that	once	flamed	to	heaven.
Though	we	cannot	make	it	by	fire,	we	do	make	salt	by	means	of	dissolutions.	Salt	is	soluble.
Weeping,	bleeding,	sweating,	urinating	bring	salt	out	of	its	interior	underground	mines.	It	appears	in
our	moistures,	which	are	the	flow	of	salt	to	the	surface.	“During	the	work	the	salt	assumes	the
appearance	of	blood”	(CW	14: 337).	Moments	of	dissolution	are	not	mere	collapses;	they	release	a
sense	of	personal	human	value	from	the	encrustations	of	habit.	“I,	too,	am	a	human	being	worth	my
salt”	–	hence	my	blood,	sweat,	and	tears.
It	is	curious	how	we	are	fixated	upon	our	wounds.	Psychology	speaks	of	trauma,	invented	a

traumatic	theory	of	neurosis	and	post-traumatic	stress	disorder.	Why	does	psychology	go	back	to	the
hurt	child	for	grounding	psychic	development,	and	why	does	the	psyche	itself	need	to	look	back?	It
seems	the	soul	must	have	its	signal	remembrance	engraved	into	its	psychic	body	so	that	it	knows	it
has	or	is	a	body.	Pain	implicates	us	at	once	in	body,	and	psychic	pain	in	psychic	body.	We	are	always
subjected	to	pain,	so	that	events	that	hurt,	like	childhood	traumas,	abuse,	and	rape,	force	our
subjectivity	upon	us.	These	events	seem	in	memory	to	be	more	real	than	any	others	because	they
carry	the	force	of	subjective	reality.
Viewed	from	the	perspective	of	salt,	early	traumas	are	moments	of	initiation	into	the	sense	of	being
a	“me”	with	a	subjective	personal	interior.	We	tend	to	fixate	on	what	was	done	to	us	and	who	did	it:
resentment,	revenge.	But	what	psychologically	matters	is	that	it	was	done:	the	blow,	the	blood,	the
betrayal.	Like	the	ashes	which	are	rubbed	into	the	wounds	at	initiation	rites	to	purify	and	scarify,	the
soul	is	marked	by	its	trauma.	Salt	still	is	touched	to	the	body	in	Christian	Baptism,	and	eaten	still	at
Jewish	Pessach	in	ritual	remembrance	of	trauma. [15]	A	trauma	is	a	salt	mine;	it	is	a	fixed	place	for
reflection	about	the	nature	and	value	of	my	personal	being,	where	memory	originates	and	looking
back	into	personal	history	begins.	These	traumatic	events	initiate	in	the	soul	a	sense	of	its
embodiment	as	a	vulnerable	experiencing	subject.
The	paradigmatic	story	of	“looking	back”	is	that	of	Lot’s	wife	(Genesis 19: 26).	(Lot	and	Lot’s	wife
were	even	used	as	alchemical	terms	for	salt	–	cf.	Johnson’s	Dictionary.)	Because	Lot’s	wife	could	not
refrain	from	looking	back	at	the	destruction	of	Sodom	from	which	they	had	been	saved,	she	was
turned	to	a	pillar	of	salt.	Jewish	commentators [16]	say	that	her	mother-love	made	her	look	behind	to
see	whether	her	married	daughters	were	following;	and	Christian	comments	on	Luke 17: 32	(Clement
of	Alexandria,	Exhortation	to	the	Greeks,	94)	also	see	the	source	of	her	move	in	remembrances	of
family	and	relatives,	personal	subjectivities	of	feeling.	Evidently,	family	fixations	are	also	salt-mines.
The	disappointments,	worries,	smarts	of	mother-complex	love	–	the	evening	with	the	photograph
album,	the	keepsakes	–	are	ways	the	psyche	produces	salt,	returning	to	events	in	order	to	turn	them
into	experiences.
The	danger	here	is	always	fixation,	whether	in	recollection,	earlier	trauma,	or	in	a	literalized	and
personalized	notion	of	experience	itself:	“I	am	what	I	have	experienced.”	Paracelsus	defined	salt	as
the	principle	of	fixation	(2: 366). [17]	This	term,	like	projection,	condensation,	sublimation,	reappears
centuries	later	in	psychoanalysis	where	it	is	defined	by	Freud:
Fixation	can	be	described	in	this	way.	One	instinct	or	instinctual	component	fails	to	accompany	the	rest	along	the	anticipated	normal
path	of	development,	and,	in	consequence	…	it	is	left	behind	at	a	more	infantile	stage. [18]

Here	we	have	Genesis 19: 26	recapitulated	in	modern	psychoanalytic	language.	The	image	of	Lot’s
family	on	its	journey	is	now	presented	as	a	“path	of	development.”	Parable	becomes	theory;	the	story
salted	down	as	science.
Among	these	sources	of	salt,	urine	holds	a	special	place. [19]	According	to	the	model	of	the
macrocosm/microcosm,	urine	is	the	human	brine.	It	is	the	microscopic	sea	within,	or	the	“waters
below.”	Jewish	legends [20]	explain	that	salt	is	included	in	all	sacrifices	as	a	remembrance	of	the	act
of	Creation	by	the	separation	of	the	waters	above	from	those	below,	their	having	been	torn	asunder,
and	the	salt	remembers	these	lower	waters	and	their	weeping	at	having	been	cast	down	from	nearness
with	God.
Urinary	salts	are	residual	traces	afloat	in	the	lower	person.	They	are	essential	remembrances	that
betray	our	inner	nature,	its	color,	smell,	opacity.	Bladder	disorders	and	urinary	symptoms	and	dreams
may	refer	to	an	awakening	to	the	lower	waters,	to	the	fact	that	there	is	psychic	life	in	the	lower	person
independent	of	what	goes	on	above,	and	this	life	is	all	intense,	burning,	personal	necessity,	which	no
one	else	can	tend	for	you	and	for	which	time	and	place	and	privacy	must	be	found.

A	patient	dreams:	“My	urine	is	to	be	examined	with	various	chemicals.	I	have	in	front	of	me	several
glass	bottles	with	different	chemicals,	but	I	don’t	know	how	much	to	take	of	each	of	the	chemicals	for
each	of	the	little	bottles	and	how	I	am	to	get	my	urine	into	these	little	bottles.”
Psychoanalysis	as	urinalysis	suggests	very	careful	discriminations	of	private,	internal	residues,	and
making	clear	(glass)	distinctions	among	them.	It	is	as	if	the	urinary	salts	must	be	separated	from
generalized	memory	and	generalized	suffering	and	examined	for	their	quite	specific	particulars.	For
the	dreamer	the	task	is	double:	dosage	(how	much	to	take)	and	focus	(capturing	the	flow	in	narrowly
accurate	perceptions).	It	is	an	exercise	in	“eachness”	–	a	term	fondly	used	by	William	James	to
counter	the	global	thinking	and	feeling	of	wholeness.
Urine	of	the	virgin	boy	(between	eight	and	twelve	years)	was	often	mentioned	as	a	starting
substance	for	the	work.	This	“urine	of	the	boy”	is	one	of	the	many	names	for	the	materia	prima.	It
refers	to	the	salts	in	the	microcosmic	sea	before	the	Fall,	that	is,	the	archetypal	essence	of	each
particular	character	before	it	has	accumulated	personal	residues:	salt	not	as	the	result	of	events,	but	as
prior	to	events.	The	virginal	condition	is	not	empty	or	blank,	even	if	unsullied	by	experience.	These
salts	have	their	own	specific	gravity	and	qualities	–	that	is,	there	is	an	a	priori	salt	in	our	“boy	of	the
soul,”	who	is	defined	by	the	fixed	intensities	that	are	the	demanding	urgencies	of	ones	own	particular
essence.	The	salts	in	the	urine	of	the	boy	are	these	archetypal	traces	of	character	essence.	Platonic
remembrances	that	are	virginal	because	they	are	given	intact	with	one’s	nature	and	that	can	be	opened
by	the	alchemical	opus.
Johnson’s	Dictionary	states	simply:	“Urina	puerorum	est	mercurius.”	Of	course,	Mercurius’s
names	are	legion;	when,	however,	a	substance	is	overtly	named	such,	there	is	immediate	significance
for	soul-making.	This	implies	that	the	ambitions	of	puer	fantasy,	which	Freudian	psychology	has
attributed	to	the	urinary	phase	of	the	little	boy’s	development,	take	on	revelatory	significance.	It	is	not
merely	“urinary	erotism” [21]	–	that	I	can	sexually	fertilize	the	world	or	extinguish	its	fires	or	start
rivulets.	The	urinary	ambition	of	the	“boy	of	the	soul”	is	also	an	expression	of	my	salt,	the	essence	of
myself,	my	base.	“Look,”	it	says,	“see	my	piss	–	this	is	me.”	There	is	a	potent	spirit	to	be	found	in	the
silly	piss	of	one’s	little	boy	(even	perhaps	in	his	bed-wetting).
We	can	feel	the	primordial	salt	of	the	puer	in	the	bitter	pains	of	ambition	that	burn	before	any
accomplishment,	and	also	in	the	sense	of	remorse	that	stings	before	there	have	been	external	events	to
rue.	Burning	intensities	can	plague	a	childhood	before	worldly	experience	has	begun,	and	these	same
salty	pains	reappear	when	the	boy	of	the	soul	is	constellated.	In	the	urina	puerorum	is	a	remembrance
of	things	a	priori	that	load	an	act	in	the	world	with	more	salt	than	puer	consciousness	can	sometimes
bare:	huge	guilts,	high-pitched	hopes,	even	suicide.	For	the	puer	comes	not	only	on	wings	of	flights
and	in	games	of	love;	he	comes,	too,	smarting	with	a	memory	of	beauty	and	what	one	is	on	earth	for.
The	urina	puerorum	suggests	that	with	the	right	operation	we	can	recover	the	salty	aspect	of	the
puer.	The	salt	to	put	on	the	tail	of	puer	flights	is	already	there	to	begin	with,	if	we	but	know	the	right
operation	for	recovering	it.	One	operation	which	alchemy	suggests	for	making	salt	is	evaporation.
The	watery	boy	who	floats	in	and	out	with	the	tides	of	emotion	and	follows	the	streams	of	least
resistance	can	be	fixed	by	the	salts	buried	in	his	own	tissues.	These	give	regularities,	densities,
squareness,	and	body.	When	the	tides	of	the	sea	are	exposed	to	sunlight	and	their	flow	stopped,	salt
crystallizes;	so	can	salt	be	gained	by	the	evaporation	of	the	microcosmic	flood.	For	this	operation,
alchemists	used	a	wide-open,	flat	pan;	all	things	exposed	in	broad	daylight	and	all	the	upward
pressure	allowed	to	escape.	The	steam,	the	smoke,	and	the	cloudy	vapors	ascend	to	dissipate	in	hot	air.
We	lose	the	lushness	of	feelings,	the	flush	of	high	hopes,	the	dumb	bogs	of	inertia;	and,	as	the
moistures	recede,	something	essential	crystallizes	in	the	dry	air.	Here,	the	sealed	hermetic	vessel
would	be	wrong.	Evaporation	means	not	taking	events	deeply	and	intensively	but	rather	flattening	the
affects	and	letting	a	pressure	steam	away	by	itself	until	it	comes	down	to	itself.	Evaporation	to	a	salt:

this	is	the	common	salt	of	the	everyday	table	of	the	world	which	is	at	the	same	time	one’s	own
crystallized	experience	of	it. [22]
The	alchemical	idea	that	urine	contained	a	potent	spirit,	a	mercurial	lumen	naturalis	(light	of
nature)	became	evident	in	1669	when	the	German	Hennig	Brand	–	called	the	“last	of	the	alchemists”	–
cooked	urine	mixed	with	sand	and	produced	a	soapy	residue	that	glowed. [23]	Phosphorous	had	been
discovered.	The	word	etymologically	means	“light-bringing.”	It	is	an	epithet	for	the	morning	star,	for
Lucifer,	and	for	Hermes.	Indeed,	urina	puerorum	est	mercurius.
The	When	and	How	of	Salting
Albertus	Magnus	declares:	“Salt	is	necessary	for	every	solution.” [24]	This	seems	a	strange	statement,
inasmuch	as	we	have	been	imagining	salt	as	the	principle	of	fixity,	of	bitter	crustiness.	Solutions,	in
contrast,	seem	to	connote	fluid,	passive,	receptive	conditions,	allowing	bitterness	to	dissolve	and
crustiness	to	melt.	The	solutio,	however,	in	alchemical	psychology	is	one	of	the	very	few	basic
operations	and	because	of	its	ubiquity	throughout	the	entire	opus,	it	cannot	be	defined	in	only	one
way.	Evidently,	a	genuine	solution	must	have	the	capacity	to	stabilize.	It	must	sustain	a	condition,	not
merely	dissolve	it.
The	alchemical	solutio	does	not	suggest	simplified	problem-solving.	Rather,	it	requires	salt	in
order	to	affect	the	material	in	a	lasting	way.	The	salt	mines	of	which	we	spoke	in	the	previous	section
are	both	deposits	of	salt	and	attempts	at	solution.	When	we	sit	still	and	sweat	it	out,	we	are	stabilizing
and	adding	salt	to	the	solution	so	that	it	becomes	a	genuine	one.	Problems	seem	not	to	go	away	until
they	have	first	been	thoroughly	received.
The	issue	at	stake	here	is	the	capacity	to	internalize,	to	admit	and	receive	a	problem	into	one’s	inner
nature	as	one’s	inner	nature.	This	would	be	to	salt	it.	A	problem	reaches	its	solution	only	when	it	is
adequately	salted,	for	then	it	touches	us	personally,	penetrating	to	that	point	where	we	can	say:	“Fiat
mihi;	all	right;	I	admit,	I	give	in;	it’s	really	my	problem;	it	has	to	be.”	The	taste	of	this	experience	is
bitter,	and	it	humiliates,	and	it	lasts	–	a	lasting	solution.
A	second	use	for	salt	is	in	order	to	“slay	sulfur.” [25]	Remember:	salt	is	square	and	blue, [26]	and	it
coagulates.	When	sulfur	flares	up	it	can	be	slain	by	a	pinch	of	salt,	the	pinch	that	kills,	whether	a
tearful	eye,	a	sharp-tongued	remark,	a	grain	of	common	sense.	Salt	wounds	and	slays	the	impulsive
reactions,	because	it	recalls	the	pain	incurred	in	similar	events.	Salt	gives	us	the	awareness	of
repetition;	sulfur,	only	the	compulsion.	Perhaps	the	exalted	sal	sapientia	(salt	of	wisdom,	wisdom	of
salt)	is	nothing	more	grandiose	than	salt’s	ability	to	inhibit	sulfur.
As	there	are	psychologies	of	sulfur	that	preach	action	and	base	themselves	on	desire,	drive,	and
will,	examining	psychological	events	in	terms	of	behavior	and	its	reinforcement	or	control,	so	there
are	psychologies	of	salt.	These	tend	to	literalize	the	idea	that	personal	suffering	is	necessary	for
every	solution.	They	insist	upon	the	self-improvement	of	interior	life.	They	advocate	guilt	and
penance	and	working	through,	examining	subjective	history,	personal	feelings,	traumata.	Alchemical
psychology	corrects	this	sort	of	literalizing	by	presenting	the	personal	factor	that	so	dominates	in
psychologies	of	salt	to	be	impersonal	and	commonly	general.	Then,	when	we	work	at	our	selfcorrection,	betterment,	purification,	we	realize	that	it	is	not	the	self	that	is	the	focus	of	our	good
work;	it	is	the	salt.	We	are	simply	working	on	the	salt.	In	this	way,	the	salt	in	alchemical	psychology
helps	keep	the	work	from	flaming	up	in	the	egoistic	inflation	of	personal	guilt.	I	am	alone
responsible;	it’s	all	my	fault.
Salt	is	especially	missing	in	young	people.	A	young	and	careless	man	dreams	of	visiting	Jung	in
his	house,	which	turns	out	to	be	a	laboratory	in	a	huge	salt	dome	where	a	wizened	Jung	explains	how
he	works	on	making	salt.	Another	young	man	full	of	promise	and	void	of	accomplishment	dreams	of

a	beautiful,	running	deer	that	springs	into	a	river,	its	antlers	high	above	the	water,	crosses,	and	then
collapses	on	the	other	bank	in	desperate	need	of	salt.	A	transition	of	the	spirit	had	been	made,	but	only
through	exhaustion	does	it	come	home	to	the	dreamer	how	badly	he	needs	to	conserve,	not	only	his
leaping,	bounding,	rutting	spirit	but	also	the	experiences	of	his	dream	life	where	his	spirit	shows
itself.	Unless	the	animals	of	his	imagination	are	salted	they	may	simply	vanish	in	spiritual	heroics	and
aesthetic	highs.	Yes,	we	catch	the	bird	by	putting	salt	on	its	tail.
Why	is	young	love	so	bitter	and	study	for	exams	so	bloody?	Are	these	not	rituals	of	the	salt,	ways
of	intensifying	that	thicken	matters	and	cement	them	in	place?	Bitter	love	is	a	salt	cure,	curing	the
tender	soul,	with	tears,	recriminations	and,	finally,	some	sort	of	stabilized	pattern.	The	backwards	and
forwards	of	lovers’	fights	between	tearing	passion	and	passionate	tears	enact	stages	of	the	salt/sulfur
conjunction.	The	salt	component	“that	just	won’t	let	go”	helps	preserve	the	relationship,	when	sulfur
would	burn	it	out	or	turn	it	black.
As	macrocosmic	salt	keeps	meat	and	fish,	and	pickles	vegetables,	so	we	need	salt	in	microcosmic
ecology	for	fixing,	toughening,	preserving.	We	can’t	swallow	and	digest	all	that	happens	in	a	day,	or
in	a	night	–	so	we	need	long	hours	of	pickling	events	in	glass	jars	for	later	staring	at,	sharing	and
consuming.	If	we	would	keep	something,	we	salt	it	down,	salt	it	away.	The	decaying	impulse	of	young
nature	–	the	fresher	and	purer	the	substance,	the	surer	and	sooner	it	rots	–	is	held	in	abeyance.	Salt
gives	us	time,	endurance,	survival.	It	seasons	youth	by	removing	excess	moisture,	thereby	preserving
the	soul	through	dryness.	Dry	souls	are	best,	said	Heraclitus,	which	Philo	turned	to	mean,	“Where	the
earth	is	dry,	the	soul	is	wisest”	–	sal	sapientia.	Analysis	shrinks.
“Salt	causes	matters	to	thicken.”	It	acts	as	“knot	and	cement.” [27]	What	modern	psychology	speaks
of	as	“integration	of	personality”	and	“integrity	of	character,”	alchemical	psychology	refers	to	as
salt,	for	it	is	this	sophic	substance	that	effects	internal	adhesion,	knitting	and	knotting	events	into
experience,	shrinking	generalities	into	specifics.	Salt	gives	the	sense	of	significant	detail,
crystallizations	that	pack	with	importance	what	might	otherwise	have	been	a	bland	evening	of	”waste
sad	time	stretching	before	and	after”	(T. S.	Eliot,	“Burnt	Norton”).	We	want	to	meet	someone	at	the
party	who	can	put	sting	into	a	conversation.	At	a	family	affair	it	is	usually	a	crusty	old	Aunt	or
Grandfather	who	adds	the	salt.	The	flow	of	unexperienced	events	suddenly	condenses	and	remains
fixed	as	we	are	shriveled	by	a	penetratingly	salty	observation.
There	is	another	time	and	place	for	salt:	when	the	soul	needs	earthing.	When	dreams	and	events	do
not	feel	real	enough,	when	the	uses	of	the	world	taste	stale,	flat	and	unprofitable,	when	we	feel
uncomfortable	in	community	and	have	lost	our	personal	“me-ness”	–	weak,	alienated,	drifting	–	then
the	soul	needs	salt.	We	mistake	our	medicine	at	times	and	reach	for	sulfur:	action,	false	extraversion,
trying	harder.	However,	the	move	toward	the	macrocosm	may	first	have	to	go	back	toward	the
microcosm,	so	that	the	world	can	be	experienced	and	not	merely	joined	with	and	acted	upon	as	an
abstract	field.	World	must	become	earth;	and	this	move	from	world	as	idea	to	tangible	presence
requires	salt.
Ruland	says:	“Nothing	can	be	tangible	without	the	presence	of	salt.”	Salty	language,	salty	wit,	salty
sailors,	soldier ’s	pay	(salarium	=	salary),	worth	one’s	salt,	a	salted	bill,	a	salted	bitch	(lustful),	a	dose
of	salts	–	these	express	the	tangible	values	of	the	base,	workaday,	and	common	earth	that	our	feet
walk	upon	and	our	hands	touch.	This	language	of	salt	connotes	each	human	being	as	“salt	of	the
earth”:	only	those	well-born	and	high-placed	can	afford	to	sit	“above	the	salt.”
The	mines	of	common	experience	offer	this	salt:	the	saws	and	skilled	physical	know-how	of	the
old-timer,	the	age-old	crystallizations	of	common	law	and	common	speech.	Each	of	these	is	like	a	salt
mine,	and	we	can	bring	down	our	high-falutin’	notions	and	half-cocked	ideas	by	earthing	them	in
commonality.	Salt	gives	what	one	has	in	one’s	head	a	worth	among	people,	a	tangible	value	on	earth.
Commonality,	however,	needs	to	be	distinguished,	from	being	practical	and	finding	application.	To

earth	an	image	is	not	simply	to	sell	an	invention.	Rather,	to	salt	or	earth	one’s	winged	speculations	is
to	express	them	with	a	common	touch;	tangibility	of	style.
Earth	is	also	a	local	sense.	There	is	salt	in	local	speech:	accent,	patois,	dialect,	idioms.	Whether
one-liners	that	are	grainy	epitomes	(New	York)	or	drawn	out	tales	that	meander	across	the	land
(Texas),	local	speech	makes	words	tangible.	The	difference	between	dialect	and	dialectics,	between
patois	and	jargon,	between	earthy	humor	and	dirty	joke,	between	local	idiomatic	and	national	idiotic
(“televisionese”)	is	all	a	matter	of	salt.
“Salt	is	not	added	in	equal	portions	to	every	kind	of	food;	and	this	circumstance	should	be
diligently	considered	by	the	physician”	(Paracelsus,	1: 264).	Now	we	are	talking	about	dosage.	Salt
requires	particularizing;	it	forces	one	to	take	note	of	the	specific	taste	of	each	event.	Tangibility
means	recognition	and	discrimination	of	specific	natures.	This	sheds	a	new	light	upon	the	idea	of	the
common:	it	is	evidently	not	merely	collective	and	general.	What	is	common,	however,	is	a	sense	for
the	particular	–	the	water	in	this	village	is	softer	and	sweeter	than	the	water	on	the	other	side	of	the
valley;	these	game	birds	need	to	hang	another	day;	you	can’t	use	that	kind	of	nail	in	this	kind	of
wood;	when	the	fever	turns	into	sweating,	you	have	to	give	even	more	liquids.	Paracelsian	medicine
turned	to	the	patient	and	tried	to	make	acute	differential	perceptions;	yet	it	also	tried	to	be	a	medicine
of	and	for	the	common	people	in	earthy	dialect.	We	have	perverted	the	meaning	of	”common”	to
denote	all	or	usual	or	equal:	whereas	“common	salt,”	alchemically	speaking,	refers	to	the	sharp
perception	of	inherent	natures	that	brings	out	their	individual	properties	so	that	we	can	understand	the
right	dosage.
As	we	become	salty,	the	caution	of	salting	tends	to	reverse.	Where	once	it	was	necessary	to	catch
the	bird	and	conserve	experiences,	we	begin	to	find	ourselves	slowly	pickling	in	brine.	Events	don’t
let	us	go:	they	return	to	our	heart’s	blood,	leap	with	tears	to	the	eye,	bring	us	to	break	out	in	cold
sweat	over	a	past	deed,	burn	in	the	bladder.	(Paracelsus	speaks	of	the	“evil	there	is	in	salt”	[1: 259].)
No	longer	the	conscious	application	of	salt,	salting	now	becomes	autonomously	psychic.	The	soul
forces	its	tangibility	upon	us	and	brings	home	our	common	and	base	susceptibility	to	human	pain.
Perhaps	this	is	the	eros	of	salt	Jung	writes	about,	or	the	wisdom	of	it,	or	the	black	earth	and	shadow
associated	at	times	with	salt	in	alchemy;	or	perhaps	it	is	the	ashes	and	dry	earth	to	which	we	are
returning,	the	soul’s	essence	becoming	fixed,	intimations	of	immortality	that	first	feel	like	personal
pain.
Paracelsus	writes	(1: 43):	“Salt	corrects	and	fixes	leprous	Luna,	cleansing	it	from	its	blackness.”
Thus	salt	is	also	a	“corrective”	–	and	particularly	a	corrective	of	lunatic	nigredo	conditions	by	fixing
them.	A	bitter	despair,	a	drawn-out	moody	meanness,	a	corrosive	worry,	a	stubborn	self-ignorance
are	leprous.	These	conditions	eat	through	their	own	skin,	spread	contagiously.	One	picks	at	oneself.
These	conditions	make	the	reflective	power,	which	belongs	with	Luna,	splotchy,	coming	out	only	in
spots,	here	and	there,	tatters	of	whiteness	that	leprously	perpetuate	the	condition	rather	than	clearing
it.	Although	“leprous”	in	alchemy	generally	meant	“impure,”	Paracelsus	seems	to	be	speaking	of	a
sickness	of	reflection	itself,	when	the	powers	of	the	moon	become	sicklied	over,	Hamlet-style.	Rather
than	having	the	body	of	a	clear	insight,	such	reflections	attack	one’s	own	embodiment	–	my	actions,
my	nature,	my	self.
Salt	corrects	this	illness	of	reflection	by	means	of	fixing	precisely	what	it	is	that	is	wrong.	The
blackness	refers	to	the	generalized	stain	obscuring	reflection,	those	introspective	attempts	to	see	into
the	dark	that	only	further	darken	the	mind.	The	acute	attack	of	salt	particularizes	the	mental	state	by
means	of	a	precision	of	feeling.	Exactly	what,	when,	where,	and	how	must	be	felt,	so	that	the	“general
mess	of	imprecision	of	feeling”	(T. S.	Eliot,	East	Coker)	can	be	spotted,	and	each	spot	cleared	one	by
one.	The	larger	disaster	is	corrected	by	the	smaller	sense	of	it.	Accuracy	means	acuteness;	painful	to
the	self-eating	wasting	disease	while	cleansing	it	of	too	much	lunar	reflection.

A	woman	dreams	of	a	small,	bottomless	lake	of	salt	and	there	are	warnings	to	stay	out	of	the	water.
She	falls	in	and	the	water	is	so	thick	that	it	doesn’t	feel	liquid.	A	long	piece	of	salt	catches	her	right
arm	and	begins	to	pull	her	under.	With	effort	she	disengages	from	it	and	manages	to	climb	out	by
finding	toeholds	in	crevices	of	solidified	salt	along	the	bank.	Public,	collective	opinion	warns	against
what	it	sees	as	a	bottomless	salt	pit	of	depression.	But	she	falls	in,	despite	prudent	opinion	and	her
intention.	When	she	is	in	this	lake,	it	is	so	dense	and	coagulated	that	the	water	no	longer	flows.	Stuck.
(Salt	causes	matter	to	thicken,	says	one	of	our	texts.)	Here	this	thickening	is	like	the	process	of
identification:	she	has	become	immersed	in	the	thickness	of	her	suffering,	which	at	the	same	time	is
the	place	of	her	becoming	more	cohesive,	stable	and	solid.	One	piece	of	this	generalized	lake	of	salt,
one	crystallized	moment	of	it	–	a	remembrance,	a	guilt,	a	bitter	point	of	pain	–	catches	her	arm	of
action	and	pulls	her	further	inward	and	downward.	Disengagement	happens	by	effort,	particularly	by
finding	toeholds	in	already	memorial,	crystallized	experience	from	which	the	moisture	has	dried	out.
She	can	actually	make	her	way	out	by	standing	upon	what	she	has	already	been	through.	She	is
afforded	a	way	out	of	the	bottomless	lake	by	standing	on	a	solid	“bank,”	by	“banking”	on	something
solid	that	is	there	whenever	the	bottomless	lake	is	there.	The	way	out	is	at	the	edge,	her
marginalization.	Like	cures	like:	the	disengagement	from	identification	with	salt	takes	place	not
through	the	efforts	of	the	right	arm	which	only	drag	her	further	under,	but	through	small	basic
understandings	that	can	be	found	in	the	little	depressions	and	faults	(crevices)	of	her	solidified
subjective	experience.
The	Fervor	of	Salt
Our	account	has	attempted	to	bring	home	the	experience	of	salt	in	alchemical	psychology.	We	have
come	to	see	salt	to	be	the	ground	of	subjectivity.	Salt	fixates,	corrects,	crystallizes	and	purifies,	all	of
which	it	can	do	to	subjectivity	itself.	This	purification	of	subjectivity	shall	more	particularly	occupy
us	in	this	final	section	where	the	connection	more	clearly	emerges	between	salt	and	virginity.
We	have	already	met	its	hard	and	square,	densive-protective	nature.	For	example:	the	egg	analogy
of	Paracelsus,	where	salt	was	the	shell;	and	in	the	writings	of	Joseph	Duchesne	(Quercetanus,	c.	1544–
1609),	where	salt	appears	in	the	hard	matter	of	things,	their	roots,	bark	and	bones,	those	parts	that	are
clotted,	cemented,	coagulated	or	congealed. [28]
We	may	go	so	far	as	attributing	to	this	substance	that	tendency	in	writings	about	salt	to	conclude
with	a	clotted	thought,	a	reduction	to	a	basic	idea.	The	multiple	nature	of	salts,	their	multiple	origins
and	effects,	that	the	term	refers	to	so	many	different	qualities	of	experience	and	chemical	materials
(alums,	alkalis,	ashes,	etc.) [29]	–	all	tend	to	congeal	into	a	single	basic	principle.	For	Jones	this	idea
was	“semen”;	for	Jung,	it	was	“Eros.”	The	stuff	of	which	we	write	becomes	the	stuff	with	which	we
write	and	we	are	affected	by	the	material	we	work	with.	As	we	would	take	in	the	reader,	captivating
and	convincing,	so	does	the	material	because	it,	too,	is	ensouled,	captures	our	imagination:	we	lose
mercurial	volatility	and	sulfuric	richness	and	become	reduced	ourselves	to	repetitions,	moral
constraints	and	fixities	of	expression	as	we	attempt	to	go	ever	inward,	accurately	defining	the	pure
roots	and	bones,	crystallizing	that	experience	called	“sal.”	The	importance	of	salt	as	value	(expressed
above	in	terms	of	soldier ’s	pay)	instead	becomes	an	overvaluation	of	either	the	place	of	this
substance	within	the	alchemical	opus	or	of	one’s	interpretation:	an	overvalued	idea	due	to	an
overdose	of	salt.
This	effect	of	salt	proceeds	from	its	own	fervor,	a	fervor	of	fixity	which	can	be	distinguished	from
the	fervor	of	sulfuric	enthusiasm	and	its	manic	boil	of	action,	as	well	as	from	the	fervor	of	mercury
and	its	effervescent	volatility.	Salt’s	fervor	is	rather	holy,	cleansing	and	bitter;	immovably	fixed;
fanatic.

You	will	recall	that	Paracelsus	(1: 258)	held	that	we	eat	salt	to	cherish	our	nature	of	salt	and	that	we
desire	salt	for	its	own	sake.	Salt	desires	itself.	Its	appetite	works	in	us	and	through	us	for	itself.	It	is
fixed	upon	itself.	Where	sulfur	and	mercury	are	found	in	and	by	means	of	other	events,	salt	is	the
experience	of	feeding	on	experience.	By	closing	out	the	other	principles,	it	can	intensify	its	own
interiority.	A	salt	mine	right	there	in	whatever	we	call	‘mine.’	Thus	in	extremis,	salt	eats	into	its	own
nature,	corrosive	as	lye	in	its	own	self-reflective	purifications:	recriminations,	repentance,	ashes,
lustrations	toward	an	ever-purer	essence.	Its	suffering	is	self-caused.	This	is	the	salt	that	turns	all	reds
to	blue	–	blue	in	the	senses	of	cold,	puritan,	celestial,	exclusive,	loyal,	doleful,	deadly	(cyanide,
cobalt,	prussic). [30]
Here	we	may	review	those	images	of	pure	salt	that	we	have	already	seen:	of	the	virgin	boy’s	urine,
white	crystal,	final	ash.	Here,	too,	belong	the	images	of	the	salt	desert	as	if	it	were	heaven:	the	Elysian
fields	become	a	Dead	Sea,	celestial,	immaculate	and	barren,	a	crystalline	ground	of	self-laceration,
that	sense	of	being	grounded	in	long-suffering	nobility,	which	negates	even	the	fiat	mihi.	For	nothing
comes	from	the	Great	Salt	Lake	when	one	has	oneself	become	purely	salt,	like	Lot’s	wife.	As	salt
fixates	and	purifies	itself,	suffering	becomes	fanaticism.
The	intensity	of	this	fanaticism	appears	in	alchemical	language	both	as	ammonia,	caustic	soda,
alkali,	white	lime,	and	as	natron,	the	white	salt	of	niter,	which	is	a	destructive,	explosive	powder.
(Even	table	salt	is	delicately	flammable,	an	unstable	metal	–	sodium.)
Some	alchemists	recognized	as	salts	whatever	appeared	in	crystalline	form.	May	we	imagine	that	a
salt	crystallizes	to	bind	its	inherent	fervor?	These	fanatical	salts	manifest	themselves	more	in	political
and	doctrinal	affairs,	although	similar	attitudes	appear	as	well	in	the	concretistic	askesis	of	paranoid
schizophrenia.	The	very	virtue	of	salt	–	its	down-to-earth,	concrete	commonality	–	seems	a	virtue
only	in	combination	with	other	elements.	Alone,	salt	fixates	on	itself,	attempting	to	become	the	pure
elixir	which	alchemy	insists	is	always	the	result	of	many	combinations.
The	inherent	capability	of	salt	to	crystallize	its	own	essence	is	what	I	would	call	the	inherent
virginity	of	salt.	By	virginity	here	I	mean	the	self-same,	self-enclosed	devotion	to	purity.	I	believe	it	is
this	aspect	of	salt	that	is	alchemically	associated	with	the	cold,	hard	aspect	of	Luna,	the	queen	as
“bitch.” [31]	The	Luna-sal	connection	is	discussed	at	length	by	Jung,	who	considers	salt	another	term
for	the	moon,	another	manifestation	of	the	more	general	principle	of	”the	feminine.” [32]
In	ancient	Rome,	salt	was	indeed	the	province	of	the	virginal	feminine,	the	Vestals. [33]	They
prepared	the	sacrificial	animals	and	sprinkled	each	with	salt	to	make	it	holy.	The	Vestal	(i.e.,	an
initiated	and	ritualized)	Virgin	was	the	mistress	of	the	salt;	she	understood	how	to	handle	it.	Here	is
the	virgin,	not	in	the	fervor	of	fanaticism,	but	the	virgin	as	mediatrix;	she	knows	the	right	dosage,	a
pinch,	a	touch,	a	grain,	not	a	state.	Jung	quotes	Picinellus:	“Let	the	word	be	sprinkled	with	salt,	not
deluged	with	it.” [34]	The	dosage	of	salt	is	an	art:	it	must	be	taken	cum	grano	salis,	not	corrosive,
bitter	irony	and	biting	sarcasm	or	fixed	immortal	dogma,	but	the	deft	touch	that	brings	out	the	flavor.
Even	the	salt	of	wisdom	(sal	sapientia)	and	the	salt	of	common	sense	become	crystallized	and
destructive	when	taken	alone,	squarely,	or	imagined	straight,	for	it	is	in	the	very	nature	of	salt	to
literalize	itself	and	conserve	itself	into	a	crystal	body.	Any	insight	or	experience	preserved	as	truth	or
faith	becomes	virginal:	it	closes	into	itself,	becomes	unyielding,	dense	and	defended.	Too	much	salt.
We	are	each	virginal	when	we	are	preserved	from	experience	by	preserved	experience.
Hence	the	importance	of	the	Vestal	Virgins.	Like	cures	like.	Their	conscious	virginity	enabled	them
to	handle	the	purifying	power	of	the	salt.	As	initiates	in	the	cult	of	salt,	they	must	have	understood	the
dangers	of	its	“corruptive	ferment.” [35]	Society	is	always	in	danger	of	the	fervor	of	salt	–
puritanism,	fanaticism,	terrorism	–	and	the	preservation	of	Roman	culture	depended	upon	the	Vestal
Virgins. [36]	This	suggests	that	a	psychological	understanding	of	the	power	of	salt	and	its	dosage	is
necessary	for	the	human	body,	the	soul’s	body,	and	the	body	politic.	Too	little	and	principles	go	by

the	board;	too	much	and	a	reign	of	terror	ensues.
We	can	recognize	when	the	principle	of	fixation	has	become	a	fixation	of	principle.	Then	salt	is
unable	to	be	combusted	and	released	by	sulfur	or	is	unable	to	be	touched	or	stained	by	mercury:
neither	life	nor	insight	possible,	only	dedication,	fervid	and	pure.	Alchemical	psychology	protects
itself	from	salt	by	its	composite	thinking,	in	mixtures,	a	bit	of	this	and	a	bit	of	that.	Alchemical	salt	is
always	yielding	its	body	to	sulfur	and	mercury,	to	the	love	for	it	of	spirit	and	soul,	fiat	mihi,	let	it	be
done	to	me,	receptive	to	other	powers,	touching	them	and	in	touch	with	what	it	is	not,	the	alien	and
unredeemed.	For	the	function	of	salt	is	not	its	own	conservation,	but	the	preservation	of	whatever	it
touches.	Images	of	the	Virgin	Mary,	welcoming	the	alien,	letting	all	things	come	to	her	and	affording
protection	by	giving	her	body	to	whatever	their	condition,	by	giving	that	touch	which	brings	out	their
flavor	and	blesses	their	earth	–	this	presents	the	soluble	salt,	Stella	Maris.	For	as	Arnold	of	Villanova
said,	“The	salt	that	can	be	melted”	is	the	desirable	salt. [37]	“Prepare	this	salt	till	it	is	rendered
sweet.” [38]
As	a	final	example	of	the	fervor	of	salt,	or	what	the	alchemist	Khunrath [39]	imagines	as	a	hell	fire
in	the	midst	of	salt,	perhaps	a	too-bright	light	in	which	purity	burns	with	a	consuming	passion,	we
close	with	an	“alchemical	text”	by	D. H.	Lawrence	from	his	1915	novel	The	Rainbow,	the	chapter
called	“First	Love.” [40]
The	scene	is	set	among	haystacks	under	the	moon,	at	a	wedding	feast.	Images	of	fire	and	darkness
pervade,	and	those	familiar	alchemical	opposites	appear	when	“red	fire	glinted	on	a	white	or	silken
skirt.”	The	principal	figure,	Ursula,	“wanted	to	let	go.”
She	wanted	to	reach	and	be	amongst	the	flashing	stars,	she	wanted	to	race	with	her	feet	and	be	beyond	the	confines	of	this	earth.
She	was	mad	to	be	gone.	It	was	as	if	a	hound	were	straining	on	the	leash,	ready	to	hurl	itself	after	a	nameless	quarry	into	the	dark.

She	invites	Skrebensky	to	dance.	“It	was	his	will	and	her	will	…	locked	in	one	motion,	yet	never
fusing,	never	yielding	one	to	the	other.”
As	the	dance	surged	heavily	on,	Ursula	was	aware	of	some	influence	looking	in	upon	her	…	Some	powerful,	glowing	sight	was
looking	right	into	her	…	She	turned,	and	saw	a	great	white	moon	…	And	her	breast	opened	to	it	…	She	stood	filled	with	the	full
moon,	offering	herself	…	She	wanted	the	moon	to	fill	in	to	her,	she	wanted	more,	more	communion	with	the	moon,	consummation.

Skrebensky	takes	her	hand	and	wraps	a	big	dark	cloak	around	her,	and	they	sit.	She	desires
desperately	to	fling	off	her	clothing	and	flee	away	to	the	moon,	“the	clean	free	moonlight.”
Skrebensky,	too,	takes	on	a	metallic	quality,	“a	dark,	impure	magnetism.	He	was	the	dross,	people
were	the	dross.”
Skrebensky,	like	a	load-stone	weighed	on	her	…	He	was	inert,	and	he	weighed	on	her	…	Oh,	for	the	coolness	and	entire	liberty
and	brightness	of	the	moon.	Oh,	for	the	cold	liberty	to	be	herself	…	She	felt	like	bright	metal.

And	her	hands	clench	“in	the	dewy	brilliance	of	the	moon,	as	if	she	were	mad.”	Then	a	strange	rage
fills	her	and	her	hands	feel	like	metal	blades	of	destruction.	“Let	me	alone,”	she	said.	She	throws	off
his	dark	cloak	and	walks	towards	the	moon	“silver-white	herself.”
They	begin	again	to	dance,	and	a	struggle	starts	between	them.	She	feels	“a	fierce,	white,	cold
passion	in	her	heart.”	And	though	he	presses	his	body	on	her,	as	if	to	make	her	feel	inert	along	with
him,	there	remains	in	her	body	a	“cold,	indomitable	passion.”	“She	was	cold	and	unmoved	as	a	pillar
of	salt.”	To	him	she	feels	“cold	and	hard	and	compact	of	brilliance	as	the	moon	itself,”	and	he	wishes
to	set	a	bond	around	her	and	compel	her	to	his	will.
They	went	towards	…	the	great	new	stacks	of	corn	…	silver	and	present	under	the	night-blue	sky	…	the	silvery-bluish	air.	All
was	intangible,	a	burning	of	cold,	glimmering,	whitish-steely	fires.	He	was	afraid	of	the	great	moon-conflagration	of	the	cornstacks	…	He	knew	he	would	die.

Ursula	becomes	aware	of	the	power	she	holds:	“A	sudden	lust	seized	her,	to	lay	hold	of	him	and	tear
him	and	make	him	into	nothing.”	Her	hands	feel	hard	and	strong	as	blades	and	her	face	gleams
“bright	and	inspired.”	Skrebensky	again	draws	her	close	to	him.
And	timorously,	his	hands	went	over	her,	over	the	salt	compact	brilliance	of	her	body	…	If	he	could	but	net	her	brilliant,	cold,
salt-burning	body	in	the	soft	iron	of	his	own	hands	…	He	strove	…	with	all	his	energy	to	enclose	her,	to	have	her.	And	always	she
was	burning	and	brilliant	and	hard	as	salt,	and	deadly.

He	puts	his	mouth	to	her	mouth,	“though	it	was	like	putting	his	face	into	some	awful	death,”	and	her
kiss	was	“hard	and	fierce	and	burning	corrosive	as	the	moonlight …”
Cold	as	the	moon	and	burning	as	a	fierce	salt.	Till	gradually	his	soft	iron	yielded,	yielded,	and	she	was	there	fierce,	corrosive,
seething	with	his	destruction,	seething	like	some	cruel,	corrosive	salt	around	the	last	substance	of	his	being,	destroying	him,
destroying	him	in	the	kiss.	And	her	soul	crystallized	with	triumph,	and	his	soul	was	dissolved	with	agony	and	annihilation.

I	have	let	D. H.	Lawrence	present	the	figures	and	scene	of	my	conclusion	for	several	reasons.	First,	to
exhibit	again	the	connection	between	psychology	and	literature,	to	suggest	their	interchangeability.
Second,	to	bring	witness	to	the	ever-presence	of	alchemical	imagination	–	in	this	case	the	sol	et	luna
conjunction	as	sulfuric	iron	and	salt.	(I	do	not	believe	we	can	reduce	these	images	and	this	rhetoric	to
the	influence	upon	Lawrence	of	his	father,	a	miner,	or	of	the	mining	milieu	of	his	native	place.)
Third,	to	show	personalities	as	composed	of	and	carried	by	imaginal	substances	–	metallic	seeds,
chemicals,	impersonal	minerals,	the	hard	and	enduring	natures	of	the	gods	working	through	our
wills.	And,	fourth,	to	raise	a	veil	and	sound	a	warning	concerning	undifferentiated	lunar
consciousness.
As	the	twentieth	century	was	setting,	a	full	moon	was	rising.	Much	as	solar	enlightenment	and	its
obsession	with	clarity,	optics,	measurement,	royalty	and	categories	of	hierarchical	order	possessed
the	Western	mind	from	the	sixteenth	century	until	the	Romantic	revolution,	so	moonbeams	infiltrated
into	the	late	twentieth	century:	Right-sided	brains	and	left-handed	cults;	herbals	and	vegetables,
fragrant	candles	and	healing	rites;	fears	of	seas	rising	and	the	aquifers	going	saline;	wiccans,	popvisions	of	Our	Lady,	Artemis	freedoms,	Diana	power,	lesbian	politics,	the	ordination	of	women
priests;	women	governors,	senators,	generals,	CEOs,	history	as	“herstory”;	marching	mothers	and
the	salt	tears	of	grieving,	the	moon-balm	of	compassion	to	all	creatures	large	and	small.	All	the
goddesses	crowded	within.	“The	Feminine”	as	a	fervor	of	salt;	new	sanity	and	old	lunacy
indistinguishable	in	the	moonlight.
Too	close	to	the	moon	can	be	madness.	“Love	burns	in	changes	of	the	moon.”	Says	Robert	Duncan,
“She	comes	so	near	to	earth	/	And	makes	men	mad.	/	O	misery!”	(“The	Venice	Poem”).	We	watch	this
moon	too	close	to	earth	in	Ursula,	whose	lunacy	is	a	death-dealing	fanaticism,	bitter,	assertive,
caustic,	sterile,	corrosive	salt.	We	witness	Ursula’s	body	turning	to	salt	as	she	becomes	infused	with
her	subjectivity.	Like	Lot’s	wife,	she	is	self-occupied.	Because	salt	is	the	soul	of	the	body,	it	can	reach
us	through	body-subjectivity.	We	become	pure	body-experience,	and	transmute	the	event	of	the	other
into	a	mere	instrument	of	the	experience.	Thus	the	body	turns	to	salt;	it	remains	untouched,	its
virginity	preserved	even	while	it	is	being	embraced	because	no	conjunction	is	happening,	only	the
intense	experience	of	subjectivity.
There	is	a	confusion	here	between	the	urge	for	purity	and	the	desire	for	liberty.	The	Vestal	Virgin
submitted	utterly;	there	was	no	possibility	of	imagining	liberty	together	with	purity.	The	result	of	this
confusion	is	a	fervid	and	lonely	purism,	a	vestigial	virgin	without	her	ritual	and	isolated	from	her
cult,	burning	with	divine	eros,	yet	seeking	the	white	light	for	herself,	her	devotion	to	the	moon
poisoned	by	the	salt	of	subjectivity.	“People	were	the	dross.”	Purism	is	the	salt	in	the	soul	that	allows
no	recovery;	it	is	also	the	passion	for	revenge.	“Carthage	must	be	exterminated,”	said	obsessed,

fanatical	Cato;	its	soil	sown	with	salt.	Purism	as	utter	destruction.
Each	planet,	each	worship,	each	archetypal	perspective	has	its	kind	of	terror.	There	is	a	terror	in	the
moon,	in	the	purity	of	a	single-minded	devotion	which	its	salt	can	claim.	The	terror	arises	not	simply
from	its	so-called	dark	side,	from	Lamia	and	Hecate’s	bitch	or	Lilith,	but	from	the	moon’s	sway	over
the	salt	in	the	seas	and	our	microcosmic	flood.	From	the	analysis	in	this	chapter	we	may	understand
purism	as	the	fixation	of	salt	into	a	literalization	of	the	preservative	principle.
Owing	to	the	inherent	relation	between	Luna	and	Sal,	purism	is	the	main	danger	in	any	devotion	to
the	moon.	To	invoke	the	moon	is	to	invite	the	salt, [41]	and	unless	we	are	trained	in	the	nature	and
power	of	salt	as	were	the	alchemists	and	the	Vestal	Virgins,	we	become	unwitting	terrorists	of	the
night,	no	matter	how	noble	our	dedication.	Fanatical	singleness	frees	one	from	the	power	of	the	other
but	at	the	expense	of	destroying	the	other ’s	core	existence.	We	may	stand	tall,	but	we	stand	alone,	cold
and	barren	as	the	moon.
Ursula	had	not	been	trained	in	alchemical	psychology	where	we	learn	that	the	moon	is	not	a
stopping	place.	Both	alchemy	and	astrology	consider	the	moon	a	way	station	to	the	other	planets, [42]
just	as	the	microcosmic	moon,	the	human	psyche,	indicates	various	gods.	The	moon	implies	others;	it
is	no	sovereign	solar	king	producing	its	all-important,	self-sufficient	light	out	of	itself.	It	reflects
light	from	beyond	itself.	For	an	alchemical	psychology,	devotion	to	the	moon	extends	to	what	the
moon	reflects	–	a	variety	of	other	powers.
In	everyday	use	salt	is	an	emetic	and	a	purgative.	It	can	rid	us	of	poisons.	In	the	right	dilution	it	is
medicinal	and	hastens	healing.	Because	it	purifies,	it	was	sprinkled	on	the	sacred	flour	and	sacrificial
animals	by	the	Roman	vestals.	That	purity	was	apportioned	precisely,	ritually,	uncontaminated	by	any
other	element.	Especially,	no	water.	The	virgins	were	issued	only	the	amount	of	water	they	would	use
each	day	and	the	water	was	held	in	an	unsteady	jar	(the	futile)	so	that	none	could	be	kept.	Purity	cannot
allow	dilution.
We	each	need	a	Vestal	Virgin	to	guide	our	hand	in	apportioning	our	fervid	dedication	and	the
grains	of	inherent	bitterness	which	accompany	dedication	and	give	it	its	zest.	The	very	same	salt	that
is	honest	wisdom,	sincere	truth,	common	sense,	ironic	wit	and	subjective	feeling	is	also	salt	the
destroyer.	Dosage [43]	is	the	art	of	the	salt;	a	touch	of	the	virgin,	not	too	much.	This	dosage	only	our
individual	taste	and	common	sense	can	prescribe.	Only	our	salt	can	taste	its	own	requirements.
Some	seek	not	gold,	but	there	lives	not	a	man	who	does	not	need	salt.
– Cassiodorus
Originally	appeared	as	“Salt:	A	Chapter	in	Alchemical	Psychology”	in	the	publication	of	papers	of	the	Dragonflies	conference	in	Dallas
in	February	1979,	and	subsequently	published	in	Images	of	the	Untouched:	Virginity	in	Psyche,	Myth,	and	Community,	ed.	Joanne
Stroud	and	Gail	Thomas	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1982),	111–37.
1 Animal	life	depends	on	common	salt.	Horses	(according	to	breed,	size	and	location)	require	up	to	40	pounds	a	year,	cows	up	to	80.
Humans	consume	about	ten	pounds	(not	including	the	amounts	in	already	prepared	edibles).	“You	and	I	each	contain	about	eight	ounces
of	salt	–	enough	to	fill	several	shakers.	[Salt]	is	involved	in	muscle	contractions	including	heartbeats	…	nerve	impulses	…	digestion.
Without	salt	the	body	goes	into	convulsions,	paralysis,	death.	Put	blood	cells	in	a	salt-free	fluid	and	they	burst.”	(G.	Young,	“Salt:	The
Essence	of	Life,”	National	Geographic	[September	1977],	381.)	Since	the	need	for	salt	is	so	basic,	governments	relied	on	salt
monopolies	and	salt	taxes	for	a	sure	source	of	funds.	Salt-tax	rebellions	ensued,	for	salt	represented	the	common	people’s	common	need
so	that	its	control	was	an	injustice	affecting	life	itself.	The	defeat	of	the	secessionist	South	in	1865	has	been	attributed	to	a	salt	famine	and
a	Chinese	law	states	that	a	man	deprived	of	salt	for	a	fortnight	would	be	too	weak	to	tie	up	a	chicken.	(R. P.	Multhauf,	Neptune’s	Gift:	A
History	of	Common	Salt	[Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1978],	3–19.)	So	valuable	was	salt	that	it	was	imported	great
distances	(for	instance,	from	Sicily	via	Venice	to	the	peasants	in	the	upper	Rhone	valleys	in	Switzerland).	In	Africa	blocks	of	Sahara	salt
were	sold	to	sub-Saharan	economies	in	exchange	for	gold	dust,	ivory,	and	slaves.	Salted	food	is	synonymous	with	“holy”	food	in	ancient
Hebrew.	(F.	Braudel,	Civilization	and	Capitalism,	15th–18th	Century,	vol.	1:	The	Structure	of	Everyday	Life,	trans.	S.	Reynolds
[Berkeley:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1992],	209.)
2 Reprinted	in	E.	Jones,	Essays	in	Applied	Psychoanalysis,	vol.	2:	Essays	in	Folklore,	Anthropology	and	Religion	(London:	Hogarth

Press,	1951).
3 Both	essays	were	re-issued	and	excellently	introduced	by	Stanton	Marlan	in	Salt	and	the	Alchemical	Soul	(Woodstock,	Conn.:
Spring	Publications,	1995).
4 Although	various	of	salts	were	alchemically	known	in	antiquity	(Theophrastus,	Pliny,	and	later	Geber	and	Rasis),	not	until	Paracelsus
was	salt	elevated	to	one	of	the	tria	prima,	more	fundamental	than	the	seven	planets	and	the	four	elemental	temperaments.	Paracelsus	refounded	alchemy	on	a	tripartite	scheme	by	introducing	salt	as	a	new	third	term.	This	“third”	position	is	characteristic	of	Paracelsus	in	that
he	opposed	both	Aristotle	and	the	Scholastics	on	one	side	and	Galen	on	the	other.	His	tradition,	as	Walter	Pagel	shows	(“Paracelsus:
Traditionalism	and	Medieval	Sources,”	in	Medicine,	Science,	and	Culture:	Historical	Essays	in	Honor	of	Owsei	Temkin,	ed.	L. G.
Stevenson,	R. P.	Multhauf	[Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1968],	57ff.),	was	Platonic	and	Neoplatonic,	especially	in
following	the	tripartite	cosmo-anthropology	of	Marsilio	Ficino	–	body,	soul,	spirit	–	whom	Paracelsus	admired.	It	is	in	his	advocacy	of
the	third	principle	that	I	see	the	importance	of	Paracelsus	for	Jung	as	a	spiritual	ancestor	(CW	15: 1 –143;	MDR	200	and	220).	Both
warned	against	theological	spiritualism	on	one	side	and	empirical	materialism	on	the	other	in	order	to	hold	the	middle	ground	of	soul	or
psychic	reality.	Part	of	the	so-called	“elusiveness”	of	Paracelsus	(O.	Temkin,	“The	Elusiveness	of	Paracelsus,”	Bulletin	of	the	History	of
Medicine	26	[1952],	201–17)	can	be	attributed	to	this	mercurial	middle	ground.	Although	Paracelsus	usually	identified	sulfur	rather	than
salt	with	the	middle	integument,	it	was	his	advocacy	of	salt	and	his	own	saltiness	(the	physical,	practical,	common,	vernacular,	purgative,
sharp-tongued,	bitter,	uncombinable	nature	of	his	character)	that	shows	this	substance	to	have	been	as	fundamental	to	his	nature	as	it	was
to	his	thought.	He	died,	by	the	way,	in	Salzburg.	(On	the	three	lines	of	thinking,	see	O.	Temkin,	Galenism:	Rise	and	Decline	of	a	Medical
Philosophy	[Ithaca:	Cornell	Univ.	Press,	1973],	esp.	128–70.)
5 “Science”	from	scire,	to	know,	is	cognate	with	scindere,	to	cut,	divide,	and	has	the	same	probable	root	as	schism,	shed,	and	shit	(as
separation).	Cf.	E.	Weekley,	An	Etymological	Dictionary	of	Modern	English	(London:	John	Murray,	1921.)
6 Cf.	CW	14: 3 22–23.	Salt	is	also	Christ,	Mercurius,	and	thus	the	spirit	as	well	as	the	soul,	and	body	or	earth.
7 A	classical	psychoanalyst	would	likely	find	the	contrast	between	sausage	roll	and	creamy	bun	to	symbolize	an	opposition	between
male	and	female	genitalia.
8 E.	Philalethes,	“The	Secret	of	the	Immortal	Liquor	called	Alkahest	or	Ignis-Aqua,”	Collectanea,	12–13.
9 In	common	cookery	salt	is	used	for	“contracting”	the	fibers	of	meat.	Mrs.	Beeton’s	Household	Management	(Ware,	Hertfordshire:
Wordsworth	Editions,	2006),	269.
10 HM	1: 2 2.
11 Ibid.
12 “Healing,”	in	The	Complete	Poems	of	D. H.	Lawrence	(Ware,	Hertfordshire:	Wordsworth	Editions,	1994),	513.
13 See	H.	Silberer,	Problems	of	Mysticism	and	its	Symbolism,	trans.	S. E.	Jelliffe	(New	York:	Moffat,	Yard	and	Company,	1917),	395–
96.	Concerning	salt	as	square	or	cube,	Silberer	makes	a	nice	differentiation:	“Crystallization	produces	the	regular	form;	fixation,	the
density.”	The	scanning	electron	microscope	shows	the	structure	of	common	salt	to	be	rather	like	hard-edged	squares	or	small	flat	cubes.
Cf.	the	alchemist	Edward	Jorden	(1569–1632)	in	A. G.	Debus,	English	Paracelsians	(London:	Oldbourne	Press,	1965),	163.
14 On	fire	and	salt,	see	Jung,	CW	14: 3 19.	The	“fire”	hidden	in	salt	is	its	dry	power	or	spirit	even	if	it	remains	itself	inflammable.
Common	sodium	chloride	melts	only	at	800 ℃.	Yet	there	is	a	“fire”	hidden	in	salt,	for	common	table	salt	is	composed	of	“a	metal	so
unstable	that	it	bursts	into	flame	when	exposed	to	water;	and	a	lethal	gas	(chlorine)”	(Young,	“Salt,”	381).
15 The	touch	of	salt	and	bitter	herbs	at	Jewish	Passover	brings	back	the	memorial	image	of	the	Red	Sea	and	the	desert.	The	image	must
not	be	forgotten	because	it	is	part	of	what	makes	this	day	different	from	any	other	day,	i.e.,	remembrances	help	differentiate	and	fix
significance.	Salt	initiates	the	youngest	child	(naive	soul)	into	the	bitter	images	of	the	soul.	When,	however,	remembrance	becomes	more
than	a	touch,	over-salted,	then	“not	forgetting”	becomes	literalized	into	history	as	facts.	Then	we	become	stuck	in	the	past	rather	than
sticking	to	the	image,	and	the	salt	acts	no	longer	as	an	imagistic	remembrance,	but	becomes	a	literalized	historical	experience.
16 L.	Ginzberg,	The	Legends	of	the	Jews,	7	vols.	(Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1998),	1: 2 55	and	5: 2 41–42.	The	same
commentaries	note	that	the	destructive	rain	that	fell	on	Sodom	while	Lot’s	wife	was	looking	back	on	that	place	of	lustful	desire	was	a
rain	of	brimstone	(sulfur),	i.e.,	salt	longing	for	sulfur.
17 Cf.	J.	Read,	Prelude	to	Chemistry:	An	Outline	of	Alchemy,	Its	Literature	and	Relationships	(London:	G.	Bell	and	Sons,	1936),	27.
18 S.	Freud,	“Psycho-Analytic	Notes	Upon	an	Autobiographical	Account	of	a	Case	of	Paranoia,”	in	Collected	Papers,	4	vols.

(London:	Hogarth	Press,	1924–25),	3: 4 53.
19 Cf.	Philalethes,	“The	Liquor	Alkahest,”	for	a	short	treatise	on	urine.	For	a	recipe	of	”piss	and	vinegar”	see	HM	2: 7 4	(“The
Testament	of	Cremer”).	The	urine	is	to	be	collected	from	an	“unpolluted	[virginal]	youth.”
20 Ginzberg,	Legends	of	the	Jews,	5: 1 8.
21 H. A.	Murray,	“American	Icarus,”	in	Puer	Papers,	ed.	J.	Hillman	(Irving,	Texas:	Spring	Publications,	1979),	91ff.
22 Since	there	are	many	salts,	there	are	many	operations	to	produce	it,	evaporation	being	but	one.	Others	are	calcination,	putrefaction,
distillation	(salt	as	a	byproduct),	coagulation.
23 I.	Asimov,	The	Search	for	the	Elements	(New	York:	Basic	Books,	1962),	35–36;	cf.	R. P.	Multhauf,	The	Origins	of	Chemistry
(London:	Oldbourne,	1966),	22f.
24 Albertus	Magnus,	Libellus	de	alchimia,	trans.	V.	Heines	(Berkeley:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1958),	61.
25 HM	1: 1 54–55	(“The	New	Chemical	Light”).
26 Debus,	The	English	Paracelsians,	163:	“Salts	are	proper	to	blew	colors.”	(citing	Edward	Jorden’s	A	Discourse	of	Naturall	Bathes,
and	Minerall	Waters	[London,	1631]).	Jorden	also	wrote	probably	the	first	treatise	in	English	on	hysteria.
27 D. R.	Oldroyd,	“Some	Neoplatonic	and	Stoic	Influences	on	Mineralogy	in	the	Sixteenth	and	Seventeenth	Centuries,”	Ambix 21
(1974),	148	(citing	the	French	alchemist	Nicolas	Le	Fèvre	[1615–1669]).
28 Debus,	The	English	Paracelsians,	94	(citing	Duchesne’s	Le	Grand	miroir	du	monde	[Paris,	1595]).
29 For	a	treatise	showing	many	salts	and	the	different	operation	for	each,	see	R.	Steele,	“Practical	Chemistry	in	the	Twelfth	Century,”
Isis 12	(1929),	10–21.	(Rasis’s	practices	are	reported	in	Bonus	of	Ferrara,	The	New	Pearl	of	Great	Price:	A	Treatise	Concerning	the
Treasure	and	Most	Precious	Stone	of	the	Philosophers	or	the	Method	and	Procedure	of	this	Divine	Art,	trans.	A. E.	Waite	[London:
Vincent	Stuart,	1963],	366–71.)
30 Cf.	below,	chap.	5,	“Alchemical	Blue	and	the	Unio	Mentalis.”
31 CW	14: 1 74ff.	Robert	Grinnell	(Alchemy	in	a	Modern	Woman	[Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1973]),	expands	upon	the	“bitch”	in
depth.
32 CW	14: 2 34,	240,	and	320–55.
33 S.	Demetrakopoulos,	“Hestia,	Goddess	of	the	Hearth,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought
(1979),	65–68,	with	notes.	Cf.	for	details	of	the	preparation	of	the	mola,	G.	Dumézil,	Archaic	Roman	Religion,	trans.	P.	Krapp,	2	vols.,
(Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1996),	1: 3 18.
34 CW	14: 3 26.
35 Philalethes,	“The	Liquor	Alkahest,”	22.
36 Cf.	Demetrakopoulos,	“Hestia,	Goddess	of	the	Hearth,”	68.
37 CW	14: 2 40.
38 HM	1: 1 77	(“The	Glory	of	the	World”).
39 CW	14: 3 37;	HM	1: 1 76–77.
40 D. H.	Lawrence,	The	Rainbow	(London:	Penguin	Books,	1995),	chap.	11.	Other	passages	exhibiting	saline,	lunar,	metallic
metaphors,	and	even	a	chemical	view	of	human	character	in	the	relationship	of	Ursula	and	Skrebensky,	appear	in	chap.	15,	“The
Bitterness	of	Ecstasy.”
41 One	name	for	salt	was	“common	moon”	(HM	1: 1 77).	The	affinity	of	sal	and	luna	was	metallurgically	witnessed	in	the	process	of
gold-making:	When	salt	is	added	to	a	gold/silver	compositum	and	it	is	exposed	to	red-hot	heat	for	a	period,	the	salt	“attacks”	the	silver,

driving	it	into	the	walls	of	the	crucible	where	it	forms	sliver	chloride,	letting	the	purified	gold	run	free.	This	process	compares	with	the
“attack”	of	salt	on	leprotic	lunar	reflection,	freeing	the	light	of	intelligence	from	hyper-subjectivity.	(R. J.	Forbes,	Metallurgy	in	Antiquity,
second	edition	[Leiden:	Brill,	1971],	180.)
42 CW	14: 2 17–18.	“Luna	represents	the	six	planets	…	She	is	multi-natured.”
43 It	was	Paracelsus	and	his	school	(Debus,	The	English	Paracelsians,	32–35)	that	“went	to	great	pains	to	determine	the	correct
dosage	with	their	medicines.”	The	concern	with	dosage	derived	most	probably	from	the	iatro-chemistry	of	mineral	and	metallic	salts	as
specific	medicines.	If	the	Paracelsians	taught	the	art	of	dosing	salts,	salt	was	the	principle	that	taught	the	Paracelsians.

	

4
The	Seduction	of	Black
	
The	principal	of	the	art	is	the	raven.
– C. G.	Jung

The	Color	of	Non-Color
Black	and	White	–	these	two	non-colors	to	the	Newtonian	eye	of	science	are,	to	the	eye	of	culture,	the
first	of	all	colors	–	the	truly	primary	colors.	Two	University	of	California	ethnologists	published	a
survey	of	the	words	for	colors	in	some	ninety-eight	languages. [1]	From	this	base,	they	made	a	wider,
universal	claim,	reporting	that	all	languages	have	terms	for	black	and	white,	dark	and	light,	obscure
and	bright.	Furthermore,	if	a	language	has	a	third	color	term,	it	will	be	red;	and	if	a	fourth	and	fifth,
yellow	or	green.
For	us,	their	principal	finding,	and	the	one	least	contested	by	others,	is	the	primacy	of	the	blackwhite	pair.	All	cultures,	it	seems,	make	this	distinction,	this	fact	suggesting	the	importance	of	the
diurnal	rhythm, [2]	and,	particularly	for	psychology,	that	contrast [3]	is	essential	to	consciousness.
Among	sub-Saharan	African	peoples,	the	three	primary	colors	–	black,	white,	and	red	(and	I	am
translating	more	metaphorically	concrete	expressions	into	our	abstract	color	terms)	–	form	the	very
ruling	principles	of	the	cosmos.	They	are	not	merely	color	words,	names	of	hues.
We	find	a	similar	idea	in	the	three	gunas	in	Indian	cosmology:	black	tamas,	red	rajas,	and	white
sattva	enter	into	the	composition	of	all	things.	The	anthropologist	Victor	Turner	states	that	these	three
colors	“provide	aprimordial	classification	of	reality.” [4]	They	are	“experiences	common	to	all
mankind,”	like	archetypal	“forces,”	“biologically,	psychologically,	and	logically	prior	to	social
classifications,	moieties,	clans,	sex	totems,	and	all	the	rest.”	For	culture,	black	and	white,	as	well	as
red,	precede	and	determine	the	way	human	life	is	lived.
Turner ’s	claim	separates	the	“culture”	of	color	from	the	“science”	of	color.	From	the	cultural
viewpoint,	colors	are	not	secondary	qualities,	reducible	to	physical	sensations	in	neurological
systems	in	the	subjective	perceiver.	On	the	one	hand,	colors	have	to	do	with	light,	reflection,	optics,
and	nerves;	on	the	other,	they	have	something	to	do	with	the	world	itself.	They	are	the	world	itself,
and	this	world	is	not	merely	a	colored	world,	as	if	by	accidents	of	light	and	chemistry,	or	as	if
decorated	by	a	painterly	god.	Colors	present	the	world’s	phenomenal	actuality	the	way	the	world
shows	itself,	and,	as	operational	agents	in	the	world,	colors	are	primary	formative	principles.
Even	the	rainbow	derives	its	colors	from	the	phenomenal	world	(rather	than	from	the	refraction	of
light)	according	to	the	mediaeval	imagination:	“From	the	heavens	it	derives	the	fiery	color;	from
water,	the	purple;	from	air,	the	blue;	and	from	the	earth	the	grassy	color.” [5]	Whether	the	earth	takes
its	colors	from	an	invisible,	colorless	light	above	or	composes	that	light	by	means	of	its	own
elemental	hues	(green	grass,	blue	water),	the	rainbow	joins	visible	and	invisible.	The	Torah	says	God
set	forth	the	rainbow	as	a	visible	sign	that	the	cosmos	is	sustained	by	invisible	principles.	The
rainbow	also	declares	the	double	principle	that	the	display	of	beauty	goes	hand	in	hand	with
discrimination,	the	spectrum	of	finely	differentiated	hues.
Only	in	a	physically	reduced	worldview,	a	worldview	reduced	to	and	by	physics,	can	black	be

called	a	non-color,	an	absence	of	color,	a	deprivation	of	light.	This	privative	definition	of	black
ignores	the	fact	that	black	appears	in	broad	daylight	in	naturally	given	pigments	and	in	other
phenomena	from	charcoal	and	obsidian	to	blackberries	and	animal	eyes.	Moreover,	the	negative	and
primitive	definition	of	black	promotes	the	moralization	of	the	black-white	pair.	Black,	then,	is	defined
as	not	white	and	is	deprived	of	all	the	virtues	attributed	to	white.	The	contrast	becomes	opposition,
even	contradiction,	as	if	day	would	be	defined	as	not-night,	and	a	blackberry	be	defined	as	a	notwhiteberry.
The	law	of	contradiction,	when	moralized,	gives	rise	to	our	current	Western	mindset,	beginning	in
the	sixteenth	and	seventeenth	centuries,	the	Age	of	Light,	where	God	is	joined	with	whiteness	and
purity,	while	black,	with	the	privatio	boni,	becomes	ever	more	strongly	the	color	of	evil.	Northern
European	and	American	racism	may	have	begun	in	the	moralization	of	color	terms.	Long	before	any
English-speaking	adventurer	touched	the	shores	of	West	Africa,	fifteenth-century	meanings	of
“black”	included:	“deeply	stained	with	dirt;	soiled;	foul;	malignant,	atrocious,	horrible,	wicked;
disastrous,	baneful,	sinister	…	”	When	the	first	English-speaking	sailors	spied	natives	on	West
African	shores,	they	called	these	people	“black.”	That	was	the	first	generally	descriptive	term	they
used	–	not	naked,	not	savage,	not	pagan	–	but	black.	Once	named,	these	native	peoples	were	cursed
with	all	the	meanings	implied	in	that	term.	The	English	term	“white”	to	characterize	an	ethnic	group
first	occurs	in	1604,	after	the	perception	of	Africans	as	“black.”	The	moralization	and	opposition
between	white	and	black	continues	to	this	day	in	general	English	language	usage,	as	white	equals
good,	and	black	equals	bad,	dirty,	foul,	sinister,	and	evil.	“White”	as	a	term	for	Christians	had	become
firmly	established	by	1670	in	the	American	lexicon. [6]
Disdain	for	black	is	not	only	contemporary,	Western,	and	English.	The	color	black	in	the	Greek
world,	and	in	African	languages	also,	carried	meanings	contrasting	with	white	and	red,	and	included
not	only	the	fertility	of	the	earth	and	the	mystery	of	the	underworld,	but	also	disease,	suffering,	labor,
sorcery,	and	bad	luck.
Black,	however,	is	no	more	cursed	than	any	other	color.	In	fact,	color	terms	bear	extremely
contrary	meanings.	Each	is	weighted	down	with	a	composite	of	opposites	–	yellow	with	sunshine	and
decay;	green	with	hope	and	envy;	blue	with	puritanism	and	prurience.	The	curse	of	black	comes	only
when	color	terms	are	laid	onto	human	beings,	a	curse	of	our	Anglo-American	culture	that	has
burdened	the	majority	culture	by	labeling	it	white,	thereby	loading	it	with	the	archetypal	curse	of
white	supremacy.
Could	there	be	an	archetypal	aspect	to	darkness	that	might	account	for	our	disdain,	as	well	as	the
fear,	the	physiological	shudder,	it	can	release?	Does	the	human	eye	prefer	light	to	darkness?	Is	the
human	being	heliotropic,	fundamentally	adapted	to	light?	Is	visual	perception	its	preferred	sense,	as
we	witness	in	the	embryo	where,	from	its	earliest	weeks,	the	rudimentary	optical	system	begins	to
form	before	many	others?
If	the	human	animal	has	an	innate	predilection	to	light,	then	the	exclusion	of	black	as	a	color	term
substituting	for	“darkness”	might	find	justification.	The	exclusion	of	darkness	favors	adaptation	to	the
phenomenal	world	and	optimal	functioning	within	it	by	means	of	our	primary	organs	of	sense,	the
eyes.	Then,	we	might	conclude	that	the	definition	of	black	as	a	non-color	belongs	to	the	ocular
identity	of	human	consciousness.	The	eye	becomes	the	pars	pro	toto	for	habitual	human
consciousness,	and	black	threatens	the	very	core	of	this	identity.	This	threat,	however,	is	precisely	its
virtue!
The	Alchemical	Nigredo
The	cosmic	significance	of	these	three	primary	colors	appears	as	well	in	early	Western	science,	that

is,	in	the	tradition	of	alchemy.	Of	the	three,	black	plays	an	especially	important	role	as	the	base	of	the
work	and	even	enters	into	the	formation	of	the	word	“alchemy.”	The	root	khem	refers	to	Egypt	as	the
black	land,	or	land	of	black	soil,	and	the	art	of	alchemy	was	called	a	“black”	art	or	science.	The
Western	alchemical	tradition	traces	its	source	to	the	techne	of	Egyptian	embalming,	dyeing	of	cloth,
jewelry,	and	cosmetics.
The	first	four	color	terms	–	black,	white,	red,	and	yellow	–	are	also	the	primary	color	terms
embracing	the	entire	alchemical	opus:	nigredo,	albedo,	xanthosis	or	citrinitas,	and	iosis	or	rubedo.
These	color	terms	describe:	(1)	stages	of	the	work;	(2)	conditions	of	the	material	worked	on;	and
(3)	states	in	the	psyche	of	the	artifex	or	worker-alchemist.	Each	color	term	combines	three	distinct
categories	which	our	modern	consciousness	keeps	separate:	the	method	of	working,	the	stuff	worked
on,	and	the	condition	of	the	worker.	For	our	epistemology,	there	is	no	inherent	or	necessary	relation
among	method,	problem,	and	subjectivity.
For	example,	for	any	alchemical	substance	to	enter	the	nigredo	phase	and	blacken,	the	operations
must	be	dark	and	are	called,	in	alchemical	language,	mortificatio,	putrefactio,	calcinatio.	and	iteratio.
That	is,	the	modus	operandi	is	slow,	repetitive,	difficult,	desiccating,	severe,	astringent,	effortful,
coagulating,	and/or	pulverizing.	All	the	while,	the	worker	enters	a	nigredo	state:	depressed,	confused,
constricted,	anguished,	and	subject	to	pessimistic,	even	paranoid,	thoughts	of	sickness,	failure,	and
death.
The	alchemical	mode	of	science	maintained	the	law	of	similitudes	among	all	participants	in	any
activity:	the	work,	the	way	of	working	and	the	worker.	All	must	conform;	whereas	in	science	the
subjectivity	of	the	experimenter	may	be	radically	separated	from	the	experimental	design	and	from
the	materials	of	the	experiment.
Alchemical	method,	by	contrast,	treats	each	problem	according	both	to	its	and	the	alchemist’s
nature.	That	is	why	no	comprehensive	system	can	be	drawn	from	alchemical	texts;	why	measurement
plays	an	indifferent	role;	why	the	inventions	of	each	alchemist	are	stridently	opposed	by	other
alchemists;	and	why	even	the	materials	worked	on	are	so	radically	differentiated	–	so	many	kinds	of
salt,	so	many	names	for	mercury,	so	many	styles	and	shapes	of	instruments.
The	radical	idiosyncrasy	of,	and	yet	deep	concordance	among,	method,	problem,	and	subjectivity
also	account	for	why	depth	psychology	finds	alchemy	so	useful	a	background	for	the	work	in	its
laboratories:	the	consulting	rooms	where	nigredo	conditions	are	all	too	familiar.
We	may	read	this	conformity	among	worker,	the	worked	on,	and	way	of	working,	backwards;	such
a	reading	may	offer	psychological	insights	that	cannot	be	gained	from	a	Cartesian-Newtonian	science
that	separates	worker	from	the	work.	From	alchemy,	we	learn	that	if	you	as	a	worker	in	any	field	on
any	project	–	from	research	to	marriage,	from	business	to	painting	–	become	exhausted,	dried	out,
stuck,	depressed,	and	confused,	then	you	have	indications	of	a	nigredo	phase,	and	the	material	you	are
encountering	is	itself	dark	and	obstinate.	This	“depression”	signifies	neither	a	failure	of	your
personality	nor	of	your	method.	In	fact,	the	very	difficulties	in	your	method	and	the	darkness	of	your
fantasies	indicate	that	you	are	in	the	right	place	and	doing	the	right	thing	just	because	of	the	darkness.
The	optimistic	and	more	Christianized	readings	of	alchemical	texts	give	the	nigredo	mainly	an
early	place	in	the	work,	emphasizing	progress	away	from	it	to	better	conditions,	when	blackness	will
be	overcome	and	a	new	day	of	the	albedo	will	resurrect	from	obfuscation	and	despair.	Christianized
readings	seem	unable	to	avoid	salvationalism. [7]
This,	however,	is	only	one	possible	reading.	The	texts	make	very	clear	that	the	nigredo	is	not
identical	with	the	materia	prima,	a	much	larger	basket	of	conditions.	The	nigredo	is	not	the	beginning,
but	an	accomplished	stage.	Black	is,	in	fact,	an	achievement!	It	is	a	condition	of	something	having
been	worked	upon,	as	charcoal	is	the	result	of	fire	acting	on	a	naive	and	natural	condition	of	wood,	as
black	feces	are	the	result	of	digested	blood,	as	blackened	fungus	is	the	result	of	decay.	Because

depression,	fixations,	obsessions,	and	a	general	blackening	of	mood	and	vision	may	first	bring	a
person	to	therapy,	these	conditions	indicate	that	the	soul	is	already	engaged	in	its	opus.	The
psychological	initiation	began	before	therapy’s	first	hour.	Jung	says	of	the	nigredo:	“It	is	right	that	the
magnum	opus	should	begin	at	this	point.” [8]
Black	Intentions
What	does	black	intend	to	achieve?	Why	is	it	an	accomplishment?	Let	me	briefly	list	what	blackening
performs,	without	using	the	mystical	language	of	John	of	the	Cross,	Simone	Weil,	and	other
proponents	of	religious	darkness.	First,	as	non-color,	black	extinguishes	the	perceptual	colored
world.
Second,	the	blackening	negates	the	“light,”	whether	that	be	the	light	of	knowledge,	the	attachment	to
solar	consciousness	as	far-seeing	prediction,	or	the	feeling	that	phenomena	can	be	understood.	Black
dissolves	meaning	and	the	hope	for	meaning.	We	are	thus	benighted. [9]
Third,	the	two	processes	most	relevant	for	producing	blackness	–putrefaction	and	mortification	–
break	down	the	inner	cohesion	of	any	fixed	state.	Putrefaction,	by	decomposition	or	falling	apart;
mortification,	by	grinding	down,	as	seeds	in	a	mortar	are	refined	into	ever	thinner	and	smaller
particles.	Newton	himself	wrote:	“[F]or	the	production	of	black,	the	Corpuscles	must	be	less	than	any
of	those	which	exhibit	Colours.” [10]	The	thickness	and	solidity	of	the	materials	he	worked	with,
Newton	said,	became	more	attenuated	by	fire	and	by	putrefaction,	“the	more	subtle	dissolver.”	Black
matter	was	the	least	formed	and	the	most	susceptible	to	dissolution	–	or	in	our	language,	chaos.
This	“subtle	dissolver,”	when	mixed	into	other	hues,	brings	about	their	darkening	and	deepening
or,	in	alchemical	psychology’s	language,	their	suffering.	Black	steers	all	varieties	of	brightness	into
the	shade.	Is	corruption,	then,	black’s	intention?
An	answer	depends	on	what	is	meant	by	“shade.”	Surely,	this	intention	is	not	merely	the	sullying	of
innocence,	the	staining	of	the	only	natural,	that	necessary	preliminary	to	all	alchemical	thinking.
Hence,	we	are	not	dealing	merely	with	the	corruption	of	natural	innocence.	The	“shade”	that	black
afflicts	pertains	to	the	deeper	and	invisible	realm	of	shades,	the	Kingdom	of	Hades,	which	is	the
ultimate	“subtle	dissolver”	of	the	luminous	world.
We	can	begin	to	see	–	through	a	glass	darkly	–	why	the	color	black	is	condemned	to	be	a	“noncolor.”	It	carries	the	meanings	of	the	random	and	the	formless.	Like	a	black	hole,	it	sucks	into	it	and
makes	vanish	the	fundamental	security	structures	of	Western	consciousness.	By	absenting	color,	black
prevents	phenomena	from	presenting	their	virtues.	Black’s	deconstruction	of	any	positivity	–
experienced	as	doubt,	negative	thinking,	suspicion,	undoing,	valuelessness	–	explains	why	the	nigredo
is	necessary	to	every	paradigm	shift.
Black	breaks	the	paradigm;	it	dissolves	whatever	we	rely	upon	as	real	and	dear.	Its	negative	force
deprives	consciousness	of	its	dependable	and	comforting	notions	of	goodness.	If	knowledge	be	the
good,	then	black	confuses	it	with	clouds	of	unknowing;	if	life	be	the	good,	then	black	stands	for
death;	if	moral	virtues	be	the	good,	then	black	means	evil.	If	nature	is	conceived	as	a	many-colored
splendor,	then	black	signifies	the	entire	opus	contra	naturam,	translating	the	great	phenomenal	world
into	the	inked	abstractions	of	letters,	numbers,	and	lines,	replacing	the	palpable	and	visual	given	with
the	data	of	marks	and	traces.	By	deconstructing	presence	into	absence,	the	nigredo	makes	possible
psychological	change.	The	change	derives	from	black’s	dissolving	effect	on	all	positivities.
“Negation	brings	fluidity”; [11]	psychic	energy	or	libido	(whose	root	means	downflowing,	like
liquid)	moves	from	its	coagulations,	seeks	new	goals.
Therefore,	each	moment	of	blackening	is	a	harbinger	of	alteration,	of	invisible	discovery,	and	of
dissolution	of	attachments	to	whatever	has	been	taken	as	truth	and	reality,	solid	fact,	or	dogmatic

virtue.	It	darkens	and	sophisticates	the	eye	so	that	it	can	see	through.	Thus,	black	often	becomes	the
color	of	dress [12]	for	the	underworld,	urban	sophisticates,	and	the	old	who	have	seen	a	lot.
Because	black	breaks	the	comforting	paradigms,	it	is	the	color	preferred	by	the	spiritually	driven
and	politically	pressuring	reformers	and	“outsiders”	–	adolescents,	rebels,	pirates,	ladies	of	the	night,
cultists,	bikers,	Satanists,	puritans,	anarchists,	hitmen,	priests	–	all	the	“non-conformists”	who	then
become	trapped	by	their	own	identification	with	black.
Though	alchemical	maxims	say	that	the	work	must	resemble	a	“raven’s	head”	in	its	blackness	and
that	this	raven	is	“the	principle	of	the	art,”	these	sayings	identify	the	depth	of	black’s	radicality.	They
do	not	intend	radical	identity	or	identification	with	black.	Black	is	itself	not	a	paradigm,	but	a
paradigm	breaker.	That	is	why	it	is	placed	as	a	phase	within	a	process	of	colors,	and	why	it	appears
again	and	again,	in	life	and	in	work,	in	order	to	deconstruct	(solve	et	coagula)	what	has	become	an
identity.	Those	who	wear	the	black	shirt	and	the	black	robe,	the	black	hood,	and	black	undergarments
as	signs	of	radical	identity	become	thereby	neither	anarchists,	outsiders,	nor	reformers,	but
fundamentalists.	Hence	the	rigid	severity	and	monotheistic	literalism	of	revolutionaries.
Alchemical	psychology	teaches	us	to	read	as	accomplishments	the	fruitlessly	bitter	and	dry
periods,	the	melancholies	that	seem	never	to	end,	the	wounds	that	do	not	heal,	the	grinding	sadistic
mortifications	of	shame	and	the	putrefactions	of	love	and	friendships.	These	are	beginnings	because
they	are	endings,	dissolutions,	deconstructions.	But	they	are	not	the	beginning,	as	a	one-time-only
occurrence.	Such	would	be	a	literal	reading	of	the	alchemical	process,	which	is	not	a	unidirectional
model,	progressing	in	time.	It	is	an	iteratio;	black	repeats	in	order	for	the	deconstruction	to	continue,
as	shown,	for	instance,	by	Figure	Nine	of	Jung’s	commentary	on	the	alchemical	Rosarium. [13]	The
soul	returns,	the	King	and	Queen	are	joined	–	yet	out	of	the	ground	emerge	the	dark	birds.	Are	these
birds	“the	seduction	of	black,”	drawing	the	psyche	back	to	the	protective	comfort	of	all-too-familiar
complaints,	the	nest	of	the	status	quo	ante?	“What	you	must	be	particularly	careful	about	…	is	to
prevent	the	young	ones	of	the	crow	from	going	back	to	the	nest	when	they	have	left	it.” [14]	I	want
neither	to	condemn	you	to	permanent	blackness	nor	to	relieve	you	from	it	by	promising	the	return	of
the	colored	world,	which	alchemical	psychology	presents	in	gorgeous	images.	My	aim	has	been
neither.
Blacker	Than	Black
I	am	moved	by	another	intention:	to	warn.	And	warning,	too,	belongs	to	the	nigredo,	for	it	speaks	with
the	voice	of	the	raven,	foretelling	dire	happenings	that	may	result	from	the	seduction	of	black.
Remember	how	nineteenth-century	colonials	feared	going	black;	how	Joseph	Conrad	perceived	a
madness	and	a	horror	in	the	heart	of	darkness;	how	the	black	plague,	the	black	knight,	the	black	shirt,
and	the	black	inquisitor	haunt	historical	Europe;	and	how	the	scariest	images	of	childhood,	from
chimney	sweep,	magician,	black	widow,	the	Rottweiler	and	the	Doberman,	to	skeletons	in	the	danse
macabre	and	the	Grim	Reaper	himself	stalk	the	halls	of	fantasy	–	all	in	black.	To	socialize	these	fears
into	race	relations	does	not	get	at	the	archetypal	imagination	of	these	fears.
Let	us	be	clear:	Negro	is	not	nigredo,	although	a	figure	in	a	dream	called	“black,”	as	any	dream
phenomenon	so	named,	may	usher	in,	and	represent,	the	blackening.	But	especially	in	a	racist	society,
we	must	keep	very	distinct	the	epithets	that	arbitrarily	color	human	beings	on	the	one	hand,	and,	on
the	other,	cosmic	forces	that	shape	the	soul	apart	from	human	beings.	What	civilized	society	fears	is
black	magic:	the	magical	pull	of	black	attraction,	the	soul’s	desire	to	descend	into	darkness,	like
Persephone	unto	Hades. [15]	We	fear	what	we	most	desire	and	desire	what	we	most	fear	.
The	essence	of	this	fear	lies	in	the	black	radix	itself:	that	it	is	implacable,	indelible,	permanent,	a
crucial	component	of	the	aqua	permanens	–	that	sense	of	psychic	reality	underlining	and	underlying

all	other	realities,	like	an	awareness	of	death.	Thus,	the	tragic	paradox	of	black.	It	sticks	like	tar [16]
to	its	own	self-same	negativity.	As	it	curses	other	colors	by	darkening	their	brightness,	it	curses	itself
as	well,	by	making	itself	“blacker	than	black,”	beyond	the	touch	of	Mercurius	duplex.
In	other	words,	the	color	required	for	change	deprives	itself	of	change,	tending	to	become	ever
more	literal,	reductive,	and	severe.	Of	all	alchemical	colors,	black	is	the	most	densely	inflexible	and,
therefore,	the	most	oppressive	and	dangerously	literal	state	of	soul.	Hence	clinicians	fear	that	nigredo
conditions	of	depression	will	lead	to	literal	suicide,	revenge	to	violence,	and	hatred	to	domestic
cruelty.	Hence,	too,	reductive	moves	and	“shadow”	work	in	therapy	feel	so	concrete	and
confining. [17]
Of	course,	as	painters	know,	there	are	many	saturations	of	black.	Part	of	the	painter ’s	opus	is	the
differentiation	of	blacks:	blacks	that	recede	and	absorb,	those	that	dampen	and	soften,	those	that	etch
and	sharpen,	and	others	that	shine	almost	with	effulgence	–	a	sol	niger. [18]	Nonetheless,	the
alchemical	maxim	“blacker	than	black”	states	an	ultimate	radicality	beyond	all	different	shades	and
varieties.	What	is	blacker	than	black	is	the	archetypal	essence	of	darkness [19]	itself,	at	times	named
by	alchemy	as	night,	Satan,	sin,	raven,	chaos,	tenebrositas,	black	dog,	and	death	…
Since	Mercurius	is	hidden	and	the	albedo,	an	unpredictable	grace,	what	can	“cure”	the	nigredo?
What	can	release	the	soul	from	its	somber	identification?	This	is	the	question	posed	in	every	analysis,
and	posed	during	the	nigredo	moments	of	every	life.	The	alchemist	answer:	decapitation.	According
to	Jung,	the	black	spirit	is	to	be	beheaded,	an	act	that	separates	understanding	from	its	identification
with	suffering.	Because,	“in	the	nigredo	the	brain	turns	black,” [20]	decapitation	“emancipates	the
cogitatio.”	Blackness	remains,	but	the	distinction	between	head	and	body	creates	a	two,	while
suffering	imprisons	in	singleness.	The	mind	may	begin	to	recognize	what	the	body	only	senses.
Decapitation	allows	the	mind	to	be	freer	from	the	body’s	identity.
Of	course,	decapitation	makes	sense	as	an	operation	only	as	a	treatment	for	the	nigredo.	It	is,	of
course,	contraindicated	–	even	redundantly	senseless	–	for	those	conditions	of	the	soul	where	the	head
is	barely	attached	and	rarely	recognizes	anything	the	body	feels.	And,	of	course,	the	alchemical
“body”	refers	not	merely	to	the	physical	flesh	and	its	symptoms,	but	to	all	imaginal	perspectives	that
are	trapped	in	habitual	concretisms.
Decapitation	is	therefore	a	separatio	–	to	use	an	alchemical	term	for	the	basic	therapeutic	move	of
making	distinctions,	or	analyzing.	Despite	the	fixity	of	nigredo	moods	and	their	repetitious	thoughts,
analysis	separates	the	material	–	dreams,	moods,	projections,	symptoms	–	from	the	mind’s	literal
identification	with	this	material.	The	dense	and	oppressive	material	becomes	images	that	can	be
entertained	by	the	mind.	Mental	images	emancipate	us	from	the	slavery	to	the	nigredo;	though	the
material	remains	dark,	decapitation	allows	the	mind	to	cogitate	the	darkness.
Alchemy	advises	“beware	of	the	physical	in	the	material.”	It	is	not	the	“material”	of	suffering	that
poisons	the	work	with	despair,	but	the	“physical,”	that	is,	the	substantive	naturalistic	mind	that
prevents	an	imaginative	appreciation	of	the	material.	Just	this	imaginative	appreciation	is	what
alchemical	psychology	offers.	Patients,	and	any	of	us	at	many	times	who	are	“unable	to	imagine”	are
often	trapped	in	the	nigredo	by	past	traumata,	and	caught	by	the	“physical	in	the	material.”	These	same
patients,	however,	may	be	trapped	as	well	in	the	nigredo	of	their	therapists	who	have	not	been
decapitated	and	whose	cogitations	have	not	been	emancipated	from	reductive,	naturalistic, [21]	and
historicist	understanding	of	what’s	going	on.
Literalism	is	surely	the	most	obdurate	of	all	our	habitual	concretiisms.	By	this	“literalism”	I	mean
singleness	of	meaning,	identification	of	any	concrete	embodiment	with	its	“word,”	that	identity
between	word	and	thing	so	that	words	become	things.	Decapitation	also	frees	the	word	“black”	from
only	nigredo	meanings,	therewith	freeing	phenomena	(including	persons)	called	“black”	from	the
indelible	fixities	of	nigredo	projections.

Remember	here	that	the	“word”	in	our	culture	is	inked	in	black,	and	this	selection	of	color	for	ink
may	be	more	than	merely	convenient	and	efficient.	The	very	blackness	of	the	inked	letter	supports	its
indelible	fixity	and	abets	the	cursing	power	of	literalism.
Perhaps,	then,	the	contemporary	attempts	at	multiple	meanings	(poly-semy),	of	separating	the
signifier	and	the	signified,	of	playing	with	the	ambiguity	of	“trace,”	troping,	displacing,	and	insisting
upon	difference	and,	as	well,	the	absenting	of	all	certitudes	from	positive	propositions,	these
deconstructive	moves	may	be	French	modes	of	decapitating	the	cogito	–	freeing	the	mind	from	the
singleness	that	I	condemn	as	literalism.	The	entire	French	effort	may	be	alchemy-like	attempts	(the
arcane	obscurantism	of	deconstructive	talk	sounds	indeed	like	the	language	of	the	alchemists)	to
invite	Mercurius	duplex	back	into	the	discourse	from	which	French	logical	clarity	had	excused	him.
Although	I	can	grasp	an	alchemical	intention	in	contemporary	French	thought,	I	do	not	profess	its
method:	it	stops	short	and	remains	an	exercise	of	the	cogito.	The	guillotine	blade	never	quite	cuts
through.	The	brain	remains	blackened,	and	so	the	cogitations	of	its	mind	are	read	by	critics	as
nihilism,	Euro-pessimism,	cynicism,	negative	theology,	and	the	latest	fashion	in	existential	despair,
and	therefore	deconstructionism	becomes	one	more	habitual	concretism	of	Western	thought.
It	stops	short	before	the	nigredo	turns	blue.	After	the	black	comes	the	blue	–	not	cynical,	but	sad;
not	hard	and	smart,	but	slow.	The	blues	bring	the	body	back	with	a	revisioned	feeling,	head	and	body
rejoined.	The	alchemists	spoke	of	this	as	the	unio	mentalis,	which	I	elaborate	in	Chapter	5	below.	Blue
gives	voice	to	the	nigredo,	and	voice	unites	head	and	body.	Darkness	imagined	as	an	invisible	light,
like	a	blue	shadow	behind	and	within	all	things.
The	principal	concretism	against	which	this	present	chapter	has	been	contending	is	the	Newtonian
convention,	upheld	by	the	dictionary, [22]	that	excludes	black	from	the	realm	of	color	because	it	is	not
concretely	visible	in	the	spectrum.	Perhaps,	however,	the	fault	is	not	Newton’s	at	all	but	results	from
black’s	cursed	literalism,	its	desire	to	be	outside	this	world,	in	the	underworld	of	invisibilities,	or	in
the	dark	kingdom	of	death.	Perhaps	black	cannot	lift	the	curse	from	off	its	own	head,	so	that	it
becomes	our	job,	each	of	ours,	to	decapitate	the	nigredo,	to	emancipate	our	minds	in	a	postNewtonian	manner.
Sol	niger	dispels	the	nigredo	curse	because	it	is	“blacker	than	black.”	As	Stanton	Marlan	shows, [23]
we	may	be	blackened	and	yet	enlightened.	Sol	niger	–	one	name	for	the	ultimate	aim	of	the	whole
alchemical	endeavor	–	blackens	with	“unassimilable”	darkness.	It	feels	to	be	an	“intolerable
image.” [24]	Yet	it	is	an	image	of	sol,	an	illuminating	sun	that	may	darken	all	day-world	positivism,
but	not	all	insight.	As	negation	of	negation,	the	black	sun	ontologically	eradicates	the	primordial
dread	of	non-being,	that	unfullfillable	abyss	–	or,	the	abyss	becomes	the	unbounded	ground	of
possibility.
Negation	conceived	as	theological	evil,	a	stage	in	a	dialectical	process,	or	a	Manichaean	power
gives	a	positive	function	to	darkness,	enhancing	the	seduction	of	black.	We	succumb	to	the	reverse	of
solar	optimism,	and	descend	into	a	positivist	negation	revealed	as	“the	horror,	the	horror,”	into
pessimism,	cynicism,	despair,	and	suicide	as	a	rationally	valid	answer	to	a	nigredo	view.	But	sol	niger
shines	invisibly	through	every	such	negative	coagulation.	Darkness	and	translucence	both,	a	true
decapitation	of	the	ordinary	mind.	Hence	Philalethes	can	speak	of	“eternal	death	that	gladdens	the
heart.”
This	emancipation	of	the	mind	means	more	than	thinking	dark	thoughts	with	a	blackened	brain	or
suffering	the	body’s	obstinate	depressions.	It	means	the	incorporation	of	invisibility	within	all
perceptions,	never	losing	the	dark	eye	or	ignoring	the	soul’s	desire	for	shades	and	sorrows.	Hades
never	far	from	brother	Zeus.	To	be	benighted	is	only	the	beginning;	to	be	black,	to	see	black	–	that’s
how	the	nigredo	inescapably	affects	us.	But,	to	see	by	means	of	black,	to	see	the	habitual	as	mystery,
the	apparent	as	ambiguous,	shifts	the	concretistic	fixities	into	metaphorical	images.	This	is	the

emancipation	of	the	nigredo	from	literalism.	Like	cures	like;	we	cure	the	nigredo	by	becoming,	as	the
texts	say,	blacker	than	black	–	archetypally	black,	and	thereby	no	longer	colored	by	all-too-human
prejudices	of	color.
Becoming	blacker	than	black	would	also	bear	upon	the	chaos	and	tragedy	of	what	are	misnamed
“race”	relations	and	are	more	truly	color	relations	because	they	are	reflections	in	the	human	sphere
of	alchemical	processes	whose	intentions	only	peripherally	concern	people.	For	the	desire	of
alchemy	was	not	merely	toward	the	human	soul;	it	sought	the	soul	of	the	world.	Alchemy	is	a
cosmological	work;	to	follow	an	alchemical	psychology	at	once	leads	to	working	with	the	world.
Alchemy	would	re-animate	the	dense	and	neglected,	sometimes	called	“matter,”	and	alchemy	demands
an	ever-returning	descent	into	that	darkness,	that	invisibility	sometimes	called	Hades.
By	continuing	to	regard	black	as	a	non-color	and	segregating	it	from	the	bright	beauty	of	the
Newtonian	prism,	our	faulty	cosmology	remains	unable	to	find	a	place	for	the	nigredo,	except	as
“shadow”	phenomena	such	as	crime,	cruelty,	racism,	imprisonment,	toxicity,	and	the	mental	disorder
of	depression.	Also,	our	science-infected	psychology,	by	locating	nigredo	phenomena	only	in
subjectivity	as	human	moods	and	human	failures,	continues	its	delusional	method	that	disconnects	the
work	from	the	worker	and	from	the	ecological	world	worked	on.
Worse	is	the	danger	that	our	Western	epistemology	loses	its	ability	to	correct	its	own	bright
blindnesses	by	making	radical	paradigm	shifts.	The	conversion	of	black	from	non-color	to	color,
from	negative	to	negation	of	negation,	is	therefore	not	merely	an	issue	of	societal	reform	regarding
the	inclusion	of	darker	peoples	and	darker	shades	of	existence.	The	inclusion	of	black	among	the
colors	becomes	a	way	for	Western	consciousness	to	decapitate	the	naive	fundamentalism	of	its
hopefully-colored	illusions.
Originally	prepared	for	and	delivered	at	the	Inaugural	Evening	of	the	“Colors	of	Life	Conference	and	Festival,”	Turin,	Italy,	August
1995,	and	subsequently	published	in	Fire	in	the	Stone:	The	Alchemy	of	Desire,	ed.	S.	Marlan	(Wilmette,	Ill.:	Chiron	Publications,	1997),
42–53.
1 B.	Berlin	and	P.	Kay,	Basic	Color	Terms:	Their	Universality	and	Evolution	(Berkeley:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1969).	See	below
for	a	fuller	presentation	of	the	Berlin-Kay	scale.
2 G.	Durand,	Les	Structures	anthropologiques	de	l’imaginaire:	Introduction	à	l’archétypologie	générale	(Paris:	Presses	Universitaires
de	France,	1963).
3 Contrast	favors	an	aesthetic	mode	of	distinction,	unlike	the	logical	severity	of	opposition	and	contradiction,	which	are	often
insensitively	applied	to	contrasting	colors,	as	if	black	and	white	or	green	and	red	were	warring	opponents	rather	than	radically	differing
co-relatives.
4 V.	Turner,	The	Forest	of	Symbols:	Aspects	of	Ndembu	Ritual	(Ithaca,	N. Y.:	Cornell	Univ.	Press,	1967),	90.
5 C. B.	Boyer,	The	Rainbow:	From	Myth	to	Mathematics	(New	York:	Thomas	Yoseloff,	1959),	85.
6 W. D.	Jordan,	White	Over	Black:	American	Attitudes	Toward	the	Negro,	1550–1812	(Chapel	Hill:	Univ.	of	North	Carolina	Press,
1968),	94.
7 E. F.	Edinger,	Anatomy	of	the	Psyche:	Alchemical	Symbolism	in	Psychotherapy	(Chicago	and	LaSalle,	Ill.:	Open	Court,	1985).
8 CW	14: 7 08.
9 See	below	on	the	sol	niger,	which	radically	shifts	the	meaning	of	“benightedness”	into	a	kind	of	illumination.
10 B. J. T.	Dobbs,	The	Foundation	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	or	‘The	Hunting	of	the	Greene	Lyon’	(Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1975),	224.
11 T.	Kawai,	“The	Function	of	Negation	in	Japanese	Society,	Art	and	Psychotherapy,”	privately	circulated	paper,	with	permission	of	the
author.

12 J.	Harvey,	Men	in	Black	(Univ.	of	Chicago	Press,	1996).
13 CW	16: 2 85.
14 E.	Philalethes,	“An	Open	Entrance,”	HM	2: 1 92.
15 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	The	Dream	and	the	Underworld	(New	York:	Harper	Collins,	1979),	for	a	fuller	psychological	treatment	of	the
Hades	realm.
16 Philalethes,	“An	Open	Entrance,”	192:	“The	whole	is	dry	as	dust,	with	the	exception	of	some	pitch-like	substance,	which	now	and
then	bubbles	up;	all	presents	an	image	of	eternal	death.	Nevertheless,	it	is	a	sight	which	gladdens	the	heart	…”
17 Bachelard	writes,	“Any	color	meditated	upon	by	a	poet	of	substances	finds	black	a	substantial	solidity,	a	substantial	negation	…
Black	feeds	in	the	depth	of	all	color;	it	is	their	intimate	abode.”	G.	Bachelard,	La	Terre	et	les	rêveries	du	repos	(Paris:	Corti,	1948),	27
(my	translation).
18 “There	is	a	black	which	is	old	and	a	black	which	is	fresh.	Lustrous	black	and	dull	black,	black	in	sunlight	and	black	in	shadow.	For
the	old	black	one	must	use	an	admixture	of	blue,	for	the	dull	black	an	admixture	of	white,	for	lustrous	black,	gum	must	be	added.	Black
as	sunlight	must	have	grey	reflections.”	The	Japanese	artist	Hokusai,	as	quoted	by	the	American	painter	Ad	Reinhardt.	The	Pursuit	of
Comparative	Aesthetics:	An	Interface	Between	East	and	West,	ed.	M.	Hussein,	R.	Wilkinson	(London:	Ashgate	Publishing	Limited,
2006),	239.
19 S.	Marlan,	The	Black	Sun:	The	Alchemy	and	Art	of	Darkness	(College	Station:	Texas	A	&	M	Univ.	Press,	2005).
20 CW	14: 7 33.
21 On	the	“naturalistic	fallacy,”	see	J.	Hillman,	Revisioning	Psychology	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1975),	84–86.
22 Oxford	English	Dictionary,	s. v.	“black”:	“Opposite	to	white,	colourless	from	the	absence	or	complete	absorption	of	light	…	no
distinguishable	colour.”
23 S.	Marlan,	The	Black	Sun,	chap.	4.
24 N.	Micklem,	“The	Intolerable	Image:	The	Mythic	Background	of	Psychosis,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and
Jungian	Thought	(1979),	1–19.

	

5
Alchemical	Blue	and	the	Unio	Mentalis
	
the	soul
vanishes
the	soul. vanishes. into	the	shape	of	things
– Robert	Kelly

I.	THE	BLUES
Transitions	from	black	to	white	sometimes	go	through	a	series	of	other	colors, [1]	notably	darker
blues,	the	blues	of	bruises,	sobriety,	puritan	self-examination;	the	blues	of	slow	jazz.	Silver ’s	color
was	not	only	white	but	blue.	We	may	consider	blue	a	transitional	color,	either	resulting	from	the
suffering	of	silver	(salt	and	vinegar)	or	resulting	in	silver. [2]	Either	way,	blue	has	an	affinity	with
both	black	and	white,	both	nigredo	and	albedo.	Even	more,	however,	blue	is	a	condition	of	soul	not	in
transition,	not	in	movement,	but	all	its	own,	multiple,	complex,	many-shaded. [3]	Soul	vanishes	as	a
weighted,	leaden	substance,	burdening	my	personal	interior	and	appears	as	a	shadowy	resonance,	an
undertone,	a	further	dimension	in	things	as	they	are.	Wallace	Stevens	says	in	his	extraordinary	poem
on	this	theme,	“The	Man	with	the	Blue	Guitar”:	“Things	as	they	are	/	Are	changed	upon	the	blue
guitar.” [4]	“Soul”	moves	from	noun	to	adjective	and	adverb,	becoming	the	universal	qualifier,	less
something	here	or	there	and	more	a	mood	or	shade	anywhere.	The	mind	begins	to	become
psychological,	discovering	soul	as	a	second	layer	(if	not	the	very	first),	which	gives	metaphorical
depth	and	psychic	value	to	things	as	they	are.
Hence	blue	becomes	necessary	to	our	explorations	of	white,	silver,	and	the	albedo.	To	do	them
justice	we	must	first	have	gained	a	blue	eye.
The	blue	transit	between	black	and	white	is	like	that	sadness	that	emerges	from	despair	as	it
proceeds	towards	reflection.	Reflection	here	comes	from	or	takes	one	into	a	blue	distance,	less	a
concentrated	act	that	we	do	than	something	insinuating	itself	upon	us	as	a	quiet	removal.	This	vertical
withdrawal	is	also	like	an	emptying	out,	the	creation	of	a	negative	capability,	a	profound	listening	–
already	an	intimation	of	silver.
These	very	experiences	Goethe	associates	with	blue: [5]
[B]lue	still	brings	a	principle	of	darkness	with	it.	(778)
As	a	hue	it	is	powerful,	but	it	is	on	the	negative	side,	and	in	its	highest	purity	is,	as	it	were,	a	stimulating	negation.	Its	appearance,
then,	is	a	kind	of	contradiction	between	excitement	and	repose.	(779)
As	the	upper	sky	and	distant	mountains	appear	blue,	so	a	blue	surface	seems	to	retire	from	us.	(780)
[I]t	draws	us	after	it.	(781)
Blue	gives	us	an	impression	of	cold,	and	thus,	again,	reminds	us	of	shade.	We	have	before	spoken	of	its	affinity	with	black.	(782)
Rooms	which	are	hung	with	pure	blue,	appear	in	some	degree	larger,	but	at	the	same	time	empty	and	cold.	(783)
The	appearance	of	objects	seen	through	a	blue	glass	is	gloomy	and	melancholy.	(784)

Sadness	is	not	the	whole	of	it.	A	turbulent	dissolution	of	the	nigredo	can	also	show	as	blue	language
(cursing	a	blue	streak),	l‘amour	bleu,	la	bleu	of	absinthe	and	the	“blue	ruin”	of	gin,	Bluebeard,	blue
murder,	the	black-and-blue	contusions	of	Lynch’s	Blue	Velvet,	and	the	cyanotic	bodies	of	Dietrich’s
Blue	Angel,	early	Picasso,	Schiele,	and	Van	Gogh’s	hungry	poor. [6]	And	–	in	blue	movies,	as
pornography	was	once	called.
Pornographic	films	are	blue	because	they	are	saturated	with	depression	and	cynicism.	Not	merely
the	concrete	graphics	of	an	anatomy	lesson,	the	Saturnian	labored	repetitions,	the	grindings,	the
grunts	and	the	grunge,	but	also	where	they	are	watched:	mongrel	bars,	truck-stop	back	rooms;	the
fixed	stare	in	blue-smoky	air.
This	is	the	realm	of	the	alchemical	blue	dog [7]	(kyanos,	blue;	kynos,	dog);	blue	takes	on	a	dog-like
quality:	hang-dog	and	dirty	dog,	both.	Why	does	depression	seek	porn?	For	arousal?	For	Eros	and
Priapos	and	Venus	to	come	to	life?	Rather,	I	think,	to	maintain	the	depression,	to	re-direct	the
verticality	of	desire	downward	and	backward	(doggy	fashion),	clipping	the	wings	of	eros.
Pornography	–	an	opus	contra	naturam,	a	counter-instinct	of	the	psyche,	perverting	the
conventionally	natural,	enslaving,	torturing;	an	erotics	of	despair.
Like	the	“black	dog,”	as	Winston	Churchill	named	his	desperate	depressions,	the	blue	dog,	too,
points	its	nose	down,	in	touch	with	sadness	and	the	bones	buried	in	the	underworld	and	its	goddesses
of	decay	and	destruction	with	whom	a	dog	often	keeps	company.	Yet,	the	texts	say	that	the	dog	is	“of
celestial	hue,”	and	the	“ithyphallic	old	man”	representing	this	dog	is	“winged”	(CW	14: 177).	The	dog
of	blue	may	be	material	in	its	attachment,	but	not	physical	in	its	purpose.	Its	nose	points	beyond	its
fondness	for	filth,	beyond	to	the	lunar	land	where	the	fascinating	power	of	images	possesses	the
mind.
The	mind	engulfed	in	its	obsession,	shame	and	disgust,	and	faced	with	the	impotence	of	its	will	to
suppress	the	hounding	fantasies,	is	forced	to	admit	psychic	reality	–	even	though	the	admission	comes
through	a	back	alley.	Thus,	the	alchemical	dog,	as	an	instinctual	energy	of	the	blue	phase,	is	called
“the	begetter,”	who	brings	a	“divine	logos”	(CW	14: 176–77)	or	archetypal	intelligence	(like	“The
Hound	of	Heaven”	in	Francis	Thompson’s	famous	spiritual	poem	that	doggedly	pursues	for	a
purpose),	in	this	case	hidden	in	the	dirt.
According	to	Kalid	(CW	14: 174),	this	dog	“preserves	bodies	from	burning	and	from	the	heat	of	the
fire.”	The	lower	we	go	into	the	slow,	blue,	dank	underworlds	of	eros,	the	less	likely	we	are	subject	to
the	puer ’s	erotic	flame.	Therefore,	too,	the	dog	is	carrier	of	diseases	(CW	14: n 280).	The
pathologized	mind	is	better	able	to	withstand	the	lunar	ablutions	of	the	albedo	that	would	wash	away
all	stains.	The	dog	is	guardian	and	keeper	of	faith	with	the	human	condition,	its	base	in	a	baseness
which	cannot	be	transcended.
When	pornographic,	perverse,	ghastly	or	vicious	fantasies	start	up,	we	can	place	them	alchemically
within	the	blue	no-man’s	land	between	nigredo	and	albedo.	We	will	look	for	bits	of	silver	in	the	vice.
A	mirror	of	self-recognition	is	forming	by	means	of	horror	and	obscenity.	The	soul’s	putrefactio	is
generating	a	new	anima	consciousness,	a	new	psychic	grounding	that	must	include	underworld
experiences	of	the	anima	itself:	her	deathly	and	perverse	affinities	expressed	alchemically	by	the
“moon	bitch”	(CW	14: 181),	“rabid	dog”(CW	14: 182) [8]	and	lunacy	that	comes	with	the	moon
goddess,	Diana. [9]	The	dark	blue	of	the	Madonna’s	robe	bears	many	shadows,	and	these	give	her
depths	of	understanding,	just	as	the	mind	made	on	the	moon	has	lived	with	Lilith	so	that	its	thought
can	never	be	naive,	never	cease	to	strike	deep	toward	shadows. [10]	Blue	protects	white	from
innocence.
The	vertical	direction,	as	Jung	reaffirms	(CW	12: 320),	is	traditionally	associated	with	blue. [11]
Ancient	Greek	words	for	blue	signified	the	sea. [12]	In	Tertullian	and	Isadore	of	Seville,	blue	referred
to	both	the	sea	and	the	sky, [13]	much	as	the	Greek	word	(bathun)	and	the	Latin	(altus)	connoted	high

and	deep	by	one	word.	The	vertical	dimension	as	hierarchy	continues	in	our	speech	as	blue	blood	for
nobility,	blue	ribbons,	and	the	many	mythological	images	of	“blue	gods”:	Kneph	in	Egypt	and	Odin’s
blue	wrappings, [14]	Jupiter	and	Juno, [15]	Krishna	and	Vishnu,	Christ	in	his	earthly	ministry	like	that
blue	Christ-man	seen	by	Hildegard	von	Bingen. [16]
The	transit	from	black	to	white	via	blue [17]	implies	that	blue	always	brings	black	with	it.	(Among
African	peoples,	for	instance,	black	includes	blue; [18]	whereas	in	the	Jewish-Christian	tradition	blue
belongs	rather	with	white). [19]
Blue	bears	traces	of	the	mortificatio	into	the	whitening.	What	before	was	the	stickiness	of	the	black,
like	pitch	or	tar,	unable	to	be	rid	of,	turns	into	the	traditionally	blue	virtues	of	constancy	and	fidelity.
Country-and-Westerns	sing	the	blues	of	desertion	and	fidelity.	“Gone	and	left	me,”	“done	me	wrong,”
“but	I	can’t	help	lovin’.”	I	may	be	ruined	and	bruised,	yet	still	my	heart’s	still	loyal.	No	way	to	put
something	behind	me	and	get	on.	Blue	remembers,	and	the	black	in	it	doesn’t	let	things	go.	The
tortured	and	symptomatic	aspect	of	mortification	–	flaying	oneself,	pulverizing	old	structures,
decapitation	of	the	head-strong	will,	the	rat	and	rot	in	one’s	personal	cellar	–	give	way	to	mourning.
As	even	the	darkest	blue	is	not	black,	so	even	the	deepest	despair	is	not	the	mortificatio,	which
means	death	of	soul.	The	mortificatio	is	more	driven,	images	locked	compulsively	in	behavior,
visibility	zero,	psyche	trapped	in	the	inertia	and	extension	of	matter.	A	mortificatio	is	a	time	of
symptoms.	These	inexplicable,	utterly	materialized	tortures	of	psyche	in	physis	are	relieved,
according	to	the	procession	of	colors,	by	a	movement	toward	melancholy,	which	can	commence	as	a
mournful	regret	even	over	the	lost	symptom:	“It	was	better	when	it	hurt	physically	–	now	I	only	cry.”
Blue	misery.
With	the	appearance	of	blue,	self-reflective	feeling	becomes	paramount	and	the	paramount	feeling
is	the	mournful	plaint.	Rimbaud [20]	equates	blue	with	the	vowel	“O”;	Kandinsky [21]	with	the	sounds
of	the	flute,	cello,	double	bass,	and	organ.	These	laments	hint	of	soul,	of	reflecting	and	distancing	by
imaginational	expression.	Here	we	can	see	more	why	archetypal	psychology	has	stressed	depression
as	the	via	regia	in	soul-making.	The	ascetic	exercises	that	we	call	“symptoms”	(and	their
“treatments”),	the	guilty	despairs	and	remorse	as	the	nigredo	decays,	reduce	the	old	ego-personality,
but	this	necessary	reduction	is	only	preparatory [22]	to	the	sense	of	soul	that	appears	first	in	the	dark
imagination	of	depression	as	it	blues	into	melancholy.
Let	us	say,	blue	is	produced	by	a	collaboration	between	Saturn	and	Venus.	According	to	Giacento
Gimma, [23]	an	eighteenth-century	gemmologist,	blue	represents	Venus,	while	the	goat,	the	Saturnian
emblem	of	Capricorn,	is	blue’s	animal.	The	Zodiacal	symbol	of	Capricorn	extends	slowly	from	the
depths	to	the	heights;	immense	range	and	immense	patience,	devotion	and	obsession
indistinguishable.	Where	blue	brings	to	Venus	a	deeper	melancholy,	and	to	Saturn	a	magnanimity
(another	virtue	of	blue	according	to	Gimma),	it	also	slows	the	expansion	of	whiteness,	for	it	is	the
color	of	repose	(Kandinsky).
Thus	blue	is	the	retarding	factor	in	the	whitening.	It	is	the	thoughtful	anxiety	of	depression	that
raises	deep	doubts	and	high	principles,	wanting	to	understand	things	fundamentally	and	get	them
right.	This	effect	of	blue	on	white	can	appear	as	feelings	of	service,	labor,	duty,	and	disciplined
observance	of	the	rules,	civil	conformities	like	the	blue	cross,	blue	collar,	blue	helmet,	and	blue
uniforms,	which	personified	figures	of	these	feelings	might	carry	in	public.	The	effect	can	also
appear	in	the	blue	moods	of	a	guilty	conscience.	There	is	indeed	a	“moral	aspect	of	the
whitening” [24]	–	and	I	think	this	is	precisely	the	effect	of	blue.	The	whitening	implies	neither	a
lessening	of	shadow	nor	awareness	about	it.
The	alchemical	albedo	is	hardly	a	shadowless	innocence.	Tho’	the	sigh	of	despair	may	turn	to	a
sigh	of	relief,	the	blue	stain	remains.	There	is	now	more	psychic	space	to	carry	the	shadow’s	full,
mysterious	stature,	a	higher	sky	and	deeper	sea.	The	soul	whitens	as	the	shadow	comes	out	of	the

repressed	and	is	aired	in	life.	One	drop	of	bluing	makes	the	laundry	whiter.	“Soul	vanishes	into	the
shape	of	things,”	because	the	soul’s	private	interiority	spreads	out,	tinging	the	world	with	serious
weight,	much	as	blues	give	shadow-depth	and	more	palpable	form	in	oil-painting.	In	fact	as	the
world’s	blue	shadows	emerge,	sadness	is	felt	in	the	world	itself,	as	if	held	together	and	wrapped
round	by	sorrow.
If	the	alchemical	white	depends	on	blue,	then	that	blue	depends	on	black.	The	influential	Emerald
Tablet	(in	Latin	ca. 1150	 )	states:	“When	the	black	exceeds	the	white	by	one	degree,	it	exhibits	a	skyblue	color.” [25]	Evidently,	the	blue	streaks	and	blue	flames	of	celestial	aspirations	require	a
modicum	of	depression,	a	drop	of	putrefaction.
A	degree	of	darkness	is	the	saving	grace	of	inspiration.	In	fact,	the	saving	grace	of	Mary’s	light
blue	may	lie	in	an	imperceptible	black	madonna	cloaked	within	her	robe.
CE

II.	ANIMUS	AND	ANIMA
I	have	understood	the	Jungian	notion	of	blue	as	“the	thinking	function”	to	refer	to	blue’s	ancient
association	with	the	impersonal	depths	of	sky	and	sea,	the	wisdom	of	Sophia,	moral	philosophy	and
truth.	Images	painted	blue,	says	the	Christian	Neoplatonist	Pseudo-Dionysius,	show	“the	hiddenness”
of	their	nature. [26]	Blue	is	“darkness	made	visible.” [27]	This	depth	is	a	quality	of	mind,	an	invisible
power	that	permeates	all	things,	like	air	–	and	blue,	said	Alberti,	in	his	great	Renaissance	work	On
Painting, [28]	is	the	color	of	the	element	of	air.
When	the	darker	blues	appear	in	analysis,	I	gird	myself,	expecting	that	we	are	now	in	for	the	highs
and	deeps	of	animus	and	anima,	or	what	Jungians	sometimes	call	“the	animus	of	the	anima.”	(Did	you
know	that	a	“blue-stocking”	meant	a	learned	lady,	that	“blueism”	meant	“the	possession	or	affectation
of	learning	in	a	woman,”	and	that	just	plain	“blue”	once	meant	“fond	of	literature”?) [29]	These	deep
blues	are	inflations	with	the	impersonal,	the	hidden.	They	do	not	feel	high	but	come	across	rather	as
ponderous	philosophical	thought,	judgments	about	right	and	wrong	and	the	place	of	truth	in	analysis.
What	seems,	and	even	is,	so	deep,	however,	is	actually	far	off	and	away	from	matters	at	hand.
What	we	are	talking	about	“seems	to	recede	from	us”	and	“draws	us	after	it”	(Goethe)	in	the
seductive	manner	of	the	anima. [30]
Jung	(CW	14: 223)	describes	this	lunar	state	as	a	“bluish	haze,”	“a	deceptive	shimmer	…	magically
transforming	little	things	into	big	things,	high	into	low,	…	into	an	unsuspected	unity.”	The	animus	of
the	anima	can	fog	analytical	precision	with	hazy	ideas	and	pseudo-wise,	unifying	generalities.
Howard	Teich	attributes	to	Jung	himself	a	haze	of	imprecise	generality	regarding	the	place	of	blue
in	the	alchemical	work.	Blue,	says	Teich,	signifies	a	male	lunar	quality. [31]	Jung’s	opposites	are	too
formulaic	(Luna = feminine = anima = white),	leading	Jung	to	miss	a	crucial	phase:	the	union	of	sames
within	the	“male”	component	–	male	solar	with	male	lunar	represented	by	blue.	To	bypass	blue
neglects	the	man	in	the	moon	or	the	moon	in	the	male	who	brings	sensitivity,	receptivity	and
compassion	to	the	hyperactive	sulfur	of	the	red	King.	The	King	must	be	complete,	regally	purpled
with	blue,	before	joining	the	Queen.	Prior	to	the	opus	maior	or	grand	conjunction,	the	male	or	animus
must	be	tempered,	learn	the	somber	chords	of	a	minor	key.
The	joining	of	likes	precedes	the	union	of	opposites.	According	to	Teich, [32]	these	likes	are	twins,
and	stand	as	one	in	the	blue	uniped	(CW	14: 721f.)	and	as	the	blue	brother	in	Navaho	mythology.	The
joined	twins	share	one	soul	and	one	spirit.	They	are	imagined	as	complements	(both	together)	rather
than	as	opposites	(either/or).	They	may	be	paired	in	the	guises	we	find	all	through	this	chapter
(depression	and	libido,	celestial	and	underworld,	passion	and	compassion,	fantasy	and	reason,	and
especially	as	anima	and	animus	or	psyche	and	logos.	Psychology	itself	depends	on	this
complementarity,	this	unio	mentalis,	if	it	would	do	justice	to	the	anima	in	the	animus	and	the	animus

in	the	anima.	Then	soul	nurtures	an	active	intelligent	spirit	and	spirit	instigates	a	receptive
understanding	soul.
By	remembering	that	“the	animus	of	the	anima”	is	a	psychic	spirit	attempting	to	enlighten	the	soul
by	deepening	or	raising	it	into	impersonal	truths,	I	am	better	able	to	get	through	these	thought-heavy
analytical	sessions.	I	realize,	thanks	to	Goethe,	that	these	deep	blue	conversations	of	“stimulating
negation”	(negative	animus	thoughts,	negative	anima	judgments)	have	soul-searching	intentions.	A
work	of	distancing	and	detaching	(Goethe)	is	going	on,	an	attempt	at	reflection	that	is	still	stained
with	the	nigredo	because	it	burrows	too	far,	pushes	too	hard,	neglecting	the	immediate	surfaces	from
which	silver	catches	its	light.
Nonetheless,	the	“negatives”	that	so	obsess	reflection	with	dark	intuitions	and	sterile	ruminations
are	enlarging	psychic	space	by	emptying	out	the	room	(Goethe)	of	its	former	fixtures.	As	the	soul
tries	to	work	its	way	out	of	darkness	by	means	of	philosophical	effort,	the	whitening	is	taking	place.
The	animus	is	in	service	of	the	anima.	Even	the	negative	mood	and	critique,	and	my	own	withdrawal
that	I	feel	during	these	exercises,	belong	also	to	this	blue	way	toward	whitening.	The	nigredo	ends
neither	with	a	bang	nor	a	whimper,	but	passes	imperceptibly	into	breath-soul	(anima)	with	a	sigh.	It
helps	to	remember	an	image	from	Rabbi	Shim’on	ben	Yohai	told	by	Gershom	Scholem. [33]	The
ascending	flame	is	white,	but	right	below	as	its	very	throne	is	a	blue-black	light	whose	nature	is
destructive.	The	blue-black	flame	draws	stuff	to	it	and	consumes	it	as	the	whiteness	flames	steadily	on.
The	destructive	blue	and	the	white	belong	in	the	same	fire.	As	Scholem	comments,	by	virtue	of	its
very	inhesion	in	the	nigredo,	the	blue	flame	is	able	to	consume	the	darkness	it	feeds	upon.
The	blue	transition	is	delicate;	things	can	go	wrong.	Both	anima	and	animus	(from	Greek	anemos,
stream	of	air,	wind)	can	blow	us	away. [34]	When	the	element	of	air	and	the	far	imagination	of	blue
conjoin,	an	archetypal	possession	can	ensue.
Texts	caution	about	red	coming	too	soon,	the	work	turning	black,	about	too	high	a	heat,	burning
the	flowers,	and	glassy	vitrification.	Many	risks,	many	ruinous	steps.	What	can	go	wrong	with	blue?
Watch	out	for	literalizing	the	image,	or,	as	the	alchemists	say:	“Beware	of	the	physical	in	the
material.”	Physical,	of	course,	means	also	metaphysical	–	the	literalization	of	airy	ideas	into	dense
and	dogmatic	truths.	Any	blue	that	becomes	pure	blue	is	not	true	blue.
The	connotations	that	we	have	uncovered	in	this	amplification	indicate	the	importance	of	blue	in
the	alchemical	process.	Were	the	white	to	come	merely	as	a	clearing	off,	something	essential	would
be	missed.	Something	must	incorporate	into	the	albedo	a	resonance	of,	a	fidelity	to,	what	has
happened	and	transmit	the	suffering	with	another	shading:	not	as	grinding	pain,	decay,	and	the
memory	of	depression,	but	as	value.	Value	belongs	to	the	phenomenology	of	silver	(as	discussed	in
Chapter	6).	Recognition	of	the	value	of	psychic	realities	is	not	born	merely	from	relief	of	black
distress.	The	blue	qualifies	the	white	with	worth	in	the	ways	we	have	mentioned,	and	especially	by	its
introduction	of	moral,	intellectual	and	divine	concerns.	Thereby	blue	brings	to	the	whitened	mind	a
capacity	for	evaluating	images,	devotion	to	them,	and	a	sense	of	their	truth,	rather	than	only
reflection	upon	their	play	as	fantasies.	It	is	the	blue	which	deepens	the	idea	of	reflection	beyond	the
single	notion	of	mirroring,	to	the	further	notions	of	pondering,	considering,	meditating.	The	mind
conjoined	with	imagination	is	drawn	away	from	itself.	This	inward	distancing	is	upward	and
downward,	both;	darkened	and	enlightened,	moral,	immoral,	and	amoral.
III.	IMAGINATION	IS	REALITY  [35]
T	he	colors	that	herald	white	are	spoken	of	as	Iris	and	the	rainbow,	as	many	flowers,	and	mainly	as
the	brilliance	of	the	peacock’s	tail	with	its	multiple	eyes. [36]	According	to	Paracelsus, [37]	the	colors
result	from	dryness	acting	on	moisture.	We	naturally	believe	that	moisture	brings	color	as	to	bushes

and	fields	after	rain.	But	alchemical	thinking	does	not	follow	the	easy	and	usual;	the	alchemical
process	is	an	opus	contra	naturam.	For	Paracelsus,	then,	color	enters	more	significantly	when	the
profligate	profusion	of	the	mind	dries	up	and	the	essentials	of	things	can	stand	bare.	Hence	the
importance	of	black	as	the	suppression	of	color	and	the	absence	of	light.	The	nigredo	scorches	and
blights	the	simplistic	fallacies	of	naturalism.
Drying	releases	the	soul	from	personal	subjectivism,	and,	as	the	moisture	recedes,	that	vivacity
once	usurped	by	feeling	can	now	pass	over	into	imagination.	Blue	is	singularly	important	here
because	it	is	the	color	of	imagination	tout	court.	I	base	this	declaration	not	only	on	all	we	have	been
exploring:	the	blue	mood	which	sponsors	reverie,	the	blue	sky	which	calls	the	mythic	imagination	to
its	farthest	reaches,	the	blue	of	Mary	who	is	the	Western	epitome	of	anima	and	her	instigation	of
image-making,	the	blue	rose	of	romance,	a	pothos [38]	that	pines	for	the	impossible	contra	naturam
(and	pothos,	the	flower,	was	a	blue	larkspur	or	delphinium	placed	on	graves);	I	call	also	on	Wallace
Stevens’s	blue	and	Cézanne’s	blue.
Blue	“represents	in	(Stevens’s)	work	the	imagination	…	such	as	the	romantic	or	the	imaginative	in
contradistinction	to	the	realistic.“ [39]	And	it	was	as	well	for	Stevens	the	color	of	intellectual	stability
and	“reason.”	“Both	the	intellect	and	imagination	are	blue,” [40]	just	as	Stevens’s	poetry	presents	that
combination	of	thought	and	image	so	successfully. [41]	The	appearance	of	blue	in	the	coloration
process	indicates	that	span	of	the	spectrum	where	thought	and	image	begin	to	coalesce,	images
provide	the	medium	for	thoughts	while	reflections	take	an	imaginative	turn	away	from	the	dark	and
confined	frustration	of	the	nigredo	and	toward	the	wider	horizon	of	mind.	The	blue	instrument	moves
soul	from	sounding	its	small	lament	to	the	great	breath	of	Kandinsky’s	organ,	its	largo,	the	spacious
march	of	philosophizing	that	can	incorporate	the	hurts	of	one’s	history	into	a	tragic	sense	of	life.
As	with	Stevens,	so	with	Cézanne, [42]	“When	he	was	composing	…	only	a	visionary’s	or	a	poet’s
imaginative	conception	…	could	be	of	help	to	him.	It	was	impossible	for	him	to	start	out	from	an
isolated	real	thing	seen.” [43]	He	based	his	painting	on	“shadow	paths	and	contours” [44]	out	of	which
“real	things”	emerged	as	local	high	points.	The	imaginative	conception,	the	visionary	shadow,
originates	and	supports	the	real	thing	seen	in	nature.	“The	deepest	shadow	color	in	Cézanne’s
paintings,	the	one	which	supports	the	composition	and	is	most	appropriate	for	shadows,	is	blue.” [45]
blue	“shadow”	contrasts	markedly	with	the	Jungian	notion	of	shadow	blackened	by	repression,	guilt,
and	moralism.	“When	[Cézanne]	used	blue	in	this	way,	he	transcended	any	special	connotation	which
had	attached	to	its	former	uses.	Blue	was	now	recognized	as	belonging	to	a	deeper	level	of	existence.
It	expressed	the	essence	of	things	and	…	placed	them	in	a	position	of	unattainable	remoteness.” [46]
The	blue	shadow	is	the	imaginal	ground	that	allows	the	eye	to	see	imaginatively,	the	event	as	image,
creating	at	the	same	time	a	remoteness	from	real	things	(Cézanne)	of	the	green	world	(Stevens),	a
remoteness	felt	in	the	nostalgia	that	blue	brings.
This	nostalgia,	however,	is	neither	sentimental	nor	wishful	–	not	vapid	blue,	baby-boy	blue,	or
lavender	blue.	For	Stevens,	the	ultimate	blue	is	utterly	real,	a	burning	blue,	approximating	gold,	red
and	fire,	an	aurora,	the	dawning	of	things	as	vividly	alive.	“When	the	sky	is	so	blue,	things	sing
themselves,” [47]	writes	Stevens,	and	in	a	letter	explains:	“… the	amorist	Adjective	means	blue	as	a
world	metamorphised	into	blue	as	a	reality.” [48]
Blue	thus	brings	a	double	nostalgia,	both	for	what	cannot	ever	be,	the	lost	and	gone,	remoteness	as
removal	of	the	soul	from	its	home,	and	a	nostalgia	for	the	blue	intensity,	the	azure	vision,	the	lapis
lazuli	of	the	goddesses’	hair	and	the	moments	when	“things	sing	themselves,”	and	the	soul	is	finally	at
home.
Once	the	black	turns	blue,	darkness	can	be	penetrated	(unlike	the	nigredo	which	absorbs	all	insights
back	into	itself,	compounding	the	darkness	with	literal,	impenetrable	introspections). [49]	The	shift	to
blue	allows	air	so	that	the	nigredo	can	meditate	itself,	imagine	itself,	recognize	that	this	very	shadow

state	expresses	“the	essence	of	things.”	Here	is	imaginal	consciousness	affirming	its	own	ground,	and
able	to	transform	the	ground	of	massive	concretism,	as	in	Monet’s	painting	of	Notre	Dame	Cathedral.
One	day	Claude	Monet	wanted	the	cathedral	to	be	a	truly	airy	thing	–	airy	in	its	substance,	airy	to	the	very	core	of	its	masonry.	So
the	cathedral	took	from	the	blue-colored	mist	all	the	blue	matter	that	the	mist	itself	had	taken	from	the	sky.	Monet’s	whole	picture
takes	its	life	from	this	transference	of	blue,	this	alchemy	of	blue. [50]

Cézanne	writes,	“Blue	gives	other	colors	their	vibration,	so	one	must	bring	a	certain	amount	of	blue
into	a	painting.” [51]	From	his	perspective,	blue	would	be	the	crucial	color	in	the	palette	of	the
peacock	because	it	transforms	the	other	colors	into	possibilities	of	imagination,	into	psychological
events,	that	come	to	life	because	of	blue.	Jakob	Böhme	writes,	“Imagination	of	the	great	Mystery,
where	a	wondrous	essential	Life	is	born,”	results	from	the	colors. [52]	The	full	flowering	of
imagination	shows	itself	as	the	qualitative	spread	colors	so	that	imagining	is	a	coloring	process,	and
if	not	in	literal	colors,	then	as	the	qualitative	differentiation	of	intensities	and	hues	which	is	essential
to	the	unio	mentalis.
Jung’s	bias	towards	unity	and	synthesis	shields	him	from	an	essential	implication	of	this	moment	in
the	opus	and	the	texts	he	is	explaining.	Jung	writes	(CW	14: 397):	“The	cauda	pavonis	announces	the
end	of	the	work,	just	as	Iris,	its	synonym,	is	the	messenger	of	God.	The	exquisite	display	of	colors	in
the	peacock’s	fan	heralds	the	imminent	synthesis	of	all	qualities	and	elements	which	are	united	in	the
“rotundity”	of	the	philosopher ’s	stone.”
Rather	than	a	messenger	of	God	(a	statement	Jung	takes	unreflectingly	from	Khunrath	(CW	14: 
392),	Iris	is	a	messenger	of	many	gods,	and	therefore	indicates	neither	the	integration	of	all	the
colors,	as	Jung	writes,	nor	“the	coming	of	God”	(ibid.).	In	fact,	the	following	paragraphs	(CW	14: 
395f.)	refer	to	an	author	(Penotus)	who	“correlates	the	coniugium	with	the	‘dii	mortui’	(dead	gods),
presumably	because	they	need	resurrecting.”	These	passages	also	refer	to	the	phases	ruled	by	Mars
and	by	Venus	and	to	Juno	whose	bird	is	the	peacock.
Rather	than	insistence	upon	unity	and	an	amplification	with	Christian	meanings	of	resurrection
(CW	14: 397)	the	text	implies	resurrection	of	the	dead	gods	buried	in	the	culturally	repressed	and
which	appear	in	differentiated	display	of	multiple	colors	in	both	rainbow	and	the	peacock’s	manyeyed	fan.	Iris’s	message	is	simple:	her	vaporous	substance	proclaims	it,	a	substance	that	is	all	and
only	appearance.	Look	with	the	eyes	of	the	heart [53]	at	my	shining	body	and	you	will	see	the	gods	in
the	power	and	beauty	of	color.	Their	infinity	actualizes	in	the	infinite	variety	of	shades	and	hues	that
compose	the	world.
When	the	colors	shine	in	the	peacock’s	tail	so,	too,	do	the	eyes	whereby	they	can	be	seen.
Imaginative	vision	precedes	the	whiteness	itself,	otherwise	the	white	earth	cannot	be	perceived	as	the
transfiguration	of	nature	by	imagination.	For	this	new	perception,	the	perception	of	colors,	too,	goes
through	a	transubstantiation	into	a	mystical	or	painterly	sense	of	them	as	substances.	They	are
complexions	on	the	faces	of	light,	revealing	the	basic	quality	of	nature:	its	endlessly	subtle	and
multiple	intensities.	Colors	shift	from	being	phenomena	of	light	to	essential	phenomena	in
themselves. [54]	Light,	as	a	generalized	Newtonian	abstraction,	shifts	to	being	the	presentation	of
color	and	secondary	to	it,	so	that	the	terra	alba	is	not	sheer	white	in	the	literal	sense	but	a	field	of
flowers	(multi	flores), [55]	a	peacock’s	tail,	a	coat	of	many	colors.
The	transubstantiation	announced	by	the	alchemical	peacock	reverses	the	history	of	philosophy.
(The	color	optics	of	Newton	and	Locke,	of	Berkeley	and	Hume	belong	to	the	concentrated
subjectivism	of	the	nigredo	with	its	neglect	and	negation	of	phenomenal	nature.)	Color	now	becomes
a	primary	quality	again,	the	thing	itself	as	phainoumenon	on	display,	the	heart	in	the	matter,	prior	to
such	abstractions	as	bulk,	number,	figure,	and	motion.	Where	color	is,	the	world	is	as	we	see	it	–	not
merely	green	as	naturalistic	sense-perception	believes,	but	green	because	of	its	blue	shadows. [56]

Even	in	the	simplistics	of	the	kindergarten	color-wheel,	green	is	secondary	to	blue,	the	primary.	The
natural	world	depends	on	the	primacy	of	the	imaginal,	which	affords	deep,	many-leveled	implications
to	sensory	data.	Because	of	blue,	the	green	world	yields	metaphors,	analogies,	intelligible	instruction,
providing	reservoirs	of	beauty	and	insight.	The	world	is	as	we	see	it	in	our	dreams	and	poems,
visions	and	paintings,	a	world	that	is	truly	a	cosmos,	cosmetically	adorned,	an	aesthetic	event	for	the
senses	because	they	have	become	instruments	of	imagining.
The	multi	flores	and	the	myriad	eyes	in	the	peacock’s	tail	suggest	that	the	colored	vision	is	multiple
vision.	One	must	be	able	to	see	polychromatically,	polymorphously,	polytemporally,	polytheistically
before	the	terra	alba	appears.	The	movement	from	a	monocentric	universe	to	a	cosmos	of	complex
perspectives	begins	with	blue	since	it	“gives	the	other	colors,”	as	Cézanne	says,	“their	vibration.”
Then	the	alchemical	colors	vanish	and	are	replaced	by	a	brilliant	white	lustre.	Here	one	might	be	so
dazzled	by	the	new	brilliance	of	mind	as	to	take	white	literally,	as	if	white	meant	only	and	literally	one
thing	–	whiteness	–	thereby	forgetting	the	multiplicity	which	made	the	whiteness	possible. [57]	The
multiplicity	must	already	have	been	built	into	the	mind	as	the	Cézanne	vibrations,	shadings	and
subtleties	that	are	both	there	in	things	and	there	in	the	eyes	of	the	mind	by	which	things	are	seen	as
images.	It	is	as	if	we	enter	the	world	without	preconceptions,	startled	by	the	phenomena	where
everything	is	given	and	nothing	taken	for	granted.
To	experience	in	this	manner	is	to	recover	innocence	–	hence	the	brilliant	white	luster.	Ruskin
called	it	“the	innocence	of	the	eye	…	a	sort	of	childish	perception	of	these	flat	stains	of	color,	merely
as	such,	without	consciousness	of	what	they	signify.” [58]	Attention	shifts	from	the	signification	of
perception	to	sense	perception	itself.	We	notice	and	are	affected	by	sense	qualities	–	What	is	there?	In
what	way	is	it	there?	What	is	it	doing	there,	and	doing	to	me?	–	rather	than:	How	did	it	get	there?
Why?	What	use	is	it?
We	are	arriving	at	the	essence	of	the	unio	mentalis:	the	transformation	of	imagination,	and	a	radical
shift	in	the	very	idea	of	imagination.	After	the	despair	of	blue	and	the	desire	of	blue,	the	inventive
virtuosity	of	this	force	has	so	saturated	our	hearts	and	sight	with	a	heaven-	or	hell-sent	sense	of	life,
imagination	having	become	so	pervasive	a	power,	it	can	no	longer	be	confined	to	a	mental	function
or	conceived	as	one	psychological	capacity	among	others.	In	fact,	imagination	can	no	longer	belong
to	human	psychology,	but	must	like	grace	be	accorded	archetypal	attribution,	something	descended
into	our	lives	from	an	imaginal	realm.	The	gift	of	imagination	in	any	human	person	is	first	of	all	a
gift	from	the	blue	yonder,	where	the	colors	themselves	begin,	much	as	the	rainbow	reaches	down
from	an	imagined	somewhere,	and	where	it	touches	the	earth	no	fact	can	find.
Colors	are	a	primary	presentation	of	archetypal	differentiation,	each	color	a	celebration	of	the
sensuality	of	the	cosmos,	each	shade	and	hue	tincturing	the	psyche	with	a	set	of	moods	and	attaching	it
to	the	world	with	particular	affinities.	These	become	our	taste,	our	aversions	and	delights.
In	recognition	of	the	power	of	color,	those	dedicated	to	transcendence	and	favoring	colorless
abstractions,	mathematical	purity,	a	spiritual	via	negativa	and	a	metaphysics	of	void,	attack	the	colors
as	only	appearances,	only	derivative	of	the	effect	of	light	on	the	optical	system.
They	march	to	the	mountain	tops	with	eyes	averted. [59]	The	spiritual	path	parts	company	with
alchemy	which	indulges	in	the	palpable,	the	oleagenous	and	the	vivid.	Alchemy	plunges	into	the
colored	matters	of	this	world;	its	devotees	are	disciples	of	color.
As	an	archetypal	grace	given	with	the	cosmos,	the	colors	donate	their	imaginative	force	to	our
creativity.	How	else	account	for	the	blue	masterpieces	in	the	arts?	Gershwin,	for	instance,	or	Miles
Davis?	Is	it	merely	a	convention	that	names	their	music	blue?	Or	does	blue’s	archetypal	power	affirm
its	imaginal	reality	by	means	of	these	masterpieces?	Blue	made	the	music	blue	as	it	makes	our	souls
sorrow.	Blue’s	specific	gift	is	to	the	mind	so	that	its	sight	can	be	insight,	its	vision	visionary,	and
metaphor	its	terra	firma.	Blue’s	appearance	in	the	world	brings	a	primordial	shading	to	all	existence,

beginning	the	world	anew	from	and	for	imagination,	as	at	the	very	beginning	of	the	world	when	the
face	of	the	deep	creates	the	sky	and	seas	in	its	image.
IV.	UNIO	MENTALIS
T	his	inquiry,	these	images,	and	the	figures	whom	we	have	summoned	–	Cézanne,	Stevens,	Monet,
Kandinsky,	Rimbaud,	Kelly,	Wakoski,	Bachelard,	Jung,	Picasso,	Marc	–	reveal	something	of	the
nature	of	the	unio	mentalis.	Jung,	expanding	on	Gerhard	Dorn,	considers	the	unio	mentalis	to	be	a
union	of	reasoned	judgment	and	aesthetic	fantasy	(logos	and	psyche)	(CW	14: 755),	freeing	soul	from
body	(CW	14: 739),	prior	to	further	union	with	body	(physis,	physics,	world,	unus	mundus)	(CW	14: 
759f.).	The	unio	mentalis	–	the	first	goal	of	the	opus	–	as	union	of	logos	and	psyche	is	nothing	other
than	psychology	itself,	the	psychology	that	has	faith	(CW	14: 756)	in	itself	and	indicates	and	activates
the	albedo	following	the	blue.	This	psychology,	which	gives	an	“inner	foundation”	(CW	14: 758)	and
“inner	certainty”	(CW	14: 756),	Jung	elsewhere	describes	as	esse	in	anima	(CW	6: 77–78)	–	being	in
soul.
Yes,	blue	can	activate.	Despite	Goethe’s	reflective	remoteness	and	cool	distancing	of	blue,	the	unio
mentalis	is	spirited,	animated;	animus	in	the	anima.	A	wind	blows	through	it.	An	Open	Entrance
(HM	2: 194)	reports	that	as	the	material	begins	to	swell	up	and	blossom	with	many	colors,	the	green
of	Venus	becomes	like	a	hyacinth,	“i.e.,	blue”	(CW	14: 393).	This	is	a	phase	of	Mars	(CW	14,	p.	289 
n22).	A	blue	Mars?	This	paradoxical	image	suggests	both	a	more	thoughtful	Mars	and	a	martial
quality	to	blue,	a	florid	activity	of	the	mind	itself.	For	under	the	aegis	of	Mars	the	rainbow	and	the
peacock’s	tail	shine	forth.
Dorn’s	statement,	“the	blue	colour	after	the	yellow	[my	italics],”	would	seem	to	reverse	the
standard	progression	of	colors	in	which	blue	precedes	yellow	as	yellow	precedes	red.	The	unio
mentalis,	however,	must	be	reaffirmed	prior	to	the	reddening,	else	the	passage	to	red	could	omit
obscurity,	mystery	and	the	values	that	blue	brought	to	the	albedo.	The	yellow	must	be	psychically
contaminated	by	the	blue	which	is	hidden	within	it	and	which,	as	Dorn	goes	on	to	explain,	“will	lead
to	the	complete	blackness	or	putrefaction	after	a	very	long	time”	(CW	14: 723).	In	short,	simple
progression	through	defined	stages	is	not	alchemical	psychology;	a	psychological	mind	has	suffered
the	unio	mentalis	where	black	shadows	hound	every	phase	and	every	hue,	mainly	by	means	of	blue.
A	mind	casually	joined	comes	easily	apart,	so	that	putting	the	blues	behind	us	as	too	nostalgic,	too
sad,	too	complicated	and	subtle	lets	the	mind	divide	against	itself.	Without	the	blue	bridge	of
metaphor	we	fall	into	black-and-white	thinking:	either/or,	fact/fancy,	good/bad	…	Crucified	by
opposites.	Strung	out	by	the	logic	of	contradiction.	Thus	the	unio	mentalis	is	neither	a	progression
from	black	to	white	nor	a	synthesis	of	black	and	white.	Rather,	it	is	a	descent	of	the	mind	from	that
cross,	an	ever-present	possibility	of	poiesis	by	a	mind	remaking	itself	out	of	whole	blue	cloth	that
underlies	and	can	undermine	oppositions.
The	nature	of	the	achieved	unio	mentalis	can	be	garnered	from	the	accounts	of	those	we	have
summoned.	They	suggest	that	the	unio	mentalis	is	the	interpenetration	of	idea	and	mood,	of	perceived
world	and	imaginal	world, [60]	a	state	of	mind	no	longer	concerned	with	sharp	distinctions	between
things	and	thought,	time	and	timelessness,	nostalgia	and	prophesy,	appearance	and	reality,	or	between
intellect	that	builds	theory	and	soul	that	invents	fantasy.	We	have	colored	this	unio	mentalis	“blue”
because	the	blue	we	have	been	encountering	transfigures	appearances	into	imaginal	realities	and
imagines	thought	itself	in	a	new	way.	Blue	is	preparatory	to	and	incorporated	in	the	white,	indicating
that	the	white	becomes	earth,	that	is,	fixed	and	real.	When	the	eye	becomes	blue,	that	is,	able	to	see
into	thoughts	and	envision	them	as	imaginative	forms,	then	images	become	the	ground	of	reality.
The	effulgent	blue	“tincture”	(witnessed	severally	below,	in	Chapter	10)	does	not	altogether

transcend	the	blue	of	mood	and	derangement	because	that	azure	occurrence	is	concocted,	according
to	Dorn	(CW	14: 703)	from	an	underworld	experience,	also	called	“wine”	(CW	14: 681–83).
Wine	has	a	vernacular	relationship	with	blue	drunkenness,	blue	noses,	and	blue	laws	of	prohibition,
and	at	the	other	end	of	the	spectrum	wine	is	the	carrier	of	divine	drunkenness	in	the	mystical	states	of
Rumi	and	Kabı-r.	Here,	we	should	immediately	recall	Heraclitus’s	saying	that	Dionysus	and	Hades	are
one,	so	that	the	unio	mentalis	brings	obscurity	(Hades)	with	it,	deranges	the	usual	mind	and	suggests	a
Dionysian	mystery.
A	blue	lens	may	allow	us	to	see	into	that	most	perplexing	of	the	ancient	cults	and	the	Dionysian
experience.	Wine	offers	truth	and	theatricality,	both	regret	and	joy,	or	in	dreadful	diagnostic	terms,
both	“depression	and	libido”	which	Stephen	Diggs	finds	to	be	the	secret	of	jazz,	declaring	Dionysus
the	God	of	“The	Blues	Revolution.” [61]	Albert	Murray	explains:	“The	fundamental	function	of	the
blues	musician	(also	known	as	the	jazz	musician)	…	is	not	only	to	drive	the	blues	away	…	but	also	to
evoke	an	ambiance	of	Dionysian	revelry	in	the	process.” [62]	The	god	in	the	disease	cures	the	disease;
like	cures	like;	drive	away	the	blues	by	means	of	the	blues.
These	authors	keep	Hades	and	the	underworld	in	close	and	tight.	Because	the	blues	are	based	on	the
most	dissonant	of	all	intervals	(the	tritone),	it	was	once	known	as	the	“Diabolus	in	musica”	and	for	a
time	actually	illegal.	Moreover,	“most	idiosyncratic	to	the	blues	is	flattening	…	failing	to	reach	the
pitch,”	“as	if	to	say	come	back	to	earth.” [63]
Of	the	consciousness	brought	by	this	mystery,	as	Dodds,	Otto,	and	Kerényi	have	told	us	–	nature
comes	alive.	The	god’s	presence	permeates	communal	existence	as	a	somber	shadow	that	gives	a
joyous	vibration	to	all	things,	or	as	Goethe	described	blue,	“a	kind	of	contradiction	between
excitement	and	repose.” [64]	The	unio	mentalis	implies	a	divine	drunkenness [65]	including	that	which
the	normal	nigredo	mind	considers	pathological.
I	cannot	call	Dionysus	directly	“blue”	despite	the	fact	that	his	hair	and	eyes,	in	the	Homeric	hymn	to
him,	are	kyaneos.	He	sees	with	the	blue	eye,	and	to	see	him	our	eye	must	be	colored	in	the	same	way.	I
can,	however,	connect	this	Lord	of	souls	and	wine	with	Kessler ’s	summary	above	of	Cézanne’s	blue:
that	“depth	of	meaning,”	that	“deeper	level	of	existence”	which	both	holds	the	world	communally	as
“existing	together”	and	yet	“in	a	position	of	unattainable	remoteness.”
“Tibetans	say	that	goddesses	have	lapus	lazuli	hair.” [66]	When	myths	say	gods	have	blue	hair	or
blue	bodies,	they	have!	The	gods	live	in	a	blue	place	of	metaphor,	and	they	are	described	less	with
naturalistic	language	than	with	theatrical	“distortion.”	“Divinity	escorts	us	kindly,	at	first	with	blue,”
writes	Hölderlin. [67]	Mythical	talk	must	be	full	of	hyperbole;	the	gods	live	in	the	highs	and	deeps.	To
depict	them	rightly	we	need	the	expressionist’s	palette,	not	the	impressionist’s.	Precisely	this	shift	into
mythical	perception	occurs	with	the	unio	mentalis.	We	now	“imagine”	the	nature	of	reality,	and	darkblue	becomes	the	right	color	to	express	Dionysus’s	hair,	because	it	is	the	natural,	reasonable	hue	for
the	hair	of	this	God	in	this	hymn,	a	most	realistic	depiction,	a	poetic	truth	(as	Vico	would	claim).
One	of	these	peculiar	depictions	that	nourish	the	alchemical	imagination	is	the	uniped,	explained	by
Jung	(CW	14: 720–25,	with	plates).	This	one-legged	figure	has	a	blue	foot;	in	another	depiction,	blue
undergarments;	a	third	shows	the	blue	foot	tipped	with	black.	This	singular	figure	neatly	shows	the
power	of	the	freakish	imagination	to	overcome	the	naturalistic	fallacy	of	a	two-footed	pedestrian
standpoint.	As	well,	the	uniped	insists	that	its	blue	still	retain	it	black	stain.
That	stain?	A	remnant	of	the	nigredo	of	which	Jung	says	in	this	context	(CW	14: 722),	“psychic
contents	free	themselves	from	their	attachment	to	the	body.”	Not	from	the	body	but	from	attachment
to	it;	a	freedom	from	the	literalization	of	body,	of	bodily	events	as	only	body.	Not	bodilessness	but	a
different	sense	of	body	as	joined	with	the	mind,	as	filled	with	mind	(and	mind	with	embodied
thought).	The	single	blue	foot	on	which	the	body	stands	allows	it	to	be	flesh	and	mystery	both.
This	flesh	clothed	in	blue	returns	us	to	the	earlier	theme	of	the	blue	dog.	Long	ago	it	was	imagined

by	a	heretical	“Gnostic,”	Justinus,	that	the	creator	god	was	none	other	than	Priapos, [68]	an	idea
scathingly	vilified	by	a	Father	of	the	early	Church,	Hippolytus	of	Rome,	finding	it	against	the	Holy
Writ,	therefore	heretical,	therefore	pagan. [69]	But	Scholem’s	discussion	of	the	rainbow	as	Jahweh’s
sign	of	the	covenant	between	heaven	and	earth	says:	“The	Hebrew	word	for	bow,	keshet,	denotes	in
Hebrew	literature	not	only	rainbow	but,	in	the	rabbinic	literature,	also	penis.” [70]	Further,	the	term,
brith,	or	covenant,	that	the	rainbow	signifies	also	applies	to	circumcision.	The	colors	of	the	rainbow
find	their	concentrated	location	in	the	sefirah	Yesod,	the	mystical	phallus,	called	the	basis	or
foundation	in	those	images	of	the	human	body	representing	the	Kabbalah’s	cosmic	tree	that	stretches
from	heaven	down	to	earth.	The	genitals	transmit	the	force	of	the	above	to	the	below,	and	this	below	–
the	last	sefirah,	Shekhina,	the	world	soul	–	is	pure	blue. [71]
To	translate	these	esoteric	references	into	the	blue	dog’s	perverse	obsessions	we	discover	this:
Invisible	Hades	appears	in	the	world	as	Dionysus. [72]	There	is	a	divine	(i.e.,	invisible,	unfathomable)
impulse	that	seeks	to	enter	ordinary	life.	It	wants	to	know	the	soul	in	the	Biblical	sense.	Carnal
knowledge,	intimate	knowledge,	knowledge	of	intimates.	(Hence	the	innumerable	images	of
copulation	throughout	alchemy.)	The	soul	longs	for	this	copulation,	and	sings	its	longing	in	the	blues,
blueing	its	own	flesh,	drawing	the	divine	down	into	the	ordinary	body.	(Hence	the	blues’	libidinous
mood.)
That	truck-stop	backroom,	the	dense	fascination [73]	with	flickering	images	is	also	a	soul	world,	a
receptacle	of	divine	penetration.	There	are	divine	seeds	in	all	things,	bits	and	pieces	of	Dionysus’s
torn	apart	body	vibrating	through	all	creation. [74]	So,	of	course,	porn	is	tawdry,	jazz	low-down	and
dirty,	earth-bound	like	a	dog,	no	matter	how	high	the	bird	flies	on	trumpet	notes	or	coke.	The	blueclothed	flesh	does	not	translate	to	mean	wrapping	impulses	in	protective	puritan	constrictions	of
single-willed	self-control.	More	liberally,	that	uniped	implies	standing	like	an	unwobbling	pivot	on
the	pediment	of	imaginal	realism,	an	understanding	given	with	the	blue	dog	where	fantasy	is	utterly
concretistic	and	the	mundane	utterly	fantastic.	This,	too,	is	a	unio	mentalis.
The	alchemist	works	under	a	ruling	maxim,	“solve	et	coagula”	(dissolve	and	coagulate).	Blue
literalizations	must	be	dissolved	lest	the	archetypal	power	coagulate	into	a	monocular	metaphysical
vision. [75]	Not	the	body	and	the	rocks	must	become	blue,	but	the	mind.	Unless	the	mind	continues	its
laborious	artful	practice	of	solve	–	dissolving	the	literal	into	its	fantasy	–	the	mind	can	become
possessed	by	a	single	feature	of	archetypal	blue’s	imagination:	e.g.,	Yves	Klein’s	manifesto	and
demonstrative	acts;	William	Gass’s	persistent	tracking	of	blue’s	erotic	language	as	if	led	by	the	blue
dog;	Howard	Teich’s	narrow	psychologizing	of	blue	into	a	component	of	male	personality.
Of	all	those	who	have	allowed	blue	to	inundate	their	work	perhaps	only	Stevens	and	Cézanne
maintained	the	complexity	of	the	color.	They	continued	to	the	end	dissolving	and	coagulating	and
dissolving	again	blue’s	multiple	shadings,	never	letting	the	unio	mentalis	fixate	into	a	singleness	of
mind	or	mood.
A	unio	mentalis	is	a	mind	that	can	hold	quietly	all	that	blue	evokes,	realizing	that	the	mind	has
moved	into	a	poetic	sensibility,	dissolved	its	conceptual	obsession	into	language.	“In	short,	the	color
blue	is	in	part	a	pure	linguistic	artifact.” [76]
The	beginnings	of	color	terms	for	“blue”	in	Greek	and	Latin	were	likely	“borrowed	by	prose	from
poetry,” [77]	from	oral	recitation,	from	the	throat’s	singing,	as	the	blues	today	carry	the	poetic
tradition	and	express	the	thought	of	the	heart’s	imagination.	If	poetry	is	the	source	for	the	deepest
blue,	so	we	have	had	to	go	to	figures	like	Stevens	and	Cézanne	for	more	understanding	of	the	soul’s
coloring	process	and	the	psychology	of	the	unio	mentalis.	This	turn	to	poet	and	painter	tells	us	also
who	are	the	alchemists	of	the	modern	day.
The	poets	and	painters,	and	the	figures	in	us	who	are	poets	and	painters,	are	those	struggling	with
the	continuing	problem:	the	transubstantiation	of	the	material	perspective	into	soul	through	ars.

Artifex	now	artisan.	The	alchemical	laboratory	is	in	their	work	with	words [78]	and	paints, [79]	and
psychology	continues	its	tradition	of	learning	from	alchemy	by	learning	from	them.	They	tell	us	one
further	thing	about	the	white	earth:	if	the	imaginal	ground	is	first	perceived	by	artistic	method,	then
the	very	nature	of	this	earth	must	be	aesthetic	–	the	way	is	the	goal.	We	come	to	the	white	earth	when
our	way	of	doing	psychology	is	aesthetic.	An	aesthetic	psychology,	a	psychology	whose	muse	is
anima,	is	already	hesitantly	moving,	surely	moving,	in	that	white	place.
Originally	published	in	Sulfur 1	(1981),	33–50,	and	reprinted	in	Spring:	A	Journal	of	Archetype	and	Culture 54	(1993),	132–48.
1 Cf.	Norton’s	The	Ordinal	of	Alchemy	(HM	2: 3 8–39):	“Physicians	have	discovered	nineteen	colours	intermediate	between	white	and
black	in	urine	…	Magnesia	[a	term	for	white]	throws	out	a	mild,	pure	splendor	in	the	subtle	state	of	our	Art;	and	here	we	behold	all
colours	that	ever	were	seen	by	the	mortal	eye	–	a	hundred	colours,	and	certainly	a	good	many	more	than	have	been	observed	in	urine;
and	in	all	those	colours	our	Stone	must	be	found	in	all	its	successive	stages.	In	the	ordering	of	your	practical	experiments,	and	in
conceiving	the	different	parts	of	the	work	in	your	own	mind,	you	must	have	as	many	phases,	or	stages,	as	there	are	colours.”
2 Ruland	lists	twenty-seven	kinds	of	blue-colored	silver.	Norton	writes	(HM	2: 4 5):	“Silver	may	easily	be	converted	into	the	colour	of
the	lazulite,	because	…	silver,	produced	by	air,	has	a	tendency	to	become	assimilated	to	the	colour	of	the	sky.”	So	strong	is	the
association	of	blue	with	silver	and	whitening	that	even	when	modern	chemistry	disputes	alchemical	testimony	(deriving	a	blue	pigment
from	silver	treated	with	salt,	vinegar,	etc.),	it	assumes	the	alchemists	had	some	to-us-unknown	physical	justification	for	their	claim.
(Wyckoff	points	out	that	silver	“so	treated	would	not	give	a	blue	pigment.	Nevertheless,	this	recipe,	with	variations,	is	found	in	many	old
collections,	so	it	must	have	some	value.”	Albertus	Magnus,	Book	of	Minerals,	ed.	D.	Wyckof	(Oxford:	At	the	Clarendon	Press,	1967),
192–93n.	Is	not	the	claim	based	rather	on	fantasy,	a	sophic	silver	of	a	whitened	imagination	that	knows	that	blue	belongs	to	silvering,	and
therefore	sees	it?
3 For	the	rich	complexity	of	blue,	see	M.	Pastoureau,	Blue:	The	History	of	a	Color	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	2001);	W.	Gass,	On	Being
Blue:	A	Philosophical	Inquiry	(Boston:	David	R.	Godine,	1976);	and	A.	Theroux,	The	Primary	Colors	(New	York:	Henry	Holt,	1994).
These	authors	do	not	draw	upon	alchemy.
4 W.	Stevens,	“The	Man	with	the	Blue	Guitar,”	in	The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens	(New	York:	Vintage	Books,	1990),	165.
5 J. W.	von	Goethe,	Theory	of	Colours,	trans.	C. L.	Eastlake	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	MIT	Press,	1970).	Also,	W.	Kandinsky,	Concerning
the	Spiritual	in	Art,	trans.	M. T. H.	Sadler	(New	York:	Dover,	1977),	38:	“Blue	…	retreat[s]	from	the	spectator	…	turning	in	upon	its	own
centre	…	When	it	sinks	almost	to	black,	it	echoes	a	grief	that	is	hardly	human.”
6 See	Gass	for	the	weird	and	sexual	blues,	especially.	On	the	cyanotic	aspects	of	blue,	see	Jung’s	remarks	on	Picasso’s	blue	period
(CW	15: 2 10),	which	Jung	compares	with	a	Nekyia	to	the	realm	of	Hades:	“We	enter	the	underworld.	The	world	of	objects	is	deathstruck,	as	the	horrifying	masterpiece	of	the	syphilitic,	tubercular,	adolescent	prostitute	makes	plain.”
7 For	a	thorough	examination	of	the	erotic	alchemical	dog	in	a	particular	case,	see	R.	Grinnell,	Alchemy	in	a	Modern	Woman	(Dallas:
Spring	Publications,	1989),	101ff.
8 On	lunar	lunacy,	see	below,	chap.	6;	also	J.	Hillman,	“You	Dirty	Dog,”	in	Animal	Presences,	UE	9: 1 50–60.
9 The	blue	dog	offers	another	reading	of	the	Diana/Actaeon	tale.	The	dogged	hunter,	drawn	by	fantasies	of	the	nude	female	body,	is
ravaged	by	the	concretism	of	his	desire	rather	than	its	obscure	object	–	the	lunar	albedo.	Concretism	belongs	with	the	dog	who,	it	is
jokingly	said,	has	only	three	concerns:	eating,	defecating,	and	copulating,	equivalent	with	Freud’s	oral,	anal,	and	phallic	phases	of	the
libido.	For	rich	discussions	of	the	Actaeon	tale,	see	T.	Moore,	“Artemis	and	the	Puer,”	in	Puer	Papers,	ed.	J.	Hillman	(Dallas:	Spring
Publications,	1979),	and	W.	Giegerich,	The	Soul’s	Logical	Life	(Frankfurt	am	Main:	Peter	Lang,	1998),	chap.	6.
10 Cf.	CW	12: 3 22:	“And	how	can	man	reach	fulfillment	if	the	Queen	does	not	intercede	for	his	black	soul?	She	understands	the
darkness	…	”	This	passage	follows	Jung’s	discussion	of	“blue.”
11 Cf.	J. E.	Cirlot,	A	Dictionary	of	Symbols	(London:	Routledge,	1962),	52.
12 T.	Thass-Thienemann,	The	Interpretation	of	Language,	vol.	1	(New	York:	J.	Aronson,	1973),	307;	E.	Irwin,	Color	Terms	in	Greek
Poetry	(Toronto:	Hakkert,	1974),	79–110,	“Kyaneos.“
13 P.	Dronke,	“Tradition	and	Innovation	in	Medieval	Western	Color-Imagery,”	Eranos	Yearbook	41	(1972),	67.	On	the	(light)	blue
sky,	see	Gaston	Bachelard’s	chapter	on	“The	Blue	Sky”	in	his	Air	and	Dreams:	An	Essay	on	the	Imagination	of	Movement	(trans.	E. R.

Farrell	and	C. F.	Farrell	[Dallas:	The	Dallas	Institute	Publications,	2002]).	The	underworld	as	an	airy	place,	and	blue,	appears	in	the
Navaho	cosmology.	The	next	to	the	deepest	(red)	world	is	blue,	inhabited	by	blue	birds,	see	G. A.	Reichard,	Navaho	Religion:	A	Study
of	Symbolism,	2	vols.	(New	York:	Pantheon	Books,	1950).
14 H.	Bayley,	The	Lost	Language	of	Symbolism	(London:	Williams	&	Norgate,	1912),	78–79.	Bayley	derives	“blue”	from	words	for
“truth”	–	a	curious	example	of	archetypal	fantasy	displayed	as	etymology.
15 Cirlot,	A	Dictionary	of	Symbols,	51.
16 Dronke,	“Tradition	and	Innovation,”	98	(Scivias,	II: 2 ).	A	blue	Christ	is	deviant	if	not	heretical.	The	image	does,	however,	add	support
for	Howard	Teich’s	argument	that	blue	represents	a	lunar	masculinity,	neither	solar	red	(male)	nor	lunar	white	(female)	but	a	conjunction
prior	to	the	familiar	red	&	white	pairing.	Teich	contends	that	blue	was	repressed	in	Christian	symbolism.	It	was	not	a	canonical	color	as
are	violet,	white,	green,	and	black.	Does	blue	carry	an	indelible	etymological	taint?	Kyanos	cognate	with	Skr.	cunya	“empty,	vacant,
vain,”	cuna-m	“absence,	want;”	Latin,	cavus	“hollow.”	Caerulus	(Lat.	dark-blue	sky)	is	cognate	(via	Skr.	Cyama)	with	dark,	vanish,
leave,	be	left.	Livid	(Lat.	blue)	belongs	to	a	group	of	words	meaning	slipping	away,	shrinking,	vanishing,	flowing.	Blue	(Germanic)	itself
belongs	to	“a	large	class	of	color	names	…	meaning	…	marked,	rubbed,	smeared,”	stained	and	colored	in	the	sense	of	“discolored.”	(F. 
A.	Wood,	Color-Names	and	their	Congeners	[Halle:	Niemeyer,	1902],	passim.)	Compare	to	these	etymologies	of	blue	this	digest	of
Goethe’s	evaluation:	“[Blue]	stands	on	the	negative	side	or	polarity	of	colors	where	deprivation,	shadow,	darkness,	weakness,	cold,
distance,	an	attraction	to	and	affinity	with	alkalis	are	to	be	found.”	(K.	Badt,	The	Art	of	Cézanne,	trans.	S. A.	Ogilvie	[Berkeley:	Univ.	of
California	Press,	1965],	59.)
17 The	black-white	mixture	in	blue	appears	in	an	old	British	expression,	”blue	skin”:	a	“person	begotten	on	a	black	woman	by	a	white
man.”	One	of	the	“blue	squadron”	meant	“a	lick	of	the	tar	brush.”	(Lexicon	Balatronicum:	Dictionary	of	Buckish	Slang,	University	Wit,
and	Pickpocket	Eloquence	(London:	C.	Chappel,	1811).
18 D.	Zahan,	“White,	Red,	and	Black:	Color	Symbolism	in	Black	Africa,”	in	Color	Symbolism:	The	Eranos	Lectures,	ed.	K.	Ottmann
(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2005),	217–18.
19 The	blue/white	association	is	not	only	in	Marian	symbolism,	since	blue	plays	an	especially	spiritual	role	in	Jewish	mystical	and	cult
symbolism,	cf.	G.	Scholem,	“Colors	and	their	Symbolism	in	Jewish	Tradition	and	Mysticism,”	in	Color	Symbolism,	1–44.
20 Rimbaud’s	sonnet	“Voyelles”	where	blue	equals	O,	Omega.	“Vowels,”	in	Rimbaud	Complete,	trans.	Wyatt	Mason	(New	York:
Modern	Library,	2002),	104.
21 W.	Grohmann,	Wassily	Kandinsky:	Life	and	Work	(trans.	Norbert	Guterman	(New	York:	Harry	N.	Abrams,	1958),	89.
22 “The	blue-clothed”	is	a	current	Persian	way	of	naming	Sufis	for	which	“various	explanations	have	been	given.”	H.	Corbin,	The	Man
of	Light	in	Iranian	Sufism,	trans.	N.	Pearson	(Boulder,	Colo.:	Shambhala	Publications,	1978),	157n 1 21.	Supposedly,	blue	dress	is
“appropriate	to	those	who	are	still	in	the	first	stages	of	the	mystic	life.”	Dark	blue	clothing	is	worn	when	“the	lower	psyche	[nigredo]	has
been	overcome,	as	though	one	were	in	mourning	for	it.”
23 G. F.	Kunz,	The	Curious	Lore	of	Precious	Stones,	(Philadelphia	and	London:	J. B.	Lippincott	Company,	1913),	31.	A	century	before
Gimma,	Cesare	Ripa	lists	in	his	painter’s	dictionary	(lconologia)	these	figures	who	should	be	robed	in	blue:	Astrology,	Goodness,	Poetry,
Steadfastness,	and	also	Inconstancy.	(Picasso’s	blue	prostitute?	Or	at	least	the	shadow	side	of	the	fidelity-truth-constancy	construct.)
24 M.-L.	von	Franz,	Aurora	Consurgens	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1966),	243.
25 Dronke,	“Tradition	and	Innovation,”	76.	Cf.	this	paradox	from	Wittgenstein:	“In	a	picture	in	which	a	piece	of	white	paper	gets	its
lightness	from	the	blue	sky,	the	sky	is	lighter	than	the	white	paper.	And	yet	in	another	sense	blue	is	the	darker	and	white	the	lighter
colour.”	L.	Wittgenstein,	Remarks	on	Colour,	ed.	G. E. M .	Anscombe,	trans.	L. L.	McAlister	and	M.	Schättle	(Berkeley	and	Los	Angeles:
Univ.	of	California	Press,	1978),	1: 2 .
26 Pseudo-Dionysius:	The	Complete	Works,	trans.	C.	Luibheid	(Mahwah,	N.J.:	Paulist	Press,	1987),	189	(337b).
27 Cirlot,	A	Dictionary	of	Symbols,	51.
28 Leon	Battista	Alberti,	On	Painting,	trans.	J. R.	Spencer	(New	Haven:	Yale	Univ.	Press,	1966),	50.	To	an	earlier	mind,	the	“airiness”
of	blue	could	be	physically	demonstrated	by	the	fact	that	blue	paint	is	a	most	fugitive	color,	fading	fast	because	it	had	no	native	pigment,
only	unwieldy	crushed	lapis	lazuli	brought	from	the	Oxus	region	of	Central	Asia.	On	the	history	and	technology	of	blue	paint,	see	Badt,
The	Art	of	Cézanne,	62,	79.
29 These	references	can	be	found	in	T. L. O.	Davies,	A	Supplementary	English	Glossary	(London:	George	Bell	&	Sons,	1881),	68–69.

30 For	a	full	phenomenology	of	anima	in	Jung’s	writings,	see	J.	Hillman,	Anima:	An	Anatomy	of	a	Personified	Notion	(Putnam,	Conn.:
Spring	Publications,	2007).
31 H.	Teich,	“Commentary	on	Where	Two	Came	to	their	Father,”	unpubl.	ms.,	10:	“Although	curiously	absent	in	classic	accounts	of
alchemy,	the	color	blue	does	indeed	appear	…	representing	a	critical	stage	of	the	transformation	process	that	fails	to	receive	much	notice
…	the	color	blue	signifies	a	union	of	solar	and	lunar	aspects	in	the	masculine	psyche,	prerequisite	to	the	final	“union	of	the	opposites,”
masculine	and	feminine.”	Cf.	Jung’s	answer	to	“Why	is	blue	missing?”	(CW	12: 3 20).
32 H.	Teich,	“Changing	Man:	Archetype	of	the	Twin	Heroes,”	Proceedings	of	the	7th	International	Conference	on	the	Study	of
Shamanism	(San	Rafael,	Cal.,	September	1990),	313–16;	and	further,	under	the	same	title,	in	Chrysalis:	Journal	of	the	Swedenborg
Foundation	6	(1991),	157–64.
33 Scholem,	“Colors	and	their	Symbolism	in	Jewish	Tradition	and	Mysticism,”	41–43.
34 R. B.	Onians,	The	Origins	of	European	Thought:	About	the	Body,	the	Mind,	the	Soul,	the	World,	Time,	and	Fate	(Cambridge:
Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1951),	168–73	on	etymology	and	early	usage	of	anemos;	also	J.	Hillman,	Anima,	91.
35 R.	Avens,	Imagination	Is	Reality	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1979).
36 “Then	take	silver,	well	purged	from	all	metals	…	then	seal	up	the	oil	of	Luna	…	and	set	it	in	a	Balneo	to	putrefy	until	it	show	all
colors,	and	at	last	come	to	be	crystalline	white.”	(“The	Bosom	Book	of	Sir	George	Ripley”	in	Collectanea	Chemica	London:	Stuart	&
Watkins,	1963],	137.)	Paracelsus,	1: 8 3:	“When	the	regimen	of	the	fire	is	moderated,	the	matter	is	by	degrees	moved	to	blackness.
Afterwards,	when	the	dryness	begins	to	act	upon	the	humidity,	various	flowers	of	different	colors	simultaneously	rise	in	the	glass,	just	as
they	appear	in	the	tail	of	the	peacock,	and	such	as	no	one	has	ever	seen	before	…	Afterwards,	those	colors	disappear,	and	the	matter	at
length	begins	to	grow	white	…	“	Cf.	CW	14: 3 88,	391–92,	and	passim	in	CW	20:	“peacock,”	cauda	pavonis,	etc.
37 Ibid.
38 See	J.	Hillman,	“Pothos:	The	Nostalgia	of	the	Puer	Eternus,”	Senex	&	Puer,	UE	3: 1 79–92.
39 E.	Kessler,	Images	of	Wallace	Stevens	(New	Brunswick,	N.J.:	Rutgers	Univ.	Press,	1972),	198.
40 Ibid.,	196:	“ ‘The	Man	with	the	Blue	Guitar,’	Stevens’s	most	overt	use	of	blue	as	symbol,	is	in	the	poet’s	own	words	a	work	of	‘pure
imagination.’	The	color	is	perhaps	best	characterized	as	a	symbol	for	speculative	thought,	or	simply	for	the	mind.”
41 “The	poet,	in	order	to	fulfill	himself,	must	accomplish	a	poetry	that	satisfies	both	the	reason	and	the	imagination.”	W.	Stevens,	The
Necessary	Angel:	Essays	on	Reality	and	the	Imagination	(New	York:	Vintage	Books,	1951),	42.
42 “Cézanne	is	mentioned	far	more	frequently	in	the	critical	prose	of	Stevens	than	is	any	other	modern	painter.”	(J.	Baird,	The	Dome
and	the	Rock:	Structure	in	the	Poetry	of	Wallace	Stevens	[Baltimore:	The	Johns	Hopkins	Univ.	Press,	1968],	84.)	See	82–93	on	their
likeness;	although	Baird	emphasizes	their	common	concern	with	structure,	I	am	stressing	their	common	regard	for	blue	and	its	implications
for	their	imaginal	view	of	their	work.
43 Badt,	The	Art	of	Cézanne,	56.
44 Ibid.,	chap.	on	“Shadow-Paths	and	Contours.”	Cf.	Keats’s	sonnet	on	blue,	where	he	writes:	“What	strange	powers	/	Hast	thou,	as	a
mere	shadow!”	The	Complete	Poems	of	John	Keats	(New	York:	Random	House,	1994),	240.
45 Ibid.,	56.	The	blue	of	Cézanne	drew	particular	comment	from	both	Zola	and	Rilke	–	no	mean	imaginers	themselves.	Badt,	The	Art
of	Cézanne,	56–58.
46 Ibid.,	82.
47 “Debris	of	Life	and	Mind,”	in	The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens,	338.	This	azure	blue	is	amplified	below,	chap.	10.
48 Letters	of	Wallace	Stevens,	ed.	H.	Stevens	(Berkeley	and	Los	Angeles:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1996),	783.
49 See	below,	chap.	10,	for	a	detailed	exposition	of	the	difference	between	a	nigredo	and	a	blue	reading	of	the	symptom	presented	in
the	famous	early	psychoanalytic	case	of	Anna	O.
50 G.	Bachelard,	The	Right	to	Dream,	trans.	J. A.	Underwood	(Dallas:	Dallas	Institute	Publications,	1988),	26.

51 Ibid.,	57.	Compare	Kessler’s	remark	on	Stevens’s	blue	as	“that	human	faculty	which	attempts	to	unify	the	disparate	colors	in
external	nature.”	The	Blue	Rider	group	in	Germany	is	another	instance	of	a	union	of	thinking	and	imagination.	“	…	blue	was	both
Kandinsky’s	and	Marc’s	favorite	color.”	“We	thought	up	the	name	(Der	Blaue	Reiter)	while	sitting	at	a	cafe	table	…	Both	of	us	were
fond	of	blue	things,	Marc	of	blue	horses,	and	I	of	blue	riders.”	(Kandinsky’s	own	account,	1930)	in	Grohmann,	Wassily	Kandinsky,	78.
The	mystical	inwardness	in	the	depiction	of	“nature,’”	the	dislike	for	‘“green,”	and	the	metaphysical	reflection	they	brought	to	imagining
all	accord	with	the	“blue”	tradition.	Duke	Ellington	is	reported	to	have	“hated	green.”	Kandinsky	places	green	in	the	“Bourgoisie	–	selfsatisfied,	immovable,	narrow	…	In	music,	the	absolute	green	is	represented	by	the	placid,	middle	notes	of	a	violin.”	Kandinsky,
Concerning	the	Spiritual	in	Art,	38–39.	For	a	wholly	different	perspective,	lifting	green	to	high	spiritual	value,	see	H.	Corbin,	“The
Green	Light,”	in	his	The	Man	of	Light	in	Iranian	Sufism,	trans.	N.	Pearson	(Boulder,	Colo.:	Shambala,	1978).
52 In	the	same	passage	of	Boehme	(Mysterium	pansophicum,	quoted	by	Jung,	CW	9.1: 5 80),	we	find	that	first	there	comes	a	“brightblue,”	then	various	other	color	analogies	to	it	and	then	“it	is	like	blue	in	green,	yet	each	still	has	its	blueness,	and	shines.”	The
blue/hairlinegreen	tension	(discussed	below)	is	also	noted	by	Boehme,	who	can	see	them	as	joined	yet	retaining	their	difference.
53 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	The	Thought	of	the	Heart	and	the	Soul	of	the	World	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2004),	3–7.
54 Again,	the	motto	of	this	book	from	Zosimos:	“… upon	this	simple	system	of	many	colors	is	based	the	manifold	and	infinitely	varied
investigation	of	all	things.”
55 The	many	flowers	appear	in	Corbin’s	white	earth.	He	speaks	of	this	“sacred	botany,”	which	gives	whitened	consciousness	a	sensuous
reality	and	particular	content	(rather	than	a	mere	snow	field	or	white	light).	The	flowers	are	an	appearance	in	our	Western	context	of	the
anima	as	Flora,	the	flowering	of	the	imagination	as	rooted	living	forms.	Corbin	says,	“The	flowers	play	the	part	of	the	materia	prima	for
alchemical	meditation.	This	means	mentally	reconstituting	Paradise,	keeping	company	with	heavenly	beings.”	(Henry	Corbin,	Spiritual
Body	and	Celestial	Earth:	From	Mazdean	Iran	to	Shi’ite	Iran,	trans.	N.	Pearson	[Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1977],	31–32.)	Von	Franz
gives	a	variety	of	splendid	passages	on	the	many	flowers	(Aurora	Consurgens,	391–95,	referring	to	Jung),	which	she	interprets	as
“components	of	our	psychic	totality,	the	self”	and	“indicate	a	blossoming	of	psychic	relationship”	as	“human	relationships”	(395).	The
reduction	of	the	flowers	to	the	personalistic	“our”	passes	by	the	very	material	she	has	assembled,	where	she	states,	“In	Greek	alchemy
flowers	and	blossoms	are	an	image	for	spirits	or	souls”	(392).	It	is	“the	heavenly	beings”	–	the	imaginal	figures	–	with	whom	the	psychic
relationship	now	occurs.	We	are	witness	to	their	blossoming	and	we	are	their	gardeners.
56 The	persistent	opposition	between	green	and	blue,	raised	to	a	principle	by	the	Blue	Rider	group	of	painters	and	overemphasized	as	an
opposition	between	nature	and	imagination	in	Stevens	(Kessler,	Images	of	Wallace	Stevens,	185	–	who	counts	163	mentions	of	each	of
the	two	hues	in	Stevens’s	work),	needs	fresh	reflection.	Blue	and	Green	were	the	names	of	rival	factions	in	the	Roman	circus,	and	the
rivalry	of	the	colors	continued	for	at	least	a	thousand	years	in	actual	clashes	between	parties	during	the	theological	and	political	disputes
in	the	Byzantine	Empire	(A.	Cameron,	Circus	Factions:	Blues	and	Greens	at	Rome	and	Byzantium	[Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1976]).
Scholars	themselves	are	divided;	some	(e.g.	Gregoire,	Mango)	attribute	blue	to	upper	classes	who	upheld	more	orthodox	and	imperial
positions,	and	others	(e.g.,	Villari)	exactly	the	reverse.	The	difference	of	scholarly	opinions	confirms	the	factioning	power	of	the	colors
under	scrutiny.	As	well,	another	persisting	fantasy	attests	to	the	problematics	of	blue	and	green.	It	is	said	that	many	earlier	and	“primitive”
cultures	and	their	language	did	not	know	blue	as	we	do,	could	not	even	“see”	blue	as	we	do	because	of	cultural	evolution	and	the
increasing	importance	of	cortical	discrimination.	An	only	green	world,	separated	form	blue,	suggests	an	archetypal	(Western?)	fantasy	of
paradise	and	the	happy	savage.	A	cosmos	without	nostalgia,	depression,	or	perversion,	no	luring	withdrawal	and	mysterious	remoteness,
everything	given,	nothing	implied.	The	linguistic	confusion	of	green	and	blue	states	a	fusion	of	nature	and	imagination,	as	in	Japanese
where	the	term	aoi	can	mean	both	blue	and	green,	and	in	another	imagistic	language,	Irish,	where	gorm	and	glas	could	mean	both	blue
and	green	(C.	Tóibín,	“Forward,”	in	In	Lovely	Blueness	[Dublin:	The	Chester	Beatty	Library,	2001]).	Cf.	further	Theroux,	The	Primary
Colors,	56–60.
57 Cf.	CW	14: 3 88	for	an	example	of	forgetting	the	multiplicity.	Jung	writes:	“The	‘omnes	colores’	are	frequently	mentioned	in	the	texts
as	indicating	something	like	totality.	They	all	unite	in	the	albedo,	which	for	many	alchemists	was	the	climax	of	the	work.	The	first	part
was	completed	when	the	various	components	separated	out	from	the	chaos	of	the	massa	confusa	were	brought	back	again	to	unite	in	the
albedo	and	‘all	become	one.’	Morally	this	means	that	the	original	state	of	psychic	disunity,	the	inner	chaos	of	conflicting	part-souls
which	Origen	likens	to	herds	of	animals,	becomes	the	vir	unus,	the	unified	man.”	This	interpretation	identifies	totality	with	unity,	whereas
totality	can	also	mean	both	each	and	every.	Moreover,	Jung’s	moral	interpretation	sees	the	many	as	“disunity,”	chaos	and	confusa,	and
places	man	above	animal.	Jung	does	give,	however,	other	passages	contrary	to	his	own	view,	for	instance,	Khunrath	(CW	14: 3 92):	“At
the	hour	of	conjunction	the	blackness	and	the	raven’s	head	and	all	the	colors	in	the	world	will	appear	…	”	(my	emphasis).
58 Quoted	from	E. H.	Gombrich,	Art	and	Illusion	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1961),	296.
59 Cf.	“Peaks	and	Vales,”	in	A	Blue	Fire:	Selected	Writings	by	James	Hillman,	ed.	T.	Moore	(New	York:	Harper	Collins,	1989),	114–
21.
60 Perceived	world	and	imaginal	world	appears	together	in	the	phenomenon	of	blue	bird	feathers.	A	vivid	blue	hue	is	not	a	pigment,	not
a	dye,	but	a	reflection	of	light	that	bounces	off	the	thin	opaque	covering	of	the	black	physical	feather.	The	blue	we	see	is	not	materially
there,	purely	a	reflection,	much	as	the	blue	of	the	sky.	While	red	and	yellow	feathers	(and	green	feathers	partly	as	well)	derive	their	hues

from	pigmentation,	a	blue	feather	is	a	phenomenon	of	structure	and	light.	See	A.	Portmann,	“Das	blaue	Wunder,”	in	Aus	meinem
Tierbuch:	Zoologische	Skizzen	(Basel:	F.	Reinhardt,	1942),	102–10.
61 S.	Diggs,	“Alchemy	of	the	Blues,”	in	Spring:	A	Journal	of	Archetype	and	Culture	61	(1997),	40f.	Two	longer	erotic	poems	are
characterized	by	both	depression	and	libido:	“Blue	Nude”	by	Robert	Kelly	(Kill	the	Messenger	[Boston:	David	R.	Godine,	1979],	181)
and	“Blue	Monday”	by	Diane	Wakoski	(Inside	the	Blood	Factory	[New	York:	Doubleday,	1968],	9.	“You	paint	my	body	blue,”	says
Wakoski,	“I	cannot	shake	you	out	of	the	sheets.”	Loss,	rejection,	bruised	soul	–	and	desirous	longing.	Kelly	finds	a	solution	in	the	last
line	of	his	poem	packed	with	sexual	recollections	by	saying:	“Deep	inside	the	image	there	is	time	for	everything.”	Imagination	is	able	to
contain	both	depression	and	libido	by	virtue	of	blue	distancing.
62 A.	Murray,	Stomping	the	Blues	(New	York:	Da	Capo	Press,	2000),	17.
63 Diggs,	“Alchemy	of	the	Blues,”	36.
64 Compare	the	two	contrasting	characters	of	elemental	Earth	in	Bachelard:	energetic	activity	and	repose	(Earth	and	Reveries	of	Will,
trans.	K.	Haltman	[Dallas:	The	Dallas	Institute	Publications,	2002]	and	Earth	and	Reveries	of	Repose	[Dallas:	The	Dallas	Institute
Publications,	forthcoming]).
65 On	divine	drunkenness,	see	D. L.	Miller,	Christs	(New	York:	The	Seabury	Press,	1981).
66 G.	Snyder,	“The	Blue	Sky,”	No	Nature:	New	and	Selected	Poems	(New	York:	Pantheon	Books,	1992),	78.
67 “Die	Gottheit	freundlich	geleitet	/	Uns	erstlich	mit	Blau.”	“Der	Spaziergang,”	in	F.	Hölderlin,	Sämtliche	Werke,	Briefe	und
Dokumente,	ed.	D. E.	Sattler,	vol.	12	(Munich:	Luchterhand	Literaturverlag,	2004),	44.
68 R. M .	Grant,	Gnosticism	and	Early	Christianity	(New	York:	Harper	and	Row,	1966),	19.
69 Hippolytus,	“Refutation	of	All	Heresies,”	in	The	Ante-Nicene	Fathers,	vol.	5,	ed.	A.	Roberts,	J.	Donaldson,	and	A.	Cleveland
Coxe	(Buffalo,	N.Y.:	Christian	Literature	Publishing	Co.,	1886).
70 Scholem,	“Colors	and	their	Symbolism	in	Jewish	Tradition	and	Mysticism,”	37.
71 Ibid.,	40.
72 On	the	Hades/Dionysus	identity,	see	J.	Hillman,	The	Dream	and	the	Underworld	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1979),	44,	171,	177,
and	passim.	The	source	is	Heraclitus,	D. 15:	“… Hades	and	Dionysus	are	the	same,	him	for	whom	they	rave	and	celebrate	Lenaia.”
73 P. G. W.	Glare,	Oxfod	Latin	Dictionary	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1982):	fascinum,	the	penis;	fascinosus,	lecherous;	fascinatio,
casting	a	spell,	bewitching.
74 The	mythological	notion	that	the	dismembered	Dionysus	as	life-force	is	promiscuously	present	in	all	things	is	discussed	in	J.
Hillman,	“Dionysus	in	Jung’s	Writings,”	in	Mythic	Figures,	UE	6: 1 5–30.
75 The	exasperating	complexity	of	blue	–	that	it	recedes,	depresses,	and	exalts	–	often	forces	on	its	devotees	a	monochromatic
reduction	that	idealizes	one	specific	component,	most	famously,	the	Blue	Revolution	of	Yves	Klein.
76 Theroux,	The	Primary	Colors,	59.
77 C.	Rowe,	“Concepts	of	Colour	and	Colour	Symbolism	in	the	Ancient	World,”	in	Color	Symbolism:	Six	Excerpts	from	Eranos	411972	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1977),	351.
78 Cf.	the	essay	revisioning	Freud	as	alchemist	by	Randolph	Severson,”	The	Alchemy	of	Dreamwork,”	in	Dragonflies 1,	no.	2	(1979),
91–121;	also	P.	Kugler,	The	Alchemy	of	Discourse:	An	Archetypal	Approach	to	Learning	(Diss.,	C. G.	Jung	Institute,	Zurich,	1979),
which	concludes	with	the	sentence:	“Matter	is	transformed	into	imagination.”
79 John	Constable,	the	British	landscapist,	quoted	this	sentence	as	if	his	motto	(or	an	alchemical	motto):	“The	whole	object	and
difficulty	of	the	art	(indeed	of	all	the	fine	arts)	is	to	unite	imagination	with	nature.”	Gombrich,	Art	and	Illusion,	386.

	

6
Silver	and	the	White	Earth
	
Preface
Allow	me	to	set	forth	as	clearly	and	rationally	as	I	can	what	I	shall	be	about	in	this	strange	chapter.	It
starts	from	two	large	ideas.	The	first	comes	from	Hegel	who	said	that	in	insanity	the	soul	strives	to
restore	itself	to	perfect	inner	harmony.	For	Hegel,	insanity	is	an	essential	stage	in	the	development	of
the	soul,	and	a	stage	upon	which	the	soul	purposefully	performs. [1]	Insanity	belongs	to	soul-making.
The	second	large	idea	comes	from	alchemy.	In	alchemical	soul-making,	gold	is	necessarily
preceded	by	silver.	This	means	that	gold	comes	out	of	silver,	red	comes	from	white,	sun	from	moon,
brighter	awareness	from	lunacy.	Alchemical	soul-making	proposes	that	the	final	idea	of	sun
conjuncted	with	moon	means	nothing	less	and	no	other	than	a	condition	of	being	in	which	solar
brilliance	and	awakeness	and	moon-madness	are	marvelously	conjoined.	The	mysterium
conjunctionis	is	illumined	lunacy.
Let	us	proceed	now	to	put	the	Hegelian	and	the	alchemical	propositions	together	–	but	not	too
quickly,	especially	not	before	we	have	examined	some	of	what	is	implied	by	these	alchemical	words:
silver,	Luna,	whitening.	This,	the	albedo	aspect	of	alchemy,	has	been	remarkably	neglected	in	our
solar	fever	and	gold	rush.	Any	usual	description	of	alchemy	will	tell	you	that	it	is	an	art	of	goldmaking	(whether	physical	or	“sophic”),	and	that	the	alchemists	aimed,	by	means	of	devotion,
wizardry,	and	technics,	to	transpose	base	metals	into	noble	gold.	And	though	these	same	accounts	all
agree	that	silver	is	the	penultimate	major	phase	and	gold’s	very	partner,	there	is	extraordinarily	little
written	about	silver.	(The	terms	“silver,”	albedo,”	“whiteness,”	and	“Luna”	(moon)	tend	to	signify
each	other.)
This	lacuna	may	be	attributed	to	a	masculine	bias	throughout	alchemy	and	the	repression	of	what	is
so	neatly	and	undifferentiatedly	(hence	monotheistically)	called	“the	feminine,”	since	silver	in
general	symbolism	carries	a	female	sign	(though	not	always). [2]	I	do	not	accept	this	feminist
explanation	for	the	lacuna	regarding	silver;	I	think	it	has	more	to	do	with	the	archetypal	nature	of
silver,	Luna,	and	whiteness.	I	further	believe	that	our	investigation	will	tell	not	only	more	about	the
general	neglect	of	silver,	but	also	something	more	fundamental	about	the	neglect	of	“the	feminine”
derived	therefrom.
Certainly	I	need	make	no	disclaimers	concerning	the	value	of	alchemy	for	psychology,	the	case
having	been	so	well	accomplished	by	Jung	earlier	in	this	century,	and	by	Jung [3]	and	then	by	von
Franz	and	Edinger.	But	perhaps	I	do	need	to	emphasize	the	particular	relevance	of	alchemy	for
psychopathology. [4]	After	all,	is	alchemy	not	a	prolonged	witness	to	mad	men	at	work	upon
themselves?
Alchemical	Silver:	Its	Nature	and	Psychological	Properties
Silver	is	the	metal	of	the	moon,	the	seed	of	the	moon	in	the	earth. [5]	Others	are	copper	as	seed	of
Venus	and	lead	as	seed	of	Saturn.	The	metals	were	imagined	to	be	made	of	coagulated	moist	vapors,
like	a	condensed	gas	whose	spirit	could	be	released	by	the	proper	operations.	Because	the	metals

were	inherently	moist,	that	is,	embodying	phlegm,	they	had	a	phlegmatic	tendency	to	be	passive	or
inert,	requiring	fire.	Resistance	to	change	is	given	with	the	seeds	of	our	nature	and	only	intense	heat
can	move	human	nature	from	its	innate	inertia.
By	considering	metals	as	seeds,	alchemy	kept	less	to	the	distinctions	between	vegetable	and	mineral
(organic	and	inorganic)	kingdoms.	Seeds	are	living	forces;	a	metal	such	as	silver	is	a	vis	naturalis
with	encoded	intentionality,	a	capacity	to	move,	form	bodies,	enter	into	combinations,	take	on	a
history,	branch	into	ramifications;	but	through	all	such	activities	and	transmutations	it	remains	true	to
its	own	“blood.”	These	ore-bodies	were	not	dead	matter	to	be	pushed	around	but	vital	seeds,
embodiments	of	soul;	not	objective	facts	but	subjective	factors.	The	alchemical	view	incorporated
into	its	theoretical	premises	what	modern	natural	science	is	now	stating	as	new:	the	observer	and
observed	are	not	independent	of	each	other.
That	the	planetary	spirits	are	in	the	earth	as	metals	reminds	us	that	the	gods	are	within	the	world,
buried	in	the	depths	of	earthly	affairs,	under	our	feet	as	we	walk.	We	walk	on	their	heads	and
shoulders,	they	hold	us	up,	though	we	may	suppose	them	placed	into	heavenly	orbit	by	our	human
fantasies.	Though	they	are	right	there	in	our	ground,	they	only	become	manifest	when	we	search	them
out.
Precisely	this	is	what	the	word	“metal”	means:	“search.”	Homer	uses	the	verb	metallao,	translated
as	“to	search.”	Metalleia	means	search	for	metals,	while	metallon	as	a	mine	or	quarry	means	a	place
for	careful	inquiry,	scrutiny,	researching. [6]	The	idea	of	a	planet	as	a	metal	–	and	not	only	a	heavenly
body	or	a	personified	god	–	induces	the	activity	of	searching	deeply	into	nature	for	the	deus
absconditus.	Metallurgy	stands	not	only	at	the	beginning	of	empirical	physical	science,	it	is	also	the
beginning	of	theoretical	research.	Metals	act	as	seeds	forcing	the	mind	to	bestir	itself	with	inquiry.	As
Pliny	the	Elder	(Naturalis	Historia,	33: 96)	says:	“Wherever	one	vein	is	found,	another	is	not	far	to
seek.”	And	it	is	the	prospector	who	embodies	the	prospective	view	of	psychological	quarrying:
looking	ahead,	going	on	further,	searching	out	further	veins.
The	words	for	silver	in	several	quite	differing	languages	converge	upon	an	idea	of	whiteness:
Egyptian	hd	means	white;	Hebrew	keseph	means	shining	white	metal;	the	root	radj	of	both	Greek
argyros	and	Latin	argentum	means	white,	bright,	shining,	gleaming.	The	Greek	argos,	besides	bearing
the	root	meanings	of	white	and	glistening,	also	denotes	swift,	as	hunting	dogs.	In	the	very	word	for
silver	are	the	hounds	of	Artemis/Diana,	Goddess	of	the	Moon,	her	elusiveness	and	danger,	and	it	is	an
alchemical	convention	to	interchange	white,	silver,	and	moon	–	and	Diana	too.	The	flash,	gleam,	and
swiftness	of	silver	appear	in	the	Argo,	the	ship	of	Jason’s	argonauts,	that	vessel	necessary	for
journeying	to	the	Golden	Fleece	in	the	realm	of	the	Sun.	Here,	too,	an	alchemical	conjunction
presented	as	mythic	configuration,	confirming	our	thesis:	the	way	to	the	gold	is	via	the	silver.
Silvering,	in	short,	is	whitening,	the	albedo	stage	of	the	work,	and	the	lunification	of	the	material
refers	to	any	process	–	lustration,	calcination,	coagulation	–	that	can	bring	forth	a	white	and	gleaming
condition	of	the	soul	in	the	material.	Transmutation	to	silver	means	cleansing	and	purifying	which	at
the	same	time	means	becoming	more	essential	and	durable.	These	qualitative	changes	refer	especially
to	the	shining	forth,	or	bringing	to	light,	the	moon	character	of	the	soul,	including	even	its	“blues.”
Silver‘s	color	was	not	only	white,	but	blue.	Ruland	lists	twenty-seven	kinds	of	blue-colored	silver.
Norton	writes:	“Silver	may	easily	be	converted	into	the	color	of	the	lazulite	because	…	silver
produced	by	air	has	a	tendency	to	become	assimilated	to	the	color	of	the	sky.” [7]
Here	we	need	to	distinguish	briefly	between	white	as	a	name	for	the	materia	prima	(ethesia	alba,
magnesia	alba,	virgin’s	milk,	etc.),	when	white	refers	to	unworked	innocence,	an	Endymion	sleep [8]
of	marshmallow	dreamings,	sweet,	shy	virginity,	and	the	like,	on	the	one	hand	and	on	the	other,	that
white	of	the	albedo,	a	cooling	that	results	from	violent	tortures,	long-suffering	patience,	and	intense
heat.	All	whites	are	not	the	same	white, [9]	and	only	the	albedo	white	refers	to	alchemical	silver	as	a

state	of	consciousness	that	proceeds	not	from	the	soul	as	simply	given	but	from	the	work	done	upon
it.
The	moon’s	body	consists	of	air.	Its	earth	is	not	our	earth,	for	“it	hath	been	permeated	through	and
through	by	ether,”	says	Plutarch. [10]	To	bring	the	metal	of	the	moon	within	our	mental	grasp	means
to	be	able	to	catch	and	hold	onto	the	subtle	invisibilities	of	air.	“Minerals	have	their	roots	in	the	air 
…” [11]	Whereas	contemporary	psychology	imagines	the	fertile	element	to	be	earth,	alchemical
psychology	considers	air	the	nourishing	principle.	When	fire	is	the	secret	of	the	art	and	sacred
principle	of	the	work,	then	air	is	the	nourisher	and	earth	the	smotherer.	For	Paracelsus,	“by	the	air
alone	are	all	things	nourished”	and	earth	“supplies	a	terminus	for	the	element	of	fire	(growth).” [12]
Earth	limits,	fixes,	and	stops.	But	modern	materialism	has	elevated	earth	and	emptied	the	air	to
insubstantiality. [13]	Contemporary	earthbound	psychology	warns	of	the	dangers	of	air:	inflation,
puer,	airy-fairy;	never	does	it	notice	the	clods	of	its	own	standpoint	or	the	dry	dust	settling	on	its
pages.
If	the	moon’s	earth	is	ethereal,	we	must	imagine	the	metal	of	the	moon	as	a	subtle	air	body	that
nourishes	the	fires	of	the	spirit	and	the	passions	of	the	soul	by	the	continual	generation	of	images,	of
fantasies.	Imagine	this	metal	then	as	a	nontangible	whitened	air,	a	silvering	white	body,	ethereal	like
the	orb	of	the	full	moon	floating,	suspended	in	dark	azure	receptivity,	a	hard,	cool	and	bright	mind	at
its	full,	whose	effects	are	both	nourishing	as	well	as	desiccating	and	astringent. [14]	For	this	coolness
and	dryness	is	precisely	what	the	fire	rejoices	in	and	is	fed	by.
By	contrasting	silver	with	its	companion	metals	we	can	better	discern	its	native	properties.	Like
copper,	silver	is	conductive,	yet	it	is	not	red.	Like	gold,	it	is	weighty,	noble,	precious	and	beautiful,
but	harder	and	less	malleable.	Like	tin	and	lead,	it	is	grayish	or	white	and	can	be	made	useful,	but
unlike	them	it	has	luster,	takes	a	high	polish,	and	reflects.	And,	like	mercury	in	its	first	appearance,
silver	is	coagulated	into	a	more	steady	state,	not	dispersible,	fragmentary,	and	free-running.	These
comparisons	indicate	that	silver	is	a	cool	white	conductor,	not	a	red	hot	one	because	it	has	a	“frigid
and	humid	body”; [15]	that	it	has	a	certain	innate	stiffness;	that	it	ennobles	the	useful	by	taking	on
polish	by	means	of	which	polish	it	reflects;	that	it	does	not	easily	flow,	but	tends	toward	the	steadiness
and	stateliness	of	self-consistency.
The	equation	used	so	frequently	in	alchemy,	Luna = silver, [16]	is	not	a	true	identity.	Silver
corresponds	with	Luna	only	in	certain	respects.	It	is	less	the	moon	of	Lilith,	of	the	night	and	the	dead,
and	certainly	less	the	little	crescent,	the	tiny	virgin	girl	at	the	beginning.	Nor	is	silver	the	fluctuating
moon	of	the	tides,	the	blood	and	vegetation,	going	through	phases,	turning	with	time;	nor	the	moon’s
salty	bitterness	and	its	commonality.	In	short,	silver	presents	the	moon’s	full	brightness,	its
completion	or	elevation.	It	is	the	metal	of	a	Great	Light,	to	use	the	traditional	way	of	speaking,	an
archetypal	principle	of	immense	potency	equivalent	to	the	opus	major	of	the	First	Great	Conjunction,
the	anima	realized	as	an	imagination	so	solid,	a	soul	so	bodied,	that	the	reflections	of	its	images
whiten	the	earth	of	mundane	consciousness.
Again	and	again,	gold	and	silver	are	spoken	of	in	one	breath,	the	two	perfect	metals,	the	King	and
Queen.	The	subtle	difference	between	them	shows,	for	instance,	in	these	adjectives:	“true”	gold	and
“fine”	silver. [17]	Gold	involves	us	in	truth,	and	all	that	truth	would	establish	by	its	power,	an
everlasting	kingdom,	physical	or	metaphysical,	moral	and	spiritual.	Silver	involves	us	in	aesthetic
value,	discrimination,	appreciation,	refinement	which	is	also	an	end	(finis)	in	itself.
To	review	the	properties	of	silver:	It	is	hard	and	dry	having	been	cleansed	of	both	the	stickiness	of
sulfur	and	of	its	own	phlegmatic	and	viscous	moisture	(Minerals,	4: 5)	–	that	is,	philosophic	silver
neither	adheres	to	its	reflections,	nor	is	it	passively	moved	by	its	images.	The	psyche	of	silver	is
“hard	and	dry”;	brilliant.	Silver	rings	and	reveals	its	true	nature	by	resonating	when	struck.
Moreover,	its	truth	is	in	its	ring,	the	ring	of	truth,	that	instantaneous	aesthetic	response	of	the	senses	to

stimuli	affecting	the	psychic	body,	which	is	“frigid	and	humid.”
The	body	of	silver	does	not	burn,	nor	does	it	ignite	other	things,	and	because	of	its	“cold”
conductivity	perhaps,	“silver	is	best	for	sticking	molten	metals	together	(Minerals,	3: 2.1).	The	cool,
silver	psyche,	though	seemingly	“unrelated,”	can	establish	relations	between	the	most	burning	issues
and	hold	them	together,	yet	without	fusing	them	into	a	false	compromise	(amalgam).	It	mediates,
attaching	molten	factions	by	means	of	its	own	detachment.	Silver	toughens	gold	because	gold	cannot
be	drawn	into	strands	and	sheets	according	to	Albertus	Magnus	unless	alloyed	with	silver.	Unalloyed
gold	cannot	“bear	the	blows	of	the	hammer”	(Minerals,	3: 2.3).	A	true	alloy	is	neither	too	moist
(malleable)	nor	too	dry	(rigid),	and,	as	Albertus	says,	poor	alloys,	because	of	their	“stuttering”
mixture,	break	under	the	hammer.
Silver	is	required	for	the	opus	of	gold-making,	for	evidently	it	is	the	hard	lunar	mind,	solid	in	the
realization	of	its	imaginative	forms,	which	allows	gold	to	be	hammered	into	specific	shape	and	take
on	definition.	Alchemical	gold	is	a	red	elixir,	we	must	remember.	It	is	active	and	incarnated,	a
universal	medicine,	a	multiplying	power	in	the	world,	a	philosopher-king,	just	as	this	universal
ambition	of	the	gold	appears	in	the	worldly	gold-making	ambitions	of	the	alchemist.	Gold	is	not	a
transcendent	spiritual	state	of	awareness,	a	mystical	saintliness	of	light,	truth	and	perfection	only,	but
rather	these	virtues	shaped	and	defined	for	which	shaping	into	precise	forms,	silver	is	required.
Besides	these	qualities,	silver	mirrors.	“	A	mirror,”	says	Albertus,
is	caused	by	moisture	which	is	solidified	and	is	capable	of	taking	a	good	polish;	and	it	receives	images	because	it	is	moist,	and
holds	them	because	it	is	solid	or	limited	(terminatum):	for	it	would	not	retain	them	in	this	way,	if	the	moisture	were	not	incorporated
and	limited	by	a	boundary. [18]

If	silver	mirrors	because	it	is	both	receptive	(moist)	and	solid,	then	solid	receptivity	is	the	kind	of
consciousness	that	serves	to	mirror.	Notice	how	necessary	it	is	for	mirroring	to	have	incorporated	or
digested	one’s	own	moisture	and	to	be	limited	by	one’s	own	boundary.	One	cannot	mirror	if	one	too
easily	flows;	and	one	cannot	mirror	everything,	but	only	what	one	can	receive	and	to	which	one	is
solidly	present	within	the	limits	of	one’s	own	borders.	Mirroring	is	not	blank	receptivity;	it	requires
focusing.
Air,	Albertus	goes	on	to	say,	“does	not	retain	such	images,	although	it	receives	them	…	having	no
boundary,	it	does	not	focus	them	into	one	place	and	shape	…	but	acts	only	as	a	medium	through
which	the	images	pass,	and	not	as	a	limiting	boundary	that	gives	them	being.” [19]	The	airy	mind
cannot	fix	and	reproduce	even	its	own	images.	They	only	pass	through	and	we	ourselves	are	only
media,	unless	fixed	by	a	sense	of	limitation.	When	we	are	engaged	in	a	limited	project	within	a
limited	frame	(a	deadline,	say),	we	are	better	able	to	imagine	than	when	we	remain	in	pure
possibilities;	such	imagining	is	not	speculative,	a	mirroring	that	actually	images	anything	because	it
is	without	terminus,	without	a	fixed	end	or	focus.	For	the	mind	to	mirror	images,	it	needs	a	specific
case,	or	a	specific	event	in	that	case,	which	brings	into	being	true	speculation	with	more	solidity	than
do	generalities	drawn	from	many	instances.	These	are	mere	air,	mirroring	nothing	specific.	Precision
and	focus	belong	to	the	mirroring	of	silver;	they	are	inherent	to	the	very	metal	of	imagining.	We
cannot	image	without	being	precise,	and	what	is	not	precise,	not	limited,	not	focused,	is	not	an	image.
Silver	serves	one	more	purpose	that	we	may	not	neglect.	It	has	the	“power	of	stirring	up	the
inherent	sulfur	of	quicksilver”	(“Tract	of	Great	Price,”	HM	1: 255).	Benedictus	Figulus	says:
“Mercury	can	be	animated	only	by	the	white	ferment	of	silver.’’ [20]	Surprisingly,	this	cold	metal	of
the	moon	animates	and	activates	both	fundamental	elements,	sulfur	and	mercury.	Does	this	not	mean
that	the	entire	opus	requires	mental	ferment,	the	animation	of	thought	and	reflection,	the	active
intervention	of	imagination,	and	that	perhaps	even	lunacy	as	a	state	of	activated	silver	is	the	silver	at
work	upon	mercury,	quickening,	animating	Mercurius,	the	God	and	guide	of	the	whole	opus,	stirring

up	a	white	ferment	by	which	he	becomes	lunatic?
As	Luna	is	the	recipient	of	all	planetary	influences [21]	and	as	white	contains	all	colors,	so	silver
incorporates	all	previous	metals	and	phases	into	its	body.	Unlike	the	moon,	however,	silver	is	not	a
starting	place.	It	is	usually	not	one	of	the	many	names	for	the	materia	prima; [22]	it	is	not	given	but
must	be	concocted,	that	is,	prepared	through	the	opus	contra	naturam,	essential	to	which	preparation
is	blackness.	“Your	substance	will	never	be	white,	if	it	has	not	first	been	black.	It	is	by	means	of
putrefaction	and	decay	that	it	attains	the	glorified	body	of	its	resurrection.” [23]
“Sulfur	burns	silver	when	it	is	sprinkled	upon	it	in	a	molten	condition,	and	the	blackening	of	silver
shows	that	it	is	burnt	by	the	sulfur”	(Minerals,	5: 5).	(Witness	the	effect	of	egg	yolk	on	a	silver	spoon.)
Even	tough	molten	silver	is	relatively	unaffected	by	sulfur;	when	the	surface	of	solid	silver	is	treated
with	molten	sulfur,	it	“burns”	the	silver	black,	an	effect	that	does	not	occur	when	molten	sulfur	is
applied	to	wood,	stone,	or	gold.	These	curious	empirical	events	suggest	that	only	cold	and	hardened
silver	is	subject	to	sulfuric	urges	while	the	silver	yielding	to	its	own	heated	intentions	remains
untarnished.
Albertus	reasons	that	sulfur	affects	silver	in	this	manner	because	of	their	innate	affinity.	How	might
this	affinity	be	characterized?	Silver	retains	in	its	body	a	modicum	of	sulfurous	moisture.
Avicenna [24]	considered	“white	sulfur”	(together	with	“pure	mercury”)	to	constitute	silver,	and
Bonus	writes	that	“Silver	suffers	from	a	phlegmatic	leprosy	because	it	contains	a	proportion	of
combustible	sulfur.” [25]	Let	us	imagine	that	the	reflective	lunar	mind,	despite	its	stable	and	astringent
properties,	retains	an	affinity	for	scorching	passion.	(After	all,	as	Rasis	says,	manifest	silver	is
copper	[Venusian]	as	manifest	copper	is	silver	[Lunarian]	within.) [26]	This	susceptibility	of	silver	for
molten	sulfur	derives	from	an	innate	proportion	of	combustible	sulfur,	its	own	oily	humor	of	desire,
like	an	astringent	schoolteacher	falling	into	sin	despite	her	brilliance	and	“frigid	and	humid	body,”
like	Hephaestus	leaping	upon	cool	Athene,	like	Persephone	herself,	purely	modest	and	yet	subject	to
being	covered	by	the	copulatory	passion	of	black	Hades,	as	if	within	Persephone	there	lies	the	secret
moisture	of	affinity	with	Hell.
The	coolness	of	the	image,	whether	of	the	moon	or	of	the	underworld,	and	the	cool	detachment	by
which	we	see	through	to	the	image,	can	become	seized,	as	if	from	without,	by	the	calor	inclusus	or
innate	heat	of	love	lurking	within	it.	So	there	will	be	within	each	moment	of	silver	–	creative	fantasy,
mental	thought,	mirrored	reflection	–	propensity	to	bum	with	sulfur.	Perhaps,	the	less	activated	this
innate	heat	of	love	within	imagining	(i.e.,	the	less	manifest	the	copper	or	the	more	humid	and	viscous
the	sulfur),	the	more	the	silver	of	the	psyche	is	subject	to	sudden	scorching	of	its	outer	skin,	by	which
I	understand	the	exteriorizing	and	literalizing	of	the	innate	sulfur	into	desires	that	no	longer	can	see
themselves	as	images	(the	blackening	of	the	silver).	Hence	the	importance	of	recognizing,	as	we	are
trying	to	do	in	this	chapter,	all	that	silver	implies.	We	would	activate	it	so	that	it	not	blacken,	that	our
images	not	be	burnt	by	their	innate	vitality.
But	such	passion	is	also	curiously	phlegmatic.	The	“phlegmatic	leprosy”	(leprosy	being	a	technical
term	for	imperfection)	that	may	make	silver	splotchy	or	black	(i.e.,	a	sporadic	or	spottily	intermittent
consciousness;	reflections	that	do	not	illumine	but	rather	poison,	eat	away,	or	blacken)	seem	to	be
caused	by	phlegm,	a	Greek	word	meaning	morbid	inflammation,	which	also	came	to	refer	to	a	dull,
passive,	and	untemperamental	temperament.
Thus	the	affinity	between	sulfur	and	silver	indicates	that	the	mind	can	be	inflamed	by	the	hot	urge
to	action,	its	reflective	ability	instantaneously	darkened.	This	propensity,	in	even	the	most	solid
coagulated	silver,	to	respond	to	the	call	of	molten	sulfur	is	because	silver	phlegmatically	suppurates
within	its	own	nature.	It	is	gummed	up	by	the	fetid	phlegm	of	its	own	mental	activity	that	does	not	get
out	of	its	head,	coagulates	there,	sticks	to	itself,	self-poisons.
There	is	evidently	more	going	on	within	silver	than	meets	the	eye	in	its	white	clear	surface:	a

passive	fantasy,	a	mental	viscosity	or	laziness,	accompanies	the	mind’s	own	brilliance. [27]	Hence,	the
long	hours	of	waste	(“can’t	get	going”),	the	phlegmatic	leprosy	that	accompanies	intellectual	activity.
There	is	inertia	and	dullness	even	in	the	midst	of	sovereign	thought.	Hence,	too,	the	necessity	for
passive	(phlegmatic)	fantasy	along	with	active	imagination.	Active	and	passive,	fancy	and	imagination
are	inseparably	coterminous	in	the	nature	of	silver.	It	seems	that	this	morbid	inflammation	within
silver	necessitates	leisure	as	the	legitimate	companion	of	the	life	of	the	mind.	From	the	viewpoint	of
an	alchemical	psychology,	leisure	is	the	phlegm	of	silver,	its	necessary	leprosy,	so	that	the	sociology
of	leisure	grows	out	of	the	seeds	of	the	metals	in	both	man	and	world.	The	leisure	class,	considered
effete	and	bloodless	as	the	noble	class	or	as	the	intellectual	and	academic	elite	or	as	those	who	live
off	their	silver	as	money	(rentiers),	represent	in	the	public	body	the	component	of	silver	including	its
phlegmatic	indolence.
Without	this	silver,	both	swift	and	sluggish,	without	this	whitened	airy	body,	there	is	no	gold.	“No
gold	is	generated	except	it	first	hath	been	silver.” [28]	And	there	is	no	conjunction:	the	power	of	gold
remains	charlatan,	a	red	without	white,	blood	without	mind,	actus	without	potency,	truth	without
fineness,	“deeds	without	image”	(ein	Tun	ohne	Bild),	as	Rilke	warned. [29]	Or	as	Keats	insisted,	truth
and	beauty	do	abide	together.	The	alchemists’	ceaseless	warning	that	“our	gold	is	not	the	common
gold”	was	a	warning	against	neglect	of	the	silver.	We	must	first	establish	the	airy	body	of	imaginal
reflection	before	we	can	comprehend	the	gold	as	image	and	not	grasp	it	as	the	natural	metal.
If	the	alchemical	process	is	witness	to	the	way	of	gold-making,	first	we	must	realize	the	whitened
mind	of	gleaming	images,	maintaining	silver ’s	aesthetic	sense	so	that	gold	can	become	“philosophic”
gold,	truth	emerge	from	beauty,	deeds	signify	images	rather	than	the	merely	singular	realm	of	solar
energies,	heroes,	and	shining	forth.	It	is	the	lunar	mind	within	the	gold	that	imagines	the	gold	from
within	and	is	its	prior	ground,	restraining	its	multiplicatio	with	coolness,	enabling	the	gold	to
recognize	that	it	and	in	its	power	is	held	to	the	enactment	of	psychic	images.	Only	those	deeds	that
generate	from	silver,	that	embody	the	reflection	of	images	and	mirror	this	reflection,	may	rightly	be
called	true	gold.
Mining	the	Silver
Alchemy	usually	tells	where	we	may	find	the	substances	we	need.	Sulfur	for	instance,	says	the	English
Benedictine,	Kramer	(HM	2: 154)	is	found	in	“All	things	of	this	world	–	metals,	herbs,	trees,	animals,
stones	are	its	ore.”	Sulfur	can	be	got	from	whatever	catches	our	attention,	blazes	up.	It	comes	from
the	natural	world	and	our	worldliness.	It	may	be	mined	from	any	compulsion,	fascination,	or
attraction	in	the	macrocosm.	Salt,	as	we	saw	above,	is	mined	from	our	internal	microcosmic	world.
“Descend	into	yourself,	for	you	carry	it	about	with	you,”	says	Eirenaeus	Philalethes. [30]	Tears,
sweat,	semen,	especially	blood	and	urine.	We	recover	salt	from	our	interior	subjectivity	and	it	refers
us	back	to	its	source	in	the	residues	and	tastes	of	experience.
Where	then	does	silver	come	from?	Let	us	first	recall	that	this	mining	of	the	metals	is	a
metaphorical	operation.	Benedictus	Figulus	says:	“My	son,	understand	here	the	Luna	Metaphorica,	not
the	literal.“ [31]	The	author	of	“The	Open	Entrance”	writes:	“All	these	things	are	to	be	understood
with	a	grain	of	salt.	You	must	understand	that	…	I	have	spoken	metaphorically;	if	you	take	my	words
in	the	literal	sense,	you	will	reap	no	harvest	except	in	your	outlay.” [32]	We	must	discover
psychological	modes	of	silver	mining,	mining	it	from	conditions	of	the	psyche	in	which	silver	is
buried	or	to	which	it	is	alloyed.	A	psychological	silver	mine	often	can	be	located	at	that	place	I	have
called	“mine,”	a	place	of	ego	appropriation	where	it	is	assumed	there	is	nothing	deeper	here,	no
buried	reflection,	no	occulted	metaphorical	fantasy.	The	work	with	silver	moves	us	from	being	mine
owners	to	mine	workers,	going	into	the	depths	of	our	minds,	freeing	the	bright	metal	from	its	dumb

ore.
(1)	Antiquity,	that	is	Lucretius,	Strabo,	Diodorus,	considered	silver	to	result	from	a	forest	fire,	a
holocaust. [33]	A	gigantic	fire	rages	through	a	forest,	charring	the	greenwood,	decimating	nature	and,
after	that	ruin,	a	thin	stream	of	silver	emerges.	Silver,	they	infer,	comes	out	of	gigantic	psychic
disasters.	It	results	from	burnout.	We	claim	it	only	after	the	woody	bowers	of	protective	naturalism
have	been	totally	blackened.
(2)	The	second	and	most	usual	discussions	of	silver	mining	in	medieval	and	Renaissance	alchemy
refer	to	it	together	with	lead.	As	the	two	planets	Moon	and	Saturn	are	often	linked	–	as	beginning	and
end,	as	both	cold	and	to	do	with	death,	as	associated	with	dogs	and	poison,	as	supporters	of	mens	–	so,
as	Forbes	says,	“the	history	of	silver-mining	is	inseparably	bound	with	that	of	lead.” [34]	Silver	is
protected	by	lead,	according	to	Albertus	Magnus,	from	being	burnt, [35]	yet	the	method	for	extracting
silver	from	mixed	lead-silver	ores	was	by	repeated	calcination	(drying	heat),	quenching	the	hot
amalgam	in	a	sharp	liquid	(sal	ammoniac	or	vinegar),	and	distillation	requiring	calcination	again.
The	protection	of	lead	and	the	release	of	silver	from	lead	as	a	white	dove	indicates	the	precious	and
noble	nature	attributed	to	silver. [36]	A	whiteness	with	the	wings	of	a	dove	can	emerge	from	a	leaden
state	that	seems	completely	to	enclose	it.	The	dull	and	heavy	heart	of	lead	conceals	a	dove	of	silver
(sometimes	magnesia).	To	extract	it,	we	need	dry	heat	and	vinegar.	Silver	does	not	come	forth	easily,
and	a	“ton	of	smelted	lead	usually	contains	only	a	few	ounces	of	silver.” [37]
The	release	of	the	dove	does	not	separate	it	from	its	weightiness,	that	gravitas	of	the	spirit.	It
carries	lead	into	its	silver.	Imagine	the	lead	becoming	winged,	mobile,	airborne,	hovering	over	the
operations	with	serious	attentiveness	(as	a	dove	with	outspread	wings	stays	suspended	over	a	scene	in
medieval	icons).	The	spirit	no	longer	caught	in	immanence	only,	immersed	in	laborious	struggles
with	the	dull	and	dense.
Lead,	as	the	metal	of	Saturn	–	cold,	heavy,	dense	–	was	not	used	widely	before	Roman	times.	Like
silver,	it	was	not	technically	as	practical	as	were	iron	and	copper,	so	that	both	lead	and	silver,	like
Saturn	and	Moon,	were	more	otherworldly,	religious	and	mystical	than	the	more	worldly	planets	and
metals	of	Mars	(iron),	Venus	(copper),	and	Jupiter	(tin).	Typical	of	the	Roman	approach	were	the
practical	uses	found	for	lead	and	silver,	plumbing	and	utensils	for	daily	life.	Silver	decoration,	for
instance,	was	the	boast	of	high	society.	Pliny	gives	details. [38]
Vincent	of	Beauvais	in	the	Middle	Ages	considered	lead	to	be	debased	silver. [39]	Silver	that	had
“fallen”	or	aged	or	lost	its	nature	and	purity	became	lead.	The	implication	is	clear:	leaden	states	are
“fallen”	or	“lost”	psychic	reflections,	the	dove	solidified,	buried	in	dumbness;	leaden	states	are	so
hard	to	carry	(“heavy	as	lead”)	partly	because	we	feel	the	oppressed	silver	within	them	that	cannot
find	its	way	free;	and	when	silver	was	extracted,	what	remained	was	a	new	materia	prima,	a	heavier,
darker	lead	–	plumbago.
Though	we	may	extract	a	silver	moment	from	our	leaden	body,	these	extractions	leave	behind	an
even	heavier	and	denser	condition.
Depression	is	the	price	of	silver.	Melancholy	has,	ever	since	Aristotle’s	Problemata,	been	the
disease	of	thinkers.	The	more	white	reflection	the	more	burdened	lead;	as	we	produce	silver,	we
increase	the	lead.	This	is	surely	familiar:	an	insight	may	be	shining	in	itself,	but	it	makes	no	dent	on
the	gray	mood	from	which	it	came.	We	have	the	feeling	of	lead	poisoning,	a	state	of	being	swallowed
by	lead,	lost	in	the	lead	mine	–	it’s	all	so	long	and	slow.	What	use,	we	feel,	these	silver	mirrorings,
this	trickle	of	light,	if	the	caughtness	of	depression	does	not	lift.	The	truth,	however,	is	that	the
depression	is	the	mine.	This	is	the	lead	necessary	for	the	silver,	even	if	the	silver	is	neither	useful	nor
functional	in	altering	the	lead.	We	mine	silver	from	lead,	but	not	to	do	away	with	the	lead,	for	that
would	close	down	the	mine.
It	would	be	too	narrow	to	perceive	the	dove	only	as	an	emblem	of	Christian	ascensionism,	i.e.,	that

good	is	only	above	and	all	sublimation	upward.	Wallace	Stevens	writes	of	“the	dove	in	the	belly,” [40]
invoking	a	holy	spirit	fluttering	in	the	bowels	of	the	deeps	and	signaling	tremendous	sensitivities.	The
dove	in	the	belly	quickens	the	life	of	images,	whose	birth	pangs	and	death	throes	are	concurrent,
analogous,	even	indistinguishable.
Here	we	must	remember	the	curious	metallurgic	fact	that	silver	corrupts	in	air.	It	tarnishes.	It
converts	with	the	chlorides	in	rainwater,	so	that	it	is	naturally	found	mainly	together	in	argentiferous
lead	ores.	Only	very	rarely	can	silver	be	found	unalloyed	under	the	earth	in	mountainous	regions.
Silver	blackens	in	air	and	cannot	always	gleam	as	gold.	Silver	requires	polishing,	attention,	a	bit	of
rubbing	and	fussing;	it	calls	for	worry.	Since	exposure	makes	it	lose	its	shine,	it	is	best	hidden,
protected.	It	is	covered	with	blackness,	by	silence	and	dullness,	and	by	hiding	itself	invisibly	in	lead.
Perhaps	this	is	why	we	cannot	find	much	about	it	directly	in	alchemy.	It	is	nearly	always	coupled	with
gold:	(“What	is	occult	in	gold	is	manifest	in	silver,	and	what	is	manifest	in	gold	is	occult	in
silver”). [41]	Manifest	silver	has	the	brilliant	and	precious	qualities	of	gold,	and	when	we	try	to
imagine	the	nature	of	silver	using	solar	consciousness,	silver	becomes	at	once	occulted,	which	then
depresses	silver	into	an	amalgam	with	lead.
(3)	The	third	place	from	which	we	may	mine	our	silver,	besides	from	the	ruins	of	our	ragings	and
from	leaden	despair,	is	from	the	brain.	Figulus	speaks	of	the	Luna	Cerebrum. [42]	Many	tracts,
including	some	by	Paracelsus,	place	the	moon	or	the	metal	silver	with	the	brain.	The	brain	is	the
silver	organ	as	the	heart	is	gold.
By	brain	here	I	mean	of	course	the	metaphorical	brain,	the	subtle	brain,	the	brain	of	the	fantasy
body	as	well	as	the	bodies	of	brain	fantasies.	Fantasies,	in	other	words,	whatever	their	nature,	contain
silver.	This	silvered	brain	presents	itself	in	descriptions	of	silvery	fantasy	forms.	For	instance:	“The
reign	of	the	Moon	lasts	just	three	weeks:	but	before	its	close,	the	substance	exhibits	a	great	variety	of
forms;	it	will	become	liquid,	and	again	coagulate	a	hundred	times	a	day;	sometimes	it	will	present	the
appearance	of	fishes’	eyes,	and	then	again	of	tiny	silver	trees	with	twigs	and	leaves.	Whenever	you
look	at	it	you	will	have	cause	for	astonishment,	particularly	when	you	see	it	all	divided	into	beautiful
but	very	minute	grains	of	silver	…	This	is	the	White	Tincture.” [43]
These	shapes	and	patterns,	these	variegated	filigrees	are	ways	to	find	silver:	in	the	bits	and	grains
and	swimming	sparkles	of	reflection,	dream	fragments	and	tinselly	fantasies,	twigs	of	branching
thoughts,	a	hundred	times	a	day,	the	interlaced	connections,	marked	by	the	interior	“uhs”	and	“ahs,”
our	awareness	resonating	in	our	throats,	as	the	whitening	mind	emerges	in	its	night.
Ruland	writes	in	his	lexicon:	“Silver	is	found	in	conglomerated	masses	looking	something	like
buds	distributed	in	the	branches	of	a	tree	…	At	other	times	it	assumes	the	shape	of	little	sticks,	or
other	similar	figures.	Agricola	testifies	that	he	has	seen	perfect	specimens	of	metallic	instruments
such	as	shovels	and	small	hammers	taken	from	the	ore.	I	myself	have	beheld	natural	figures	or
images	of	small	fish,	lions,	wolves,	etc.” [44]	Agricola,	the	metallurgist,	saw	silver	in	nature	in	the
very	shape	of	the	shovels	and	hammers	of	his	interest.	Silver	comes	in	the	shapes	of	fantasy;	it	can	be
mined	from	our	brain’s	projected,	imagined	figurations.	(Muhammad,	by	the	way,	also	considered
silver	the	metal	of	images:	amulets	in	the	Moslem	faith	were	forbidden	to	be	made	of	any	metal	but
silver.) [45]	Silver	as	the	metal	of	imaging	indicates	that	imaging	itself	may	be	the	mode	of	mining
silver	and	whitening	the	brain.
(4)	A	fourth	mode	of	mining	silver	is	from	the	money	complex. [46]	Ever	since	Roman	times,
silver	has	been	the	metal	of	money,	so	that	the	word	itself	“silver,”	argent	in	French,	is	generic	for
money.	The	curiously	constant	alchemical	pairing	of	silver	and	gold	repeats	in	monetary	habits,	for
the	value	of	silver	is	tied	intimately	with	that	of	gold.	During	classical	times	(Pericles),	the
relationship	was	10: 1;	still	today,	though	silver	is	economically	more	valuable	than	gold	because,	as
a	commodity,	it	is	consumed	faster	than	produced	and	industrially	more	necessary.	Silver	fluctuates

more	in	relation	with	the	price	of	gold	than	in	accordance	with	its	own	worth.
The	debasement	of	the	value	of	silver	in	relation	to	gold	during	the	third	century	has	been
considered	a	symptom,	if	not	a	contributing	cause,	of	the	decline	of	Rome.	At	the	very	end	of	the
Empire	(397–422	 ),	the	ratio	between	them	dropped	from	1: 1	to	1: 18	in	just	twenty-five	years.	But
the	total	collapse	of	the	values	of	silver	came	during	the	heyday	of	Western	materialism,	between
1870	and	1930,	a	debasement	of	silver	that	cannot	be	accounted	for	wholly	in	terms	of	new	mines	and
mining	methods.
Mining	silver	from	the	money	complex	is	exceedingly	difficult	(as	discussed	in	seminars	often	by
Rafael	López-Pedraza).	The	more	the	value	of	silver	decreases,	the	more	material	seems	the	culture
in	which	silver	is	used	as	money.	As	values	become	materialized,	the	more	silver	it	takes	to	assert	a
value.	The	more	materialistic	a	person’s	values	are,	the	less	philosophic	silver	to	be	found,	that	is,	the
less	the	person	is	able	to	reflect	on	money	as	other	than	“what	it	can	buy.”	As	money	becomes	only	an
item	of	exchange,	without	value	itself	or	stimulus	to	reflection,	its	worth	is	wholly	external:	what	you
can	get	for	it.	Money’s	main	value	then	is	materializing	it	into	something	else.
The	monetary	question	–	what	is	the	intrinsic	value	of	coinage,	what	is	it	backed	by	–	is	not	only	a
monetary	question.	It	is	philosophical	inasmuch	as	it	raises	issues	of	internal	and	external	relations
and	referents:	do	the	coins	refer	to	their	exchange	value	only	or	do	they	bear	internal	values	in	and
for	themselves,	as	concretizations,	tokens	of	the	ideas	of	worth	and	the	good.
Psychotherapists	generally	have	not	faced	the	deeper	issues	of	money	and	have	taken	over	the
exchange	notion	without	realizing	what	they	are	thereby	perpetuating	in	the	soul	of	the	patient	and	the
soul	of	the	community.	When	an	analyst	interprets	money	in	a	dream	as	an	equivalent	for	energy	–
much	money	means	much	energy,	and	money	in	hand	means	disposable	energy	–	silver	is	being
further	debased.	For	this	view	is	purely	functional	and	utilitarian.	The	money	in	itself	has	no	backing
except	as	a	counter	for	something	egocentrically	desirable:	energy.
This	view	of	money	affords	no	psychic	reflection,	no	silver	can	be	mined	from	it,	and	one	could
just	as	well	have	dreamt	of	a	car	or	a	horse	or	an	outboard	motor	as	equivalent	energy	symbols.
Instead	of	value,	money	comes	to	mean	power:	what	you	can	do	with	it,	get	for	it,	valuable	only	in
being	put	to	use,	spending	and	owning,	which	further	reinforces	inflation	of	the	individual	and	the
society.	Need	I	insist	that	practicing	psychologists,	despite	their	devotion	to	self,	soul,	and	the	process
of	individuation,	reinforce	the	crassest	kinds	of	materialism	when	they	appropriate	from	the
conventional	and	“only-natural”	world	the	meanings	they	attribute	to	images.
The	utilitarian	and	materialistic	notion	of	money	contrasts	with	Greek	silver	coinage.	Coinage	was
invented	in	Asia	Minor;	it	was	the	Greeks	who	replaced	utilitarian	money	–	cakes,	bars,	and	spits	of
metal	–	with	the	marvelously-crafted	coins	of	silver	showing	the	heads	and	animals	of	gods	and
bearing	witness	to	local	pride.	A	silver	bar	is	like	a	contemporary	dime	in	the	U.S.	But	a	Greek	coin
of	silver	refers	back	to	a	specific	place,	its	culture	and	its	god.	Greek	coins	were	at	one	and	the	same
time	«a	true	mirror	of	Greek	religion,	history,	and	economics,	as	well	as	Greek	love	of	beauty,” [47]
an	aesthetic	joy,	a	standard	of	value,	and	a	tribute	to	the	gods	of	the	place	–	all	at	once.	No	distinction
here	between	commerce	and	piety,	and	silver	was	the	substance	of	this	valorization	of	commerce	by
the	gods.
Money	has	long	lost	this	silver	backing.	It	is	no	longer	an	instrument	of	reflection,	but	has	instead
become	the	bottom	line	of	anti-reflection.	The	ultimate	excuse	we	give	when	we	don’t	wish	to	go
further	into	the	depth	of	something	is	that	it	“costs	too	much.”	That	stops	talk	and	thought.	What	we
mean	ultimately	by	the	word	“realistic”	is	money.	Really	real	reality	has	come	to	be	equated	with
money.	The	ultimate	literalism	is	the	economic	fallacy,	by	which	I	mean	considering	money	as
wholly	outside	the	psyche.
Mining	silver	from	money	means	simply	remembering	the	psychic	value,	the	value	for	soul,	in
CE

money	issues.	An	argument	over	money	is	a	silver	quarry	–	money	anxieties	as	we	age;	marriage
fights	over	household	spending;	inheritance	claims,	insurance,	indemnities;	analytical	fees	–	these	can
become	valuable	mirrors	of	where	the	soul	is	entrapped	in	matter.	Here	we	are	offered	a	chance	to
move	through	the	material	and	quantitative	levels	to	a	mirrored	insight,	seeing	one’s	own	shadow
face	and	the	face	of	the	specific	god	backing	the	contested	coin.	Each	time	we	take	money	on	its
meanest	terms	by	giving	an	economic	excuse	–	“I’m	doing	it	for	the	money”	–	we	are	back	with	Nero
and	Diocletian,	debasing	silver,	the	betrayal	of	value	as	exchange	only.	There	can	be	no	betrayal	of
Christ	by	silver	were	not	silver	first	debased.	The	soul	is	sold	not	to	the	devil	for	money,	but	to
money	itself	when	it	becomes	the	measure	of	worth	rather	than	the	affirmation	of	value.
(5)	Comparable	with	the	red	(gold)	and	white	(silver)	of	alchemy	are	the	two	currents	that	circulate
through	the	psychic	physiology	of	kundalini	yoga,	the	red	pingala	and	the	white	ida.	According	to
Gopi	Krishna’s	biographical	account, [48]	the	experience	of	ida	leads	to	a	whitening	of	the	perceptual
world	and	to	the	internal	sensations	of	silver	streaking	through	the	body	attended	by	cooling. [49]
There	is	definite	connection	between	the	lunar	ida	channel,	silver,	whiteness,	and	coldness:	Silver	is
“cold,”	says	Figulus. [50]	Why	not	mine	it	from	our	cold	conditions?
Relevant	here	are	the	ancient	notions	of	the	underworld	as	a	place	of	refrigeration,	and	the
etymological	meanings	of	“psyche”	as	cool,	cooling,	cold. [51]	Plutarch’s	essay	“On	the	Principle	of
Cold”	states	that	“coldness	is	what	binds	together,” [52]	and	because	coldness	expresses	the	astringent
element	and	planet	earth	(as	warmth	does	the	fire	and	sun)	it	is	the	nature	of	cold	to	harden.
According	to	Francis	Bacon,	the	inmost	earth	is	cold,	passive	and	static. [53]
Bacon’s	fantasy	is	an	archetypal	one	(that	is,	both	widespread	and	valuable),	that	the	cold	depth	of
things	is	a	place	of	death,	an	underworld	where	the	existence	of	sunlight	and	warmth	thins	to	psychic
essence,	beings	as	solely	images.	One	of	the	connotations	of	ida	is	“nonexistence,” [54]	and	the
transition	to	silver	as	in	Gopi	Krishna’s	case	is	a	chilling	death	experience.
Dreams	of	snow	might	be	placed	within	this	context.	They	may	refer	less	to	frozen	feelings	and
chilled	relationships,	and	more	to	the	freshly	fallen	snow	of	the	ida	experience,	or	to	the	appearance
of	the	white	sulfur	and	whitened	mercury,	the	magnesia-like	chalk	dust	that	begins	to	coat	objects	with
a	new	luster,	creating	on	the	one	hand	a	sense	of	the	remoteness	and	unreality	of	ordinary	life,	while
on	the	other	hand	congealing	and	firming	psychic	reality	into	the	white	earth.	The	hardening	of
fantasy	into	obdurate	psychic	fact	requires	cooling.	Alchemy	speaks	of	congelation	as	one	of	the
major	operations.	The	coldness	here	is	not	bitter,	but	relieving,	as	if	the	psyche	comes	home	to	itself,
losing	some	of	its	airy	flightiness,	its	attraction	for	the	flame,	its	succulent	attachments,	becoming
more	firm	and	solid,	achieving	its	kind	of	earth	by	becoming	cold.	Coldness	then	is	a	mode	of
descent	by	astringency,	drying,	grounding	and	hardening	the	mind,	solidifying	the	silver,	developing
its	stability	and	passivity,	so	it	can	better	receive	its	own	matter	in	the	cool	mirror	of	reflection.	Those
introverted,	schizoid,	intuitive	persons	(called	cold,	remote,	and	withdrawn	in	clinical	descriptions)
are	the	very	ones	to	whom	the	shapes	and	reflections	of	the	mind	carry	the	most	conviction.
Why	not	then	turn	to	our	coldest	conditions	for	mining	silver?	I	am	thinking	particularly	of	hatred,
which	is	a	fixture	of	psychic	reality	as	natural	to	our	individual	underworlds	as	was	the	frigid	river
Styx	(the	name	means	hateful,	hatred)	to	the	mythological	underworld	and	to	the	gods. [55]	The	palace
of	this	hatred	goddess	was	propped	up	by	silver	pillars	(Hesiod,	Theogony,	777),	and	no	water	was
ever	colder.
Perhaps	our	hatreds	are	not	personal	only,	but	necessities	of	silver,	firming	the	mind	with
supportive	principles,	giving	determinate	backing	to	its	mirror.	If	in	love	we	may	not	see;	in	hatred
every	line	of	the	other	stands	out	in	cruel	detail.	Maybe	hating	belongs	to	silver-making,	and	is	a
requirement	for	the	conjunction	with	gold,	where	the	vision	of	perfection	gilds	all	things	with	a
golden	glow.	Maybe	the	conjunction	also	means	a	conjunction	of	the	shadows	of	gold	and	silver	–

golden	love	tempered	by	a	hatred	that	cools	the	heart’s	optimism	with	astringent	perceptions	like	a
cold-silvered	glass	at	the	back	of	the	mind.	The	work	with	silver	polishes	the	hatred.	The	personal
salty	nature	of	hating	and	its	sulfuric	compulsion	become	“translucent,”	so	that	the	personal	object	of
hatred	and	the	personal	feelings	resolve	their	narrowness	of	focus	into	the	face	of	an	image,	like	a
frightful	Japanese,	Tibetan	or	Greek	mask.	Not	harden	the	heart,	but	harden	the	mind,	for	the	courage
and	faith	that	gold	brings	assumes	true	value	only	when	it	is	married	with	these	cold	depths	of	earthed
insight	that	hatred	so	well	provides.
(6)	Silver	may	also	be	gained	from	the	dark	side	of	the	moon,	the	face	of	the	psyche	turned	away
from	life	on	earth	and	toward	the	further	reaches	of	planetary	influences.	I	am	now	talking	about	an
aspect	of	Luna	that	turns	its	back	on	the	earth	and	does	not	participate	in	daylight	concerns.	Yet	this
place	is	traditionally	inhabited	by	waiting	souls	and	dead	souls,	daimones,	shades	and	ghosts	whose
presence	is	felt	when	our	consciousness	is	like	blackened	silver,	a	darkness	primordially	given	and
not	merely	a	tarnishing	from	exposure	to	events.	We	sense	this	blackened	silver	as	premonitions	and
omens,	as	poisonous	moods	and	lunatic	fantasies	that	descend	into	us,	as	if	from	the	moon,	without
any	relation	to	the	dayworld.	There	is	silver	in	these	absentminded	conditions,	ghostly,	separated,
wraith-like,	and	we	regain	the	reflective	metal	by	mining	our	superstitious	hauntings	and	forebodings
for	psychic	images	and	nuggets	of	thought.
According	to	Plutarch’s	essay	on	the	face	in	the	orb	of	the	moon,	our	composite	personality	–
body,	soul,	spirit	–	goes	through	at	least	two	deaths	or	separations. [56]	The	first,	which	Plutarch	calls
the	death	of	Demeter,	occurs	on	earth	and	separates	soul	and	spirit	from	body,	swiftly	and	violently:
natural	death.	The	second	death	takes	place	on	the	moon.	This	death	belongs	to	Persephone.	It
separates	mind	(nous)	from	soul,	gently	and	by	slow	degrees,	resulting	in	mindless	souls	and	soulless
minds.	These	souls	on	the	moon	become,	as	it	were,	free-floating	fantasies,	disembodied	and
mindless	both,	wholly	images	or	eidola	(945a).	They	are	driven	by	“the	affective	element	gone	astray
in	delusion”	(945b).	However,	these	alienated	moony	souls	can	be	ordered	by	the	moon,	says
Plutarch,	if	they	stay	there	in	that	place	and	condition,	for	in	time	they	shall	receive	new	light	and	can
return	to	earthly	affairs	and	human	body	in	a	sane	condition.
Plutarch’s	mythology	of	afterlife	is	also	a	psychology	of	lunacy	for	it	describes	the	condition	of
bodiless,	mindless	souls	under	the	sway	of	“counterterrestrial	Persephone”	(944c),	waiting	for	return
to	the	light.	These	are	the	souls	who	have	“lost	their	minds”	or	“gone	out	of	their	minds”	–	or	whose
minds	have	gone	out	of	them	–	whom	we	separate	by	placing	in	lunatic	asylums,	a	place	apart,	like	the
dark	side	of	the	moon,	where	the	dominant	gods	of	the	place	do	seem	like	Hecate,	Lilith,	and
Persephone.	In	the	asylum,	the	death	of	Persephone,	separating	mind	and	soul	from	each	other,	occurs
before	the	death	of	Demeter.	One	might	expect	suicide	in	an	asylum.
According	to	Plutarch,	the	souls	in	this	condition	of	darkened	silver	(as	I	am	calling	it),	images
without	reflection	of	themselves	as	images	–	wholly	in	the	dark,	yet	nonetheless	psychic	–	cannot	wait
patiently	in	their	lunacy.	Driven	by	delusional	belief	in	affects	(944f),	they	wish	to	enter	bodies	too
soon,	giving	rise	to	various	monstrous	conditions	like	Tityus	and	Typhon,	even	confounding	the
Delphic	oracle	(945d),	i.e.,	the	ability	of	images	to	cast	their	inherent	intelligence	forward	as
providential	insights,	setting	limits,	measure,	and	pattern	to	human	behavior.	Evidently,	for	Plutarch
the	embodiment	of	a	fantasy	(eidolon)	in	a	mindless	way	leads	to	precipitate	embodiment	(“actingout”),	a	direct	entrance	of	soul	into	world	without	having	been	ordered	by	the	moon.	Prolonged
habituation	with	lunar	darkness	or	blackened	silver	allows	the	right	embodiment	that	cannot	occur
until	the	soul	succumbs	fully	to	Luna.	Succumbing	to	her	dark	side	opens	one	to	the	paler	lights	of	the
planetary	influences,	the	multiple	rays	too	tenuous	to	be	noticed	in	monocular	sunshine.	Then	the	soul
can	enter	the	world	aware	of	itself	as	image.	It	is	this	silver	of	the	imaginal	that	backs	the	reflective
mirror	by	which	we	recognize	ourselves	as	images.	We	return	to	the	world	with	the	eidola	of	the

imaginal	that	became	real	only	when	we	were	on	the	moon,	deluded,	daimonic,	without	recourse	to
Demeter.
I	speculate	(silver	is	also	worked	by	speculation:	speculum = mirror;	species = likeness,	apparition,
image,	coin)	that	it	is	precisely	this	silver	from	the	far	side	of	the	moon	that	provides	the	backing	for
the	mind,	so	that	it	can	recognize	in	earthly	matters	the	planetary	influences,	the	presence	of	the	gods
who	give	the	world	its	inherent	intelligibility.	On	the	moon,	in	lunacy,	the	soul	gets	“both	tension	and
strength	as	edged	instruments	get	a	temper,	for	what	laxness	and	diffuseness	they	still	have	is
strengthened	and	becomes	firm	and	translucent”	(943d).	Without	sufficient	silver	we	mistakenly
believe	affects	to	be	more	real	and	reliable	than	images.	It	takes	a	sojourn	with	Persephone	to	tighten
the	laxness	of	the	soul’s	sentimentality,	to	hone	an	edge	on	the	mind’s	knife.	Without	sufficient	silver,
we	mistakenly	believe	–	because	we	dare	not	speculate,	because	we	debase	silver,	because	we	would
not	be	cold,	because	we	fear	the	airy	body	–	that	images	are	given	by	the	object	imaged;	whereas	they
appear	only	in	a	glass	with	a	silver	background,	reflecting	to	us	ourselves	as	image.	For
photography,	silver	is	the	essential	metal	for	fixing	light,	so	it	can	strike	a	picture.	For	psychology,
no	silver,	no	image;	no	image,	no	reflection.
(7)	The	last	place	of	silver	mining	is	even	more	complex	and	subtle	than	our	decoction	from
money	or	the	moon.	This	one	has	to	do	with	sound.	Ruland’s	1612	lexicon	says	that	silver	especially
is	resonant:	it	resonates,	resounds,	re-sounds.	We	are	now	moving	from	the	silvery	shapes	of	fantasy
into	their	silvery	sounds	–	shapes	as	sounds.	For	instance,	the	manner	of	constructing	early	musical
instruments	as	well	as	the	shapes	of	Hebrew	and	Arabic	letters	have	supposedly	been	derived	from	the
moon’s	varying	forms. [57]	The	patterns	of	our	speech	and	the	structures	of	musical	tones	are	thus
legendarily	attributed	to	the	moon.	Silver	connects	with	eloquence	also	in	Christian	symbolism,
especially	the	eloquence	of	the	Evangelists	who	fulfill	what	is	said	in	Psalm	12: 6:	“The	words	of	the
Lord	are	pure	words:	as	silver …”	and	in	Proverbs	10: 20:	“… tongue	of	the	righteous	is	as	silver.”
Clichés	still	refer	to	silver-voiced	sopranos	and	silver-tongued	orators.	William	Jennings	Bryan,	the
most	renowned	orator	in	American	history,	gave	his	most	renowned	speech	in	defense	of	silver.
In	Shakespeare’s	play	about	two	moonstruck	and	lunatic	lovers,	Romeo	says	(in	the	balcony	scene
of	Act	2):	“How	silver	sweet	sound	lovers’	tongues	by	night	/	Like	softest	music	to	attending	ears.”	In
Act	5,	when	the	musicians	enter	and	parade	their	wit,	the	First	Musician	answers	the	question	“Why
music	with	her	silver	sound?”	doubly:	“Music	hath	a	sweet	sound”	and	musicians	“sound	for	silver”	–
our	theme	again	of	silver	and	money.
I	here	aim	at	the	throat,	and	turn	to	William	Faulkner	for	an	astounding	passage	connecting	moon,
silver,	money,	blackness,	and	the	throat.	The	story	in	Go	Down	Moses	called	“Pantaloon	in	Black”
gives	“moonshine”	a	new	significance,	for	it	is	not	simply	that	colorless	drink	made	in	secret	by	the
light	of	the	moon;	it	is	a	cold	liquid	silver	that	the	goin-crazy	black	man	in	the	story	pours	into	his
throat	again	and	again	as	he	proceeds	to	a	lunatic	denouement	of	murder	over	a	few	bits	of	money.
The	scene	is	set	in	moonlight,	the	character	moves	through	solid	silver	air,	his	throat	filled	solid	with
the	silvering,	glinting,	shivering,	chill	liquid	air	of	the	drink.
The	curious	stress	Faulkner	lays	on	the	solidity	of	this	spirit,	the	substantiality	of	the	air	in	the
throat	which	produces	lunacy,	appears	in	another,	radically	different,	context:	the	vishuddha	chakra	of
the	Kundalini	yoga	system.	That	chakra	is	one	of	seven	centers	of	the	subtle	or	imaginal	body.
Vishuddha	is	in	the	throat;	it	is	depicted	by	a	white	elephant.	Its	element	is	ether,	and	it	refers	to	the
word,	the	voice	in	speech	and	song. [58]	Here	air	becomes	essence	(ether).	It	takes	on	weight,	and
words	can	carry	armies	on	their	backs.	We	meet	here	the	enduring	solidity	of	the	mind,	where	what
we	say	and	sing	matters	with	the	density	and	durability	of	an	elephant.	Jung	says	of	the	vishuddha
chakra:	“The	power	of	the	elephant	is	lent	to	psychic	realities,” [59]	and:	“Psychical	facts	are	the
reality	in	vishuddha.” [60]	Only	in	vishuddha	does	one	“trust	the	security	of	psychical	existence.” [61]

Words,	concepts,	thoughts,	the	interior	logos	that	talks	to	us	in	our	semiconscious	grunts	and	hums,
the	voices	of	the	spirit,	the	adumbrations	of	the	mind	where	they	reach	downward	to	the	heart	and
upward	to	the	forehead	–	all	this	in	the	throat	center	becomes	utterly	and	massively	real,	yet	whitened,
without	visible	hue	or	tint.	Nothing	is	as	heavy	or	bears	more	weight	than	what	sounds	from	us,	just
as	the	tone	and	pitch	of	our	actual	voices	–	the	catch,	the	rasp,	the	flat	nasal	monotone	–	reveal	the
shape	of	our	souls.
If	silver	can	be	mined	from	the	throat,	we	would	also	have	to	learn	to	hear	with	silver,	whiten	our
ears	so	as	to	tune	into	resonances.	This	is	the	art	of	hearing	musically,	letting	the	word	resound,	as	the
Second	Musician	plays	upon	the	First	Musician’s	silver	sound	of	music,	doubling	the	meaning,
catching	an	additional	inflection	from	the	words.	Mining	silver	from	our	very	syllables:	Silben	as
silbern.	After	all,	what	is	psychotherapy	but	the	art	of	listening,	and	speaking.
We	seem	to	be	opening	into	a	psychology	of	vishuddha,	and	not	only	one	originating	in	muladhara
(sex,	family,	and	society),	svadhisthana	(the	heroic	battle	with	the	dragon	of	unconscious	waters),
manipura	(furies	and	energies,	the	gut	gestalts	of	personal	emotion),	or	anahata	(feelings).	As	part	of
its	polytheistic	enterprise,	archetypal	psychology	sits	on	the	back	of	various	animals,	tints	its
abstractions	with	differing	colors,	and	works	the	mines	of	many	metals,	not	only	the	depressive	lead
of	Saturn	and	the	quicksilver	of	Hermes.	Imagine!	Words	not	only	angels	with	silver ’s	trumpet,	but
descendents	of	the	mammoth;	tusked	words,	shouldering	their	way	into	our	minds,	shaggy	and
towering	above	our	frantic	actions,	so	close	to	the	jugular.
The	silvering	by	which	we	hear	the	soundness	in	words	implies	that	they	are	worlds	themselves	and
do	not	need	to	gain	authentication	through	reference.	Words	sound	their	own	depths	of	reflection	–
allusions,	alliterations,	etymologies,	puns,	the	guises	of	rhetoric.	These	resonances	in	words	are	the
singings	of	angels	hitherto	throttled	by	the	golden	rules	of	logic,	objective	reference	and	definition.
We	are	in	the	realm	of	voices,	lunacy:	the	mind	sounding	itself,	sounding	its	depths,	hearing	its
essential	nature	as	a	choir	of	voices,	discordant,	antiphonic,	responsive,	the	dead	souls	in	us	speaking,
ghosts	swaying	on	the	family	tree,	the	unborn	clustered	on	the	moon,	all	sounding;	talking	with	our
voices	and	listening	to	them,	hallucinatory.
These	ghosts,	their	voices	are	silver ’s	modes	of	mentation;	mind	mirroring	mind.	Silver	gives	us
pause,	that	particular	nobility	of	mind	of	which	Hamlet	speaks	in	his	exemplary	reflective	soliloquy
(3.1).	“The	native	hue	of	resolution”	(gold	alone?)	that	leads	to	“enterprises	of	great	pith	and
moment”	are	“sicklied	o’er	with	the	pale	cast	of	thought”	and	“lose	the	name	of	action.”	This	anima
hesitation	immediately	brings	its	personified	exemplar,	Ophelia	on	stage.	The	tragic	disjunction
between	them	demonstrates	the	impossible	coniunctio	(“no	more	marriages”)	of	two	lunacies,	each
turning	away	from	the	other	and	turning	the	other	way.
Hallucinatory,	lunatic:	“For	vishuddha	means	just	what	I	said:	a	full	recognition	of	the	psychical
essences	or	substances	as	the	fundamental	essences	of	the	world,	and	not	by	virtue	of	speculation	but
of	fact,	namely	as	experience.” [62]	These	“psychical	essences,”	which	are	the	fundaments	of	the
world,	become	experiences	when	the	mind	is	silvered	and	the	images	vividly	engraved.	Such
experiences	from	the	perspective	of	other	centers	and	other	gods	may	be	called	lunatic.
To	recover	the	silver,	by	which	I	mean	to	be	established	in	the	value	of	reflection,	in	the	sense	of
psychic	beauty,	in	clarity;	in	short,	to	be	of	sound	mind	or	sane,	we	have	to	hear	all	things	reverberate
as	words,	and	shed	all	words	of	their	outer	darkness	(that	darkness	which	comes	from	their	reference
outward	for	body,	a	move	that	disembodies	the	word	of	its	own	substantiality,	its	body	of	air,	its
native	voice).	By	listening	to	words	themselves,	we	allow	them	to	ring	ever	more	clearly,	as	if	the
whitened	ear	can	actively	debride	speech	of	its	literalisms.	This	ear	hears	for	rhetoric,	for	rhythm,
sound,	breath,	and	silence;	for	evocation	of	psychical	essences,	a	call	to	the	elephant,	its	trumpet,	so
that	everything	said	or	read	matters	to	the	soul	because	it	bears	psychic	matter.	If	we	would	refashion

with	grace	our	psychological	language,	its	books	and	talks	and	therapeutic	hours,	we	must	calcine
and	lustrate	our	ears.
Listen	to	the	words:	they	shine	in	their	own	silver.	Ultimately,	the	mirror	is	more	firm	and	real	than
the	world	it	supposedly	mirrors,	the	image	brighter	than	the	object,	all	things	sounding.	“The	world
itself	becomes	a	reflection	of	the	psyche.” [63]	“[The	elephant]	is	supporting	those	things	which	we
assume	to	be	most	airy,	the	most	unreal,	and	the	most	volatile,	namely	human	thoughts.	It	is	as	if	the
elephant	were	now	making	realities	out	of	concepts.” [64]	In	crossing	to	vishuddha,	“one	should	even
admit	that	all	one’s	psychical	facts	have	nothing	to	do	with	material	facts.	For	instance,	the	anger
which	you	feel	for	somebody	or	something,	no	matter	how	justified	it	is,	is	not	caused	by	those
external	things.	It	is	a	phenomenon	all	by	itself.” [65]
These	lunatic	phases	are	silver	mines.	When	we	enter	the	mine	we	go	lunatic	for	a	spell.	Jung
speaks	of	the	vishuddha	experience	as	“a	very	critical	kind	of	adventure.” [66]	These	places,	or
phases,	do	not	require	mining	in	the	heat	of	passion	or	the	heart’s	feeling.	They	are	forges	without
heat	and	hammer	where	silver	separates	from	the	ore-body	and	runs	off	clear	as	a	mirror,	whitening
the	whole	earth.	Neither	holocaust	nor	filigrees	of	fantasy,	nor	depression,	i.e.,	silver	mined	only
from	lead;	now	simply	the	ring	of	cool	metal	that	sounds	an	event	back	with	another	resonance,
strangely	paranoid	or	depersonalized.	Suddenly	metaphor.	“What	really	matters	in	a	metaphor	is	the
psychic	depth	at	which	things	of	the	world,	whether	actual	or	fancied,	are	transmuted	by	the	cool	heat
of	the	imagination.	The	transmutative	process	that	is	involved	may	be	described	as	semantic
motion.” [67]	Meanings	shift;	words	move	into	things;	things,	into	words.
Literary	critics	speak	of	voice,	overtones,	tenor	(and	the	technical	term	for	the	elephant	in	the
vishuddha	chakra	is	“vehicle”). [68]	We	are	at	the	throat	of	metaphor	–	not	merely	metaphor	as	a
figure	of	speech	and	semantic	problem,	but	as	an	ontological	vision	with	a	psychic	base	in	the	subtle
body	of	vishuddha	consciousness	and	an	alchemical	base	in	silver.	“Metaphor	is	the	dreamwork	of
language,”	begins	Donald	Davidson’s	essay [69]	and	Nelson	Goodman	concludes	his:	“In	metaphor,
symbols	moonlight.” [70]	Metaphors	are	psychological	language	–	and	all	alchemy	is	metaphorical,
the	luna	metaphorica	that	Benedictus	Figulus	spoke	of	–	making	subtle	everything	we	ever	may	have
assumed	to	be	only	empirical	fact,	whether	events	in	the	world,	our	own	flesh,	even	the	elemental
minerals	in	the	earth.	Alchemy	transmutes	the	world	to	the	dream,	which	it	does	in	the	laboratory	of
its	language. [71]
Hence	silvering	is	so	essential	to	this	work,	and	so	hidden,	that	complaint	we	began	with.	Silver	is
hidden	because	it	is	buried	all	through	the	alchemical	work	itself,	within	every	word,	as	the
metaphorical	resonance	that	transfers	everything	said	and	done	to	a	psychic	level.	Silver	is	necessary
from	the	beginning,	else	we	cannot	rightly	hear	the	instructions.	“Throw	away	the	books,”	say	the
alchemists,	meaning	“discard	the	literal,”	so	as	to	hear	the	spirit	in	the	letter.
However,	if	silver	is	the	mineral	that	grounds	metaphorical	consciousness,	then	a	psychology	that
takes	its	stand,	as	does	alchemy,	in	a	metaphorical	ontology	–	all	is	in	semantic	motion	–	will	have	to
bear	the	pathology	of	lunacy.	To	hear	the	world	speak,	to	consider	emotions	not	“ours,”	to	remain	on
the	dark	side	of	the	moon	and	transmute	matter	into	dream	–	and	especially	that	semantic	motion
toward	meaning	everywhere	coupled	with	coldness	and	hardness	–	invite	depersonalization	and
paranoia.
These	pathologies	might	lead	us	to	imagine	that	silver	is	pure	reflection,	subjectivity	supreme.	But
in	an	alchemical	universe	the	metals	are	in	things	as	well	as	in	us,	so	that	things	reflect	and	resonate
with	subjectivity	as	much	as	we	who	are	mineral	bodies	even	as	the	“objective”	world	breathes	and
desires.	The	word	“subjectivity”	cannot	apply,	for	what	is	subjectivity	without	a	subject?	In	a
vishuddha	psychology	that	speaks	from	the	throat,	there	are	only	psychical	essences,	resonances
belonging	to	nobody	or	to	the	ore	body	of	silver.

What	is	reflection	then	when	there	is	no	subject	reflected,	neither	emotion	nor	external	object?	No
fact	at	all?
The	very	idea	of	reflection	transmutes	from	witness	of	a	phenomenon,	a	mirroring	of	something
else,	to	a	resonance	of	the	phenomenon	itself,	a	metaphor	without	a	referent,	or	better	said,	an	image.
And	these	images	or	subtle	bodies	do	not	reflect	a	borrowed	light,	later,	dimmer,	after.	Silver	does
not	come	after	gold,	but	precedes	it.	So	images	have	their	own	hardness,	their	innate	gleam	and	ring.
They	are	not	reflections	of	the	world,	but	are	the	light	by	which	we	see	the	world.	The	psyche	comes
to	each	moment	of	the	world	from	the	moon	–	not	just	once	at	birth	in	a	mythology	of	creation,	but	at
birth	each	day,	right	now.	This	light	by	which	the	world	reflects	in	us	is	the	light	of	silver,	hidden	like
the	moon	in	sunlight,	hidden	because	it	is	white	and	swift,	yet	all	the	while	giving	the	soul’s
differentiated	worth	to	each	particular	thing	that	the	sunlight	shows	as	the	same,	for	the	sun	beams
magnanimously	on	all	things	alike;	this	is	the	light	of	silver	that	the	alchemical	work	strives	to
reconstitute	and	refine.
Terra	Alba,	the	Whitening,	and	Anima
Albedo	is	another	alchemical	term	for	Luna	and	for	silver.	In	alchemical	color	symbolism	white	is	the
principal	stage	between	black	and	red,	a	transition	of	soul	between	despair	and	passion,	between
emptiness	and	fullness,	abandonment	and	the	kingdom.	Albedo	is	also	the	first	goal	of	the	work,
coming	after	the	nigredo	has	divided	the	world	into	mind	and	matter,	yet	before	the	rubedo	restores
the	subtle	body	to	its	carnal	keeper.	Because	of	alchemical	warnings	about	the	“reddening	coming	too
fast”	and	about	the	black	crows	creeping	back	down	into	the	nest,	the	albatio	or	“whitening”	is
essential	to	slow	the	reddening	on	the	one	hand,	and	on	the	other	to	raise	the	blackness	from	its
inertia.	As	a	state	between,	the	albedo	is	referred	to	as	bride,	Mary	(as	intercessor),	moon,	dawn,	and
dove.	As	a	state	between,	it	is	both	closely	attached	to	what	it	joins	and	yet	is	distinct	from	them.	It	thus
corresponds	with	that	middle	realm	and	mediating	attitude	we	speak	of	as	“psychic	reality,” [72]	so
that	the	descriptions	of	the	albedo	and	of	the	white	earth	teach	about	the	nature	of	psychic	reality	and
the	operations	of	the	albatio	teach	how	reality	becomes	psychic;	and	psyche,	real.
Beware	here!	There	are	at	least	two	sorts	of	white	“conditions	which	often	look	alike	/	yet	differ
completely”	as	T. S.	Eliot	says	in	“Little	Gidding.”	There	is,	as	mentioned	above,	an	original	white,
the	primary	Luna	or	virgin’s	milk,	pure	virgin,	smoke,	cloud,	the	lamb,	spittle	of	the	moon,	urine	of
the	white	calf,	summer,	white	moistures,	lye,	syrup	–	all	names	for	the	primary	material, [73]	all
names	for	those	early	and	repetitive	miseries	of	the	soul:	the	syrupy	nostalgias	and	overeager	kisses,
tender	calf	love,	the	mouth	of	salivating	desirousness	(Freud’s	oral	phase),	the	days	under	the	cloud,
summertime,	the	agenbite	of	introspective	lye,	the	smoke	that	neither	clears	to	fire	nor	dissipates,	and
above	all,	that	psychic	innocence	of	self,	world	and	others	that	psychology	has	renamed
“unconsciousness.“	This	primary	white	is	pre-black.	It	appears	in	figures	of	speech,	behavior,	and	in
dreams,	whether	made	up	at	night	or	by	admen:	the	toothpaste	smile,	spot	removers,	milk	shakes	and
ice	cream,	white	linen	trousers	and	Mr.	Clean,	ski	resorts	(the	resort	to	skis),	aspirin	consciousness,
“jes’	fine,	jes’	fine.”
Primary	white	is	immaculate	(without	stain	or	blemish),	innocent	(without	hurt,	harmless),	ignorant
(without	knowing,	disregarding),	unsullied	and	unsoiled.	This	condition	cannot	be	the	terra	alba
because	there	is	no	earth	to	whiten.	The	work	begins	on	these	original	white	conditions,	blackening
them	by	scorching,	hurting,	cursing,	rotting	the	innocence	of	soul	and	corrupting	and	depressing	it
into	the	nigredo,	which	we	recognize	by	its	stench,	its	blind	impulse	and	the	despair	of	a	mind
thrashing	about	in	matter,	lost	in	its	introspective	matters,	its	materialistic	causes	for	what	went
wrong.

Our	white,	the	second	white	or	albedo,	emerges	from	that	black,	a	white	earth	from	scorched	earth
as	the	silver	from	the	forest	fire.	There	is	a	recovery	of	innocence,	though	not	in	its	pristine	form.
Here	innocence	is	not	mere	or	sheer	inexperience,	but	rather	that	condition	where	one	is	not
identified	with	experience.	Virginity	returns	as	impersonality.	Or	let	us	say,	memory	returns	as	image,
the	evening	with	the	photograph	album	and	you	are	not	the	person	there	on	the	film	and	maybe	not	the
person	turning	the	pages.	Experience	and	experiencer	no	longer	matter	as	the	“images	that	yet	/	fresh
images	beget”	release	one	from	the	nigredo	of	personal	identity	into	the	mirrors	of	impersonal
reflections.
This	second	whiteness	is	also	not	mere	ignorance,	a	disregarding	insouciance	of	the	world	and	its
ways.	Rather,	it	is	that	casualness	with	the	world	and	its	ways,	which	results	from	psychic	realities
taking	precedence	over	more	earthbound	perception,	which	attempts	to	resolve	psychic	difficulties
either	away	from	the	world	or	into	the	world.	Albedo	prefers	neither	introversion	nor	extraversion,
since	the	differences	between	soul	and	thing	no	longer	matter,	that	is,	are	no	longer	imagined	in	the
material	terms	of	nigredo.
These	two	whites	combine	in	anima,	one	reason	that	anima	is	such	a	complex	psychological	affair.
She	is	the	White	Goddess [74]	and	also	Candide/candida,	the	little	innocent.	The	two	whites	shadow
each	other,	so	that	latent	in	blank	innocence	and	its	seductive	stupidities	is	the	yearning	of	Candida	for
the	whitened	mind,	while	shadowing	the	sophisticated	White	Goddess	is	both	the	snow	blindness	of
purity	and	the	blinding	by	lunatic	imaginings,	being	“out	of	it,”	which	delude	one	again	and	again
into	that	same	uncaring	ignorance	that	was	the	primary	material.	Because	of	these	white	shadows,	we
must	take	pains	in	this	section	to	differentiate	the	sophisticated	white	from	its	fall	into	the	primary
condition.
Transitions	of	color	in	our	moods,	tastes	and	dream	figures	reflect	alterations	in	the	material	of	the
soul.	Inasmuch	as	alchemical	psychology	equated	change	in	color	to	change	in	substance,	the	albedo
is	not	only	a	state	between	but	a	condition	per	se.	It	is,	however,	difficult	to	speak	from	this	condition:
either	one	tends	to	feel	it	as	betterment,	as	rising	from	the	dark,	greeting	whiteness	in	the	Christian
symbolism	of	baptism	and	resurrection	or	one	tends	to	feel	it	as	a	not-yetness,	a	silent	potential
(Kandinsky), [75]	an	absence,	that	has	still	to	become	the	color	of	fire	itself	(Corbin). [76]	We	shall
try,	nonetheless,	to	stay	in	the	middle	ground	speaking	of	white	as	if	we	stood	in	its	earth.
	
When	the	word	earth	appears	in	most	psychological	contexts,	it	weighs	us	down:	earthy	rituals	and
earthen	pots,	mother	earth	and	earth	sciences,	gravity	and	the	grave.	Psychology	assumes	earth	is
material.	As	Patricia	Berry [77]	has	written	on	Gaia,	Demeter,	and	the	Archetypal	Mother,	“earth”	is
that	projective	device	by	means	of	which	we	unload	ourselves	of	matter,	an	elemental	dump	for	the
modern	mother	complex.	We	imagine	earth	only	with	a	material	imagination,	that	naturalistic	fallacy
which	identifies	the	element	Earth	with	natural	dirt	and	soil:	to	be	earthy,	we	must	be	dirty	and	soiled.
Psychology	insists	Earth	be	our	red	body,	brown	mother,	black	madonna.	Open	the	Whole	Earth
Catalogue	and	there	amid	the	concretisms	of	bedrolls,	ridgepoles,	herbs,	and	canoes	you	will	search
in	vain	for	the	material	ways	of	the	mind	and	the	qualities	of	psychological	soil,	inscapes	of	arid
plains,	muddy	swamps,	hidden	banks	where	green	lovers	entwine,	where	there	are	also	bedrock	faults
and	islands,	whole	continents	of	the	mind,	an	imaginal	geography	whose	catalogue	covers	the	whole
earth	because	Gaia	is	also	a	region	of	soul	–	white	earth.
Although	the	modern	naturalistic	earth	of	psychology	is	a	supportive	element,	it	mainly	supports
heroic	spiritual	fantasies.	Even	Bachelard	lumps	earth	together,	not	only	with	supportive	repose,	but
with	the	fantasies	of	will	(forging,	cutting,	conquest,	work,	and	action). [78]	The	dumb	and	supine
materialization	of	earth,	as	well	as	the	fantasy	that	it	needs	attack	(mining,	plowing,	moving)	insults
Gaia,	as	Berry	says,	buries	her	under	our	dirt,	forces	her	to	bear	our	misplaced	concreteness,

depriving	her	of	her	own	inner	sky,	Uranos,	her	own	luminous	and	celestial	possibilities.	As	a
goddess,	Earth	is	also	invisible.	She	generates	immaterially,	unnaturally.	She	supports	perhaps	most
where	she	is	seen	least,	in	psychic	territories	of	repose,	like	the	void	in	the	vessel	that	is	the	vessel,
like	the	rest	within	all	rhythms,	the	hollowness	in	the	drum, [79]	working	her	will	within	the
intangible	forms	of	things	into	their	visible	matter.
The	gross	notions	of	earth	in	contemporary	psychology	betray	its	materialism;	this	psychology	is
so	heroic	and	spiritualized	that	mother	must	carry	its	grounding.	No	wonder	that	modern	psychology
cannot	leave	its	philosophy	of	development,	its	laboratory	concretism	and	reliance	upon
measurement,	its	reductive	explanations.	It	has	not	found	another	earth	that	would	give	support	and
yet	not	be	materialistic.
This	other	earth	is	described	in	Henry	Corbin’s	book	Spiritual	Body	and	Celestial	Earth.	There	is	a
marvelous	Earth,	an	imaginal	place	(or	placing	in	the	imaginal)	whose	“soil	is	a	pure	and	very	white
wheat	flour.” [80]	It	has	a	physics,	a	geography,	climates	and	fertilities.	This,	too,	is	a	ground,	the
earth	our	heads	touch	just	as	our	feet	touch	this	earth	here.
Our	heads	are	always	reaching	up	and	out	to	the	celestial	earth.	And	the	problem	of	head	trips	is	not
that	they	are	trips	or	that	they	are	heady,	but	that	they	are	not	grounded.	To	ground	these	flights	of
fancy	and	ideational	excursions,	psychology	sends	the	head	down	again	to	the	material	earth,	insisting
it	bow	down	to	the	dark	madonna	of	tangible	concrete	existence.	Psychology	fails	to	grasp	that	spacey
head-trips	are	in	search	of	another	ground	way	out,	an	attempt	to	reach	the	atopic,	placeless,	farfetched	terra	alba	of	anima	inspiration.	It	is	as	if	psychology	hasn’t	read	the	Bible,	page	one,
reminding	of	two	firmaments,	above	and	below.
Corbin’s	work	opens	a	radically	different	perspective	toward	grounding	and	earthing:	the
firmament	above	is	an	archetypal,	angelic	ground	of	the	mind.	The	mind	descends	from	archetypal
configurations;	it	is	originally	in	converse	with	angels	and	has	this	angelic	originality	forever
possible,	so	that	all	terrestrial	and	material	events	can	be	led	back	by	the	act	of	ta‘wil	(return)	to	the
original	ground	in	the	white	earth.	If	we	ground	ourselves	in	the	upper	firmament	everything	is
turned	around;	by	turning	everything	around	(seeing	through,	metaphorizing,	ta‘wil)	gross	matters
become	subtle.	To	make	the	terra	alba,	one	must	start	in	the	terra	alba.	Anima	consciousness,	or	the
albedo	in	alchemy,	offers	a	different	mode	of	perception.	Seeing,	listening,	attending	all	shift	from
the	gross	attachments	of	the	nigredo	to	a	new	transparency	and	resonance.	Things	shine	and	speak.
They	are	images,	bodies	of	subtlety.	They	address	the	soul	by	showing	forth	their	souls.
What	is	here	presented	in	the	subtle	language	of	Corbin	and	alchemy,	can	as	well	be	stated	in	the
gross	language	of	our	usual	psychology.	The	phase	called	whitening	in	alchemy	refers	to	the
emergence	of	psychological	consciousness,	the	ability	to	hear	psychologically,	and	to	perceive
fantasy	creating	reality	(CW	6: 78).
As	long	as	the	psyche	is	struggling	in	the	nigredo,	it	will	be	emotionally	attached,	stuck	in
materializations,	fascinated	by	facts,	grinding	away.	It	will	sense	psychic	“material”	mostly	as	dense
and	difficult:	(she	has	such	long	dreams;	I	get	confused	listening;	he’s	a	hard	case;	the	hours	drain
me,	exhausting,	depressing	–	a	long	mortification).	The	gnosis	of	the	nigredo	is	mainly	diagnostic
and	prognostic.	Its	eye	is	on	the	materialization	of	predictions,	fascinated	by	the	various	forms	of
putrefactio,	which	clinical	psychology	calls	“diagnoses.”	(The	DSM	diagnostic	manual	is	a	catalogue
of	materia	prima	becoming	nigredo	states,	like	one	of	Ruland’s	lists.)	The	nigredo	eye	looks	for
what’s	wrong,	the	caput	corvi	(raven’s	head)	of	foreboding	prophesy.	It	is	caught	by	physical
questions,	whether	in	etiology	(is	it	an	organic,	neurological	problem?),	in	transference	(touch	or	not
to	touch?),	or	in	treatment	(pills,	body	work,	or	maybe	dance	therapy?).	Grossness	casts	a	cloak	of
physicality	over	the	subtle	body	of	the	patient.
The	grounding	of	mind	in	whitened	earth	is	what	I	have	written	about	at	other	times	as	the	“poetic

basis	of	mind”;	consciousness	–	not	the	product	of	brain	matter	(left	or	right,	it’s	still	matter),	society,
syntax,	or	evolution	–	but	a	reflection	of	images,	an	ongoing	process	of	poesis,	the	spontaneous
generation	of	formed	fantasies.	So,	for	the	deepest	comprehension	of	mind,	we	are	obliged	to	turn	to
poetry.	We	must	go	to	the	moon	people,	the	lunatic	poets,	who	say,	like	the	poetic	clown	in	Marcel
Carné’s	film	Les	Enfants	du	Paradis,	“La	lune,	c’est	mon	pays.”	Poetry	gives	us	chunks	of	whitened
earth,	moon	rocks,	which	when	seized	upon	with	Apollonic	mission	prove	dead	and	worthless.
(Imagine!	the	greatest	deed	of	our	age’s	heroic	quest	was	to	capture	and	bring	home	to	actual	earth	a
tangible	souvenir	of	the	physical	moon.	The	insanity	of	literalism.)	But	when	the	moon	rocks	are
turned	over	in	the	imaginative	hand,	then	ideas,	songs,	dreams,	dances	–	essences	of	mind	–	emerge.
These	ores	of	the	moon,	these	mythopoeic	materials,	are	the	primordial	seeds	out	of	which	soul	life
comes.	Platonic	psychology	says	that	souls	originate	on	the	moon,	which	means	nothing	less	than
psychological	life	begins	in	the	places	of	our	lunacy.	Of	course,	Hegel	insisted	that	lunacy	was
purposeful	to	the	soul’s	development.
The	lunar	ground,	and	therefore	silver,	whiteness	and	anima,	assume	a	favored	place	in	a
psychology	that	begins	in	a	poetic	basis	of	mind,	i.e.,	in	an	imaginal	or	archetypal	psychology.	The
tradition	of	this	psychology,	such	as	we	find	in	Medieval	and	Renaissance	accompaniments	to
alchemy	like	the	Picatrix	or	Marsilio	Ficino’s	Book	of	Life,	starts	on	the	moon.	The	moon,	says
Ficino,	rules	the	first	year	of	life	and	every	seven-year	cycle	thereafter;	the	moon	is	primus	inter
pares,	first	among	equals.	All	prayers	to	the	planets	and	all	influences	from	them	pass	by	way	of	the
moon,	according	to	the	Picatrix.	The	moon	is	intercessor,	the	landing	place	between	outer	space	of
the	spirits	and	the	mundane	world	of	the	natural	perspective.	What	passes	by	way	of	the	moon
becomes	lunatic,	that	is,	enters	imaginal	reality.	The	direct	prayer	from	us	to	them	and	the	literal
planetary	message	from	them	to	us	become	fantasy	images,	metaphorical.	It	is	this	sense:	that	all
occurrences	must	first	be	imagined,	that	they	begin	as	images,	that	the	very	cycle	through	which
anything	turns,	including	ourselves,	is	a	psychological	process,	that	soul	fantasies	are	the	ground	and
seed	in	all	we	think	and	do,	want	and	fear	–	this	is	the	terra	alba.
The	terra	alba	is	a	climate	and	geography,	with	palaces	and	persons,	a	richly	imaginal	place,	not
mere	abstract	wisdom.	In	Corbin’s	accounts	the	celestial	earth	is	full	of	spiritual	bodies;	or	let	us	say
that	the	subtleties	of	soul	are	embodied	in	the	mundus	imaginalis	by	primordial	persons,	eternal
archons,	angelic	essences	who	offer	human	consciousness	a	grounding	in	hierarchical	principles,
enabling	a	human	being	to	recognize	what	is	essential,	what	comes	first,	and	what	is	of	lasting	worth.
It	is	a	place	of	truth.	Its	orientation	toward	truth,	however,	is	eastward	rather	than	up	or	down,	toward
the	orient,	dawn’s	early	light,	glimmer	of	silver,	hard	to	see	by	and	declare.
This	hierarchical	sensitivity	to	values,	truth	and	first	things,	coming	as	it	does	via	personified
forms	who	are	these	firm	subtleties	themselves,	brings	us	to	truth	psychologically	–	in	vision,	dream,
fantasy	dialogue	–	and	so	we	gain	a	psychological	apprehension	of	truth.	We	are	instructed	by	the
silvered	mind	rather	than	by	spiritual	enlightenment.	This	truth	evokes	reflection	and	the	illumination
of	the	senses,	especially	the	ear,	else	we	could	not	hear	voices,	the	messages	(angels),	the	angels	who
are	not	only	there	in	that	other	earth,	but	here	in	this	earth	that	can	be	whitened	by	a	mind	that
perceives	whitely,	metaphorically.	Although	silvered	perception	of	truth	may	be	polished	to	hard	and
cool	sophistication,	it	is	nonetheless	glancing,	oblique,	a	poetic	truth	that	includes	poetic	license	–
even	truth	as	fantasy	and	truth	of	fantasy	–	so	that	it	may	not	seem	truth	at	all	in	the	rational	eyes	of
reason	alone.	Ray	(of	the	sun),	radiant	(bright),	radius	(of	the	circle	or	a	straight	measuring	rod),
ratio,	and	rational	are	etymological	cousins	–	archetypal	descendants	of	the	Sun.
We	cannot	hold	Corbin’s	accounts	of	the	lunar	earth	in	our	solar	minds,	in	our	usual	hands,	any
more	than	our	usual	ears	can	get	anything	from	poems.	They	are	so	remote	from	daily
consciousness,	so	farfetched	and	arcane.	(“The	moon	is	the	arcane	substance,”	CW	14: 154.)	Even	if

alchemy	says	that	“earth	and	moon	coincide	in	the	albedo”	(ibid.),	they	feel	miles	apart,	like	death	and
life.	How	can	they	be	co-present	and	how	can	we	be	real	and	imaginal,	sane	and	lunatic	at	the	same
time?	The	answer	is	closer	than	we	realize:	the	“white	brain	stone”	(another	term	for	the	white	earth
and	the	arcane	substance,	CW	14: 626)	is	an	actual	experience	any	day.	Poems,	dreams,	fantasies	are
wispy,	haunting,	elusive,	arcane,	calling	for	petrifaction	by	definite	fixation	techniques	(memorizing,
recording,	depicting).	At	the	same	time	these	shimmering	gossamer	psychic	materials	are	dense	and
impenetrable:	“I	had	this	powerful	dream,	but	couldn’t	keep	it.”	“I	can’t	see	through	it;	it	escapes	me.”
“I	had	it	once,	but	can’t	get	it	again.”	Little	tiny	things,	yet	so	hard	to	crack	–	poems,	dreams,
fantasies.	And,	full	of	impact,	shocking	us,	hurting	us,	driving	us	to	the	far	corners	of	lunacy,
unforgettable,	possessed	by	beauty,	by	anima,	a	mere	whim	or	poetic	phrase.	The	substantial	language
about	matters	that	supposedly	have	no	substance	at	all	shows	the	subtle	body	in	the	solar	world.	These
experiences	that	so	annoy	our	everyday	awareness	are	the	apprehension	in	the	mind	of	the	white	earth
dawning.
What	is	this	dawning?	How	is	it	felt?	Precisely,	as	feeling.	What	dawns	is	not	a	“new	day”	but	the
day	in	a	new	way.	Rosy-fingered	dawn,	as	Homer	called	her,	touches	all	things	aesthetically.	It	is	as	if
the	world	had	a	new	skin,	imagination	become	flesh.	There	is	an	erotic	hue,	an	Aphroditic	cast,
pleasure.	The	goddess	of	Dawn	(Eos)	is	both	daughter	of	the	Sun	(Helios)	and	sister	of	the	Moon
(Selene).	She	holds	together	silver	and	gold	and	is	engaged	in	multiple	affairs	of	love.	The
consciousness	that	dawns	now	awakens	into	the	world	as	into	a	rosy-armed	embrace,	the	white	earth
inviting	with	smiles	because	it	is	a	lover. [81]
The	white	earth	shows	in	dreams,	but	not	necessarily	as	snow	fields,	white	sands,	or	azure-silver
celestial	scenes.	What	shows	rather	is	the	whitening	of	tangibles,	common	familiar	objects:	painting
the	house	white,	a	white	jacket,	silvered	things.	When	a	blade,	needle,	thimble,	dish	or	dress	is	silver,
then	silvering	is	occurring	to	these	activities	(one’s	knifing,	fingering,	stitching,	serving)	and
silvering	is	occurring	by	means	of	these	activities.	That	is,	by	means	of	knifing,	sewing,	robing,	the
psyche	is	being	silvered	or	whitened.	Things	themselves	are	becoming	psychic;	the	psyche’s
thingness,	and	its	thinking	(Heidegger),	are	beginning	to	show	reflection:	things	as	images,	images
things;	the	Dinglichkeit	of	psychic	phenomena.
Those	silver	containers	of	which	the	Grail	is	the	classic	example	refer	us	back	to	the	etymologies
of	silver	as	shining,	glistening,	glancing.	A	silvered	or	white	chalice,	cup,	bowl,	spoon,	jar,	or	mug
present	containment,	shape,	and	reflection	in	one	and	the	same	image.	Shaping	is	a	mode	of
reflection,	and	reflection	is	a	way	of	holding	things	and	putting	them	in	definite	shape.
A	silvered	container	differs	from	an	earthenware	pot,	wooden	box,	leather	bag,	glass	bottle.	Each
permits	and	prevents	certain	kinds	of	holding;	each	depicts	attitudes	to	psychic	contents.	When	the	cup
is	silver,	then	there	is	swiftness	in	our	holding	mode,	a	keen	quick	grasping-for	silver	and	white	mean
flashing,	swift,	and	light.	The	silver	receptacle	shows	mental	intelligence,	a	rapid	understanding.	But
silver	tarnishes,	clouds	over,	so	that	it	tends	to	lose	the	insights	that	once	shone	clear.	At	the	same
time,	silver	as	the	precious	metal	of	money	values	what	it	holds,	or	rather	it	holds	by	giving	worth,
dearness	to	events.
Of	course,	the	silvered	container	is	usually	thought	of	as	the	chalice	for	the	blood.	The	rubedo	first
requires	a	receptive	soul	and	a	comprehensive	understanding,	else	it	streams	in	the	firmament,
reddening	the	world	with	manic	missionary	compulsion,	the	multiplicatio	and	exaltatio	as
conversion,	moneymaking,	and	fame.	But	the	nigredo,	too,	requires	a	silvered	vessel.	(“Take	the	black
which	is	blacker	than	black,	and	distill	of	it	18	parts	in	a	silver	vessel.” [82])	It	seems	that	the	best	way
to	hold	the	blackest	of	the	black	–	that	irremediable	and	inert	pathology	–	is	again	with	a	silvered
soul,	that	quality	of	understanding	appropriate	to	the	holiest	of	essences,	the	enlightened	and	receptive
mind	that	belongs	to	the	white	anima.	Only	she	can	distill	from	the	utter	blackness	some	trickle	of

possibility.
Silver	may	also	appear	in	the	sky:	airships,	white	forms,	missiles.	If	the	airy	element	is	the	ground
and	place	of	mental	life,	then	the	mind	is	projecting	out	new	directions,	shaping	new	forms,
exploratory	speculations.	It	may	be	reaching	for	the	moon,	not	merely	escaping	the	earth.	Whether	or
not	the	waking	personality	can	follow	its	night	soul	in	these	directions	is	a	therapeutic	question,	but
silvering	in	the	realm	of	air	is	a	process	as	regular	as	natural	dawning,	dew,	starlight	and	the	throat	of
larks,	and	silvering	appears	in	dreams	as	well	as	in	nature.
The	white	ladies	in	dreams	and	sickbed	visions	(in	a	silver	gown,	head	in	light	or	white	cloaked,	a
dead	beloved,	the	man	with	the	silver	badge	or	instrument)	are	figures	of	the	white	earth	calling	one
to	another	inscape	by	sounding	music,	shearing	away,	opening	passages,	instructing,	beckoning.	They
are	“calls”	away	from	life	who	signal	the	death	of	one’s	embeddedness	in	the	body	of	the	world.	We
fear	them	and	are	wonderfully	impressed	when	they	ask	us	to	come	across	the	border.	But	what
border?	I	think	it	is	less	the	simple,	literal	line	between	life	and	death	and	more	the	one	we’ve	drawn
around	love,	holding	it	from	death.	The	white	lady	or	the	silver	man	makes	the	passage	easier	by
bringing	one’s	love	to	death,	a	loving	death,	moving	Eros	to	Thanatos,	so	that	we	may	follow	more
easily	into	deep	unknowns,	ready	to	go,	anytime	mount	the	stair,	all	aboard	for	White	City.
Although	the	remarkable	phenomenology	of	visionary	white	figures	has	been	examined	by	Aniela
Jaffé, [83]	there	is	something	further	to	be	said	about	white	animals.	They	have	been	called	witch,
spirit,	ghost,	or	doctor	animals,	but	what	really	is	happening	to	the	soul	when	a	whitened	or	silverblue-gray	animal	appears?
First	of	all,	the	animal	is	now	a	shade	of	itself,	“dead”	or	psychized.	The	figure	is	now	both	a
psychic	presence	as	well	as	an	animal	presence.	Its	body	is	now	subtle.	Second,	by	virtue	of	its	color,
it	belongs	to	the	albedo.	It	is	an	animal	of	the	anima,	an	anima	animality.	The	animal	is	no	longer	a
terrestrial	natural	figure,	what	psychology	calls	“instinct,”	but	this	animal,	this	instinct,	appearing	in
white,	shows	that	the	terra	alba	is	also	a	place	of	vital	life.	There	is	animality	in	whiteness;	instinctual
body	in	silvered	subtleties.
A	whitened	animal	is	one	that	reflects	itself;	animal	action	hearing	itself,	knowing	itself.	Reflex	and
reflection	joined	in	one	image,	desires	that	self-respect,	the	sulfur	whitened	to	sure-footed	awareness,
an	animal	faith.	No	wonder	that	such	animals	are	“doctor	animals”;	they	are	the	guides	of	soul,	image
guides,	who	can	sense	their	way	among	images.	Their	territory	is	the	white	earth,	the	silver	land,
where	the	mind	and	voice	of	the	soul’s	intelligence	rule.	They	bear	intelligence,	bring	reflection	in
their	white	forms.	The	best	way	to	keep	them	near	is	to	treat	them	with	the	food	they	live	on:
intelligence,	speech,	words,	thoughts.	Speak	with	them:	Doctor	Dog,	Frau	Doctor	Cat.	Talk	is	their
soul	food.
Of	all	these	phenomena	–	silver	vessels	and	instruments,	white	missiles	and	animals	–	perhaps	the
most	singular	event	of	the	albedo	is	the	puzzlement	of	consciousness.	The	mind	as	it	was	is	baffled	by
the	paradoxes	of	its	whitening,	a	paradox	expressed	even	in	the	term	“white	earth.“	Wittgenstein’s
Remarks	on	Colour	show	an	excellent	mind	struggling,	during	the	last	eighteen	months	of	his	life,
with	white	and	anima.	We	may	read	his	questions	and	statements	with	a	metaphorical	eye	as	if	they
came	from	an	old	alchemical	text	having	to	do	with	the	whitening	of	consciousness.	Even	more	–	as	if
white	were	the	color	of	psyche,	and	of	psychology:
But	what	kind	of	a	proposition	is	that,	that	blending	in	white	removes	the	colouredness	from	the	colour?	As	I	mean	it,	it	can’t	be	a
proposition	of	physics.	Here	the	temptation	to	believe	in	a	phenomenology,	something	midway	between	science	and	logic,	is	very
great.	(II-3)

What	then	is	the	essential	nature	of	cloudiness	[des	Trüben]?	For	red	or	yellow	transparent	things	are
not	cloudy;	white	is	cloudy.	( -4)
II

Isn’t	white	that	which	does	away	with	darkness?	(II-6)
“The	blending	in	of	white	obliterates	the	difference	between	light	and	dark,	light	and	shadow”;	does	that	define	the	concepts	more
closely?	Yes,	I	believe	it	does.	(II-9)
If	everything	looked	whitish	in	a	particular	light,	we	wouldn’t	then	conclude	that	the	light	source	must	look	white.	(II-15)
The	question	is:	is	constructing	a	‘transparent	white	body’	like	constructing	a	‘regular	biangle’?	(III-138)
Nor	can	we	say	that	white	is	essentially	the	property	of	a	–	visual	–	surface.	For	it	is	conceivable	that	white	should	occur	as	a	highlight	or	as	the	colour	of	a	flame.	(III-145)
A	body	that	is	actually	transparent	can,	of	course,	seem	white	to	us;	but	it	cannot	seem	white	and	transparent.	(III-146)
But	we	should	not	express	this	by	saying:	white	is	not	a	transparent	colour.	(III-147)
‘Transparent’	could	be	compared	with	‘reflecting.’	(III-148)
We	don’t	say	of	something	which	looks	transparent	that	it	looks	white.	(III-153)
We	say	“deep	black”	but	not	“deep	white.”	(III-156)
Consider	that	things	can	be	reflected	in	a	smooth	white	surface	in	such	a	way	that	their	reflections	seem	to	lie	behind	the	surface
and	in	a	certain	sense	are	seen	through	it.	(III-159)
What	constitutes	the	decisive	difference	between	white	and	the	other	colours?	(III-197)
What	should	the	painter	paint	if	he	wants	to	create	the	effect	of	a	white,	transparent	glass?	(III-198)
White	seen	through	a	coloured	glass	appears	with	the	colour	of	the	glass.	That	is	a	rule	of	the	appearance	of	transparency.	So	white
appears	white	through	white	glass,	i.e.,	as	through	uncoloured	glass.	(III-200)
This	much	I	can	understand:	that	a	physical	theory	(such	as	Newton’s)	cannot	solve	the	problems	that	motivated	Goethe,	even	if	he
himself	didn’t	solve	them	either.	(III-206)
Why	do	I	feel	that	a	white	glass	must	colour	black	…	while	I	can	accept	that	yellow	is	swallowed	up	by	black?	(III-208)
We	often	speak	of	white	as	not	coloured,	Why?	(III-210)
Is	that	connected	with	the	fact	that	white	gradually	eliminates	all	contrasts,	while	red	doesn’t?	(III-212)
I	am	not	saying	here	what	the	Gestalt	psychologists	say:	that	the	impression	of	white	comes	about	in	such	and	such	a	way.	Rather
the	question	is	precisely:	what	is	the	impression	of	white,	what	is	the	meaning	of	this	expression,	what	is	the	logic	of	this	concept
‘white’?	(III-221)

The	logic	of	the	concept	white	is	precisely	what	we	are	working	on	in	this	essay,	in	order	to	show	it
to	be	a	psycho-logic,	“something	midway	between,”	and	something	both	transparent	and	cloudy,	a
strange	third	that	cannot	be	made	into	a	“regular	biangle.”	This	psycho-logic	also	attempts	to	account
for	feelings	such	as	Wittgenstein’s	that	“white	does	away	with	darkness,”	“that	a	white	glass	must
colour	[stain,	lighten,	tincture]	black,”	and	that	“white	eliminates	all	contrasts”	[the	albedo	as	relief].
Moreover,	as	consciousness	moves	from	the	darkness	of	the	materialistic	perspective	toward	the
white	earth,	we	can	understand	why	Wittgenstein	finds	that	Newton’s	physical	approach	cannot	answer
the	kinds	of	questions	set	by	Goethe.
	
Despite	the	intellectual	puzzlement,	whitening	frequently	comes	first	as	an	experience	of	emotional
relief,	a	lightening	after	blackness	and	leaden	despair,	as	if	something	else	is	there	besides;	within	the
misery,	the	tremor	of	a	bird.	Burnout	cools;	the	ida	stream	of	Kundalini	showers	the	exhausted	and

bitter	soul	with	gentle	dew.	A	mood	dulcet,	a	descending	grace.	Traditional	symbolism	speaks	of
white	as	the	color	of	pardon	appearing	after	the	black	of	penitence.	We	say:	“It’s	lifted”	–	not	so
heavy,	not	so	frantic.	“I	feel	I’ll	make	it.”	All	the	while	there	is	a	new	sense	of	trust	in	what’s	going	on.
For	Dante,	white	was	the	color	of	faith.	This	faith,	however,	is	not	adamantine	as	a	credo,	or	an	iron
anchor,	and	feels	rather	like	sweet	anticipations	of	another	chance,	a	second	coming,	and	that	one	can
go	on	because	somewhere	down	the	line	there	is	a	holding	place	(that	same	gray	ash,	dry	sand,	sere
leaf	now	white	earth).
A	whitened	holding	place	must	be	imagined	with	a	whitened	mind.	For	the	terra	alba	is	not	merely
rest	after	struggle;	it	is	not	rest	at	all	in	the	sense	of	surety.	In	fact,	“white	is	motion,	black	is	identical
with	rest”	(according	to	that	same	twelfth-century	text,	which	concludes	with	the	famous	“emerald
tablet”). [84]	So	the	albedo	is	experienced	also	as	the	motion	of	psychic	reality,	what	we	have	come	to
call	“psychodynamics”	and	“processes”	–	so	long	as	these	are	not	literalized	into	systems	upon	which
we	can	rest	content.	For	when	motion	becomes	a	system	of	motion,	rather	than	the	actual	moves	the
psyche	makes,	then	we	are	again	in	a	nigredo,	that	is,	densely	unconscious.	Our	language	(psychic
energy,	process	of	individuation,	development,	psychodynamics)	is	stifling	actual	movement	in
concepts	about	movement.	The	nigredo	must	speak	in	the	past	tense	as	part	of	the	mortificatio	and
putrefactio,	whereas	the	white	abjures	reports	of	“what	happened”	and	how	it	got	this	way,	in	order	to
move	with	the	actual	images.	Albedo	talk	speaks	rather	of	“what’s	going	on,”	this	move	and	that:	how
the	psyche	is	moving	and	what	moves	the	patient	and	the	analyst	make	in	response.
Another	sense	of	the	turn	to	whiteness	is	shelter:	less	exposed,	less	raw,	less	delivered	over	to	the
fires	and	floods.	Wounds	swathed	in	white	dressings;	untoiling	lilies;	milk,	flowing	and
coagulating [85]	into	the	more	solidly	putrefied	culture	of	cheese.	The	soul	has	now	a	tabernacle;
Mary	as	refuge.	There	is	some	structure	and	a	place	where	it	can	tend	to	its	motions;	it	finds	itself
placed	within	itself	and	not	driven	“out.”
We	also	find	ourselves	easing	off,	no	longer	purging	the	bowels	of	putrefactio,	no	longer	guilty.
Complaining	gives	way	to	recollections	in	tranquility:	the	memories	are	there	but	no	longer	hold	one
to	their	rack.	The	sense	of	sin	is	washed,	ablutio.	The	material	has	sweat	itself	into	moistening,	and
we	may	even	find	a	sense	of	humor.	Ironic	chagrin	relieves	shame.	The	voice	now	speaking	in	the
inner	ear	and	the	words	now	coming	from	the	inner	figures	of	imagination	tell	us	“it’s	all	right,”
“take	it	easy,”	“let	it	be,”	“give	yourself	a	chance.”	The	white	lady	brings	peace.	She	sits	in	the	garden
with	a	wide	lap.
“Putrefaction	extends	and	continues	even	unto	whiteness,”	says	Figulus; [86]	yet	“matter,	when
brought	to	whiteness,	refuses	to	be	corrupted	and	destroyed.“ [87]	When	does	the	putrefaction	finally
cease?	Is	the	soul’s	resistance	to	destruction	ever	accomplished	and	when	is	its	own	capacity	for
corrupting	and	destroying	overcome?	Evidently,	even	after	whiteness	is	there,	the	putrefactio	extends
and	continues	in	some	manner.	One	text	speaks	of	“a	white	vapour,	which	is	a	soul	that	is	whiteness
itself,	subtile,	hot,	and	full	of	fire.” [88]	Other	texts	refer	to	a	“white	ferment,”	and	we	have	already
discussed	the	affinity	of	silver	for	sulfur	as	silver ’s	inherent	tendency	to	corruption	(blackening,
tarnishing,	quick	heating,	etc.),	its	“phlegmatic	leprosy.”
We	must	therefore	amend	our	notions	of	the	white	earth	as	a	place	of	repose.	Something	else	goes
on	in	these	anima	states,	despite	the	comforting	whispers	in	the	inner	ear.	Silver	is	copper	within,	says
Rasis. [89]	Copper	was	often	used	for	the	imitation	of	silver	(Leyden	Papyrus	X), [90]	and	the
majority	of	gold	imitations,	too,	were	alloys	containing	copper.	So	in	which	way	does	copper
“falsify”	the	true	silver?	Of	course,	we	turn	to	Venus,	for	copper	was	her	metal:	red	in	color,	quick	to
heat,	welcoming	amalgamations,	greening	in	time	like	her	vegetative	nature.	Von	Franz	interprets
copper	as	“man	himself,”	the	“microcosm,”	the	term	used	in	the	texts	she	comments	upon. [91]	This
“man	himself,”	concealed	in	silver	and	able	to	falsify	it,	must	refer	to	the	human	propensity	toward

all	things	Venusian	–	joy	and	beauty	in	the	work,	personalized	feelings,	the	sensualism	and	passion	as
the	transformations	proceed,	the	heating	up,	the	desire	to	connect	out	of	the	loneliness	of	whitened
reflective	isolation.	Inside	silver ’s	cool	lurks	the	all-too-human	shadow	of	copper	–	which	also
serves	to	keep	the	work	subjectively	important,	affecting	“me.”	Otherwise,	it	would	all	be	a	matter	of
symbols	and	measurements,	like	chemistry,	objective,	going	on	only	in	glass	vessels.
Within	the	whiteness	lie	the	former	stages.	As	whiteness	emerges	from	blue,	from	black,	and	from
great	heat	(‘“White	medicine	is	brought	to	perfection	in	the	third	degree	of	fire”), [92]	so	these	prior
conditions	are	there	within	the	albedo	itself.	It	must	tell	us	of	itself	as	sweet,	soft,	and	cool,	just
because	it	is	always	threatened	by	its	own	red	copper,	its	propensity	for	sulfur,	its	hot	and	black	inner
nature.	It	is	precisely	this	inherent	putrefaction	that	distinguishes	the	albedo	from	the	primary	states	of
whiteness	(innocence,	purity,	ignorance)	and	guarantees	the	soul	against	its	own	corrupting	effects.
Thus	whitening	gives	the	anima	an	awareness	of	its	innate	power,	which	comes	from	shadow	that	is
not	washed	away	and	gone	but	built	into	the	psyche’s	body	and	becomes	transparent	enough	for
anyone	to	see.
	
This	brings	us	to	four	major	dangers	in	the	transition	to	white:
(1)	Transition	as	conversion.	The	black	all	gone,	born	again,	a	new	love,	cure	as	loss	of	shadow.	As
clinicians	know,	the	danger	of	impulsive	suicide	may	be	greater	when	coming	out	of	depression	into
a	manic	phase	or	defense	than	when	in	the	depths	of	melancholy	itself.	Thus	every	whitening	needs
clinical	inspection.
Conversion,	as	regression	to	innocence,	to	the	garden	before	the	fall	is	the	eternal	seduction.	There
had	to	be	killing	at	once	on	leaving	Eden	to	make	dead	sure	that	all	of	them	–	Cain,	Abel,	Seth,	Adam,
Eve,	and	maybe	the	Biblical	God	too	–	wouldn’t	be	tempted	back.	In	the	garden	the	serpent	is	the
tempter,	but	once	out	in	the	vale	of	soul-making,	it	is	the	garden	itself	that	seduces.	Whenever
whiteness	–	white	lights,	white	ladies,	white	knights,	white	pages	for	a	new	leaf	–	draw	us	to	them,
keep	the	clinical	eye.	Remember	your	alchemy:	the	albedo	must	always	be	distinguished	from	the
materia	prima.
Just	here	the	difference	is	hard	to	discern.	The	urge	to	white	is	so	close	to	the	escape	from	black.
Then	the	ablutio	can	become	simply	whitewashing,	and	candida	can	mean	only	a	clean	breast,	a	frank
and	open	discussion,	candid.	“Albation,”	says	the	dictionary,	still	means	dusting	(off,	away,	over)	with
a	fine	white	powder.	Here	the	whitening	converts	back	to	primary	innocence	and	the	opus	is	back
where	it	began.
Bonus	of	Ferrara	offers	a	way	through	this	danger.	“When	the	Artist	sees	the	white	soul	arise,	he
should	join	it	to	its	body	in	the	very	same	instant;	for	no	soul	can	be	retained	without	its	body.”	“Now
the	body	is	nothing	new	or	foreign;	only	that	which	was	before	hidden	becomes	manifest.” [93]	And
what	is	this	“body”?	Bonus	says:	“Body	is	the	form.”	Elsewhere:	“The	Ancients	gave	the	name	of
body	to	whatsoever	is	fixed	and	resists	the	action	of	heat.“ [94]
I	understand	this	body	that	resists	heat	and	stays	as	it	is	(does	not	convert)	to	refer	to	those	hidden
forms	within	each	of	the	manifest	emotional	changes	that	have	led	to	the	albedo.	The	occurrence	of
white	can	make	us	feel	we	are	wholly	in	a	new	place	because	we	are	blanketed	by	the	whitened
condition.	If,	however	,the	white	is	fixed	in	its	own	body	of	images,	that	is,	its	attention	fixed	upon	the
“hidden”	forms	that	shape	experiences	(rather	than	the	manifestations	of	those	experiences),	then	we
are	less	subject	to	conversion.	For	conversion	here	is	nothing	else	than	a	consciousness	submerged
under	its	own	white	phenomena.	Anima-enthused,	anima-inflated,	as	the	Jungians	say.	The	soul	has
lost	its	body,	the	hidden	form	or	image	by	which	it	can	see	itself. [95]	The	whitening	can	simply	mean
being	unconscious	in	a	new	way,	which	is	baptized	(whitewashed)	by	the	exalted	name	of	“conversion
experience.”

We	do	not	gain	anima	awareness	(whitening)	only	by	examining	manifest	experiences:
remembering	what	happened	and	how	it	felt.	Anima	comes	to	its	knowledge	by	an	imaginative
process:	by	the	study	of	its	own	images.	That’s	one	reason	why	my	version	of	psychoanalysis	spends
so	much	time	on	dreams	(and	less	on	reports	of	what	happened)	–	to	awaken	the	soul	to	imagination
by	the	study	of	its	images.
If	the	study	of	his	images
Is	the	study	of	man,	this	image	of	Saturday,
This	Italian	symbol,	this	Southern	landscape	is	like
A	waking,	as	in	images	we	awake,
Within	the	very	object	that	we	seek,
Participants	of	its	being.	It	is,	we	are. [96]

Anima	wakens	in	its	images	–	of	Saturday,	Italy,	landscape	–	becoming	what	it	is	by	virtue	of	those
forms,	those	bodies.	Notice	that	the	“body”	of	which	Bonus	speaks	is	its	body	–	”nothing	new	or
foreign.”	The	whitening	is	present	in	any	object	that	we	seek	once	we	seek	it	as	image.
The	body	of	the	albedo	is	already	there,	the	earth	whitened,	as	the	formal	pattern	that	shows	itself	to
the	imagining	anima	as	images.	The	lines	of	Wallace	Stevens	add	to	Bonus	the	further	idea	that	these
image-forms	are	participants	in	each	being,	including	that	being	we	consider	to	be	ourselves.
(2)	Transition	as	“premature	cooling.”	The	term	is	von	Franz’s	interpretation	of	a	passage
referring	to	fearing	“the	cold	of	the	snow.” [97]	Von	Franz	sees	this	as	an	inflation	in	which	“feeling,
relatedness	to	one’s	fellow	men,	perishes	and	is	replaced	by	an	intellectual	form	of	relationship.” [98]
We	have	discussed	above	the	potential	silver	that	lies	in	coldness,	and	the	innate	coldness	of	the	soul
itself	at	some	length	elsewhere, [99]	showing	that	the	very	word	psyche	is	cognate	with	many	words
signifying	cool	and	cold.	Furthermore,	coldness	works	in	different	ways	at	different	times.	For
instance,	“Digestion	is	sometimes	quickened	by	outward	cold	…	For	cold	drives	heat	inward	and
increases	its	action,”	says	Norton	in	his	“Ordinal”	(HM	2: 43).
Since	coldness	is	familiar	to	the	soul	and	intrinsic	to	the	whitening	(as	in	Kundalini	yoga),	why	just
now	the	fear	of	snow?	I	think	the	danger	to	the	work	has	less	to	do	with	feeling	relationships	than	with
a	benign	neglect	of	the	alchemical	fire	which	can	occur	at	this	moment.
Because	the	albedo	brings	relief	from	the	tortures	that	instigated	the	process	in	the	first	place,	we
forget	that	the	soul,	whose	body	(its	images	now	fixed)	is	better	than	ever	able	to	bear	heat,	now
requires	a	higher	intensity	than	before.	Bonus	of	Ferrara	writes:	“When	the	Alchemist	…	has	reached
the	end	of	the	first	part	of	our	Magistry	in	which	is	seen	the	simple	white	colour	…	then	he	must
straightway	set	about	the	second	part	of	the	work,	and	this	is	the	ferment	and	the	fermentation	of	the
substance.” [100]	By	ferment,	Bonus	refers	to	“seething	or	bubbling,”	which	makes	the	soul	substance
“swell	and	rise,	exalting	it	into	a	nobler	condition.” [101]	Premature	cooling	stops	before	the	ferment.
As	things	improve	–	and	after	all,	the	albedo	is	a	betterment	according	to	every	text	–	there	is	less
urgency.	The	whole	work	may	go	into	the	freezer,	the	baby	abandoned	in	the	snow.	We	forget	that	the
long	point	of	the	opus	is	not	resolving	the	nigredo	nitty-gritty	of	our	personal	neuroses,	but	an
exaltation,	a	multiplication	of	the	soul’s	vermilion	nobility	to	its	full-blooded	and	manifold
realization.	Thus	at	this	moment	the	analysis	itself,	as	instrument	of	the	fire,	may	have	to	turn	up	the
heat	deliberately	in	order	to	prevent	cooling,	which	separates	body	and	soul.	“So	long	as	the
substance	is	volatile	and	flees	from	the	fire,	it	is	called	soul;	when	it	becomes	able	to	resist	the	action
of	the	fire,	it	is	called	body.” [102]	In	order	to	keep	the	body,	we	must	keep	the	heat. [103]	We	may
have	to	invite	new	aggressions	and	passions;	summon	up	the	furies;	force	confrontations	with
essential	questions	that	the	white	lady	might	prefer	to	cool.	Active	imagination,	for	instance,	may	now
begin	grappling	with	the	angels	of	one’s	destiny,	angels	who	are	cores	of	fire.	Now,	“therapeutic
support”	means	feeding	the	fire.	The	fire	is	the	guardian	angel	and	guards	the	angel	from	cooling.

Analysis:	place	of	fire.	“The	Spirit	is	Heat,”	says	Canon	94	of	Figulus.
(3)	Transition	as	premature	calcining.	This	is	the	caution	against	“burning	the	flowers.”	“Premature
drying	only	destroys	the	germ	of	life,	strikes	the	active	principle	on	the	head	as	with	a	hammer,	and
renders	it	passive”	(HM	2: 188).	Yes,	the	opus	needs	intense	heat	to	dry	up	the	personalized	moistures:
sobbing	collapses,	longings	that	flow	out,	sweet	dopey	confusions.	These	are	dried	in	the	soulmaking	process.	But	these	conditions	cannot	just	be	hit	over	the	head,	taken	to	the	(dry)	cleaners,
caustically	scorched.	For	in	them	there	is	a	germ	trying	to	flower.	The	flowers	are	burnt	when	anima
seizures	are	blasted	with	scorn,	with	desiccating	criticisms	or	abstract	analysis.	One	of	Figulus’s
canons	states:	“Those	who	…	use	sublimate,	or	calcined	powder,	or	precipitate,	are	deceived,	and	err
greatly”	(134).	So	do	those	who	“resolve	Mercury	into	clear	water”	(135).	What	is	wanted,	as	the
pressure	rises	and	the	heat	intensifies	and	anima	infuses	herself	into	everything,	are	not	clear	and
distinct	reasons.	No	dry	powders.	These	kill	the	germ	of	life.
This	is	a	curious	warning.	Though	calcination	(drying	in	heat)	is	essential	for	whitening,	this	same
process	can	lead	to	an	analytical	burnout.	When	the	therapeutic	base	in	moisture,	in	permanent
underlying	humor,	gentleness,	and	mercurial	slipperiness	(aqua	permanens)	is	forgotten;	then
calcination	blackens	with	mutual	accusations,	disappointments,	exhaustion	from	too	intense	a	heat	at
the	wrong	time.	A	new	nigredo,	cynical,	bitter,	burnt.	Analysis	failed.
Instead,	like	cures	like	–	even	while	calcining	is	the	main	operation,	responses	to	anima	effusions
can	be	in	kind,	i.e.,	feeling-toned	images	and	reflective	speculations,	but	only	if	held	in	the	right
mirror.	Mirrors	catch	images	because	they	are	“moist,”	like	the	anima	effusions	themselves.	But	the
mirroring	moisture	is	cool	and	limited,	contained	by	the	act	of	mirroring.	A	modicum	of	moisture,
humorful	mirroring	helps	then,	and	personal	effusions	that	start	off	by	flowing	out	everywhere
hysterically	will,	surprisingly,	achieve	a	more	objective	telos:	the	white	earth	flowering,	a	sense	of
Flora	in	matter,	the	whole	earth	alive	with	her,	amused	by	her.
(4)	Vitrification.	This	is	the	sudden	solidifying	of	the	soul	work	into	glass.	Bonus	says,	“If	by
calcination	a	metallic	spirit	becomes	vitrified,	it	is	not	capable	of	any	further	change.”	Unlike	cold
metals,	he	goes	on,	“on	which	one	can	either	engrave	or	stamp	any	image	…	and	it	will	retain	that
image;	but	glass	will	do	nothing	of	the	kind.“ [104]	Vitrified	materials	have	lost	their	“metallic
humour”	and	can	no	longer	amalgamate	with	the	perspectives	of	other	metals.
We	find	several	specific	dangers.	The	vitrified	soul	can	no	longer	receive	an	image.	It	cannot
imagine	and	so	it	cannot	move.	What	isolates,	then,	is	the	lack	of	imaginative	receptivity.
(Conjunctions	take	place	when	subtle	bodies	join,	that	is,	when	fantasies	open	to	one	another,	take
each	other	in.) [105]	Here,	the	isolation	results	specifically	from	the	soul’s	loss	of	insight	into	itself	as
an	image	in	a	“metallic”	process.	The	“metallic	humour”	in	alchemical	psychology	may	refer	to	the
realization	that	all	personal	events	are	objectively	produced	by	the	basic	metals.	What	goes	on	in	the
soul	is	not	of	your	or	my	doing,	but	refers	back	to	the	germination	in	us	of	the	gods	in	the	earth,	the
seven	metals	of	the	objective	psyche	or	world	soul.	Vitrification	closes	us	to	this	awareness;	we
become	glassed	into	our	personal	individuality.
Vitrification	“may	happen	at	any	time	from	the	middle	of	the	Reign	of	the	Moon	(into)	the	Reign	of
Venus”	(HM	2: 194).	It	is	a	danger	in	the	anima	process.	As	the	sweetness	of	the	albedo	passes	into	a
Venusian	love	of	life,	a	copper-greening	of	the	material	(ibid.),	the	heat	can	rise	beyond	the	capacity
of	the	material.	It	glazes,	fixes,	and	petrifies.	The	intensity	of	the	psychic	process,	fused	by	desire,
creates	an	idée	fixe,	a	globular	obsession	or	glassified	idol.	“Be	on	your	guard	against	the	danger	of
vitrification;	too	fierce	a	fire	would	render	your	substance	insoluble	and	prevent	granulation”	(HM	2: 
195–96).	No	longer	can	one	release	the	psyche	from	the	form	in	which	its	passion	is	cast;	no	longer
can	one	deal	with	it	in	particulars,	piecemeal.
Silvering	as	granulation	needs	special	comment.	During	the	Reign	of	the	Moon	while	the	substance

coagulates	into	the	many	shapes	of	silver,	dissolving	and	coagulating	“a	hundred	times	a	day,”	then
“you	see	it	all	divided	into	beautiful	but	very	minute	grains	of	silver	like	the	rays	of	the	Sun	…	This
is	the	White	Tincture”	(HM	2: 193).	Vitrification	prevents	the	particularization	of	awareness,	the
tininess	of	insight,	analytical	precision	that	separates	reflection	within	itself.	Not	the	large	mirror
reflecting	broad	vistas	and	whole	perspectives	all	at	once,	but	rather	a	granulated,	gritty,	grainy
consciousness	that	picks	up	“very	minute	grains,”	each	spark,	the	little	intensities,	“a	hundred	times	a
day.”
The	passage	from	“An	Open	Entrance”	(HM	2: 194)	continues:	“Do	not	irritate	the	spirit	too	much	–
it	is	more	corporeal	than	before,	and	if	you	sublime	it	to	the	top	of	the	vessel	it	will	hardly	return …
The	law	is	one	of	mildness,	and	not	of	violence,	lest	everything	should	rise	to	the	top	of	the	vessel,
and	be	consumed	or	vitrified	to	the	ruin	of	the	whole	work.”
We	tend	to	forget	that	work	on	the	psyche	(soul-making)	does	indeed	make	the	spirit	more
embodied.	We	forget	that	what	goes	on	in	the	mind	is	gaining	more	and	more	substantial	reality.	If
these	newly-made	psychic	realities	rise	to	the	top,	they	tend	to	take	on	a	life	of	their	own,	up	and	out,
in	behaviors	“glazed	and	unsusceptible	to	any	further	change.”	Evidently,	the	body	that	is	gained
through	the	work	is	to	be	substantiated	lower	down	in	the	vessel,	as	the	body	of	the	images	themselves
rather	than	as	sublimed	into	hard	truths,	real	values,	factual	persons	and	hot	projects.	Ideational
inflations,	highs,	“that’s	the	tops”	can	be	vitrifications	that,	at	this	moment	of	anima	substantiation,
spell	“the	ruin	of	the	whole	work.”
Glass	is	an	ideal	analogy	for	psychic	reality:	it	mirrors,	warms,	and	cools	with	its	content,	becomes
transparent,	appears	like	its	contents	though	is	unaffected	by	them,	and	it	forms	them	according	to	its
shape.	It	is	the	material	par	excellence	for	the	opus.	It	both	contains	and	allows	seeing-through.	Or
seeing-through	events	is	a	way	of	containing	them,	as	containing	events	is	a	way	of	seeing	them	as
psychic	images	and	processes.	But	glass	is	not	itself	the	substance	of	the	opus,	and	when	it	becomes
so,	vitrification	has	occurred.	When	the	vessel	becomes	the	focus	of	the	work,	when	we	take	psyche
itself	substantially,	when	we	literalize	containment	or	seeing-through,	then	we	are	vitrifying.
Psychology	as	a	subject	of	its	own,	rather	than	a	mode	of	seeing	through,	reflecting,	shaping	and
containing	other	substances,	is	simply	a	vitrification,	a	glazed	and	fixed	consciousness	without
humour,	without	imagination,	without	insight.	Psyche	has	become	Psychology.	The	paradox	here	is
that	seeing-through,	as	an	act	that	makes	any	substance	transparent,	puts	it	into	glass,	and	so	can	tend
to	vitrify	the	act	of	seeing-through.	When	an	insight	coagulates	into	a	truth	(because	of	too	much	heat,
because	it	is	compelled	by	Venus,	because	it	rises	to	the	top),	this	is	vitrification.
	
Let	us	now	turn	to	three	alchemical	versions	of	the	whitening	in	order	to	grasp	better	what	goes	on	in
this	process.	The	first	is	a	statement	from	Maria	the	Jewess:
If	the	two	do	not	become	one,	i.e.,	if	the	volatile	does	not	combine	with	the	fixed,	nothing	will	take	place	which	is	expected.	If	one
does	not	whiten	and	the	two	become	three,	with	white	sulfur	which	whitens	(nothing	expected	will	take	place) … [106]

We	are	told	that	nothing	happens	to	the	soul	unless	its	gaseous	state	becomes	solid,	and	its	solidities
mobile.	All	the	scattered	flying	about	and	lofty	arrogances	of	the	spirit	need	fixation.	At	the	same
time,	those	certainties	that	we	feel	unquestioningly	shall	find	wings	and	take	off.	To	volatilize	the
fixed	is	to	realize	that	things	as	they	are	are	not	as	they	are.	Nothing	takes	place	until	we	can	see
through	the	fixed	as	fantasy,	and	coagulate	fantasy	into	forms	and	limits.	The	precondition	for
whitening	is	simply	this	embodiment	of	spirit	and	inspiriting	of	body.	Until	this	simultaneous	action
occurs,	we	do	not	feel	psychic	reality,	we	perpetuate	the	“realm	of	the	two”	(body	vs.	spirit,	inner	vs.
outer)	and	are	vexed	into	every	sort	of	“difficult	decision.”
When	we	recognize	that	all	these	hard	matters	are	in	the	mind,	then	a	whitening	is	happening.	We

are	now	in	a	new,	third	place	where	both	being	scatty	and	being	stuck,	being	in	the	world	yet	not	of
the	world,	being	volatile	and	being	fixed,	are	reflected	as	psychic	realities	necessary	to	each	other,
setting	each	other	up	within	the	retort	of	an	alchemical	attitude.	The	two	have	become	one,	as	Maria
the	Jewess	says	they	must.	But	not	by	joining	them,	not	by	living	them	as	oscillating	alternatives,	not
by	compensating	one	with	the	other.
They	have	become	one	because	they	have	lost	their	literal	pulls.	And	they	have	lost	their
oppositional	tension,	because	our	attention	is	on	their	relations	(rather	than	on	their	substantiality),
the	movement	between	them,	how	they	resound	or	require	each	other,	and	how	we	have	required
them.	Realizations	dawn;	insights,	illuminations;	the	sulfur	active	and	whitened.	The	whitened	sulfur
here	is	not	so	much	a	purified	will	power	that	can	hold	the	opposites	and	hold	from	acting	them	out
(cutting	off	the	green	lion’s	paw).	Rather,	this	white	sulfur	refers	to	the	coagulation	of	psychic	reality
as	a	third	place	that	holds,	a	sticky	stuff,	a	gum	or	mucilage, [107]	that	keeps	the	doer	in	the	soul,
making	a	third	place	between	“the	two,”	esse	in	anima. [108]
One	finds	oneself	standing	on	a	new	ground,	the	white	earth.	But	the	earth	does	not	necessarily
come	before	the	standing;	the	standing	may	make	the	ground.	To	stand	one’s	ground,	in	the	soul	and
for	the	soul,	helps	make	the	very	ground	one	stands	on.
	
Here	is	another	discussion.	It	is	a	tale	told	by	John	Trinick,	whom	Jung	called	“one	of	the	rare
alchemists	of	our	time.” [109]	(I	remember	meeting	him	while	he	was	working	on	his	version	of
Eirenaeus	Philalethes’s	text,	Introitus	Apertus	or	An	Open	Gate,	a	text	Jung	examines	in	the	Mysterium
Coniunctionis.)
Trinick	describes	the	white	earth	much	like	a	pale	young	English	lady,	a	virginal	spirit,	who	is	in
love	with	a	slim,	aristocratic,	but	distant	and	winged	youth.	Trinick’s	vision	shows	two	white	“spirits”
attempting	to	join:	the	dried	white	earth	waiting	to	be	released	from	salty	encrustations	and	the	refined
white	sulfur	wanting	to	fecundate.	But	–	the	white	lady	is	also	being	pursued	by	another	sulfur,	“the
red	thief,”	vile,	coarse,	active,	and	smelly,	and	so	she	cannot	escape	her	imprisoning	room.
We	must	note	in	passing	that	salty	whitening	is	not	sufficient.	“Luna	is	never	fixed	…	having	only
been	washed,	and	fixed	(as	they	call	it)	with	Salt	…	O	foolishness!	O	blindness	of	mind!	Can	common
Salt	be	the	Soap	of	the	Philosopher?” [110]	The	lady’s	tearful	pining,	the	soul	locked	into	its	private
introspective	room,	is	not	enough	to	fix	the	white	earth.	The	ablution	is	not	performed	by	tears	alone;
nor	by	memories,	repentance	or	remorse.	Not	salt	but	sulfur.
But	which	sulfur?	Who	will	break	through	the	door	and	open	the	space,	white	puer	or	red	thief?
In	Trinick’s	account [111]	it	is	the	lady	herself,	in	a	moment	of	negligence,	who	unbolts	the	door.	At
the	same	instant	the	white	sulfur,	forgetting	his	anxiousness	and	resorting	to	his	own	style,	enters	on	a
rush	of	wings,	and	the	sulfuric	thief	is	left	on	the	other	side	of	the	threshold	to	vanish	gradually	away.
Notice	that	the	two	come	together	in	a	double	unconsciousness:	neither	reason	nor	will	bring	this	pair
together.	The	scene,	says	Trinick,	is	tumultuous	and	dark,	which	describes	the	state	of	consciousness
as	one	tosses	tensely	looking	for	what	is	wrong,	yet	that	very	upset	signals	the	opening	door,	the
sulfuric	wings.	The	alchemical	process	of	whitening	happens	to	sulfuric	consciousness,	but	not
necessarily	in	consciousness.
To	go	on:	The	two	white	lovers	within	–	the	virginal	anima	whose	imagination	is	caked	in
fearfulness	and	the	crusted	images	of	childlike	knowings,	and	the	white	puer	spirit	of	sulfur	–	have	no
vital	instinct.	They	do	not	know	what	to	do,	how	to	conjoin.	Slowly,	the	white	lady,	delivered	from	her
fear	of	the	red	thief,	its	fat,	its	smell,	its	violation	of	her	timing,	comes	to	life	through	melting:	“The
pores	of	the	Earth	will	be	loosened”;	“The	youth	enters	easily	through	the	pores.” [112]	What	was
passivity	and	immobility	of	the	salted	condition	becomes	a	receptivity,	a	capacity	for	fusion.	This
conjunction	is	not	a	sexual	penetration	–	a	juxtaposition	of	dissimilars	–	but	a	fusion	of	likes,	a	gentle

exchange	through	the	pores	as	windows	in	and	out	of	the	body,	the	interchange	of	subtleties:	the
conjunction	here	a	flowing	conversation	of	images.
The	substance	in	question	(the	“medium”	of	the	conjunction),	Trinick	writes, [113]	is	a	vapor,
“unctuous,	yet	highly	subtilized	–	a	smoke,	or	fume;	that	is,	an	exhaled	matter	…	It	is	exuded	–	as
milk	from	a	nipple;	or	exhaled	–	since	it	is	usually	described	as	a	‘thick	white	vapour.’	“ [114]	The
crucial	white	“medium”	occurs	concomitantly	with	the	“dissolution	of	the	two	bodies.”	Another	text
says:	“At	last	you	must	see	that	nothing	remains	undissolved.	For	unless	the	Moon	or	Earth	is
properly	prepared	and	entirely	emptied	of	its	soul,” [115]	it	will	not	be	fit	for	the	conjunction.	Now
what	is	going	on	here?
The	Moon	or	Earth	becomes	whitened	when	its	own	identity	as	Moon	or	Earth	is	emptied	out,
dissolved,	losing	its	old	ground	in	order	to	enter	the	new	middle	ground.	Anima	is	now	no	longer
defined	by	its	own	feminine	principle.	With	the	dissolution	of	the	two	bodies	goes	also	the	dissolution
of	gender.
This	conjunction,	unlike	many	others	in	alchemy,	is	not	described	in	sexual	terms	where	gender
represents	extreme	opposites	whose	opposition	is	solved	by	the	apposition	of	these	(sexual)	extremes.
This	conjunction	teaches	us	something	about	gender	thinking:	it	derives	from	the	opposites,	maintains
them,	and	prevents	the	formation	of	the	middle	ground.	Both	radical	feminism	and	male	chauvinism
are	inherently	unpsychological;	the	imagination	remains	trapped	in	the	oppositions	of	gender.	The
dissolution	of	the	two	“bodies”	(substantiations)	does	not	occur	and	the	white	earth	of	psyche	cannot
seem	to	dawn	out	of	the	nigredo	of	physical	naturalism.
Now	we	can	understand	why	in	this	paradigm	the	“red	thief”	is	the	wrong	lover.	His	vision	is
bodily;	he	emphasizes	the	opposition	in	natures	of	male	and	female,	red	and	white.	The	white	sulfur,
however,	joins	the	anima	at	that	place	where	they	are	most	similar:	the	mutual	experiencing	of	fantasy
and	feeling.	An	imaginative	conjunction	is	a	conjunction	in	imagination.
But	what	happened	to	the	red	sulfur?	Is	it	enough	to	say	with	Trinick	that	“the	young	lover	…
recognizes	…	that	his	own	evil	shadow	is	departing	from	him,	never	to	return”? [116]	Here	we	must
recall	the	“wateriness”	 [117]	of	the	sulfur	within	silver,	its	latent	copper,	the	potency	of	the	white
ferment,	how	suddenly	silver	heats	–	themes	discussed	above.
As	an	Artephius	text	says,	“A	white	vapour,	which	is	a	soul	which	is	whiteness	itself,	subtile,	hot,
and	full	of	fire.”	“It	is	whiteness	itself	which	quickeneth …” [118]	The	red	sulfur	is	no	longer	thief
when	he	is	already	“within,”	as	that	liveliness	that	sulfur	brings	to	soul.	His	activity	gives	images	their
sense,	their	palpability	and	musk,	their	sexual	attraction	as	well	as	our	delight	in	being	seized	by	them.
He	remains	a	thief	only	when	the	psyche	remains	like	a	lady	in	a	small	space,	door	closed	against	the
visitations	of	clamoring	images.	These	she	then	must	see	as	dirty	(fat	and	smelly),	as	a	moral
problem	which	divides	the	sulfur	into	good	and	bad	kinds,	and	as	literal	demands	on	her	for	carnal
actions.	Fantasy	then	seems	like	an	assault,	a	red	thief,	demonic	and	compulsive.
We	learn	from	this	text	that	imagination	does	not	come	into	life	directly.	The	anima	of	fantasy	does
not	find	its	way	to	the	world,	unless	mated	with	sulfur,	and	yet	the	red	phallus	is	not	the	answer	to	the
maiden’s	prayer	–	though	the	puer ’s	wings	are.	She	meets	the	spirit	side	of	sulfur	first	from	which	the
body	later	comes.	The	maiden	here	of	course	is	not	a	woman,	but	a	soul,	i.e.,	that	condition	of	psychic
inability:	of	waiting	in	boredom	and	fret	for	something	just	beyond	the	threshold	to	come	in,	when
tears	are	no	use,	nor	is	hope,	only	a	sense	of	being	threatened	by	life	and	knowing	it	would	be	too
direct	and	too	concrete	to	bear.
That	it	is	white	sulfur,	which	does	the	job	of	releasing	the	soul	points	to	the	operations	upon	desire
itself:	it	must	become	white	to	be	effective.	This	sulfur	is	like	the	image	of	Pan,	white	as	snow,
mentioned	in	Vergil	(Georgics,	3: 391),	a	sense	that	the	sulfuric	fulminate	generating	within	all	nature
is	the	imaginal	force	of	the	world	soul.	Sulfur,	too,	is	soul,	as	Figulus	says.	And	sulfur	whitens	when

it	is	seen	not	as	will	or	compulsion	or	desire	only,	but	as	soul;	or,	when	we	recognize	soul	in
compulsion,	will,	and	desire.	This	recognition	releases	the	imprisoned	soul	from	feeling	itself	cut	off
from	life	since	life	too	has	now	become	whitened	as	a	sulfuric	aspect	of	soul,	i.e.,	life	fused	with
psychic	reality	through	and	through.
Trinick’	s	account	has	come	from	a	young	man’s	text:	Philalethes	is	said	to	have	written	it	at
twenty-three.	The	problem	and	resolution	are	mainly	sulfuric.	But	this	is	not	the	only	method	of
whitening.	For	example,	the	text	of	Artephius	is	by	an	old	man	over	eighty.	It	insists	that	“without
antimonial	vinegar	no	metal	can	be	whitened.”	This	antimony	“is	a	mineral	participating	of	Saturnine
parts.”	It	is	“a	certain	middle	substance,	clear	as	fine	silver,”	which	receives	tinctures	so	that	they	be
“congealed	and	changed	into	a	white	and	living	earth.” [119]	Evidently	the	effective	“middle
substance”	can	be	many	things:	the	souring	of	depression	as	well	as	puerile	sulfur	(and	of	course	it
can	be	Mercury,	which	we	are	not	discussing	here),	as	long	as	the	experiential	mode	produces	a	vivid
sense	of	psychic	reality,	Whether	vinegar,	sulfur,	or	the	processes	of	calcining	or	fusion,	the
experiential	mode	is	extremely	active.	Anima	refinement	may	lead	through	blue	moods	to	cool	silver,
but	the	way	to	that	refinement	seems	no	less	rending	and	intense	than	the	torments	of	the	nigredo.
	
My	third	alchemical	example	of	whitening	refers	to	the	Doves	of	Diana,	also	mentioned	by
Philalethes,	but	here	as	they	were	worked	by	Isaac	Newton	in	his	Clavis	(“The	Key”). [120]	For
Newton,	the	Doves	of	Diana	meant	both	the	mediation	between	mercury	and	antimony	(puer	and
senex?),	and	especially,	it	seems,	an	amalgam	of	silver	with	the	metallic	center	body	(or	star	regulus
as	it	was	called)	in	the	ore	of	antimony. [121]	Newton	suggests	an	anima	possibility	in	this	antimony,
this	saturnine	substance	of	Artephius	(who	spoke	of	its	vinegar).	In	Newton’s	alchemical	psychology
this	substance	amalgamates	with	silver.	There	is	more	to	an	old	man’s	vinegar	than	your	common
sourness.
Sometimes	this	star	regulus	was	called	corleoni	or	lion’s	heart, [122]	so	that	Diana’s	Doves	also
means	a	silver	that	has	joined	with	the	heart	of	the	lion,	a	silver	that	has	become	amalgamated	with	the
heat	and	light	and	desire	of	the	animal	king,	his	sulfur,	his	drive.	A	lion-hearted	dove;	a	white-winged
lion.
Philalethes’s	text,	Secrets	Reveal’d,	which	was	the	basis	of	Newton’s,	says:	“Learn	what	the	Doves
of	Diana	are	which	do	vanquish	the	lion	by	asswaging	him.” [123]	He	continues	that	it	is	especially	the
green	lion	(Ruland	says	a	ferocious	dragon)	“killing	all	things	with	his	Poyson”	who	is	pacified	in
the	embrace	of	the	doves.	In	“An	Open	Entrance”	(HM	2: 170),	the	bestial	enemy	is	a	rabid	dog.	Jung,
commenting	on	this	passage	(CW	14: 185),	prefers	(for	the	word	mulcere)	“caress”	for	the	action	of
the	doves.	Similar	to	Trinick’s	dry	earth	that	loves	the	white	sulfur,	Newton’s	Doves	of	Diana	contain
a	kind	of	love.	There	is	a	sensuous	heart	in	the	mineral	body.	The	doves	make	possible	“melioration,”
“sociability,”	and	“mediation”	of	substances. [124]	We	should	expect	this	Venusian	aspect	since	the
dove	traditionally	belongs	to	Aphrodite	(cf.	CW	14,	p.	157n).	The	dove	tames	the	dragon	because
“like	cures	like.” [125]	These	doves	have	the	heart	of	a	lion.	One	animal	spirit	cures	another. [126]
Newton	compares	work	with	silver	with	the	mediating	action	of	“Animal	Spirits,”	a	long-lasting
psychophysical	idea [127]	that	includes	our	concepts	of	emotion,	instinct,	libido,	and	imagination.	The
animal	spirits,	or	spirits	of	the	soul	to	translate	the	term	rightly,	were	what	we	might	today	refer	to	as
psychosomatic	functions,	emotions,	vegetative	nervous	system,	or	unconscious	fantasy	–	all	of	which
work	“between’”the	conscious	will	and	the	physical	body.
Newton’s	analogy	between	the	alchemical	doves	and	the	animal	spirits	does	lead	us	to	“learn	what
the	Doves	of	Diana	are.”	They	are	the	mediating	activity	of	the	anima	that	can	present	as	images	of
fantasy	what	goes	on	in	the	green	lion	of	our	nature.	They	can	tame	the	green	lion’s	passion	because
they	are	also	passion	–	though	of	an	other	kind.	This	is	a	silvered	passion	that	descends	through	the

air,	in	whiteness.	They	are	the	capacity	to	imagine	passion	(rather	than	to	rage	it	only).	They	are	other
than	lions,	dragons,	rabid	dogs,	that	is,	images	of	emotions;	the	doves	are	the	emotions	of	images,	the
animal	in	the	air,	in	the	mind,	the	mind	as	winged	animal;	and	they	are	the	excitation	and	tenderness
released	by	imagining.	These	doves	of	alchemical	fantasy	present	the	mediating	power	of	fantasy
itself.	They	express,	as	they	do	in	the	traditional	symbolism	of	the	Third	or	Holy	Ghost,	Jung’s
transcendent	function	of	active	imagination	(CW	8: 67).
The	transition	from	passive	fantasy,	as	Jung	calls	it	(CW	6: 712)	to	active	imagination	is	announced
by	the	doves	–	and	these	doves	belong	to	Diana.	As	Diana	(Artemis)	is	a	goddess	of	nature	and	the
moon,	the	whitening	here	suggests	a	transition	from	reflective	consciousness	that	is	only	natural	and
only	moony	–	the	garden	of	plants	and	animals,	all	things	passing	in	somnambulist	vegetative	grace	–
to	the	active	perception	of	the	lunar	forms	–	the	images	within	nature,	the	presence	of	Artemis	as	an
elusive	White	Goddess	within	all	natural	things. [128]	As	I	see	it,	these	Doves	of	Diana	refer	to	a
fundamental	reunion	of	nature	and	imagination,	where	nature	is	seen	as	a	vast	coming-to-be	and
perishing	of	images,	and	imagination	is	experienced	as	a	natural	and	necessary	process,	not	merely
human,	not	a	faculty	of	the	psyche,	not	psychic	at	all	in	the	usual	sense	of	subjective,	but	as	given	and
autonomous	as	nature.	Nature	becomes	the	display	of	images,	and	images	become	the	forms	of
nature.	I	would	even	hazard	that	this	vision	of	imagination	in	the	heart	of	nature,	the	imaginal	white
earth	as	nature’s	ground,	corresponds	with	Isaac	Newton’s	vision	of	alchemy	as	an	essay	in	the
middle	ground	or	Mediation, [129]	for	which,	as	he	says,	silver,	the	middle	term, [130]	is	the	secret.
The	cliche	that	Newton’s	alchemical-religious-philosophical	writings	were	the	old-age	crankiness,
even	tragedy,	of	a	puer	who	had	finished	his	genius	at	age	twenty-four [131]	is	being	dispelled	as
more	of	his	manuscripts	have	been	opened	and	published.	Rather,	it	seems,	he	was	engaged	in
mediating	a	Neoplatonic	vision [132]	of	the	universe	and	its	world	soul	(anima	mundi),	a	universe	that
proceeds	from	above	downward	and	whose	pull	is	an	epistrophé	upward	–	much	like	the	pull	of
Corbin’s	white	earth	–	with	the	gravitational	forces	of	a	mechanical	world	and	its	corresponding
interpretation	from	below.	His	was	a	lifelong	attempt	from	two	sides,	physics	and	alchemy,	at	a
“wedding	of	the	Hermetic	tradition	with	the	mechanical	philosophy	which	produced	modern	science
as	an	offspring.” [133]	My	own	view	is	that	Newton	was	wrestling	as	must	we	all	with	the	anima,	“the
secret	…	of	the	virgin	Diana,”	in	his	own	arcane,	experimental,	and	seventeenth-century	style	–	and
this	imaginal	meditation	helped	keep	him	going	into	very	old	age.	The	key	to	“Newton’s	Key”	is	the
enigmatic	figure	called	“Philalethes”	(or	two	figures	Eirenaeus	and	Eugenius)	who	was	“one	of
Newton’s	favorite	alchemical	writers.” [134]	This	“Philalethes”	was	perhaps	the	last	of	the	great
alchemical	philosophers	 [135]	of	the	late	Renaissance	whom,	some	have	said,	was	none	other	than
Thomas	Vaughan, [136]	the	Hermetist	twin	brother	of	Henry	Vaughan,	the	English	mystic,	Platonist,
and	poet.
	
But	what	are	these	doves	in	our	whitening?	How	are	they	our	silver?	Jung	remarks	in	passing	that	“the
tender	pair	of	doves”	“would	be	capable	of	an	interpretation	downward.”	(CW	14: 205)	Here	he	has
been	brushed	by	their	wings. [137]	Interpretation	from	above	downward	follows	their	descending
motion	that	announces	a	new	vision	of	things.	This	is	the	moment,	in	Corbin’s	language,	of	ta‘wil,
that	shift	in	mind	enabling	us	to	experience	the	sensate	world	of	perception	by	means	of	the	imaginal
world.	And	it	is	this	move	that	tames	the	lion,	depriving	him	of	his	usual	power	as	king	of	the
physical	world.	We	can	now	see	all	things,	not	spiritually	through	a	glass	darkly	or	naturally	through
a	green	lens,	but	first	through	a	silvered	imagining,	an	exegesis	of	events	that	leads	them	out	of	their
physical	encasement.
“Interpretation	from	above	downward”	is	another	way	of	describing	the	gift	of	tongues	brought	by
the	dove.	This	is	not	some	peculiar	pentecostal	babbling,	but	rather	a	recognition	that	the	dove	is

forever	possible	within	our	spontaneous	speech,	that	speech	is	a	gift	and	that	the	love	of	speech,	its
peitho	or	persuasiveness,	is	a	tongue	of	fire	as	strong	as	love’s	desire	which	can	at	any	moment	ignite
any	thing	with	the	whiteness	of	a	silvered	image	simply	by	use	of	an	inspired	word.	We	wrote	above
of	a	psychology	based	in	the	vi´shuddha	chakra	of	the	throat,	psychology	as	an	act	of	speech,	a	work
of	sound	and	listening,	and	we	are	trying	to	continue	in	that	style	of	psychology	here.	Yes,	Freud	was
right:	therapy	is	a	talking	cure,	and	the	doves	cure	the	tongue	of	its	nigredo	talk:	opaque	concepts,
deadening	ideas	in	dull	language,	densities	of	plodding	protocols,	prose	–	interpretations	from	below.
The	doves	teach	trust	in	the	sudden	word,	that	miraculous	appearance	of	the	silver,	which
interpretations	from	below	have	called	complex	indicators,	slips	of	the	tongue,	poetic	license,	puns,
and	lunacy.
Interpretations	from	below	are	necessary	when	reduction	in	Berry’s	sense	is	necessary. [138]	Then
we	need	nigredo	talk,	the	hermeneutic	of	shadow:	mortifying,	depressive	and	nasty.	But	to	carry	on
reduction	when	the	dove	is	dawning	from	the	lead	occludes	the	whitening	and	frustrates	imaginal
realization.	The	shadow	is	not	a	panacea.
The	hermeneutic	of	shadow	is	misplaced	especially	when	literalized	as	the	nigredo,	shadow	as	only
black.	For	this	misses	the	shadows	in	whiteness,	protecting	the	albedo	from	primal	innocence.
Shadow	conceived	only	as	darkness	forces	the	albedo	to	defend	itself	by	intensifying	its	whiteness,
thereby	returning	the	albedo	to	the	very	condition	for	which	it	is	under	attack:	innocence,	ignorance,
smoothness,	purity.	Then,	whiteness	is	driven	to	anima	extremes,	becoming	lofty,	cold,	and	hard.
Cure	of	white	is	not	by	opposites,	but	by	sames,	or	at	least	similars	–	the	blues,	gray	areas,	foggy
densities,	mooniness,	and	other	cloudings	of	consciousness	that	are	the	true	shadows	of	white.
The	actual	shadow	lies	concealed	in	the	nature	of	whiteness	itself.	For	as	the	writers	on	color	say,
and	the	alchemists	including	Jung	(CW	14: 389)	concur,	all	colors	unite	and	disappear	into	the	white.
So	now	the	sense	of	discrimination	is	absolutely	crucial,	else	one	can	lose	the	plurality	of	soul	in	a
naive	and	simplistic	unio	mentalis.	The	doves	do	not	herald	unity.	As	von	Franz	observes,	“The	dove
was	generally	interpreted	as	the	‘multitude	of	the	righteous’	…	as	an	image	of	plurality.” [139]	The
idea	of	unity	is	the	primary	shadow	of	the	whitening,	an	indication	of	delusional	lunacy.	It	makes	us
forget	that	the	alchemical	psyche	intends	toward	multiplicatio	and	rotatio	through	all	degrees	of	the
compass,	i.e.,	an	orientation	by	means	of	multiplicity	and	the	precision	of	its	tiny	differences	in
direction.	Multiplicatio	already	begins	with	the	dove,	as	a	sense	of	psychic	plurality,	those	multiple
perspectives	emerging	from	the	soul’s	myriad	fantasies.
Unless	the	multiplicities	of	white	are	kept	as	its	shadows	–	as	blues,	as	creams,	as	the	wan	and	pale
feelings	of	grey	–	the	whitening	becomes	sheer	blankness.	Here	is	a	reflective	consciousness	that
perceives	without	reaction,	a	kind	of	frank	stare,	chilled	and	numbed,	lunar,	curiously	deadened
within	its	own	anima	state	that	should	have	brought	it	life.
To	keep	whiteness	from	blinding	itself	with	simplicities	(instead	of	multiplicities),	a	reduction
needs	to	be	performed	on	the	albedo,	but	in	its	own	style,	which	means	turning	up	the	heat	in	an	anima
fashion.	New	lunatic	intensities,	demanding	active	imaginations	and	fermentations	that	lead	to	ever
finer	discriminations	(white	against	white), [140]	adding	weight	to	light	and	rubbing	the	silver	to
more	clarified	reflections.	This	means	friction,	more	accurate	tuning	of	responses,	and	keeping	to	the
lunatic	fringe	–	noticing	the	oddity	of	behavior	and	feeling	when	images	are	first	reality.	We	whiten
the	earth	by	earthing	our	whiteness.	So,	put	the	heat	on	anima	attractions,	soulful	philosophizings,
delicate	aestheticisms,	petty	perceptions,	global	moods,	lovey-dovey	coziness,	and	the	nymphic
gossamer	illusions	that	promise	lions.	Don’t	literalize	the	relief	of	the	albedo	into	relaxation:	pull	the
plug	on	Mary’s	bath.	Silver	is	hard	and	it	likes	heat	and	truth;	its	eventual	telos	is	yellow	and	red:
vivification.	Get	at	essentials.	Stick	to	the	image.	Greet	the	angel.
This	white	earth	of	the	imaginal	is	also	a	territory	of	essences,	principles,	archai	(as	we	saw	above

from	Corbin).	The	aim	of	reduction	is	not	to	stay	stuck	to	the	nigredo	nose	in	the	dirt	but,	as	Berry
writes,	to	come	to	“the	essential	oil,	the	quintessence	of	one’s	nature.” [141]	To	achieve	this	intensity
of	soul,	whether	in	an	hour	of	analysis,	in	a	close	relationship,	in	language,	study	or	art,	takes	as
much	sweat	as	shoveling	through	the	stable	with	Hercules.	These	essences	stand	out	the	further	we	can
move	into	each	image,	each	fantasy,	each	event,	working	at	distinctions	within	them	rather	than
comparisons	between	them.	For	in	the	albedo	the	very	method	of	psychoanalysis	changes	from	an
Aristotelian	observation	of	similarities	(and	its	ultimate	reduction	downward	to	common
denominators)	to	the	study	of	singularity,	each	phenomenon	a	thing	in	itself,	allowing	and	forcing	the
necessary	angel	to	appear	as	the	body	in	the	image	making	its	behavioral	demands	on	the	soul.
A	double	dove,	both	male	and	female,	appears	in	one	of	Jung’s	own	dreams,	and	from	that	dream
and	Robert	Grinnell’s	analysis	of	it, [142]	we	can	take	a	final	cue	as	to	the	doves’	significance,	or	how
the	silvered	psyche	works	in	our	consciousness.	I	shan’t	recapitulate	the	dream.	It	is	in	Jung’s
biography. [143]	But	the	result	of	the	dove’s	appearance,	its	transformation	into	a	little	girl	–	and	do
not	such	girls	“belong”	to	Diana? [144]	–	its	speech	to	him	and	its	vanishing	into	blue	air,	adds
something	more	to	the	gift	of	speech	and	the	gift	of	interpretation	from	above	downward.	The	result
of	the	dove	was,	as	Grinnell	brings	out,	the	gift	of	faith	in	images,	a	psychological	faith,	which
permits	belief	and	enjoins	conviction,	a	fervid	animal	faith	in	the	depths,	a	dove	in	the	belly	that	gives
one	the	sense	that	the	psyche	is	the	first	reality	and	that	we	are	always	soul.
We	have	returned	to	that	place	of	soul	described	above:	What	is	reflection	then	when	there	is	no
subject	reflected,	neither	emotion	nor	external	object?	No	fact	at	all?	The	very	idea	of	reflection
transmutes	from	witness	of	a	phenomenon,	a	mirroring	of	something	else,	to	a	resonance	of	the
phenomenon	itself,	a	metaphor	without	a	referent,	or	better	said,	an	image.
Mental	events	as	images	do	not	require	and	cannot	acquire	further	validation	by	reference	to
external	events.	The	soul’s	life	is	not	upheld	as	correct	by	virtue	of	exteriority.	But	neither	are	mental
events	validated	by	virtue	of	my	“having”	a	dream,	“thinking”	an	idea	or	“feeling”	an	experience.	We
are	beyond	soul	as	a	conglomerate	of	subjective	functions,	with	imagination	merely	one	function
among	others,	a	bureau	in	the	department	of	mind.	(Imagination	imagines	itself	in	this	bureaucratic
fashion	only	when	it	must	give	report	of	itself	in	the	language	of	historical	psychology	that	denied
imagination	any	valid	place	to	begin	with.)	Psychic	events	do	not	require	my	reports	in	the	language
of	functions	and	experiences	in	order	to	be.	They	do	not	require	my	reports	at	all.	Soul	need	no
longer	be	captured	by	subjectivity,	a	mind	owning	its	events	and	distinct	from	them.	Neither	wax
tablet,	cage	of	birds,	ghost	in	the	machine,	iceberg	or	saddleback	–	functional	models	all,	attempting
to	account	for,	give	support	to,	a	subjective	base	for	psychic	events.	Let	it	go.
We	can	dispel	subjectivity	and	yet	still	have	soul.	No	subject	needed,	neither	conscious	nor
unconscious,	neither	empirical	nor	transcendental,	neither	personal	ego	nor	impersonal	self.	Personal
pronouns	can	lose	their	hold:	whose	is	that	cat,	this	music,	the	idea	which	‘I’	am	writing	now?	The
event	is	there,	shining.	Have	we	thought	it,	or	has	it	appeared,	ephiphanic	amid	that	birthing	turmoil
which	we	call	work.	And	who	are	“we”	to	say	?	Let	events	belong	to	themselves,	or	to	the	Others.	“All
things	are	full	of	gods,”	said	Thales;	it	is	their	personal	belongings	that	furnish	our	world.	The	event
is	there	–	though	not	in	a	mirror,	for	if	the	mirror	vanish	the	event	will	still	be	there.	Or	better:	the
event	is	the	mirror	self-sustaining	its	own	reflection.	Have	faith	in	the	everlasting	indestructible
ground	of	images.	They	do	not	need	us.
Do	you	recall	the	passage	in	Jung,	who	on	the	great	Athi	Plains	watches	the	animal	herds	like	slow
rivers	across	the	primeval	scene	of	Africa:	“Man,	I,	an	invisible	act	of	creation	put	the	stamp	of
perfection	on	the	world	by	giving	it	objective	existence.” [145]	The	objective	world	requires	a	human
subject!	Horribile	dictu:	“I”	crown	the	creation,	those	herds,	by	my	consciousness!	But	what	if	both,
all,	are	images	?	Consciousness	may	be	necessary	to	the	anima	mundi	in	specific	ways	she	devises,

but	consciousness	is	not	confined	to	my	mind	and	is	not	only	consciousness	as	“I”	have	defined	it.
The	plains	are,	and	their	grazing	gazelle,	and	these	images	move	in	the	soul	of	the	world	unwitting	of
“Man,	I”	or	any	personal	observation.	Psychological	faith	affirms	those	gazelles,	those	images,
whose	appearance	does	not	require	my	consent.	Take	joy	in	witness,	but	do	not	believe	the	world	is
held	together	thereby.
“Earth	and	moon	coincide	in	the	albedo”	(CW	14: 154).	All	earthly	things	become	whitened	into
lunacy;	they	are	now	apparitions,	having	dreamed	themselves	to	death.	All	lunatic	things	become
dense,	real	and	slow,	forms	filled	with	earth.	Lunar	phantasms	become	ground	on	which	to	stand,
because	they	themselves	stand,	faithfully.	Images	as	things;	as	things	in	themselves;	each	phenomenon
noumenal,	yet	utterly	here.	Perhaps	things	appear	and	have	durée	simply	because	they	enjoy	their
images,	themselves	as	they	are	in	the	display	of	their	forms.	They	come	into	the	world	in	such	good
faith,	exuding	such	confidence	that	we	test	our	reality,	our	theories	and	diagnoses	by	means	of	them.
Their	faith	gives	us	our	certainties.
Strange	to	find	imagination	as	the	ground	of	certainty,	that	nothing	is	more	certain	than	fantasy	–	it
is	as	it	is.	It	can	be	subjected	to	the	noetic	procedures	of	cognition	but	these	cannot	negate	it.	It	still
stands,	and	more	firmly	than	the	doubts	with	which	it	is	assailed	by	noetic	inquiry.	When	the	mind
rests	on	imaginal	firmament,	then	thinking	and	imagining	no	longer	divide	against	each	other	as	they
must	when	the	mind	is	conceived	in	the	categories	of	nous.
Now	nous	can	as	well	be	psyche;	the	noetic,	the	psychological.	Knowledge	comes	from	and	feeds
the	soul,	the	epistrophé	of	“data”	to	its	first	meaning	“gifts.”	Knowledge	is	received	by	the	soul	as
understanding,	in	exchange	for	which	the	soul	gives	to	knowledge	value	and	faith.	Knowledge	can
again	believe	in	itself	as	a	virtue.	Here	is	knowledge	not	opposed	to	soul,	different	from	feeling	or
life,	academic,	scholarly,	sheerly	intellectual	or	merely	explanatory	(ein	Erklärendes),	but	knowledge
as	a	necessity	demanded	by	the	silvered	mind	by	means	of	which	the	soul	can	understand	itself.
In	this	white	country	where	the	barriers	between	soul	and	intellect	do	not	try	to	keep	each	other	out,
psyche	is	itself	a	kind	of	knowing,	a	keen	accounting,	a	wit	of	what	is	there;	and	nous	is
psychological,	engaged	in	intelligent	interlocutions	among	its	images.	The	entire	dialectic	of
philosophy	becomes	whitened	to	talk	among	imaginal	figures.	We	take	part	in	a	symposium	going	on
forever;	mental	life,	an	extraordinary	banquet.	Through	this	inquiring	conversation	and	this	display
of	the	image	by	means	of	its	rhetoric,	psyche	becomes	knowledgeable,	noetically	aware	of	itself,
though	not	as	defined	by	nous	(which	limits	psychological	knowledge	to	the	cognition	of	experience,
introspection	of	the	interiority	of	time,	structures	of	transcendental	subjectivity	and	the	operations	of
its	logic).	Instead	of	these	philosophical	constrictions	on	psychological	knowledge,	psyche	becomes
aware	by	means	of	an	imaginal	method:	the	ostentation	of	images,	a	parade	of	fantasies	as
imagination	bodies	forth	its	subtleties.	Nous	observer	of	psyche,	seeing	in	her	mirror	how	his	mind
actually	proceeds.	Nous	at	last	psychological:	all	its	cognitive	instrumentarium	become	lunatic,	the
logic	of	images;	psyche	with	logos.	Here,	in	the	white	earth,	psychology	begins. [146]
Lunacy
We	began	by	proposing,	from	Hegel,	that	soul	purposely	goes	through	a	stage	of	insanity:	lunacy
belongs	to	soul-making.	And	we	suggested	that	this	necessary	stage	might	be	what	alchemical
psychology	speaks	of	as	silver	and	the	whitening	of	the	earth.	All	along,	however,	we	have	been
begging	a	question:	we	have	used	terms	like	“lunacy,”	“psychopathology,”	“madness,”	seeming	never
to	have	heard	the	arguments	by	Thomas	Szasz	against	this	medical	language.	But	I	think	these
maddening	terms	belong	first	to	the	moon, [147]	and	only	incidentally	to	medicine.	They	are	true
coinages	presenting	true	values,	minted	by	the	lunatic	mind	attempting	to	formulate	a	specific	lunar

state	of	its	imagining	that	is	underworld	or	otherworld,	shocking	and	abnormal,	and	that	therefore
these	terms	themselves	become	vehicles	of	an	epistrophé,	a	mode	of	carrying	us	to	the	archetypal
principle	to	which	they	refer.	On	the	one	hand,	I	am	agreeing	with	Hegel	and	with	alchemy:	lunacy	is
a	necessity,	as	silver	is	a	precondition	of	the	conjunction.	On	the	other	hand,	I	agree	with	Szasz	that
lunacy	becomes	insanity	when	diagnosed	as	such	by	the	medical	model.	Lunacy	is	a	moon	moment,
and	we	must	be	aware	of	what	happens	to	the	moon	when	assaulted	by	Apollonic	medicine.	Lunacy
calls	for	lunar	understanding.
Let	us	look	now	at	two	forms	of	lunacy	in	the	light	of	the	alchemical	moon.	The	first	is	delusional
literalism,	the	core	problem	in	what	medical	psychology	calls	paranoid	behavior,	and	the	second	is
depersonalization.	A	paranoid	delusion	is	a	factified	imagination,	a	fantasy	believed	literally.	The
belief	in	this	literal	event,	plot,	or	scheme	cannot	be	shaken	by	appeal	to	feelings,	by	evidence	of	the
senses,	or	by	argument	of	reason.	One	who	is	held	by	this	so-called	“false	belief”	conforms	precisely
to	what	religions	might	call	a	“true	believer,”	so	that	the	border	between	fundamentalism	in	religion
and	delusional	literalism	is	subtle	indeed. [148]
What	happens	to	an	image	that	it	becomes	immutable	and	true?	What	congeals	it	into	a	delusion?
Memories,	dreams,	reflections	are	usually	so	shadowed	with	uncertainty:	they	flicker	and	resonate	in
so	many	different	ways.	Besides,	the	anxious	intuitions	of	the	lunar	night	dispel	quickly	in	the
morning	light.	So	what	indeed	happens	that	lunar	imagination	takes	on	solar	certainty?	Let	us
approach	this	psychiatric	question	by	means	of	alchemical	language.
Alchemy	warns	that	only	separated	things	can	join. [149]	Before	any	two	things	such	as	moon	and
sun	can	be	conjunct	or	experienced	as	conjunct,	they	must	be	distinguished	or	else,	says	alchemy,	a
monstrum	is	born	of	a	premature	conjunction.	Any	union	that	does	not	differentiate	its	unity	into
distinct	feeling	realities	is	actually	a	monster.	To	go	through	the	world	seeing	its	pre-established
harmony	in	synchronistic	revelations	–	that	inner	and	outer	are	one;	that	mother	is	daughter,	and
daughter,	mother;	puer	is	senex,	and	senex,	puer;	that	nature	and	spirit,	body	and	mind,	are	two
aspects	of	the	same	invisible	energy	–	fuzzes	over	the	acute	distinctions	joined	by	these	conjunctions.
This	wisdom,	no	matter	how	wondrous,	is	therefore	both	premature	and	monstrous.	And	by
monstrous,	alchemy	means	fruitless,	barren,	without	issue. [150]	Whenever	we	see	sameness	in	two
events	without	at	the	same	instant	recognizing	their	incommensurability,	a	sterile	fusion	has	occurred,
which	means	that	paradox,	absurdity,	and	overt	enormity	are	more	characteristic	of	a	true	union,	than
are	androgynous	wholeness	and	the	harmony	of	the	unus	mundus.
The	alchemical	conjunction	hears	various	disparate	voices	at	once.	The	alchemical	conjunction,	in
short,	is	metaphorical	consciousness;	or,	it	is	metaphorical	consciousness	in	short,	more	like	an
absurd	pun	than	a	bliss	of	opposites	transcended.	Ananda	(bliss)	in	the	joy	of	a	joke:	the	alchemy
books	illustrated	by	grotesque	cartoons,	ridiculous	terms,	doing	it	in	the	bathtub,	exact	formulas
laced	through	with	metaphors	–	who	said	they	did	not	know	what	they	were	doing.	These
monstrosities	provide	antidotes	to	the	monstrum,	the	principal	among	which	is	the	delusional	unity	of
the	Great	Opposites,	silver	and	gold.	“The	colour	of	the	Sun	does	not	enter	into	the	Moon,	nor	that	of
the	Moon	into	the	Sun,”	says	Arnold	de	Villanova. [151]	“What	is	occult	in	gold	is	manifest	in	silver,
and	what	is	manifest	in	gold	is	occult	in	silver,”	says	Rasis. [152]	Their	union	requires	that	each	must
be	stubbornly	different.	Silver	can	only	rightly	join	gold	when	it	hides	its	gold,	when	it	is	not	colored
by	the	Sun,	remaining	manifestly	silver,	loyally	itself,	an	unalloyed	seed	of	its	own	planet.
We	have	to	look	carefully	at	our	notions	of	conjunction.	The	conjunction	is	not	a	balanced	mixture,
a	composite	adding	this	to	that;	it	is	not	a	blending	of	substantial	differences	into	a	compromise,	an
arrangement;	it	is	not	a	symbolic	putting	together	of	two	halves	or	two	things	into	a	third.	As	a
psychological	event	it	takes	place	in	soul,	as	a	recognition,	an	insight,	an	astonishment.	It	is	not	the
reconciliation	of	two	differences,	but	the	realization	that	differences	are	each	images	that	do	not	deny

each	other,	oppose	each	other,	or	even	require	each	other.	In	fact,	as	differences,	they	have	gone	away.
The	notion	of	difference	itself	dissolves	into	shadings,	tonalities,	possibilities,	implications	–	the
multiple	relations	that	are	in	the	nature	of	any	image.	Once	the	logical	category	of	“difference”	gives
way	to	the	imaginal	“image,”	then	gold	and	silver	can	be	perceived	in	the	same	way,	having	the	same
imaginal	nature:	“From	these	considerations	we	see	clearly	how	silver	and	gold	are	of	the	same
nature,”	writes	Bonus. [153]
A	conjunction	occurs	when	the	problem	of	conjunction	is	no	longer	our	focus.	The	problem
dissolves	into	metaphor,	which	is	to	say	that	the	kind	of	consciousness	that	imagines	in	problems,	the
tension	of	opposites,	the	law	of	contradiction	and	paradoxes	has	itself	dissolved	into	a	metaphorical
mode	of	hearing	so	that	there	is	doublespeak,	polysemy,	going	on	everywhere.	Each	thing	is	a
conjunction	when	consciousness	is	metaphorical,	and	there	are	no	halves	or	realms	to	be	joined.
There	are	also	no	overvalued	meanings	that	have	to	be	held	and	unified	by	a	symbol;	metaphorical
consciousness	does	not	have	to	refer	an	event	to	a	larger	realm	of	meanings	for	its	significance	but
rather	enjoys	the	allusions	that	spring	from	the	event.	Nor	is	there	anything	to	be	unified	since	what	is
there,	as	an	image,	is	already	that	which	it	is.
Here	is	an	example	of	the	difference	between	symbolic	and	metaphorical	perception:	if	I	say
“cross”	in	an	association	experiment,	your	symbolic	reply	might	be:	suffering,	Easter,	to	bear,
mandala,	Greek,	Lorraine,	martyrs,	cosmic	compass,	sun	wheel,	protection	–	or	any	of	the	meanings
of	the	cross	as	worldwide	symbol.	The	word	“cross”	would	be	deepened	by	reference	to	these	larger
meanings.	Your	metaphoric	response	might	not	neglect	these,	but	it	would	also	include:	crosspatch,
crossed,	your	fingers,	my	heart,	the	street,	transgression,	court,	stitch,	tic-tac-toe,	and	other
spontaneous	associations	arising	from	the	word	as	sound	and	image	beyond	its	symbolic	meaning.
For	the	symbolic	reply,	Jung	might	be	your	guide;	for	the	metaphoric,	Joyce	–	and	these	two	guides
were	often	at	cross	purposes.
It	is	in	this	metaphorical	way	that	we	must	read	alchemy’s	hundreds	of	terms	for	its	major	symbols
–	Mercury,	or	materia	prima,	or	whitening.	That	is,	it	is	precisely	with	a	whitened	mind	of
metaphorical	understanding	that	alchemy	proceeds,	dissolving	even	its	own	favorite	symbols	into
images	–	and	images	that	shatter	meaning,	that	are	so	freakish,	so	absurd	and	funny,	so	vexing	that
they	refuse	to	stand	up	as	symbols	with	universal	significance.	The	symbolic	reading	of	alchemy
would	reverse	alchemy’s	own	metaphorical	method.	It	tries	to	establish	definite	symbolic	meanings,
so	that	in	all	alchemical	psychology,	including	what	I	am	writing	here,	we	may	lose	the	alchemy	in
the	psychology.	Hence	the	importance	of	the	white	earth,	which	provides	an	imaginal	ground	for
hermeneutics	rather	than	a	symbolic	one.
We	have	had	to	expose	the	usual	symbolic	understanding	of	the	conjunction	because	it	bears	on	the
lunacies	we	are	examining.	Lunacy	as	paranoid	behavior	begins	already	when	we	think	symbolically:
when	the	test	of	the	conjunction	is	the	synchronous	appearance	of	an	event	in	two	realms	of	meaning,
gold	and	silver	worlds	conjoined.	Then,	I	feel	a	conjunctio	has	been	confirmed,	meanings	appear	in
multiplication,	and	I	believe	myself	to	be	in	symbolic	reality.	But,	these	very	terms	–	“symbol,”
“meaning,”	“two,”	“synchronous,”	“unified”	–	are	part	of	the	delusional	construct	itself.	What
actually	has	happened	is	the	concretization	of	metaphor.	We	have	gone	tone	deaf	in	the	amplified
system	of	symbolic	meaning;	we	have	exchanged	metaphorical	illusiveness	for	symbolic	delusion.
The	notion	of	the	symbol	indicates,	even	produces,	the	monstrum.	Instead	of	saying:	the	monstrum	is
an	alchemical	symbol,	let	us	now	say	the	symbol	is	an	alchemical	monstrum.
A	proper	alloy	does	not	“stutter”	–	this	we	saw	above.	It	takes	the	blows	of	the	hammer	because	it	is
relatively	malleable	(malleus = hammer).	An	alchemical	conjunction	that	is	not	a	monstrum	holds	the
distinct	images	in	a	loosely	federated	manner,	precise	in	lines	though	not	fixed	in	meaning,	a
malleable	sort	of	consciousness,	bending,	supple,	like	the	Chinese	Tao	or	a	Rabbinical	or	Sufi	story	–

it	could	mean	this,	it	could	mean	that	–	but	always	the	image	remains	right	under	your	nose,	and	its
meaning	does	not	congeal	into	allegory,	parable,	or	symbol.
The	test	of	the	amalgamation	of	silver	with	gold	is	not	witness	of	itself	in	the	day	world,
imagination	witnessed	in	literality,	fantasies	“coming	true.”	The	test	is	rather	standing	to	the	blows	of
the	hammer	as	silver:	that	mental	and	imaginational	realities	are	ungraspable	elusives,	quick	and
silver,	and	yet	remain	self-same,	as	they	are,	permanent	as	the	white	firmament	in	which	they	are
lodged.	They	can	take	every	sort	of	pounding	(query,	analysis,	concentration,	reproduction,
emotional	challenge)	without	coming	apart	into	two	interpretive	halves,	a	physical	side	and	a	psychic
side,	a	good	side	and	a	bad,	a	female	side	and	a	male	–	or	the	image	and	its	meaning.	“A	poem	should
not	mean	/	but	be.” [154]
So	pound	these	delusions,	therapists!	Hammer	away	at	those	meaningful	coincidences	that	seem	to
confirm	psychic	reality	with	physical	evidence.	Make	them	stutter.	Ask	what	stance	of	mind	requires
this	sort	of	literal	witness.	Don’t	let	the	work	fall	back	into	cloudy	whiteness,	taking	sweet	comfort	as
“meaning”	dawns.	Hit	meanings	with	a	stick	until	the	images	stand	clear,	by	themselves,	silver.
Why	this	urge	to	meaning	just	now	in	the	work?	Why	the	need	to	prove	the	psychic	silver	process
by	means	of	solid	gold?	What	is	this	move	defending	against?	“Terror	in	poems,”	says	Bachelard	in
Air	and	Dreams.	As	the	volatile	becomes	fixed	and	the	fixed	more	volatile	(Maria	the	Jewess),
imagination	usurps	the	field	–	and	this	lunacy,	this	poiesis	is	terrifying.	The	psyche	moves	from	prose
to	poetry.	Bachelard	calls	it
a	kind	of	Copernican	revolution	of	the	imagination	…	In	fact,	images	can	no	longer	be	understood	by	their	objective	traits,	but
by	their	subjective	meaning.	This	revolution	amounts	to	placing:
  dream	before	reality,
  nightmare	before	event,
  horror	before	the	monster,
  nausea	before	the	fall;
in	short,	the	subject’s	imagination	is	vigorous	enough	to	impose	its	visions,	its	terrors,	its	unhappiness	…	it	is	a	reminiscence	about	a
state	that	comes	before	life,	the	state	of	a	life	that	is	dead	…	We	could	go	one	step	further	and	put	the	image	not	only	before
thought,	before	the	account	of	it,	but	also	before	all	emotion.	A	kind	of	nobility	of	soul	is	associated	with	terror	in	poems	…	[that]
guarantees	the	primacy	of	the	imagination	forever.	It	is	the	imagination	that	thinks	and	the	imagination	that	suffers …The	dynamic
image	is	a	primary	reality. [155]

In	this	revolution	we	reach	back	for	old	structures,	attempting	to	meet	the	lunacy,	the	poetic	fright	of
the	whitening,	by	“subjective	meanings”	in	prosaic	accounts	of	thought,	narrative	and	emotion,	all	the
fictions	of	our	case	history,	desperately	in	search	of	a	meaning	to	which	we	can	fix	the	image,
somewhere,	anywhere	outside	the	imagination	itself.	The	mere	being	of	the	image,	the	image	as	a
being,	without	recourse	to	meaning,	psychic	reality	as	such,	is	too	much	unless	the	soul	be	whitened.
Or,	shall	we	say,	this	poetic	fright	is	one	way	the	necessary	blanching	can	occur.	Lunacy,	a	necessary
initiation	to	poiesis.
This	brings	us	again	to	our	first	form	of	lunacy,	delusional	literalism.
When	silver	conjoins	with	gold	before	psychic	reality	is	hardened	and	cooled,	then	it	easily	yields
to	gold	in	such	a	way	that	the	sun	dominates	and	covers	over	the	moon.	“The	man	will	dissolve	over
the	woman,”	as	Philalethes	says	it	(HM	2: 265).	Lunar	imagining	becomes	“solified”:	images	reveal
themselves	as	blazing	truths,	the	night-world	vision	and	its	fright	converted	into	day-world
certainties:	“It	all	makes	sense.	I	see	meanings	everywhere.”	Moreover,	a	surging	rectitude	seizes	the
lunar	world,	attempting	to	establish	its	reign	by	means	of	solar	energy.	Fantasy	speech	becomes
delusional	declaration;	lunacy	becomes	insanity,	paranoia.	The	psyche	can	no	longer	hear	its
speaking	as	its	own	voice.	Its	silver	resonance	gilded,	it	hears	only	the	overt	content	of	its	voice	as

literal	statement,	the	stuttering	disguised	in	positive	and	clear	assertion.	We	can	no	longer	see
through:	“Sometimes,	too,	the	glass	looks	as	though	it	were	entirely	covered	with	gold	…	it	is	a
certain	indication	that	the	seed	of	the	man	is	operating	upon	the	seed	of	the	woman,	is	ruling	it	and
fixing	it,“	says	Paracelsus. [156]
Psychology	may	also	become	one	of	these	stuttering	alloys,	a	gilding	of	silver	that	covers	over	the
woman,	ruling	it	and	fixing	it.	Whenever	we	define	soul,	declare	it	to	be	death	or	image,	experience,
reflection,	or	anima,	perspective	or	metaphor,	we	are	deluded	with	gold,	making	declarative
statements,	blinded	by	our	logos	brilliance,	covering	over	psyche	with	an	“ology.”	Psychology	can
take	the	blows	of	the	hammer	only	if	its	glass	remains	backed	with	silver	so	that	we	can	reflect	as
metaphor	each	of	the	psyche’s	“ologies.”
“Sow	gold	in	the	white	foliate	earth,” [157]	say	the	instructions.	Not	over	the	earth,	covering	it;	but
inside	the	silvered	mind;	let	the	sun	shine	in.	Or,	let	it	out:	“Gold	is	hidden	in	silver	and	extracted
from	its	womb,”	says	Bonus	of	Ferrara. [158]	The	gold	reaches	the	silver	from	within	itself,	life
emerging	from	within	psychic	realities,	charging	the	images	with	heat	and	beauty	from	within
themselves.	Glow,	not	gild.
	
The	second	lunatic	condition	psychiatry	calls	“depersonalization.” [159]	It	can	occur	in	organic
psychoses,	toxic	states	and	anxiety	states,	in	hysteria	and	in	schizophrenic	psychoses,	in	neurotic
phobias,	compulsions,	and	depressions,	and	also	in	normals.	This	symptom	cannot	be	tied
specifically	to	any	syndrome;	it	can	come	and	go	or	last,	and	it	can	happen	at	any	time	from	puberty
to	old	age.	As	one	of	the	more	universal	psychic	vicissitudes,	it	must	be	recognized	as	archetypal,
therefore	having	a	background	in	the	poetic	basis	of	mind	and	its	fantasy	processes	to	which
alchemical	psychology	directly	speaks.
During	depersonalization,	it	is	as	if	myself	and	world	have	become	irreal	and	de-souled.	Despite	a
fretful	sort	of	introspection,	there	is	no	animation.	Everything	is	as	it	is,	but	there	is	no	dimension,	no
importance.	All	my	functions	are	intact	–	sensing,	remembering,	orienting,	thinking	–	but	something
primary	has	gone	dead.	Apathy,	monotony,	flatland,	the	world	and	my	experience	of	it	behind	glass,
in	a	vacuum	or	on	another	planet.	Mechanical.	Personal	common	life,	the	warmth	of	the	sun-baked
world	and	my	responses	to	it,	suddenly	useless,	frozen,	formally	automatic.	A	mirror	image	of	the
daily;	underworld	eidola;	moonlit	shadows	of	substance.	Philalethes	says	(HM	2: 265):	“The	woman
has	become	coagulated	over	the	man.”
Let’s	turn	to	poetry	rather	than	to	medicine	for	understanding	this	condition.	Wallace	Stevens,	in
“The	Man	with	the	Blue	Guitar,” [160]	describes	depersonalization	in	the	language	of	sun	and	moon:
It	is	the	sun	that	shares	our	works.
The	moon	shares	nothing.	It	is	a	sea.
When	shall	I	come	to	say	of	the	sun,
It	is	a	sea;	it	shares	nothing;
The	sun	no	longer	shares	our	works
And	the	earth	is	alive	with	creeping	men,
Mechanical	beetles	never	quite	warm?
And	shall	I	then	stand	in	the	sun,	as	now
I	stand	in	the	moon,	and	call	it	good,
The	immaculate,	the	merciful	good,
Detached	from	us,	from	things	as	they	are?

Depersonalization	reverses	the	condition	of	paranoid	delusion.	There,	everything	fits	together	into	a
deluded	sense	of	meaningful	coincidences	and	subjective	importance:	everything	means	me,	quite
literally.	The	silver	of	the	soul	has	been	coated	over	with	gold	into	absolute	importance	and	highest
value.	All	things	resonate	(silver)	with	truth	(gold);	psychic	images	receive	indestructible,	ultimate,

ontological	status.	Omnipotence.	Here,	however,	the	warm	world	turns	into	the	great	cold	sea,	sharing
nothing.	The	earth	and	its	works	and	human	bodies	become	merciless	mechanical	beetles,	never	quite
warm.	Impotence.	Everything	is	as	it	is,	things	as	they	are,	coagulated	and	present,	but	detached	like
shades	departed	from	the	sunlit	world,	because,	as	Stevens	says,	“I	stand	in	the	moon.”
In	this	monstrum	of	gold	and	silver,	the	silver	dominates	the	gold,	coagulating	the	day	world	so	that
it	is	sicklied	over	with	a	pale	cast	of	mooning,	of	introspective	reflection;	stale,	flat	and	unprofitable
become	the	uses	of	this	world.	When	Luna	usurps	the	Sol’s	place,	the	solar	world	remains,	but
transfigured,	as	if	transported	to	the	moon,	the	heat	gone	out	of	it,	gone	the	calor	inclusus,	which
distinguishes	the	living	from	the	dead.	Then	we	find	no	values	such	as	mercy	and	compassion,	no
caring	or	wanting	(only	creeping),	no	good	of	any	kind	because	the	solar	world	has	been	silvered	and
resonance	now	means	only	hollowness.	The	very	danger	alchemy	warned	of,	vitrification,	has	taken
place.	Glassiness	of	animation,	the	world	a	glass	menagerie.
	
Back	to	Hegel,	back	to	alchemy.	Even	should	we	envision	these	two	basic	conditions	of	lunacy	in
terms	of	gold	and	silver	and	their	relation,	must	the	soul	go	through	these	stages?	Are	overgilding
the	imagination	and	overwhitening	the	warm	workaday	world	not	mistakes?	Is	lunacy	necessary;
could	it	not	be	otherwise?	Can’t	insanity	be	prevented?
Here,	I	am	wholly	with	Thomas	Szasz:	insanity	can	indeed	be	prevented	by	one	major	simple
measure	–	call	off	the	medics	who	turn	lunacy	into	insanity	by	the	medical	model	of	literalizing:
accounting	for	what	happens	in	the	soul	in	positivistic	clinical	terms.	But	–	the	pathologizing,	the
lunacy	and	its	“mistakes,”	cannot	be	prevented	because	it	is	necessary,	according	to	both	Hegel	and
alchemy.	The	only	prevention	I	can	imagine	would	be	an	education	of	the	psyche	along	the	lines	of	an
alchemical	training,	so	as	to	keep	the	lunacy,	but	not	its	clinical	literalism.	We	would	learn	the	metals,
the	seeds	of	the	gods	in	our	depths,	and	enter	a	long	apprenticeship	to	the	purpose	of	their	workings.
The	meaning	of	the	word	prevention,	“to	come	before”	would	be	our	guide:	that	is,	we	could	prevent
the	“mistakes”	of	lunacy	by	turning	to	the	primordial	factors	that	come	before	all	else	and	by	relating
what	happens	in	lunacy	to	what	comes	before	–	not	causally	in	a	medical	case	history,	but	archetypally
to	the	primordial	seeds.	Yet	even	then	there	is	no	guarantee;	one	may	succumb	to	their	purposes.
What	then	are	the	purposes	of	the	metals,	and	what	is	accomplished	in	the	soul	by	these	“mistakes”
of	silver,	such	as	depersonalization?	Perhaps	depersonalization	is	an	activation	of	the	seed	of	silver,
asserting	the	impersonal	over	the	personal,	detachment	over	warmth,	by	whitening	and	deadening	the
sun	of	the	shared	world.	It	shows	us	that	we	are	shades	who	can	stand	on	the	moon	at	any	time	and	that
what	is	truly	real,	according	to	the	silver,	is	not	the	object	and	the	world	or	even	the	gold	as	such,	but
the	psychic	imagining	that	the	silver	brings	to	the	gold,	that	anima	resonating	factor	on	which	the
solar	world	actually	depends	for	experience	of	its	reality.	We	are	told	by	this	“mistake”	that	we	do	not
and	cannot	properly	inhabit	the	common	earth	until	we	have	sojourned	alone	on	the	moon.
Or,	take	the	first	condition,	the	paranoid	delusion	which	we	have	placed	against	the	background	of
the	“solification”	of	fantasy.	This,	too,	can	be	accepted	as	a	purposive,	necessary	moment.	These
literalistic	delusions	are	attempts	by	the	sun	to	seduce	lunar	fantasy	into	the	world	of	persons	and
things.	The	intention	in	the	seed	of	gold	is	to	turn	the	psychological	faith	of	the	silvered	dove	into
living	conviction,	giving	width	and	connectedness	to	the	moony	reflections	that	by	themselves	remain
unshared	and	private.
A	paranoid	delusion	–	a	plot	against	me	or	a	cosmic	revelation	or	a	jealousy	obsession	–	each
involves,	as	Freud	first	pointed	out,	an	erotic	component,	indeed,	a	homoerotic	component,	a	moment
of	libidinal	connectedness	with	sames.	Here	is	the	gold	attempting	its	conjunction	with	silver,	as	if	it
were	gold,	the	sun	mounting	upon	and	covering	the	body	of	the	moon	as	if	silver	were	the	same	as
gold.	An	archetypal	or	alchemical	therapy	will	approach	paranoid	delusion	as	a	gold-silver

monstrum,	seeing	there	the	sun’s	desire	to	unite	with	the	moon’s	fantasy	and	bring	it	into	the	common
world.	And	this	therapy	will	approach	depersonalization	as	a	silver-gold	monstrum,	seeing	there	the
moon	insinuating	its	importance	by	whitening	and	deadening	the	sun.
Our	approach	attempts	to	prevent	insanity	by	recourse	to	lunacy,	where	lunacy	is	understood	as	the
first	appearance	of	the	white	earth	in	the	solar	world,	the	first	recognition	of	psychic,	imaginal
reality,	yet	still	couched	in	that	notion	of	reality	given	by	solar	definitions.	Solar	consciousness
responds	to	the	white	earth	in	a	solar	style:	the	response	of	Apollonic	medicine,	so	that	in	its	clear
eyes	lunacy	must	be	insanity.	The	medical	response	serves	only	to	fix	the	white	earth	into	a	solar
literalism,	furthering	the	wrong	conjunction	and	creating	that	monstrum	called	the	psychiatric	case.
Our	task	lies	neither	in	curing	what	is	called	lunacy	nor	even	in	using	the	term	in	the	old	and
common	sense	of	moon-mad,	passing	strange,	out	of	one’s	mind,	deluded.	Rather	our	task	–	and	by
our	I	mean	everyone	engaged	in	soul,	not	merely	professional	specialists	–	is	the	recognition	of
moon	moments,	of	silver	states,	so	that	they	can	be	understood	as	phenomena	of	the	white	earth	and
reverted	(epistrophé)	to	it.	Then	we	can	see	these	conditions	as	inherent	to,	purposeful	and	intentional,
and	necessarily	appropriate	in	the	work	of	the	soul’s	silvering.
The	medical	model	is	a	theology,	according	to	Szasz.	It	is	indeed	a	model	that	represses	the	gods	as
images	and	serves	them	as	diseases.	Lunacy	becomes	insanity,	a	secular	diagnosis	that	no	longer
echoes	Luna.	The	myths	have	been	driven	out	only	to	return	as	the	myth	of	mental	illness.	Szasz	is
right	to	insist	that	the	problem	of	mental	illness	and	mental	health,	and	therapy,	too,	is	myth.	We	need
a	polytheistic	theology,	old	in	the	manner	of	Vico	or	new	in	the	manner	of	David	L.	Miller, [161]	new
logoi	to	hold	the	theoi	and	give	them	articulation,	each	in	his	and	her	own	form.
This	long	essay	has	been	working	at	one	example,	a	principal	one,	reverting	lunacy	to	its	metallic
seed	and	planetary	principle	so	that	we	can	understand	lunatic	processes	as	whitening	of	the	psychic
body	and	silvering	of	soul.	This	example	implies	that	there	might	be	other	planetary	modes	of
pathologizing,	such	as	leadenness,	mercurialness,	martial	ironing,	manic	sulfurism	(that	we	today
call	“ego”)	and	so	on.	A	psychopathology	might	better	be	derived	from	the	principals	of	the	heavens
and	their	seeds	in	the	earth,	from	the	elements	and	the	myths,	a	psychopathology	which	starts	in	the
white	earth	of	the	imagination	where	the	mind	itself	begins,	than	deriving	psychopathology	from
secular	behavioral	categories.	This	archetypal	psychopathology	returns	the	conditions	we	suffer	to
their	authentic	home	in	cosmic	and	divine	events.	For	if	we	are	created	in	divine	images,	so,	too,	are
our	afflictions.	Archetypal	psychopathology	gives	credit	to	these	events,	where	credit	means	faith	in
them	as	bearing	transpersonal	seeds	that	will	out	through	our	individual	lives.	What’s	more	–	and	last
–	this	mode	of	psychopathology,	which	considers	silver	the	prime	ingredient	and	necessary	origin	of
psychological	thinking,	turns	to	those	smiths	of	silver	–	the	poets	–	as	physicians	and	musicians	of	the
soul.
Postscript
This	essay	was	originally	drafted	to	be	delivered	at	a	conference	in	Niagara	Falls,	N.Y.,	in	January
1979,	held	by	the	Analytical	Psychology	Club	of	Eastern	New	York	and	chaired	by	Paul	Kugler.	The
conference	brought	together	Charles	Boer,	Robert	Creeley,	Rafael	López-Pedraza,	David	Miller,	and
Thomas	Szasz.	Its	theme	was	“The	Lunatic,	the	Lover,	and	the	Poet.”	The	conference	allowed	the
speakers	to	play	upon	these	three	parts	and	to	show	their	commonality.	It	offered	me	the	occasion	to
elaborate	the	poetic	basis	of	mind	(a	major	theme	since	the	1972	Terry	Lectures) [162]	and	to	expose
my	lunatic	penchant	toward	re-forming	clinical	language	so	that	it	speaks	to	clinical	conditions	in
their	own	tongue.	Our	tongues	must	become	silvered;	to	reach	souls	on	the	dark	side	of	the	moon,	we
must	talk	from	the	vishuddha.	A	poetic	basis	of	mind	implies	that	a	psychology	truly	representing

mind	will	have	to	find	its	way	into	poetic	speech	–	a	task	that	may	not	be	left	only	to	poets	anymore
than	the	tasks	of	lunacy	be	left	only	to	the	insane.

Originally	given	as	a	talk	at	a	conference	held	by	the	Analytical	Psychology	Club	of	Western	New	York	in	January	1979	at	Niagara
Falls,	N.Y.,	and	subsequently	published	in	two	parts	in	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought	(1980),	21–
48,	and	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought	(1981),	21–66.
1 Hegel’s	Philosophy	of	Mind:	Part	Three	of	The	Encyclopaedia	of	the	Philosophical	Sciences,	trans.	W.	Wallace	(Oxford	Univ.
Press,	1971),	125 ff.
2 Figulus,	285:	“Silver	is	masculine.”
3 Jung	considered	alchemy	the	fundamental	paradigm	and	background	for	his	psychology	(cf.	MDR	205	and	221).	A	good	third	of
Jung’s	writing	is	directly	or	tangentially	concerned	with	alchemy,	proportionally	far	more	than	he	wrote	about	typology,	psychiatry,
association	experiments,	eastern	wisdom,	or	parapsychology.
4 Cf.	R.	Grinnell,	Alchemy	in	Modern	Woman	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1973).
5 On	“how	the	metals	are	produced	in	the	Bowels	of	the	Earth,”	see	Sendivo-gius,	“The	New	Chemical	Light,”	HM	2: 9 0f.	Also:
Albertus	Magnus’s	Book	of	Minerals,	especially	Book	Three,	“Metals	in	General”;	B.	Dibner,	Agricola	on	Metals	(Norwalk,	Conn.:
Burndy	Library,	1958).	Agricola’s	De	re	metallica	was	translated	into	English	in	1912	by	a	mining	engineer	(together	with	his	wife),
Herbert	Hoover,	born	the	son	of	a	village	blacksmith	and	later	President	of	the	United	States.	An	alchemist	in	the	White	House!	On	the
relation	of	planetary	gods	with	metals	(going	back	to	Babylonian	and	perhaps	Sumerian	times),	see	J. R.	Partington,	“The	Origins	of	the
Planetary	Symbols	of	the	metals,”	Ambix 1	(1937),	61–64.	On	the	history	of	metals	in	general,	see	L.	Aitchison,	A	History	of	Metals,	2
vols.	(New	York:	Interscience,	1960);	on	silver,	R. J.	Forbes,	Metallurgy	in	Antiquity:	A	Notebook	for	Archaeologists	and	Technologists
(Leiden:	Brill,	1950).
6 H. G.	Liddell	and	R.	Scott,	Greek-English	Dictionary	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1996),	s.v.	μεταλλάω,	μεταλλεία,	μέταλλον.
7 The	Ordinal	of	Alchemy	(HM	2: 4 5).	The	assimilation	of	silver	(white)	to	the	color	of	the	sky	compares	with	this	paradox	from
Wittgenstein:	“In	a	picture	in	which	a	piece	of	white	paper	gets	its	lightness	from	the	blue	sky,	the	sky	is	lighter	than	the	white	paper.	And
yet	in	another	sense	blue	is	the	darker	and	white	the	lighter	colour,”	Remarks	on	Colour,	trans.	L. L.	McAlister	and	M.	Schättle
(Berkeley:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1978),	I.2.	So	strong	is	the	association	of	blue	with	silver	and	whitening	that	even	when	modern
chemistry	disputes	alchemical	testimony	(deriving	a	blue	pigment	from	silver	treated	with	salt,	vinegar,	etc.),	the	modern	mind	assumes
that	the	alchemists	had	some,	to-us-unknown,	physical	justification	for	their	claim.	Is	not	the	claim	based	rather	on	fantasy	–	a	sophic
silver	of	whitened	imagination	that	knows	that	blue	belongs	to	silvering,	and	therefore	sees	it?	Cf.	Dorothy	Wyckoff’s	note	to	her
translation	of	Albertus	Magnus’s	De	mineralibus	(Minerals,	192–93).
8 Cf.	R.	López-Pedraza,	“Moon	Madness	–	Titanic	Love:	A	Meeting	of	Pathology	and	Poetry,”	in	Images	of	the	Untouched,	ed.	J.
Stroud	and	G.	Thomas	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1982).
9 This	crucial	distinction	between	naive	and	sophisticated	white	is	further	elaborated	below.	Muhammad	Ibn	Umail	gives	a	varety	of
names	for	the	“intense	whiteness,”	which	is	called	“The	second	whiteness”	(Book	of	the	Explanations	of	the	Symbols	[Kitab	Hall	arRumuz],	Corpus	Alchemicum	Arabicum,	vol.	1,	ed.	T.	Abt,	W.	Madelung,	T.	Hofmeier,	trans.	S.	Fuad	[Zurich:	Living	Human	Heritage
Publications,	2003],	9).
10 “Concerning	the	Face	Which	Appears	in	the	Orb	of	the	Moon,”	in	Moralia	XII,	Loeb	Classical	Library	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard
Univ.	Press,	1951).
11 Quoted	by	E. A.	Hitchcock	from	an	unspecified	tract	in	his	Remarks	upon	Alchemy	and	Alchemists	(Los	Angeles:	Philosophical
Research	Society,	1976),	41.
12 Paracelsus,	2: 2 66.
13 On	the	importance	of	air	for	psychotherapeutic	work	with	anima	(soul),	see	J.	Hillman,	Anima:	Anatomy	of	a	Personified	Notion
(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2007),	143–45,	and	below,	chap.	9,	“The	Imagination	of	Air	and	the	Collapse	of	Alchemy.”
14 Lexicon,	41.
15 Philalethes,	“The	Fount	of	Chemical	Truth,”	HM	2: 2 65;	also	Figulus,	304:	“Cold	and	moist.”
16 Cf.	The	Works	of	Geber,	ed.	E. J.	Holmyard,	trans.	R.	Russell	(London:	J. M .	Dent	&	Sons,	1928),	16;	Lexicon,	209;	Paracelsus,	1: 
8–9	for	three	more	examples	where	Luna	and	silver	are	synonymous.

17 “Verissimum	aurum	et	finissimum	argentum,”	D.	Geoghegan,	“A	License	of	Henry	vi	to	Practice	Alchemy,”	Ambix	6	(1957),	14.	The
Near	Eastern	word	root	for	silver	(kashpu)	derives	from	“to	refine,”	as	the	Arabic	(sharîf	=	pure	silver)	has	the	root	meaning	of	“refined
metal.”	Cf.	R. J.	Forbes,	Studies	in	Ancient	Technology,	vol.	VIII	(Leiden:	Brill,	1971),	247.	Let	us	recall	here	that	refinement	and	purity
are	not	identical.	Alchemical	refinement	meant	a	“sophistication”	of	the	metal,	its	transmutation	into	a	differentiated	and	subtle	power.
Whereas	our	notions	of	refinement	today	tend	for	it	to	mean	a	higher	percentage	of	self-sameness,	singleness,	and	concentration.	The
alchemical	notion	is	more	aesthetic;	the	modern,	more	quantitative	and	simplified.
18 Minerals,	3: 2 .3.
19 Cf.	Norton,	The	Ordinal	of	Alchemy	(HM	2: 4 5):	“The	cause	of	a	mirror	is	fixed	humidity;	and	for	that	reason	it	is	also	smooth,
because	air	receives	no	impressions,	and	is	incapable	of	confining	itself.”
20 Figulus,	281.
21 Cf.	Paracelsus,	1: 8 –9.	Sendivogius	notes	in	“New	Chemical	Light”	(HM	2: 9 8)	that	“the	virtues	of	the	planets	descend,	but	do	not
ascend”	and	since	“the	last	place	is	occupied	by	the	moon,”	it	is	this	principle	that	receives	and	passes	downward	the	influences	of	the
others.	The	silvered	psyche	by	nature	reflects	images	from	the	polytheistic	universe;	it	is	by	nature	polytheistic	and	infers	a	priori	the
other	planets	and	their	metals.	Refined,	sophisticated	silver	cannot	mean	pure,	exclusive,	or	single;	it	cannot	be	defined	except	in	terms	of
a	thoroughly	concocted	and	digested	multiplicity	of	virtues,	which	have	descended	into	it	and	whose	lights	it	sheds.	Its	body	has	received
theirs,	as	the	moon	receives	their	invisible	rays.	A	consciousness	reflecting	this	silver	will	therefore	never	be	able	to	stand	alone,	or	to
conceive	or	imagine	in	an	isolating,	univocal,	or	mono-theistic	style.
22 The	exception	that	proves	the	rule	is	in	Ruland’s	lexicon:	the	eighty-first	epithet	for	the	materia	prima	is	“silver”	(Lexicon,	225).
23 Philalethes,	“Celestial	Ruby,”	HM	2: 2 55.
24 Cf.	E. J.	Holmyard,	Alchemy	(Harmondsworth,	Middlesex:	Penguin	Book,	1957),	94.
25 Bonus,	272.
26 Rasis’s	Book	of	Alums	and	Salts	cited	in	Minerals,	3: 1 .8.
27 There	is	a	curious	pun	in	Greek	that	underscores	an	inherent	contradiction	in	silver:	argos	as	shining,	gleaming,	swift-footed,	and
related	etymologically	to	white,	silver,	etc.,	and	argos	as	idle,	lazy,	fallow,	unwrought,	slow,	slothful,	do-nothing,	related
etymologically	to	“not	working	the	ground.”	The	various	etymological	and	associative	meanings	of	argos	are	discussed	further	in	E.
Irwin,	Colour	Terms	in	Greek	Poetry	(Toronto:	Hakkert,	1974),	215–18.	Also	of	interest	is	the	fact	that	the	invisible	wind,	air	itself,	was
considered	“white,”	i.e.,	silvery	(argestes),	ibid.,	169–73.
28 Figulus,	277.
29 Duineser	Elegien	IX,	in	R. M .	Rilke,	Sämtliche	Werke,	12	vols.	(Frankfurt	am	Main:	Insel	Verlag,	1975),	2: 7 18.
30 Collectanea,	12.
31 Figulus,	304.
32 HM	2: 1 83.
33 Forbes,	Studies	in	Ancient	Technology,	201.
34 Ibid.,	197.
35 Minerals,	3: 1 .8.
36 CW	12,	p.	437n	and	fig.	178.
37 Aitchison,	A	History	of	Metals,	1: 4 6.
38 Pliny,	Naturalis	Historia,	33: 4 9–54.
39 Forbes,	Studies	in	Ancient	Technology,	204.

40 The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	1978),	366.
41 Rasis,	Book	of	Alums	and	Salts,	cited	in	Minerals,	175 n.
42 Figulus,	24.
43 “An	Open	Entrance,”	HM	2: 1 93.
44 Lexicon,	40,	s.v.	“argentum.”
45 J. E.	Cirlot,	A	Dictionary	of	Symbols,	trans.	J.	Sage	(New	York:	Philosophical	Library,	1971),	216.
46 For	more	on	the	“money	complex,”	see	J.	Hillman,	“Imagination	Is	Bull,”	in	Animal	Presences,	UE	9,	58–75,	and	“Soul	and
Money,”	in	City	&	Soul,	UE	2,	355–66.
47 L.	Lanckoronski	and	M.	Lanckoronska,	Mythen	und	Münzen:	Griechisches	Geld	im	Zeichen	griechischen	Glaubens	(Munich:
Ernst	Heimeran,	1958),	8–9.
48 G.	Krishna,	Kundalini:	The	Evolutionary	Energy	in	Man,	with	an	introduction	by	F.	Speigelberg	and	a	psychological	commentary
by	J.	Hillman	(Berkeley:	Shambhala	Publications,	1971),	66–67,	72–73,	and	136–48.
49 Gopi	Krishna	describes	the	ida	experience	with	these	terms:	“the	lunar	nerve”;	“imaginary	cold	current”;	“a	sound	like	a	nerve	strand
snapping	and	instantaneously	a	silvery	streak	passed	zigzag	through	the	spinal	cord,	exactly	like	the	sinuous	movement	of	a	white
serpent”;	“a	bright	silvery	sheen”;	“silvery	luster”;	“milky	luster”;	and	“freshly	fallen	snow.”	This	passage	is	particularly	relevant:	“It
appeared	as	if	a	thin	layer	of	extremely	fine	dust	hung	between	me	and	the	objects	perceived	…	The	dust	was	on	the	conscious	mirror
which	reflected	the	image	of	objects.	It	seemed	as	if	the	objects	seen	were	being	viewed	through	a	whitish	medium,	which	made	them
look	as	if	an	extremely	fine	and	uniform	coat	of	chalk	dust	were	laid	on	them	…	The	coat	hung	between	me	and	the	sky,	the	branches
and	leaves	of	trees,	the	green	grass,	the	houses,	the	paved	streets,	the	dress	and	faces	of	men,	lending	to	all	a	chalky	appearance,
precisely	as	if	the	conscious	centre	in	me	…	were	now	operating	through	a	white	medium,	needing	further	refinement	and	cleaning”	(ibid.,
140–41).	Cf.	my	commentary,	ibid.,	156.
50 Figulus,	304.
51 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	Dream	and	the	Underworld	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1979),	168–71.
52 Moralia	XII,	954a.
53 G.	Rees,	“Francis	Bacon	on	Verticity	and	the	Bowels	of	the	Earth,”	Ambix 26	(1979),	202–11.
54 Krishna,	Kundalini,	157;	A.	Bharati,	The	Tantric	Tradition	(London:	Rider	and	Company,	1965),	173–77.
55 Cf.	Hillman,	The	Dream	and	the	Underworld,	57–59.
56 Plutarch,	“Concerning	the	Face	Which	Appears	in	the	Orb	of	the	Moon,”	943a	to	the	end.
57 Cirlot,	Dictionary	of	Symbols,	206.
58 The	swift	silver	ship	of	the	Argonauts	“had,	in	the	oldest	accounts,	the	gift	of	speech.”	K.	Kérenyi,	The	Heroes	of	the	Greeks
(London:	Thames	&	Hudson,	1959),	252.
59 KY	56.
60 Ibid.
61 Ibid.,	46.
62 KY	47.	Jung’s	use	of	the	plural	(“essences	or	substances”)	compares	with	the	silvered	dove	“as	an	image	of	plurality”	analogous
with	the	traditional	symbolism	of	the	Church	where	the	dove	image	presented	the	“multitude	of	the	righteous”	(M.-L.	von	Franz,	Aurora
Consurgens	[Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1966],	238–39).	Evidently,	the	albedo	in	alchemy	and	the	anima	in	Jung’s	descriptions	resist
unification,	even	definition.	Cf.	Hillman,	Anima:	An	Anatomy	of	a	Personified	Notion.

63 KY	50.
64 Ibid.,	55.
65 Ibid.,	49.
66 Ibid.,	50.
67 P.	Wheelwright,	Metaphor	and	Reality	(Bloomington:	Indiana	Univ.	Press,	1962),	71.
68 On	metaphor	as	tenor	and	vehicle,	see	I. A.	Richards,	The	Philosophy	of	Rhetoric	(Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1936),	100.
69 “What	Metaphors	Mean,”	in	On	Metaphor,	ed.	S.	Sacks	(Univ.	of	Chicago	Press,	1979),	29.
70 “Metaphor	as	Moonlighting,”	in	ibid.,	175.
71 Cf.	the	essay	revisioning	Freud	as	alchemist	by	Randolph	Severson,	“	The	Alchemy	of	Dreamwork:	Reflections	on	Freud	and	the
Alchemical	Tradition,”	Dragonflies:	Studies	in	Imaginal	Psychology	1,	no.	2	(Spring	1979),	which	concludes	with	the	sentence:	“Matter
is	transformed	into	imagination.”
72 Cf.	CW	14: 6 30.
73 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Materia	Prima	et	huius	Vocabula.”
74 For	a	splendid	phenomenology,	see	R.	Graves,	The	White	Goddess:	A	Historical	Grammar	of	Poetic	Myth	(New	York:	Farrar,
Straus	and	Giroux,	2000).
75 “White	is	a	symbol	of	a	world	far	above	us,	of	silence	–	not	a	dead	silence,	but	one	full	of	potentialities	…	It	is	a	blank	that
emphasizes	the	beginnings,	as	yet	unborn,”	W.	Grohmann,	Wassily	Kandinsky:	Life	and	Work	(New	York:	Harry	N.	Abrams,	1958),	88.
76 “The	Realism	and	Symbolism	of	Colors	in	Shiite	Cosmology,”	trans.	P.	Sherrard,	in	Color	Symbolism:	The	Eranos	Lectures,	ed.	K.
Ottmann	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2005),	45–108.	I	have	deliberately	denied	myself	any	alchemical	discussion	of	the	rubedo
here,	for	it	would	require	an	entire	shift	of	perspective,	rhetoric,	and	images.
77	 “What’s	the	Matter	with	Mother,”	in	P.	Berry,	Echo’s	Subtle	Body:	Contributions	to	an	Archetypal	Psychology	(Putnam,	Conn.:
Spring	Publications,	2008),	9–22.
78 G.	Bachelard,	Earth	and	Reveries	of	Will:	An	Essay	on	the	Imagination	of	Matter,	trans.	K.	Haltman	(Dallas:	The	Dallas	Institute
Publications,	2002).
79 Cf.	D.	Miller,	“Red	Riding	Hood	and	Grand	Mother	Rhea:	Some	Images	of	a	Psychology	of	Inflation,”	in	Facing	the	Gods,	ed.	J.
Hillman	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1980),	92–94,	on	the	drum	and	the	magna	mater	who	may	be	both	Rhea	and	Gaia.	On	alchemy’s
rhythms,	see	Bachelard,	Earth	and	Reveries	of	Will,	195.
80 Spiritual	Body	and	Celestial	Earth:	From	Mazdean	Iran	to	Shi’ite	Iran,	trans.	N.	Pearson	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1989),	156.
81 Dawn	comes	in	little	ways	in	dreams	–	rising,	early	morning,	“the	alarm,”	breakfast,	pulling	up	the	window	shades	–	and	in	those
significant	dreams	“just	before	waking”	or	which	end	with	“I	woke	up.”	Dawn	also	appears	in	sexual	eroticism,	not	only	at	actual	dawn
but	in	any	amorous	flush	that	pinks	the	horizon.	According	to	myths,	young	men	(pueri?)	are	particularly	subject	to	being	Dawn’s	lovers,
carried	up	and	away	by	her.	On	the	erotics	of	Dawn,	see	P.	Friedrich,	The	Meaning	of	Aphrodite	(Univ.	of	Chicago	Press,	1978),	36–48.
From	this	mythological-archetypal	perspective,	the	Aurora	Consurgens	(attributed	to	Thomas	Aquinas	by	Marie-Louise	von	Franz	whose
very	title	means	the	rising	up	of	dawn	will	of	course	be	suffused	with	erotic	mysticism	as	it	depicts	the	conversion	of	its	author	by	the
anima	to	love.
82 Bonus,	355.
83 A.	Jaffé,	Apparitions:	An	Archetypal	Approach	to	Death	Dreams	and	Ghosts	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1979),	79ff.
84 P.	Dronke,	“Tradition	and	Innovation	in	Medieval	Western	Color-Imagery,”	Eranos	Yearbook	41	(1972),	74–76.
85 On	milk	and	the	coagulation	of	the	white,	see	Bonus,	277–82.	The	coagulated	substance	is	“female,”	having	received	the

coagulating	impetus	from	the	“male.”	Another	name	for	it	is	the	(white)	earth	(von	Franz,	Aurora	Consurgens,	10).	The	coagulant
sometimes	appears	in	dreams	as	cheese	–	mother	nature	turning	into	culture	and	differentiated	sense	–	awareness	through	fermentation	and
putrefaction.
86 Figulus,	Canon	79.
87 Figulus,	Canon	95.
88 J.	Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone	(Signum	Atque	Signatum):	An	Enquiry	into	the	Development	of	a	Symbol,	prefaced	by	letters	from
C. G.	Jung	and	Aniela	Jaffé	(London:	Stuart	&	Watkins,	1967),	81.
89 Rasis,	Book	of	Alums,	cited	by	Wyckoff	in	Minerals,	175 n1;	cf.	Norton	(HM	2: 5 9):	“The	redness	is	concealed	in	the	whiteness.”
90 V.	Karpenko,	“The	Chemistry	and	Metallurgy	of	Transmutation,”	Ambix	39	(1992),	56–57.
91 M.-L.	von	Franz,	Muhammad	ibn	Umail’s	HALL	AR-RUMUZ	(“Clearing	of	Enigmas”):	Historical	Introduction	and
Psychological	Comment	(Küsnacht:	Verlag	Stiftung	für	Jung’sche	Psychologie,1999),	63.
92 Figulus,	Canon	106.	Cf.	Bonus,	342,	referring	to	Arnold	de	Villanova’s	instructions	on	making	white	elixir:	“Expose	it	to	a	good
fire	for	twenty-four	hours,	to	a	still	fiercer	fire	for	another	day	and	night,	and	to	a	very	fierce	fire	proper	for	melting,	in	the	third	day	and
night.”
93 Bonus,	256–57.
94 Ibid.,	261.
95 Ibid.,	262:	“The	force	of	the	body	should	prevail	over	the	force	of	the	soul,	and	instead	of	the	body	being	carried	upward	with	the
soul,	the	soul	remains	with	the	body.”
96 “Study	of	Images	I,”	in	The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens,	233.
97 Von	Franz,	Aurora	Consurgens,	233.
98 Ibid.,	234.
99 Hillman,	The	Dream	and	the	Underworld,	168–71.
100 Bonus,	264.
101 Ibid.,	255–56.
102 Ibid.,	262.
103 I	suggest	that	analysis	is	instigator	of	“the	ferment”	because	Bonus	says,	“The	ferment	of	which	we	speak	is	invisible	to	the	eye,
but	capable	of	being	apprehended	by	the	mind”	(256).	Thus	what	turns	up	the	heat	and	generates	ferment	is	an	intensification	of	the	mental
work,	i.e.,	deeper	demands	of	analytical	understanding.
104 The	reference	in	Bonus	has	escaped	my	pursuit.	“An	Open	Entrance”	(HM	2: 1 94)	states:	that	the	vitrified	substance	becomes
“unsusceptible	to	any	further	change.”
105 Cf.	R.	López-Pedraza,	Hermes	and	His	Children	(Einsiedeln:	Daimon	Verlag,	2003),	chap.	4,	for	an	understanding	of	erotic	unions
based	on	the	attraction	between	and	commingling	of	fantasies.
106 A. J.	Hopkins,	Alchemy:	Child	of	Greek	Philosophy	(Columbia	Univ.	Press.	1934),	99.	More	on	Maria	the	Jewess	(Maria	Hebræa)
and	the	use	of	so-called	called	witches’	multiplication	tables	in	kabbalistic	writings	on	alchemy,	see	G.	Scholem,	Alchemy	&	Kabbalah,
trans.	K.	Ottmann	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2008).
107 “Gum”	is	a	frequent	reference	to	the	“holding	stuff	between,”	that	which	joins	but	is	different	from	what	it	joins.	Cf.	CW	12: 3 36,
484;	Bonus,	279;	Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	79.
108 Cf.	CW	6: 6 6–67,	71,	and	77.	These	passages	present	the	alchemical	gum	in	the	intellectual	language	of	philosophy.	Esse	in	anima

remains	a	third	conceptual	position,	a	mere	rational	argument.	unless	anima	has	become	utterly	real,	so	sticky	that	one	can’t	shake	it	off,
staining	and	smearing	whatever	one	touches.	Abelard,	who	promulgated	the	philosophical	position	esse	in	anima	(though	it	is	already
present	in	the	Platonic	metaxy)	was	one	for	whom	anima	was	a	desperately	convincing	experience	in	the	person	of	Heloise.
109 Letter	dated	12	June	1961,	in	Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	12.
110 Hitchcock,	Remarks	upon	Alchemy	and	Alchemists,	174.
111 Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	38.
112 From	Trinick’s	translation	of	“An	Open	Entrance”	in	The	Fire-Tried	Stone	(cf.	CW	14: 1 89–213).	On	the	pores	and	puer,	see	J.
Hillman,	“Notes	on	Opportunism,”	in	Senex	&	Puer,	UE 3: 9 6.
113 Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	80.
114 “For	this	water	is	a	white	vapour,	and	therefore	the	body	is	whitened	with	it.	It	behooves	you	therefore	to	whiten	the	body	and	open
its	infoldings,”	from	Artephius,	cited	in	Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	81.
115 E.	Kelly,	“The	Theatre	of	Terrestrial	Astronomy,”	in	Alchemy:	Pre-Egyptian	Legacy,	Millennial	Promise,	ed.	R.	Grossinger
(Richmond,	Calif.:	North	Atlantic	Books,	1979),	62.
116 Ibid.,	39.
117 Minerals,	3: 1 .5.
118 Trinick,	The	Fire-Tried	Stone,	81.
119 Hitchcock,	Remarks	upon	Alchemy	and	Alchemists,	80–81.
120 B. J. T.	Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy	or,	“The	Hunting	of	the	Greene	Lyon”	(Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1983),
Appendix	C	(text	of	“The	Key”	from	which	come	these	passages):	“Thus	join	the	mercury,	the	doves	of	Diana	mediating,	with	its	brother,
philosophical	gold	…	Another	secret	is	that	you	need	the	mediation	of	the	virgin	Diana	(quintessence,	most	pure	silver);	otherwise	the
mercury	and	the	regulus	are	not	united.”
121 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	177;	cf.	also	183	and	207.	For	an	entire	text	on	antimony,	with	many	references	to
its	poisonous	nature	and	the	curative	powers	of	its	vinegar,	see	B.	Valentinus,	The	Triumphal	Chariot	of	Antimony,	trans	A. E.	Waite
(London:	Stuart	&	Watkins,	1962).
122 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	148.
123 Ibid.,	68.
124 Ibid.,	207.
125 Ibid.,	209.
126 On	the	motif	of	one	animal	spirit	curing	another,	see	my	Animal	Presences.
127 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	207;	cf.	also	J.	Hillman,	Emotion:	A	Comprehensive	Phenomenology	of	Theories
and	Their	Meanings	for	Therapy	(London:	Routledge	&	Kegan	Paul,	1960),	75–76,	on	animal	spirits.
128 We	see	Artemis/Diana	only	if	we	are	already	in	her	train,	that	is,	already	hunting	in	the	vegetable	matter	of	our	symptoms	and	slow
growth	and	tangly	underbrush	of	feelings	for	the	elusive	“animal	spirits.”	Diana’s	sign	is	not	only	the	animal	and	the	forest;	it	is	also	the
bow	and	arrow.	Active	imagination	inspired	by	Diana	will	therefore	be	intentional.	It	will	aim	to	seize	fleeing	images,	and	it	will	draw	our
puer	intensity	for	quest	into	their	pursuit,	even	at	the	one-sided	risk	of	abandoning	the	pleasures	of	the	flesh	for	the	joys	of	the	chase.
129 On	Newton	and	“middle	natures”:	Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	204–10	and	228–30.	We	recapitulate	in
Newton	the	theme	we	developed	in	Stevens	and	Cézanne	(above,	chap.	5,	“Alchemical	Blue	and	the	Unio	Mentalis”):	the	reunion	of
imagination	and	nature,	which	is	also	the	reunion	of	imagination	and	reason,	since	for	Newton,	nature	is	rational.	This	reunion	requires	an
alchemical	work,	the	work	of	an	art.	The	great	landscape	painter	John	Constable	stated	it	thus:	“The	whole	object	and	difficulty	of	the	art
(indeed	of	all	the	fine	arts)	is	to	unite	imagination	with	nature,”	Cited	in	E. H.	Gombrich,	Art	and	Illusion:	A	Study	in	the	Psychology	of

Pictorial	Representation	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1961),	386.
130 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	183.
131 Cf.	S.	Sambursky,	“Von	Kepler	bis	Einstein:	Das	Genie	in	der	Naturwissenschaft,”	Eranos	Yearbook	40	(1971).	Dobbs,	The
Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	chap.	1.
132 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	19,	36 ff.	Cf.	F. A.	Yates,	The	Rosicrucian	Enlightenment	(London:	Routledge	&
Kegan	Paul,	1972),	chap.	14.
133 Cited	by	Dobbs	in	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	211,	from	R.	S.	Westfall,	“Newton	and	the	Hermetic	Tradition,”	in
Science,	Medicine	and	Society	in	the	Renaissance:	Essays	to	Honor	Walter	Pagel,	ed.	A. G.	Debus,	2	vols.	(New	York:	Neale	Watson
Academic	Publications,	1972).	In	his	early	work	on	light	Newton	had	captured	Iris,	the	mediating	rainbow	(and	anima	mediatrix),	in	a
prism	of	glass	and	dissected	her	into	seven	colors.	Iris,	the	Rainbow	Girl,	and	colors	themselves	lost	their	mediating	role	(which	Goethe
tried	to	restore)	between	the	phenomenal	and	the	invisible.	Colors	were	once	the	visibilities	of	the	planetary	principles;	or,	colors	are
planetary	“messages”	carried	from	above	downward	by	Iris	–	hence	they	must	be	understood	by	epistrophé,	or	interpretation	upward.
When	color	becomes	merely	subjective	(not	really	given	with	and	in	things),	things	do	indeed	become	soulless,	mechanical,	and	dead.
Even	in	his	mature	work	Newton	was	still	trying	to	connect	changes	in	color	to	changes	in	particle	size	(Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of
Newton’s	Alchemy,	221–24),	a	quantitative,	mechanistic	reduction,	searching	for	the	source	of	color	in	the	colorless,	soul	in	reason.
Newton’s	optics	deprived	the	world	of	its	multicolored	soul	so	that	the	restitution	of	anima	(“mediation”	in	Newton’s	terms)	by
alchemical	means	became	his	ever-growing	concern.	Further	on	theory	of	color	and	the	Rainbow	Girls	in	James	Joyce,	see	B.	DiBernard,
Alchemy	and	Finnegans	Wake	(Albany:	State	Univ.	of	New	York	Press,	1980),	87–91.
134 Dobbs,	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	67.
135 Ibid.,	179.
136 The	controversy	concerning	the	true	identity	of	“Philalethes”	is	discussed	by	Jung	in	CW	14,	p.	33 n183,	and	more	recently	by
Dobbs	in	The	Foundations	of	Newton’s	Alchemy,	53 n25	(referring	to	investigations	by	R. S.	Wilkinson).
137 Jung	goes	on,	unfortunately,	to	moralize	the	doves,	placing	them	into	a	pair	of	opposites	with	the	evil	rabid	dog,	Two	does	not
always	have	to	mean	opposition.	Twos	are	also	cooperative	as	pairs,	partner,	mutuals,	lovers	–	especially	the	last,	when	the	two	comes	in
the	soft	flutter	and	bicker	of	two	turtledoves.	Two	feet,	two	eyes,	two	lungs,	two	shoulders	–	must	they	always	be	seen	as	opposites?	In
alchemical	psychology	we	must	never	abstract	a	number	from	its	image.	Is	the	image	two	entangled	serpents,	two	beasts,	two	fish
swimming	away	from	each	other?	My	“two’”may	be	opposing	currents	in	the	stream	passing	by	and	bypassing	each	other,	whereas	your
“two”	may	be	a	raging	conflict	of	fighting	beasts,	or	a	mating	folie	à	deux	that	cannot	do	without	each	other.	The	alchemical	images	of
Lambspring	(HM	1: 2 71ff.)	depict	many	kinds	of	animal	pairs.	The	image	always	takes	precedence	over	the	abstraction,	shapes	it,	and
adjectivizes	it.	This	is	the	perspective	of	psyche	over	and	against	the	abstract	numbers	and	laws	(of	opposites)	of	spirit.
138 “On	Reduction,”	in	Berry,	Echo’s	Subtle	Body,	151–70.
139 Von	Franz,	Aurora	Consurgens.	She	understands	the	plurality	here	differently:	for	her	it	is	tied	with	a	problem	of	evil	so	that
“pluralization”	becomes	“regression.”
140 The	artist	Robert	Ryman,	in	response	to	a	question	regarding	his	supposed	all-white	canvases,	said:	“I’m	not	really	interested	in
white	as	a	color,	although	I	have	at	times	used	different	whites	for	different	purposes.	White	is	used	instrumentally	and	for	itself;	but
‘whiteness’	as	such	is	not	the	work’s	subject	or	essence.	When	it	snows,	you	see	things	clearly	that	you	didn’t	see	before.	So	the	white
can	eliminate	certain	visual	clutter	so	that	you	can	see	nuances	and	certain	things	that	you	wouldn’t	be	aware	of	ordinarily,”
http://www.praemiumimperiale.org/eg/laureates/rymanhtmlpages/rymansummarycontent.html	(accessed	10	March	2009).
141 “On	Reduction,”	in	Berry,	Echo’s	Subtle	Body,	169.
142 “Reflections	on	the	Archetype	of	Consciousness:	Personality	and	Psychological	Faith,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal
Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought	(1970),	15–39.	See	also	J.	Hillman,	Re-Visioning	Psychology	(New	York:	Harper	Perennial,	1992),
42–44,	50–51,	on	“Anima”	and	“Psychological	Faith.”
143 MDR,	166.
144 Cf.	K.	Kérenyi,	“A	Mythological	Image	of	Girlhood:	Artemis,”	in	Facing	the	Gods,	39–45.
145 MDR,	240.

146 The	reader	with	interests	in	philosophy	may	notice	that	these	last	paragraphs	play	off	from	and	comment	upon	the	following
obvious	references:	Henri	Bergson’s	durée,	Immanuel	Kant’s	noumenon,	Socratic	dialectic	(albeit	altogether	other	than	the	Symposium),
Wilhelm	Dilthey’s	knowledge	versus	understanding,	Edmund	Husserl’s	transcendental	subjectivity,	as	well	as	all	philosophies	that	place
imagination	in	the	mind	(rather	than	the	mind	in	imagination)	and	consider	it	a	function	of	a	subjective	knower.
147 Pliny	speaks	of	silver	as	”a	madness	of	mankind”	(Naturalis	Historia,	33: 3 1.95).	The	relations	between	the	moon	and	“madness”
are	legion;	a	footnote	in	CW	14,	p.	156	(a	page	that	discusses	lunar	madness)	illuminates	this	relation:	“Not	only	does	Luna	cause	moonsickness,	she	herself	is	sick	or	ailing.”	Lunacy	is	inherent	in	the	archetypal	principle,	an	infirmity	of	the	archetype	itself,	and	therefore
lunacy	must	be	understood	on	an	archetypal	(alchemical)	level.	For	a	discussion	of	“archetypal	infirmity,”	see	J.	Hillman,	“Athene,
Ananke,	and	Abnormal	Psychology,”	in	Mythic	Figures,	UE	6: 3 1–73.
148 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	Eranos	Lecture	8	–	On	Paranoia	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1988),	on	“Revelation	and	Delusion.”
149 “The	ancient	philosophers	have	enumerated	several	kinds	of	conjunction,	but	to	avoid	a	vain	prolixity	I	will	affirm,	upon	the
testimony	of	Marsilius	Ficinus,	that	conjunction	is	a	union	of	separate	qualities.”	Kelly,	“The	Theatre	of	Terrestrial	Astronomy,”	63.
150 Lexicon,	234:	“The	fruit	of	an	unlawful	and	accursed	copulation.	They	generate	nothing	in	their	turn	…	not	produced	by	any
honourable	means	but	by	the	guile	of	men	…	These	monstrosities	are	impotent	and	useless	for	breeding	purposes	…”
151 Bonus,	332.
152 Cited	by	Wyckoff	in	Minerals,	175n.
153 Bonus,	260.
154 The	famous	last	stanza	of	Archibald	MacLeish’s	“Ars	Poetica.”
155 G.	Bachelard,	Air	and	Dreams:	An	Essay	on	the	Imagination	of	Movement,	trans.	E. R.	and	C. F.	Farrell	(Dallas:	The	Dallas
Institute	Publications,	2002),	101–2.
156 Paracelsus,	1: 8 3.
157 Cf.	von	Franz,	Aurora	Consurgens,	384.
158 Bonus,	260.
159 Cf.	on	anima	and	depersonalization,	Hillman,	Re-Visioning	Psychology,	44–46,	and	Anima:	An	Anatomy	of	a	Personified	Notion.
160 The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens,	168.
161 D. L.	Miller,	The	New	Polytheism:	Rebirth	of	the	Gods	and	Goddesses	(Dallas:	Spring	Publications,	1981).
162 Hillman,	Re-Visioning	Psychology,	xvii.

	

7
The	Yellowing	of	the	Work
	
A	statement	of	Jung’s	in	Psychology	and	Alchemy	launches	this	chapter	on	its	course.	Jung	wrote:
Four	stages	[of	the	alchemical	opus]	are	distinguished,	characterized	by	the	original	colors	mentioned	in	Heraclitus:	melanosis
(blackening),	leukosis	(whitening),	xanthosis	(yellowing),	and	iosis	(reddening)	…	Later,	about	the	fifteenth	or	sixteenth	century,
the	colors	were	reduced	to	three,	and	the	xanthosis,	otherwise	called	the	citrinitas,	gradually	fell	into	disuse	or	was	but	seldom
mentioned	…	There	were	only	three	colors:	black,	white,	and	red.
The	first	main	goal	of	the	process	…	highly	prized	by	many	alchemists	…	is	the	silver	or	moon	condition,	which	has	still	to	be
raised	to	the	sun	condition.	The	albedo	[whitening]	is,	so	to	speak,	the	daybreak,	but	not	till	the	rubedo	is	it	sunrise.	The	transition
to	the	rubedo	is	formed	by	the	citrinitas	[yellowing],	though	this,	as	we	have	said,	was	omitted	later. [1]

Some	questions	arise	from	Jung’s	statements:	What	is	the	nature	of	the	omitted	yellow?	What	are	the
specific	qualitative	consequences	of	this	omission	beyond	the	ominous	reversion	from	a	fourfold
symbolic	system	to	a	trinitarian	one?	Since	the	color	yellow	continues	to	appear	in	the	material	of
contemporary	alchemy	–	analytical	work,	as	an	opus	of	imaginative	sophistication	–	can	this	work
shed	light	on	the	nature	of	yellow?	Can	a	more	precise	understanding	of	the	alchemical	yellowing
shed	light	on	our	analytical	practices?
Because	the	alchemical	craft	supposedly	developed	from	hand	workers’	arts	of	metallurgy,
embalming,	jewelry,	shamanistic	medicine,	cosmetics,	and	cloth-dying,	the	alchemical	mind
perceived	changes	in	color	in	the	material	at	hand	to	be	changes	of	essential	nature.	A	bit	of	iron
changes	color	when	fired	and	when	cooling.	Red	iron	is	malleable;	black	iron,	rigid.	A	cotton	cloth
dipped	in	a	blue	tint	irreversibly	alters	its	plain	white	state.	Dyeing,	as	bathing	or	dipping	–	the	Greek
word	is	baptizein	–	affects	essence.	The	unbleached	muslin	now	colored	blue	has	been	baptized;	its
soul	has	been	changed.	A	gilded	statuette	was	considered	more	precious	than	one	of	solid	gold
because	the	gilded	piece	signified	the	transmutation	of	a	baser	metal	to	a	golden	state.	Gilding
indicates	an	opus	contra	naturam,	while	the	sheerly	gold	is	merely	nature.
Our	usual	view	of	colors	is	derived	from	Western	philosophy.	For	example,	Newton,	Locke,
Berkeley	and	Kant	considered	colors	to	be	not	inherent	in	things	but	secondary	qualities	effected	by
light	upon	our	subjective	eyesight.	Conflicting	with	this	view	is	the	earlier	and	alchemical	proposition
that	change	of	color	reveals	change	of	essence.	This	earlier	proposition	corresponds	with	the	way	we
actually	live	in	the	world.	Colors	of	the	sky,	sea,	sunset	portend	the	coming	storm.	As	a	fruit	sweetens
on	the	stem,	its	color	changes.	As	a	patient	sickens,	we	see	pallor,	jaundiced	skin,	cyanotic	lips,	brown
urine,	empurpled	nose,	raspberry	tongue,	red	rashes,	white	exudates,	black	stools.	The	human	eye’s
ability	to	distinguish	20,000	varieties	of	hue	helps	us	read	the	inherent	intelligibility	of	the	world.
Yellow	signifies	a	particular	kind	of	change	–	usually	for	the	worse:	withering	leaves,	aging	pages,
and	long-stored	linen,	old	teeth	and	toenails,	liver	spots,	peeling	skin,	indelible	stains	of	food	and
semen.	The	process	of	time	shows	as	a	yellowing.	The	alchemists	spoke	of	it	as	“putrefaction”	and
“corruption.”
English	and	American	common	speech	continues	to	use	yellow	in	a	manner	that	is,	as	the	Oxford
English	Dictionary	says,	“often	disparaging.”	Cowardice	is	yellow;	so	is	jealousy.	A	yellow	dog	is
craven,	and	a	canary	informs	on	friends.	The	yellow	press	and	a	yellow-back	novel	are	cheap	and
lurid.	The	yellow	star	pinned	on	Jews	reflects	the	jaundiced	eye	of	prejudice. [2]	The	“yellow	peril”

raised,	in	Americans,	engulfing	fears	of	Asians.	The	yellow	flag	of	quarantine	is	the	international
sign	for	dangerously	contagious	disease.	The	Spanish	amarillo	relates	to	the	bitterness	of	bile	and	the
Hebrew	yerek	derives	from	yarak,	to	spit.
Yet	yellow	has	a	host	of	cheerfully	sunny	implications,	from	the	etymological	link	of	“yellow”
with	“yolk”	to	the	metaphorical	association	with	ripening	grains,	spring	flowers,	honey,	sunlight,	and
the	apotropaic	use	of	lemons	to	ward	off	death.	The	German	gelb	and	the	Latin	galbus	and	galbinus
derive	from	roots	meaning	radiant	and	shining,	like	gold;	so	the	Homeric	Achilles	and	Apollo	are
yellow-haired,	blond,	fair,	and	sunlit.	In	addition,	the	most	luminous	of	all	hues	(least	saturated)	is
yellow	and	the	yellow	spot	in	the	middle	of	the	retina	is	where	vision	is	most	acute.
Thus,	it	would	be	easy	to	neglect	Freud’s	insight	into	the	contrary	meanings	inherent	in	the	basic
terms	of	language,	and	instead	to	look	at	yellow	via	Jung’s	lens	of	opposites.	Then	we	would	oppose
yellow	with	purple	as	in	our	kindergarten	color	wheels,	or	with	blue	as	did	Goethe,	or	with	green	as
did	Jung	himself	in	opposing	yellow,	for	intuition,	with	green	for	sensation. [3]	But	definition	by
opposition	restricts	the	meaning	of	a	phenomenon	to	that	face	to	which	it	is	opposed.	If	purple	is
mysterious,	then	yellow	must	be	crass	and	blatant.	If	green	is	growth	and	concrete	nature,	then	yellow
must	be	mental	and	loftily	abstract.	If	blue	is	cold,	withdrawn,	deep,	and	sober,	then	yellow	must	be
hot,	active,	shallow,	and	crazy.
The	opinion	that	yellow	is	crazy	floats	through	the	arts.	It	was	Edgar	Allan	Poe’s	favorite	color,	as
well	as	Van	Gogh’s	–	leading	Ellis [4]	and	Birren [5]	to	state	that	yellow	frequently	appeals	to	troubled
minds.	Kandinsky	wrote	that	yellow	“may	be	paralleled	in	human	nature,	with	madness,	…	with
violent,	raving	lunacy.” [6]
The	lens	of	opposites	tends	to	ignore	the	context	in	which	a	yellow	appears,	its	precise	hue,	and	the
words	that	describe	it	(butter,	lemon,	primrose,	sulfur,	gold,	chrome,	cadmium,	mustard,	amber,
straw,	etc.),	its	relation	with	other	hues	in	the	same	image,	and	the	personal	myths	perceived	in	the
experience.	For	Van	Gogh,	for	instance,	yellow	was	the	color	of	love,	as	it	was	in	Gauguin’s	painting
The	Yellow	Christ	(1889).	For	Kandinsky,	yellow	was	aggressive,	trumpet-like,	acidic,	eccentric.	I
draw	your	attention	also	to	the	fearless,	brilliant,	triumphantly	luxurious	joy	of	the	yellows	in	the	oldage	paintings	by	the	French	painters	Rouault	and	Bonnard.	Thus	it	is	not	easy	to	become	clear
regarding	even	this,	the	clearest	of	all	colors.	The	most	we	gain	by	imagining	in	terms	of	opposites	is
seeing	clearly	a	divine,	goldlike,	incorruptible	yellow	on	the	one	hand	and	on	the	other,	corruption
and	decay.
Here	I	need	to	intersperse	some	supposed	facts	from	anthropological	research.	By	compiling	lists
of	the	words	for	different	colors	from	languages	the	world	over,	Berlin	and	Kay [7]	state	the
following	conclusions:	all	languages	have	terms	for	bright	and	dark,	that	is,	white	and	black;	if	a
language	has	a	third	color	term,	it	is	always	red;	if	a	fourth	term,	yellow	or	green;	and	if	a	fifth,
either	green	or	yellow.	If	we	imagine	colors	along	a	scale	from	simple	to	sophisticated,	then	yellowgreen	–	the	hue	the	Greeks	called	chloris	–	becomes	the	essential	bridge	between	black-white-red	and
the	color	terms	that	follow:	blue,	brown,	purple,	pink,	orange,	and	gray;	in	that	order,	more	or	less
universally.
Newton’s	chromatic	prism,	curiously,	locates	green-yellow	in	the	center	of	its	spectrum	and	da
Vinci’s	six	primary	colors	(black,	white,	red,	yellow,	green,	blue)	also	give	yellow	a	median	position.
Today	the	green-yellow	of	chloris,	which	for	the	Greeks	described	the	earth	goddess	Demeter,
reappears	in	English	electrical	wiring	where	a	spiraling	green	and	yellow	insulation	signifies	the
grounding	or	earth	line,	neither	positive	nor	negative.
It	is	well	to	bear	in	mind	this	median	position,	allowing	yellow	to	remain	indicative	of	both
Apollo’s	sunny	brightness	and	the	green	of	Demeter,	chloris	never	definitely	restricted	to	singleness.
Citrinatis	and	xanthos	in	alchemy’s	texts	and	commentators	tend	to	present	yellow’s	more	favorably

“sunny”	side	as	the	nominative	noun	“yellow,”	and	the	other	side	as	the	gerund	(-ing)	or	verbal	noun
referring	to	staining	and	decay.
To	draw	a	first	conclusion:	neither	by	translating	yellow	into	a	symbolic	meaning	nor	by	dividing
it	into	positive	and	negative	poles	can	we	uncover	its	significance	for	an	alchemical	psychology.
Rather,	we	must	find	answers	to	our	questions	within	the	context	of	alchemical	relations	in	which
yellow	appears	as	a	specific	transitional	quality	in	a	temporal	process.	(See	below,	“Postscript:	The
Missing	Yellow.”)
An	Excursion	on	Sulfur
In	the	often-quoted	passage	from	Maria	the	Jewess	(Maria	Hebræa)	to	whom	is	attributed	one	of	the
earliest	alchemical	formulations	of	the	transitions	in	the	process,	we	find	this	sentence:	“When	one
yellows,	three	becomes	four,	for	one	yellows	with	yellow	sulfur.” [8]	Albertus	Magnus	says,	“The
yellow	color	in	metals	is	caused	by	sulfur,	which	colors	them.” [9]
Another	name	for	sulfur	is	hudor	theion,	Holy	Water,	because	of	its	vivifying	power	in	bringing
about	substantive	change.	These	changes	are	intensely	sensate,	as	when	raw	sulfur	heated	with	lime
results	in	calcium	sulfide,	which,	when	added	to	water,	results	in	the	gas	hydrogen	sulfide.	Hydrogen
sulfide	–	spirit	of	sulfur	–	stinks.	By	introducing	this	gas	into	solutions	of	a	variety	of	metals,	various
colors	appear	also	on	the	surface	of	metals.	The	alchemical	mind	regards	these	changes	perceived	by
the	nose	and	eye	as	evidence	of	the	dictum	“By	means	of	rot	essential	change	takes	place.”	The
organic	process	of	putrefaction	is	fortified	by	sulfur.	Sulfur	hastens	nature	toward	its	decay	and	thus
toward	its	next	season.	Thus,	when	things	stink,	when	they	yellow	with	decay,	something	important	is
going	on,	and	what	is	going	on	is	sulfuric.
Since	the	texts	so	often	warn	that	the	sulfur	of	which	they	speak	is	a	“sophic”	material	and	not	your
common	or	vulgar	sulfur	(despite	the	fact	that	the	texts	also	specifically	refer	to	a	yellow	material
mined	and	refined	in	definite	geographical	locations),	we	need	to	translate	the	term	“sophic”	into
“metaphoric”	or	“psychic.”	We	are	speaking,	therefore,	of	psychic	change,	which	appears	as
“something	going	wrong,”	and	going	wrong	in	two	particular	ways.	First,	when	things	corrupt,	rot,
decay;	second,	when	they	become	physically	hyperactive	because	sulfur	is	defined	as	the	principle	of
“combustibility”	–	flaring	up,	“easily	kindled	to	violence	or	passion”	(Oxford	English	Dictionary),
“tumult”	(Random	House	Dictionary).	“It	hinders	perfection	in	all	its	works” [10]	because	sulfur
hinders	sublimation.	Sublimation,	as	Ruland’s	1612	alchemical	dictionary	says,	“is	effected	by	means
of	Distance.” [11]	Yellowing	caused	by	sulfur	therefore	impedes	detachment	and	distancing.
“Sophic”	best	translates	as	“not	natural”	–	sulfur	mediated	by	sophia,	sulfur	sophisticated	by	an
imagination	and	craft	of	anima,	sulfur	as	having	an	esthetic	and	reflective	interiority	beyond	its	crude
compulsion.	Sendivogius	(1566–1636)	gives	a	hint	of	this	hidden	potential	within	sulfur	in	his	parable
of	wounded	sulfur	bleeding	as	“pure	milk-white	water.” [12]	Within	my	choleric	greed	for	the	fatness
of	life,	my	desirous	reach	into	the	world	–	what	analysis	long	condemns	as	manic	defense,	projective
identification,	and	acting-out	–	there	lies	an	anima,	a	soul	significance.	Sensationalism,	consumerism,
and	compulsions	have	other	than	common	or	vulgar	significance.	They	have	a	suksma	aspect,	a
sophic	interiority	beyond	sheerly	appetitive	goals.	This	interior	intention	disguises	itself	in	the	vivid
object	of	desire,	but	sulfur ’s	desire	is	its	own	true	intention,	that	leonine	heat,	that	“earthy
feculence” [13]	without	which	the	opus	has	no	life	and	the	lapis	cannot	redden.	In	each	hunger	there
lies	the	whiteness	of	anima,	which	is	revealed	in	the	wounds	suffered	by	sulfur.
Similarly,	when	things	go	wrong	as	rot	–	my	job	stinks,	my	marriage	stinks,	this	analysis	stinks,	I
stink	–	this	stench	signifies	sulfur	making	changes.	These	changes,	however,	do	not	have	to	appear	as
the	result	of	a	process,	as	a	clearer	reflective	consciousness	after	the	putrefaction.	The	feeling	of

putrefaction	is	itself	an	awareness;	feeling	bad	and	wrong	is	already	sulfur	experiencing	its	own
wound.
To	say	it	again:	combustion	and	decay	are	the	two	ways	sulfur	sophisticates.	Sulfur	becomes	aware
of	itself	cholerically,	violently.	Hence,	some	alchemists	said	sulfur	could	not	be	worked	with	until	it
had	first	been	calcined,	that	is,	had	been	dried	of	its	moisture	or	abstracted	from	its	propensity	for
emotional	attachment. [14]	They	were	afraid	of	its	eruptive	inflammability.	We,	too,	are	afraid,	most
of	us	still	enchanted	by	Anna	Freud’s	dictum	that	the	patient	who	acts	out	cannot	be	analyzed;	most	us
are	afraid	of	an	analysis	going	wrong,	beginning	to	stink.	Jung	devoted	a	chapter	to	sulfur	in
Mysterium	Coniunctionis:	not	many	pages,	but	wondrously	condensed	information	and	interpretation.
He	considered	sulfur	to	be	the	active	principle	in	the	opus	and	thus	of	human	life.	He	equated	sulfur
with	what	psychology	calls	the	motive	factor:	on	the	one	hand,	the	conscious	will;	on	the	other,
unconscious	compulsion.
The	extreme	language	to	which	alchemy	resorts	to	describe	sulfur	indicates	to	Jung	that	sulfur	has
affinities	with	the	Devil	–	as	corrupter	and	compeller	–	and	with	Christ,	giver	of	warmth	and	life.	In
either	direction,	Devil	or	Christ,	sulfur	is	usually	imagined	as	male,	hot,	of	an	obdurate	earthly	body,
fat	and	oily,	desirous	as	a	dragon	or	lion.	Though	it	is	the	urgent	agent	of	change,	sulfur	at	the	same
time	resists	not	only	sublimation,	but	is	that	very	component	of	the	psyche,	as	Jung	said,	“responsible
for	our	resistance	to	psychology	in	general.” [15]
The	innate	extraversum [16]	or	turning	outward	of	sulfur	(despite	its	milk-white	interior)
corresponds	with	the	place	of	yellow	in	Japanese	medical	color	symbolism,	where	yellow	and	red	are
outside;	black	and	white,	inside.	According	to	this	four-color	set,	black	is	inside	and	cold;	white,
inside	and	chill	or	tepid;	yellow	is	outside	and	warm;	red,	outside	and	hot.	The	transition	then,	from
white	to	yellow	would	show	both	as	an	increase	in	warmth	and	a	conversion	from	inside	to	outside.
Warm	and	outside:	like	the	games	we	played	as	children,	where	clues	to	the	hidden	are	given	by
temperature.	The	closer	you	get,	the	warmer	you	are,	as	if	drawn	outward	and	toward	the	object	by	its
calor	inclusus,	its	innate	sulfur,	that	hidden	warmth	concealed	in	the	world.
“Outside”	–	that	is	our	clue	for	the	relation	between	the	yellowing	and	sulfur.	“In	what	substance	is
this	Sulfur	to	be	found?”	asks	Sendivogius’s	Alchemist.	“In	all	substances,”	is	the	reply.	“All	things	in
the	world	–	metals,	herbs,	trees,	animals,	stones,	are	its	ore.” [17]	Outside:	wherever	interest	is
kindled,	wherever	the	active	attention	(or	what	Freud	named	“object	libido”)	turns	away	from	itself	to
things,	things	lighting	up	to	be	consumed.	The	“I”	is	called	forth	by	its	counterpart,	the	sulfuric
element	in	the	world,	which	calls	the	soul	from	the	chill	lunar	reflection	of	the	albedo	into	a
combustible	fusion	with	the	warm-bodied	objects	of	desire.	As	things	light	up	and	catch	fire,	we	get
burned	by	the	sulfur	lurking	in	each	tree,	lurking	from	behind	every	stone,	like	the	Devil	tempting	us
into	the	body	of	the	world.
Between	White	and	Red
So	far	we	have	been	explicating	yellow	per	se.	Our	main	concern,	however,	is	with	yellowing	as
transitional	process	in	which	something	is	yellowed.	The	“something”	yellowed	is	the	albedo,	that
lunar	style	of	consciousness,	when	the	anima	or	soul	infuses	the	work	with	its	whiteness.
This	albedo	whiteness,	achieved	after	the	soul’s	long	exile	in	nigredo,	must	be	distinguished	from
the	primary	white	of	the	materia	prima,	the	candida	of	unmarked	and	unremarking	innocence.	In
alchemy,	albedo	refers	to	both	a	complete	separation	and	a	complete	conjunction:	the	separation
between	sulfur	(concrete	urgency)	and	mercury	(psychic	fusibility	and	intellectual	volatility).	Life	of
mind	and	life	of	the	body	can	be	kept	distinct,	even	go	their	separate	ways.	The	conjunction	occurs	in
mind,	in	the	unio	mentalis	of	soul	and	spirit	(as	elaborated	below,	in	Chapter	10,	“Alchemical	Blue

and	the	Unio	Mentalis”).	In	both	conditions	–	separation	of	sulfur	and	mercury,	and	conjunction	of
soul	and	spirit	–	the	absent	component	is	the	solar	power	of	sophic	sulfur,	which	gives	body	to	the
clarified	mind	and	is	necessary	for	the	rubedo.
In	analysis,	this	whiteness	refers	to	feelings	of	positive	syntonic	transference,	of	things	going
easily	and	smoothly,	a	gentle,	sweet	safety	in	the	vessel,	insights	rising,	synchronistic	connections,
resonances	and	echoes,	the	dead	alive	on	the	moon	as	ancestors	who	speak	with	internal	voices	of	the
activated	imagination	–	all	leading	to	the	invulnerable	conviction	of	the	primacy	of	psychic	reality	as
another	world	apart	from	this	world,	life	lived	in	psychological	faith.	In	this	tepid	and	shadowless
lunar	light,	everything	seems	to	fit.	As	Jung	said, [18]	this	is	the	first	main	goal	of	the	process	and
some	alchemists	were	satisfied	to	stop	here,	bringing	the	opus	to	rest	in	silvery	peace.
This	condition	does	not	want	more	light,	more	heat.	Like	the	lyric	cry	of	the	lunatic,	the	lover,	or
the	poet,	it	asks	for	asylum,	poetic	reveries,	and	love.	“One	night	of	love”	–	a	forever	lunar	night	that
would	be	spoiled	by	dawn.	Petrarch	provides	a	classical	example	of	the	anima’s	song:
Con	lei	foss’io	da	che	si	parte	il	sole
et	non	ci	vedess’	altri	che	le	stelle,
sol	una	notte	et	mai	non	fosse	l’alba
Might	I	be	with	her	from	when	the	sun	departs
and	no	other	see	us	but	the	stars,
just	one	night,	and	let	the	dawn	never	come! [19]

Having	absorbed	and	unified	all	hues	into	the	one	white,	the	mirror	of	silvered	subjectivity	expands	to
reflect	all	things	at	the	expense	of	differentiation	of	itself.	It	takes	something	outside	subjectivity	to
see	into	oneself.	Hence	Jung’s	insistence	on	“the	other”	for	individuation.	This	other,	however,	does
not	have	to	be	confined	to	the	other	person	in	the	analytic	situation.	Rather,	“the	other”	refers	to
anywhere	that	the	different	appears,	anything	outside	subjective	reflection,	any	moment	that	intrudes
upon	white	consciousness’s	love	of	its	own	lunar	illumination,	which	is	precisely	where	its	blindness
lies.
As	Figulus	says,	“Matter,	when	brought	to	whiteness,	refuses	to	be	corrupted.” [20]	The	white
refuses	to	be	yellowed.	It	seems	a	spoiling.	Yellowing	rots	the	perfection.	White	is	cool,	self-content;
yellow	is	hot,	smelly,	earthy,	male,	active.	To	use	an	alchemical	simile,	the	yellowing	of	the	white	is
like	milk	becoming	cheese.	The	white	coagulates,	takes	on	body,	flavor,	fatness.	White	resists	this
physical	substantiation,	for	it	feels	like	a	regression	to	the	vulgar	drivenness	of	earlier	moments	in
the	work	–	materia	prima	and	nigredo	–	which	the	arduous	hours	of	analytic	reflection	have	finally
sophisticated	and	pacified.
Yet	Figulus	also	says	that	whiteness	remains	imperfect	unless	it	be	brought	by	heat	to	highest
redness	and,	in	fact,	remains	“dead”	until	that	occurs. [21]	Other	authors	agree	that	the	yellowing
brings	life,	calling	the	yellowing	a	“resurrection.”	“Citrinatio	est	resuscitatio”	(Johnson’s
Dictionary).	To	achieve	this	resuscitation,	as	another	treatise	says,	the	artifex	“goes	on	increasing	his
fire	till	it	assumes	a	yellow,	then	an	orange	or	a	citron	colour.” [22]	The	increasing	yellow	is
imagined	as	growing	within	the	belly	of	the	white,	its	lunar	mother	and,	as	Hopkins	says,	“It	was	not
only	silvery	on	the	outside,	but	was	yellow	on	the	inside	…	‘At	the	same	time	you	whiten	on	the
outside,	you	yellow	on	the	inside.’	” [23]
Clearly	then,	the	yellowing	is	more	than	a	spoiling	of	the	white.	It	is	also	its	brighter,	more
vivifying	illumination,	a	richer,	more	expansive	clarity.	This	clarification	is	particularly	intellectual.
The	sixteenth-century	alchemical	writer	Gerhard	Dorn,	on	whom	Jung	relied	for	many	insights,	made
this	explicit:	“The	form,	which	is	the	intellect,	is	the	beginning,	middle	and	end	of	the	procedure;	and
this	form	is	made	clear	by	the	saffron	color.” [24]	This	should	come	as	no	surprise.	Since	the

yellowing	operates	upon	the	unio	mentalis,	it	would	have	to	be	a	transmutation	of	the	mind,	a	change
in	intellect.	“Birds	play	a	prominent	part	in	the	citrinitas.” [25]	A	mental	analysis	of	citrinato	will	be
looking	through	a	white	glass	only.	It	will	see	coloring	or	discoloring	of	the	albedo	harmony,	but	not
fattening,	not	warming,	as	if	these	qualifications	of	mind	do	not	belong	to	the	province	of	thinking.	In
other	words,	the	yellowed	mind	cannot	be	captured	by	whitened	reflection.
“The	growing	light	of	solar	illumination	helps	one]	discern	more	clearly	the	imperfections	of	the
lunar	sphere.” [26]	Therefore,	one	may	expect	a	growing,	though	hidden,	critical	discernment	of
analyzing	itself;	for	“yellow	observes	whiteness.” [27]	The	yellow	flowers	of	celandine	(chelidonium
maius)	mentioned	by	Dorn	at	this	juncture	of	the	transition	become	a	“precious	ingredient”	because
celandine	“cures	eye	disease	and	is	particularly	good	for	night	blindness.” [28]	Paracelsus	gives
similar	prominence	to	the	cheyri	or	four-petaled	yellow	wallflower,	both	an	abortive	(out	of	the
belly)	and	a	restorative	(resuscitatio). [29]	“When	the	citrinitas	(xanthosis,	“yellowing”)	appears,
there	is	formed	the	collyrium	(eyewash)	of	the	philosophers.” [30]	Many	eyes	appear	in	the	cauda
pavonis,	and	these	peacocks’	tails	are	yellow,	heralding	a	new	yellow	ground	of	seeing.	Where	white
unifies	all	colors [31]	into	a	monotheism	of	subjective	reflection,	the	yellow	clarification	is	also	a
dawning	of	multiple	vision,	seeing	each	thing	as	it	is,	beyond	subjectivity,	and	thus	bridging	to	the
rubedo’s	sanguine	tincturing	of	the	world	out	there.
The	intellect,	too,	goes	through	changes;	not	only	the	heart,	the	body	and	the	imagination.
“Thinking	and	being	are	the	same”	according	to	Parmenides	(fr.	B 3,	17–18),	a	position	shared	by
Gnostics	and	Zen	teachers	as	well	as	alchemists.	Alchemy	(and	analysis)	clarifies	the	mind	and
sophisticates	its	thought	since	thought	derives	from	psyche.	During	early	phases	of	the	work	alchemy
speaks	of	clouds,	haze	and	fog,	of	the	massa	confusa,	of	white	smoke,	metaphors	equally	viable	for
the	mind	at	beginning	moments	in	analysis	–	and	beginning	moments	occur	not	only	at	the	literal
beginning.	They	recur	all	through	the	work.
The	mind	in	nigredo	shows	characteristics	of	downward	and	backward	thinking,	an	intellect	caught
in	reductive	and	depressive	reasonings	and	figurings	out:	past	history,	materialized	fantasies,	and
concretistic	explanations,	coupled	with	a	bitterly	stubborn	protest	against	its	condition.	The	nigredo
psyche	knows	itself	as	victimized,	traumatized,	dependent,	and	limited	by	circumstantiality	and
substantiality.	The	nigredo	psyche	is	eo	ipso	substance-abused.	The	mind	in	albedo	more	likely
dreams.	Receptive,	impressionable,	imagistic,	self-reflective	and	perhaps	comfortably	magical.	“But
in	this	state	of	‘whiteness’	one	does	not	live	…	it	is	a	sort	of	abstract,	ideal	state,”	as	Jung	states.	No
problems,	except	the	vast	generalized	abstractions	of	spirit	–	for	spirit	and	soul	are	indistinctly
unified.
Dorn’s	intellectual	account	of	the	yellowing	as	an	aurora	of	the	moon	becoming	sun	does	not
describe	adequately	the	nature	of	the	yellowed	intellect.	It	is	not	the	continued	expansion	of	white
consciousness,	an	increase	of	reflective	capacity.	It	is	more	than	aware,	more	than	enlightened.	It	must
be	hot	and	male,	beginning	with	the	light	yellow	or	dirty	yellow-brown	of	Mars [32]	and	even	putrid,
if	it	is	to	spring	the	mirrored	prison	of	reflection.	Since	sulfur	with	all	its	corruption,	intensity,	and
feculence	has	been	instrumental	in	its	change,	this	mind	“burns”	with	its	own	bitter	bile,	yellow
choler. [33]	In	sum:	during	nigredo	there	is	pain	and	ignorance;	we	suffer	without	the	help	of
knowledge.	During	albedo	the	pain	lifts,	having	been	blessed	by	reflection	and	understanding.	The
yellow	brings	the	pain	of	knowledge	itself.	The	soul	suffers	its	understanding.
“The	yellowing	phase	in	Senior	is	expressed	by	an	arch	of	armed	eagles	…	[which]	adds	yet
another	image	to	the	cutting	swords,	splitting	arrows,	cleaving	serpents,	and	piercing	rays	of	the
citrinitas.” [34]	Brighter,	more	coagulated	and	more	combustible,	the	yellowed	intellect	is
complicated	with	emotions,	as	one	is	indeed	acutely	aware	and	alive	when	in	the	grips	of	jealousy,
cowardice,	fear,	prejudice,	aging,	or	decay.	It	is	like	an	instinctual	smoky	light	shining	through

reflections	from	within,	thought	jaundiced	with	prejudice,	fear,	envy,	the	mind	like	a	smoldering
yellow	effusion	staining	with	intellect	whatever	it	meets.	“The	yellowness	of	the	sulfur	has	brought
out	all	the	hidden	yellow	of	the	metal	and	changed	it	into	a	kind	of	gold	in	which	yellow	was	abundant
and	overflowing.” [35]
This	is	not	the	usual	intellect,	dried	with	concepts,	abstracted,	pulled	away;	this	is	the	fat	intellect,
physical,	concrete,	emotional,	fermenting	with	instinctual	interiority,	an	unctuous	passion.	Having
first	been	whitened,	its	desire	is	not	simple	and	driven,	but	desire	aware	of	itself	through	intellectual
fervor	–	an	intellectus	agens	–	dawnings	of	the	winged	mind,	sure	as	gold.	No	longer	that	separation
between	mercury	and	sulfur,	between	fantasy	flights	and	dense	emotional	body.	In	the	carcass	of	the
lion [36]	a	new	sweetness,	thick	and	yellow	and	sticking	to	all	things,	like	honey,	like	oil,	flowing	like
wax	and	gilding	as	it	touches.	One’s	nature	goes	through	a	temperamental	turn,	a	change	in	humors
from	choleric	to	sanguine,	which	the	dictionary	defines	as	confident,	optimistic,	cheerful.	So	does
citrinitas	become	the	reddening.
Here,	the	yellowness	of	sulfur	brings	the	riches	of	jovial,	solar	blessings.	Ficino,	describing	the
traditions	of	amulets	and	graven	or	painted	images	depicting	states	of	the	soul,	writes:
For	longevity	and	a	happy	life,	they	made	an	image	of	Jove	on	a	clear	or	white	stone.	It	was	a	man	sitting	above	an	eagle	or	a
snake,	crowned,	in	the	hour	of	Jove,	when	he	is	in	exaltation	happily	ascending,	wearing	yellow	clothes	…	For	curing	diseases
they	crafted	an	image	of	the	Sun	in	gold	…	an	image	of	the	king	on	his	throne,	with	yellow	clothes	…	For	happiness	and	strength
of	body,	the	image	of	Venus	as	a	little	girl	…	wearing	yellow	and	white. [37]

About	the	red	only	this:	Whatever	its	many	names	and	equations,	it	indicates	the	inseparability	of
visible	and	invisible,	psyche	and	cosmos,	a	unus	mundus.	It	requires	the	most	intense	heat:	“The	spirit
is	heat.” [38]	The	operations	coincident	to	the	reddening	are	exaltation,	multiplication,	and	projection,
according	to	the	fifteenth-century	English	alchemist	George	Ripley.	These	expansions	together
perform	the	tincturing,	staining	all	things	as	the	sun	shines	everywhere.	The	image	of	the	King
dominates.	The	King	as	a	political	figure	redresses	the	balance	of	the	introverted	process	that	has	led
to	his	crowning,	now	toward	the	polis,	the	city	on	earth.
The	rubedo	as	a	purple-red	is	also	called	in	Greek	terms	the	iosis,	which	means	poisoning.	It	would
seem	that	the	rubedo	deconstructs	the	very	matter	from	which	the	King	arises.	“All	corruption	of
matter	is	marked	by	deadly	poison.” [39]	The	Ouroboros,	which	can	also	indicate	the	rubedo,	at	this
red	juncture	signifies	a	final	dissolution	of	sunlit	consciousness	and	all	distinctions	–	all	the	stages,
phases,	operations,	and	colors.	It	is	a	moment	of	the	rotatio,	a	turning	and	turning	like	the	cosmos
itself,	requiring	endless	numbers	of	eyes	to	see	with,	like	the	King	seeing	and	being	seen	by	each	one
in	the	realm.	The	work	is	over;	we	no	longer	work	at	consciousness,	develop	ourselves,	or	possess	a
distinct	grid	by	means	of	which	we	recognize	where	we	are,	how	we	are,	maybe	even	who	we	are.
“The	dissolution	of	Sol	should	be	effected	by	Nature,	not	by	handiwork,”	concludes	Figulus. [40]
Psyche	is	life;	life,	psyche.
Psyche	is	also	death,	an	equation	investigated	in	my	writings	on	the	Underworld.	The	“death”	in
this	moment	of	the	alchemical	work	is	the	“dissolution	of	Sol,”	which	occurs	“by	Nature,”	as	if	a
homeostatic	self-correction	of	solar	optimism.	This	process	is	similar	to	the	insidious	dark	strength
of	Yin	afflicting	bright	Yang	from	within.	The	sure	optimism	of	solar	clarity	is	the	blind	spot	itself.
Sol	dissolves	in	the	darkness	of	its	own	light.	Or,	to	put	it	another	way:	yellow	at	this	moment	is
nothing	other	than	the	visible	presence	of	the	black	in	its	depth. [41]
Albrecht	Dürer	as	witness	to	the	black-in-yellow.	In	keeping	with	his	unsurpassed	commitment	to
melancholia	(the	nigredo	affliction	of	black	bile),	Dürer	drew	himself	naked	to	the	pelvis,	extended
index	finger	pointing	to	a	yellow	spot	just	below	the	rib	cage	as	focus	of	his	pain.	Above	the	selfportrait	is	the	handwritten	phrase:	“Do	wo	der	gelb	fleck	ist	und	mit	dem	finger	drauff	deut,	do	ist	mir

we.” [42]	(There,	where	the	yellow	spot	is,	to	where	I	point	with	my	finger,	there	it	hurts.)
Another	witness:	Proust’s	character,	the	art	critic	Bergotte,	in	ill	health	and	ordered	to	rest,
nonetheless	is	compelled	to	seek	out	a	painting	by	Vermeer	with	its	remarkable	“little	patch	of	wall	so
beautifully	painted	in	yellow.”	Overcome	by	dizziness	while	climbing	the	first	steps	towards	the
gallery,	Bergotte	quickly	submerges	the	weakness	by	the	thought	of	“sunshine.”	As	he	falters,	he
repeats	to	himself	as	if	an	incantation	“Little	patch	of	yellow	wall,	with	a	sloping	roof,	little	patch	of
yellow	wall.”	“Meanwhile	he	sank	down	on	a	circular	settee;	…	and	reverting	to	his	natural	optimism,
told	himself:	‘It’s	nothing,	merely	a	touch	of	indigestion	from	those	potatoes,	which	were	undercooked.”	A	fresh	attack	struck	him	down;	he	rolled	from	the	settee	to	the	floor	…	He	was	dead.” [43]
A	Case
Turning	now	to	a	case	for	further	amplification	and	using	alchemy	as	grid	for	conceiving	the
psychology	of	analysis,	I	confess	myself	a	Jungian	rather	than	of	another	school	that	relies	on	other
basic	metaphors	such	as	infancy,	typology,	chronological	development,	mythical	gods,	diagnoses,
transference.	I	take	Jung	seriously,	even	literalistically,	when	he	claims	that	alchemical	metaphors	best
provide	understanding	for	what	the	psyche	goes	through	in	deep,	long-term	analysis.	I	also	confess
myself	a	Jungian	by	introducing	a	case	as	further	amplification	of	the	metaphors	and	figures:	“Instead
of	deriving	these	figures	from	our	psychic	conditions,	[we]	must	derive	our	psychic	conditions	from
these	figures.” [44]
The	analysand:	a	woman	in	her	forties,	professional,	married	though	not	closely,	childless,
intensely	introverted,	yet	adapted.	After	a	second	bout	of	analysis	lasting	two	years,	she	was	required
to	return	to	her	home	country	on	a	fixed	date.	Although	she	often	had	dreamt	of	colors,	at	this
juncture	with	the	departure	date	firm	in	our	calendars,	her	dreams	began	to	yellow,	as	follows	and	in
brief:
January	18:	A	cat	dozing	on	and	off;	yellow	and	white	stripes.
January	20:	Yellow	cloth	with	letters	on	it.
January	24:	White	lustrous	letters.
January	24:	Yellow	legal-size	note-pads.
January	27:	“I	remember	I	had	a	baby;	baby	is	wrapped	in	a	yellow	robe.”
January	27:	A	yellow	book	opened	to	where	it	says,	“end	Chapter	One;	beginning	Chapter	Two.”
January	28:	Big	eye	on	the	wall.	Eye	looking	through	a	hole	in	a	curtain.	“I	said	the	word
‘origin’	in	English.” [45]
February	1:	Big	rooster,	Black,	“but	some	part	had	a	different	color.”
February	2:	“It	became	daylight.”
Later	in	February:	Bright	light	even	with	eyeshades	(dark	glasses).
Themes	in	this	material	correspond	with	the	citrinitas:	alternating	yellow	and	white	in	the	striped
cat’s	dozing	on	and	off;	the	logos	clarifications	in	letters,	words	and	books;	eyesight;	awakening;

daylight;	new	life.	The	yellowing	of	her	dreams	also	corresponds	with	the	phases	of	the	analysis
itself:	ending	to	return	to	her	obligations	in	the	world.
Hers	had	been	a	very	white	analysis:	two	or	three	times	a	week;	many	dreams	each	session	which
she	worked	on	assiduously;	hours	of	solitude;	reading,	reflection,	reverie,	imagination,	memory,
nature;	few	relationships;	eating	alone;	isolation	owing	to	language	difficulties;	feelings	and	fantasies
focused	on	the	analysis	and	on	me,	the	analyst.	Now	she	was	planning	her	work	for	the	next	months	at
home:	arranging	schedules,	letters	and	phone	calls,	parting	ceremonies,	shopping,	and	imagining
further	activities	such	as	dancing,	cooking,	friends,	and	translating.
She	suggested	translating	one	of	my	books	into	her	language.	Then,	we	found	a	white
interpretation	for	this	suggestion.	We	understood	translation	as	a	way	of	remaining	in	the	work	by
maintaining	the	relationship,	abstract	and	distanced	as	exigencies	had	decreed.
Since	then,	I	see	that	this	turn	to	words	in	her	dreams	and	plans	accords	with	the	yellowing,	not
only	as	solar	clarification	described	in	the	“Ninth	Key”	of	The	Golden	Tripod, [46]	where	“Grammar,
bearing	a	yellow	banner”	precedes	the	Sun	in	the	parade	of	planets	and	the	virtues	and	arts	associated
with	them.	Dorn’s	emphasis	on	the	activation	of	intellect	during	the	citrinitas	seems	borne	out	in	this
case.	Now	I	have	a	more	yellowed	and	sulfuric	interpretation	for	her	suggestion	to	translate.	It	did	not
merely	represent	a	backward	move	to	retain	the	transference;	it	was	also	a	move	outward	into
publication,	a	multiplicatio	and	proiectio,	her	embodied	mind	entering	the	world.	Besides,	isn’t
translation	a	copulation,	a	meeting	of	tongues	in	linguistic	intercourse?
Perhaps	I	have	not	made	clear	that	her	yellowing	differs	from	another	sort	I	have	seen.	Just	as	all
whites	are	not	the	albedo,	since	the	primary	material	can	be	candida	rather	than	albus,	white	as
innocence	rather	than	white	as	reflection	–	so	there	is	sometimes	a	primitive	yellow-orange	of	raw
and	burning	activity,	a	pleasure	principle	of	id	fire,	the	uncooked	sulfur	of	manic	brightness.	This
figures	in	dreams	as	a	boy	with	orange	hair	or	a	yellow	shirt,	a	bright	yellow	car	going	like	mad,	a
construction	worker	with	yellow	hard-hat	on	a	high-voltage	line,	a	lion	escaped	or	a	yellow	dog,	a
yellow	propeller	plane	crashing	into	mud.	These	examples	of	sulfuric	intensity	do	not	result	from
white	as	interior	to	it,	like	butter	from	milk,	but	require	whitening	the	yellow	as	an	anterior	materia
prima.	Again:	colors	have	no	single	meaning;	they	must	be	placed	with	image,	mood,	time,	context.
Despite	the	preparations	for	departure,	the	yellowing	was	mainly	internal,	where	Fabricius’s
“yellow	death” [47]	was	taking	place,	as	symbolic	with	aging	and	ending	of	life.	“Fall’n	into	the	sere,
the	yellow	leaf,”	as	Macbeth	says, [48]	herself	no	longer	the	girl,	her	safety	in	whiteness	no	longer
assured.	How	would	her	husband	react?	There	occurred	fear	of	losing	what	had	happened;	jealousy
over	others	who	did	not	have	to	leave,	smoldering	anger	over	what	was	not	accomplished,	not
fulfilled	concretely	in	the	martial	urge	toward	me.	Remember:	“Yellow	is	a	true	sign	of	Copulation	of
our	Man	and	Woman	together.” [49]	Sometimes,	a	bitter	look,	a	curled	lip,	a	lapse	into	suppressive
silence.	A	killing	was	also	going	on.
Looking	back,	I	ask	where	was	the	smelly,	oily,	fat	sulfur	that	brings	richness,	lightness,	and	waxy
receptivity	to	the	lapis	as	rubedo,	the	ease	and	joy	and	capacity	to	float	along?	I	remember	feeling	that
an	underlying	depression	had	not	all	lifted	and	an	acidic	bitterness	had	not	all	sweetened;	I	was	myself
then	disconsolate	by	what	I	felt	had	cut	short	the	work.	Our	rapport	had	become	complicated	–	she
seemed	suddenly	so	dense	–	by	the	increasing	presence	of	indelible	emotions	that	seemed	bent	on
destroying	the	harmony	and	illuminating	insights	that	nevertheless	still	kept	coming.	Then,	I
rationalized	these	perceptions	by	attending	mainly	to	what	we	were	achieving.	Today,	looking	back
through	my	yellow-tinted	lens,	I	believe	that	what	was	also	being	achieved	–	besides	the	evident
yellow	illumination	–	was	actually	a	thorough	spoiling	of	the	white	harmony	which	her	emotions	and
my	perceptions	were	clearly	indicating,	a	spoiling	which	my	own	analytic	whiteness	resisted	and	tried
to	smooth	over.

The	Analyst,	Too,	Is	Yellowed
Jung	said	alchemy	has	two	aims,	“the	rescue	of	the	human	soul	and	the	salvation	of	the	cosmos.” [50]
Yellowing	rescues	the	soul	from	the	whiteness	of	psychological	reflection	and	insight:	“In	this	state
of	‘whiteness’	one	does	not	live	…	In	order	to	make	it	come	alive	it	must	have	‘blood.’	“ [51]
I	understand	this	rescue	operation	to	apply	to	psychology	itself.	Let	me	explain:	as	the	alchemical
opus	rescues	the	soul	of	the	individual,	so	this	opus	can	rescue	the	psyche	of	psychology	conceived
only	in	terms	of	the	individual	human.	From	the	alchemical	perspective	the	human	individual	may	be
a	necessary	focus	but	cannot	be	a	sufficient	one;	the	rescue	of	the	cosmos	is	equally	important.
Neither	can	take	place	without	the	other.	Soul	and	world	are	inseparable:	anima	mundi.	It	is	precisely
this	fact	that	the	yellowing	makes	apparent	and	restores,	a	fact	which	the	white	state	of	mind	cannot
recognize	because	that	mind	has	unified	into	itself	the	world,	all	things	psychologized.
If	psychological	practice	neglects	its	yellowing,	it	can	never	leave	off	psychologizing,	never
redden	into	the	world	out	there,	never	be	alive	to	the	cosmos	–	from	which	today	come	our	actual
psychological	disorders.	Remember:	sulfur	is	found	in	all	things	and	out	there;	the	yellow	turns
outward.	The	inwardness	habit	of	psychologizing	follows	consequently	from	the	albedo	condition
that,	as	an	“undivided	purity,” [52]	loses	distinctions	among	the	opposites	it	has	united.	Therefore,	the
albedo	seeks	mental	integrations	of	the	disturbing	yellowing	emotions	of	transference	by	means	of
psychological	grids.	Yet	each	new	grid,	each	new	analytic	refinement	–	object	relations	theory,	Kohut,
Laings,	Winnicott	–	continue	to	polish	further	the	albedo	mirror	so	that	we	may	see	more	clearly,	but
what	we	see	is	still	the	human	face	and	what	we	hear	is	still	human	language.	Getting	“out	there”
requires	the	yellow	death,	that	poisoning	prepared	by	a	putrefaction	of	the	unio	mentalis	that	is
analytic	consciousness.
This	poisoning	awakens.	The	pharmakon	kills	as	it	cures.	Our	eyes	open	to	the	narcissistic
corruption	inherent	to	our	theory,	our	diagnoses,	treatment	and	training.	We	begin	to	see	the	addictive
codependency	of	analyst	and	analysand	disguised	and	glorified	by	theories	of	transference
/countertransference,	which	intensify	the	mirror ’s	gleam	to	the	world’s	neglect. [53]
As	analyst	I,	too,	am	yellowed;	I	cannot	escape	the	opus	since	the	arti-fex	is	myself,	the	material
worked	on.	I	therefore	feel	a	fermenting	discomfort	of	interior	doubt,	that	yellowing	inside	the	white
which	treacherously	observes	it	from	within.	We	feel	ourselves	betraying	what	we	were,	the
realizations	we	believed,	our	very	psychological	faith	and	its	achievements,	even	our	former	pain	and
the	scars	of	identity	it	gave.	For	pain,	too,	changes	color.	As	the	nigredo	has	its	inconsolable	wounds
that	lift	into	the	whitened	suffering	of	aesthetic	sensitivity,	so	the	yellow	brings	the	pain	of	further
knowledge	derived	from	piercing	insights,	critical,	cruel,	the	eagles	and	arrows	of	seeing	sharp	and
true,	insights	that	arrive	suddenly	together	with	the	fire	and	fear	regarding	the	cowardice,	jealousy,
choler,	and	decay	that	taints	both	opus	and	artifex.
To	evade	the	death	by	yellowing,	that	is,	going	straight	from	white	to	red,	soul	to	world,	is	not	what
alchemy	recommends.	The	texts	warn	against	the	reddening	coming	too	fast,	warn	against	direct
flame,	warn	that	if	a	red	oil	floats	on	the	surface	the	work	has	been	spoiled.	Without	the	yellow,	the
whitened	mind	converts	directly	to	red,	enantiodromia,	moving	straight	forward	by	converting
psychic	insights	into	literal	programs,	red	bricks	without	straw.	We	reflect	the	world	in	the	mirror	of
psychology,	reducing	its	political	conflicts	to	shadow	projections,	its	exploitation	of	the	earth	to	body
problems,	the	destruction	of	nature	to	repression	of	our	interior	unconscious	wilderness.	We
prescribe	more	of	“the	feminine,”	more	anima,	more	lunar	consciousness	(though	the	yellowing	is	a
time	of	Mars	where	the	“male	is	on	top	of	the	female.” [54])	We	believe	magically	that	selftransformation	trickles	down	(multiplies	and	projects)	into	the	world.	As	our	learned	colleague
Edward	Edinger,	who	does	not	mention	yellow	in	his	major	work	on	alchemical	symbolism	in

psychotherapy,	wrote:	“Multiplicatio	gives	us	a	hint	as	to	how	psychotherapy	may	work	…	the
consciousness	of	an	individual	who	is	related	to	the	Self	seems	to	be	contagious	and	tends	to	multiply
itself	in	others.” [55]	No	matter	how	the	Self	“multiplies	itself	in	others,”	these	others,	too,	are
psychological	entities	(selves),	and	the	opus	remains	one	which	psychologizes	the	world	instead	of
mundifying	the	psyche.
Yet	alchemy	itself	tempts	away	from	the	yellow	which	gives	an	inherent	reason	for	its	eventual
neglect	and	our	urge	to	jump	over	it.	Because	the	last	operations	are	so	extraverted,	the	heat	of	the
spirit	so	high,	the	King	constellated	in	the	rubedo,	there	is	an	exalted	mission	to	multiply	psychic
projects	in	the	world.	Go	forth	and	multiply.	Mercurius	as	multi	flores	(many	flowers)	“tempts	us	out
into	the	world	of	sense,”	says	Jung,	and	his	habitation	is	“in	the	vein	swollen	with	blood.” [56]	This
blood,	identified	in	the	secular	unconscious	with	the	redemptive	and	missionary	blood	of	Christ, [57]
urges	ever	forward	to	spread	by	conversion	of	the	heathen	(those	“in	need	of	psychology”).	Largescale	film	showings	of	Jung,	his	summer	institutes	including	tours	of	his	tower,	his	grave,	teaching
missions,	and	their	appropriations	for	extending	the	study	of	Jung	to	“underdeveloped”	start-up
societies,	even	Jungian	training	programs	may	be	driven	by	the	sudden	reddening,	which	prompts	a
countermovement	to	slow	the	training	process	by	increased	numbers	of	analytical	hours.
We	began	by	recalling	that	the	yellowing	phase	faded	from	the	alchemical	schema	after	the
sixteenth	century,	which	is	precisely	when	alchemy	itself	began	to	fade	partly	into	the	Rosicrucian
movement,	or	to	coagulate	into	either	mountebank	gold-making	for	temporal	princes,	or	into
spiritual	directions	for	esoteric	Christian	redemption,	or	into	experimental	physical	sciences. [58]
Against	this	scientific	coagulation	of	subtle	alchemical	spirit,	the	alchemists	themselves	were	ever
on	guard.	“Beware	of	the	physical	in	the	material”	was	a	basic	caution.	“Those	who,	in	place	of	liquid
Mercury,	use	sublimate,	or	calcined	powder,	or	precipitate,	are	deceived,	and	err	greatly.” [59]	There
is	an	ever-present	danger	in	regarding	psychic	materials	by	means	of	dry	(calcined)	metaphysical
abstractions	or	from	the	naturalistic	perspective	of	physical	literalism	(right-brain	/	left-brain,
concrete	holistic	medicine,	genetics,	information	theory,	etc.).	“The	highest	mystery	of	the	whole
Work	is	the	Physical	Dissolution	into	Mercury.” [60]	Keep	the	metaphors	fluid.
Can	we	not	draw	a	lesson	from	history?	If	the	practice	of	Jungian	psychology	continues	the
alchemical	tradition,	then	we	too	–	unless	we	are	fully	yellow	–	simply	repeat	its	fate,	falling	prey	to
either	physical	scientism,	spiritual	esotericism,	or	the	business	of	professionalism	as	princes	of	this
world	–	or	all	three	mixed.	For	our	work	to	approach	its	cosmic	purpose,	for	it	to	reach	the	world,	it
must	spoil	itself.	“The	withering	away	of	the	state”	(Marx).	“Displacing	the	subject”	by	deconstructing
its	own	consciousness	(Derrida).	Self-destruction	as	damage	control.	Kill	the	Buddha.	Apocalyptic	via
negativa.	Catastrophe	theory.	Shevirath	Ha-Kelim	(the	Breaking	of	the	Vessels).
If	we	washed	our	vision	in	the	yellow	collyrium	we	would	be	able	to	observe	the	whiteness	of
psychology	with	a	fully	jaundiced	eye.	We	might	then	recognize	that	the	issues	plaguing	professional
psychologists	–	sexual	misbehavior,	ethical	rules,	lawsuits,	insurance	payments,	licensing	laws,
warring	societies,	training	regulations,	regional	and	international	organizations	–	expose	the
fermenting	corruption	breaking	the	white	psyche	out	of	its	self-enclosure,	which	it	defends	by
intensely,	narcissistically,	focusing	on	countertransference,	training	supervision,	childhood,	and	the
Self.	The	fermenting	corruptions,	which	seem	diversions	from	the	main	job	of	therapy,	may	actually
be	how	the	psyche	is	yellowing	into	the	cosmos.	If	so,	there	will	be	more	psychology	actually	going
on,	more	soul	actually	to	be	made,	in	the	ferment	of	these	corruptions	than	in	the	enlightened
discussions	of	cases	and	theories.	The	esoteric	is	always	in	the	outcast	area;	today,	the	stone	the
builders	reject	is	the	building	itself.
Furthermore,	those	analysands	who	turn	on	us,	turn	on	analysis,	who	condemn,	sue,	expose,	violate
the	trust,	may	actually	be	angels	of	the	yellow	road	to	the	emerald	city,	angels	in	the	salvation	of	the

cosmos	from	the	psyche	closed	long	enough	into	individualism,	sulfuric	angels	pointing	the	way	at
the	end	of	this	analytic	century	to	an	end	of	analysis	that	omits	the	world.	What	I	hoped	to	do	in	this
text	I	feel	is	done:	to	disclose	the	yellow	light	within	a	process	we	ourselves	are	in	and	to	leave	on	it
an	indelible	yellow	stain.
Finally	this,	inasmuch	as	every	objective	exposition	is	also	a	subjective	confession	and	inasmuch	as
I	have	said	that	thought	derives	from	psyche,	what	one	thinks	reflects	where	one	is,	the	coloring	of	the
intellectus	agens	as	it	filters	through	imagination.	Let	me	bear	empirical	witness	to	these	assumptions
and	to	the	citrinitas	in	my	own	case.	I	have,	in	part,	been	yellowed.	Like	Albrecht	Dürer ’s	selfportrait,	I	point	to	my	own	yellow	spot.
Nine	months	ago	I	ceased	practicing	private	analysis.	I	continue	to	practice	psychology	with	large
groups,	in	public	speaking	and	teaching,	publishing	and	writing.	These	activities	are	permeated	with
the	same	sulfuric	fumes	that	have	characterized	this	paper	and	others	corrosive	to	the	white
psychology	which	other	parts	of	me	have	long	championed.	In	the	white	mirror	I	see	myself	as
having	simply	walked	out	and	closed	the	door	on	the	consulting	room	of	transference	entanglements,
too	yellow-bellied	and	too	withering	in	age	to	refine	my	skills	further,	and	so,	instead,	I	am	acting	out
my	countertransference	on	analysis	itself,	globally,	with	the	destructive	vision	of	prophetic	inflation,
convinced	that	what	takes	place	in	the	depths	of	one’s	soul	is	taking	place	as	well	in	other	souls,	in	the
cosmic	soul	of	the	world.
I	attribute	this	conviction	to	a	predominance	of	sulfur	in	conjunction	with	mercury.	What	else	to
say	save	that	for	me	the	white	moon	is	down	even	if	the	red	is	not	risen,	and	my	choler	not	sanguine.
Postscript:	The	Missing	Yellow
When	we	read	alchemical	hues	as	distinct	phases,	the	colors	become	bound	to	temporal	process.
Yellow	as	a	state	becomes	yellowing	as	a	phase	between	an	earlier	condition	and	a	later	one,	e.g.,
white	to	red.	The	narrative	of	transformation	subjects	each	color	to	a	stage	in	the	narrative.	Because
of	its	median	position	in	the	various	scales	mentioned	above	(Newton’s	spectrum,	Leonardo	da	Vinci,
Berlin	and	Kay),	yellow	implies	transition,	even	invites	the	fantasy	of	progression.	The	very	title	of
this	chapter,	“yellowing,”	casts	our	comments	in	accord	with	this	model.	We	find	ourselves	in	a
developmental	fantasy.
Yet	yellow	itself,	apart	from	relations	with	other	hues,	presents	a	state	of	soul	with	conventional
significations,	some	of	which	Jung	mentions	in	his	1929	Dream	Seminar: [61]	cowardice,	jealousy,
unfaithfulness,	infectious	contagion,	prostitution,	warning	of	danger,	as	well	as	the	bright	and	joyful
ones	drawn	from	nature	–	ripe	grain,	sunrise,	egg	yolk,	spring	flowers.	I	have	tried	to	show	that	the
illumining	and	decaying	or	threatening	significations	are	coterminous	and	that	there	is	no	either	/or
dividing	yellow	into	sharply	opposed	halves. [62]
Can	we	do	the	same	for	a	deeper	division	constellated	by	yellow:	between	yellow,	the	nominative
noun,	and	yellowing	as	a	gerund	or	verbal	noun	signifying	motion,	process,	even	intending	toward	a
goal?	In	the	contrast	between	yellow	and	yellowing	are	we	confronted	in	the	depths	of	yellow	with	the
classic	philosophical	conundrum	of	Being	and	Becoming?
In	these	depths	lies	the	defeat	of	the	gerund	form	itself.	The	Tabula	Smaragdina,	perhaps	the	root
text	of	the	entire	alchemical	enterprise,	states:	“	The	combination	of	white	and	black,	if	the	black
predominates,	produces	a	saffron	color	…	[W]hite	is	motion,	black	is	identical	with	rest	…	the
essence	of	night	is	rest	and	blackness	…	all	blackness	is	death." [63]	At	least	since	Aristotle,	blackness
has	continually	signified	stasis,	like	the	stuckness	we	feel	enduring	the	nigredo	and	its	immovable
depression.	Freud	was	absorbed	by	this	same	archetypal	analogy	between	stasis	and	the	death	drive	as
he	called	it.

May	we	imagine	that	within	yellow	lies	the	blackness	whose	intention	is	stopping,	bringing	to	the
dead	stop	of	stasis	all	forward	motion	whatsoever?	Remember	Dürer ’s	morbid	yellow	spot,
Bergotte’s	tiny	yellow	patch	in	contemplation	of	which	he	falls	dead.	Thus	the	yellowing	of	the	work
feels	to	be	a	regression,	decomposing	and	putrefying	what	has	been	achieved.	But	“regression”	is	a
term	also	belonging	within	a	developmental	fantasy.	In	fact,	there	is	just	plain	cessation,	stasis.
Yellow	as	a	reversal	of	progress	appears	in	a	woman’s	dream:	“A	man	is	painting	the	walls	of	a
church	yellow.	Half	the	church	is	already	painted	yellow.	I	am	amazed,	since	the	church	had	only
recently	been	freshly	renovated.”	A	man	dreams:	“Cleaning	up	stuff;	packing.	I	use	yellow	tooth	paste
before	leaving	to	brush	my	teeth.”	Yellowing	the	white	interior,	the	white	teeth,	reverses	and	vitiates
progress,	perhaps	the	belief	in	process	itself,	that	the	soul’s	life	moves	in	time.	At	least	and	for	sure,
yellow	here	suggests	a	breakdown	of	the	phallic	thrust	forward.
A	woman	dreams:	“I’m	pissing	in	the	stall	at	the	conference	center.	After	the	day’s	vitamins,	the
piss	is	extremely	yellow.	I’m	standing	up	like	a	man	to	piss	–	no	penis.	Just	able	to	do	this.	My	Timex
watch	plops	down	into	the	piss.	I	am	laughing	as	this	happens,	feeling	clarity	about	how	I	don’t	care.”
No	penis,	and	no	penis-envy,	since	the	mechanical	forward	march	of	time,	its	fallen	idol,	plops	into
the	vitality-colored	citrinitas.
A	dreamer	in	Jung’s	Dream	Seminar [64]	reports	that	“parts	of	a	machine	are	out	of	order	and	these
parts	are	marked	with	little	yellow	labels …”	Then,	“the	machine	that	is	“injured”	“disappears,”	and
the	dreamer	sees	his	“little	daughter.”	In	the	discussion	which	follows,	Jung	speaks	of	the	patient	as
being	shocked	out	of	his	righteousness	(may	we	call	this	“the	phallic	patriarchal,”	“the	masculine
protest,”	or	“progress	fantasy”),	so	that	Jung	concludes	the	yellow	labels	were	“the	anima	flag,”	that
is,	the	dawning	of	soul	which	simultaneously	illuminates	and	corrupts	a	mechanistic	attitude.	The
black	stasis	within	yellow	seems	to	bring	to	a	complete	stop	the	belief	in	development	through	time,
that	Timex	watchfulness,	which	runs	Western	consciousness.
If	yellow	brings	process	to	a	halt,	then	yellowing	is	stopped	from	within	by	yellow	per	se.	We	do
not	need	to	know	about	the	white	which	it	has	stained	and	left	behind	or	the	red	which	it	is	heralding.
The	famous	maxim [65]	declares:	“the	three	becomes	four”	and	the	third	of	the	four	traditional
colors	is	yellow.	As	we	have	seen,	the	third	is	not	simply	to	be	considered	a	stage	on	the	way	to	four,
yellow	progressing	into	red.	Rather,	the	fourth	is	red	that	is	also	a	tincturing	gold,	both	yellow	and
red,	three	and	four	at	once,	so	that	the	citrinatio,	is	fully	implicated	a	priori	in	the	rubedo.	The	secret
of	the	fourth	–	that	ultimate	mystery	of	an	alchemical	psychology	–	is	concealed	in	the	gerundive
“ing”	of	yellow,	an	ever-active,	ever-becoming,	and	clarifying	sol	of	the	rubedo.
Now	we	can	better	grasp	the	Ouroboros	as	basic	to	alchemical	psychology.	The	Ouroboros	is	both
active	and	static	because	its	activity	is	within	itself	and	not	aimed	beyond	itself.	As	stasis-in-motion,
the	Ouroboros	is	like	a	living-dying,	analogous	with	entropy,	an	ongoing	movement	intending	to
stand	still,	intending	its	own	cessation	by	swallowing	itself.
The	rotatio	also	characterizes	the	end	of	the	opus.	It,	too,	is	a	movement	that	arrives	nowhere,	a
becoming	that	stays	in	being,	self-same.	Being	is	a	Becoming	because,	by	continually	rotating,	it
never	stands	still,	neither	advances	nor	regresses	despite	always	moving.	No	point	on	the	rotating
circumference	can	be	a	“stage”	of	time’s	progress.	There	are	no	phases,	no	advances,	no	regressions,
since	a	wheel’s	rotation	always	returns	it	to	the	same	point.
The	rubedo	is	imagined	as	a	final	moment	of	the	opus	–	not	because	a	result	is	finally	achieved	(the
King,	the	gold,	the	elixir),	but	because	Becoming	is	overcome	and	Being	is	released	from	static
immobility.
Hence	the	alchemists	can	speak	of	eternity,	less	as	an	extension	of	time,	or	beyond	time	and
altogether	independent	of	any	considerations	of	temporal	process:	utterly	timeless,	pure	stasis,	yet
fully	lively.	The	opus,	that	via	longissima,	ends	here	because	alchemy	as	a	psychological	process	with

all	its	procedures	has	brought	time	to	a	stop.
We	may	now	hazard	a	supposition	regarding	the	issue	that	opened	this	chapter:	the	omission	of
yellow	and	the	reduction	of	the	color	scheme	to	only	three.
For	Jung,	fourness	or	the	quaternity	was	like	an	article	of	faith	condensed	into	a	numerical	or
geometric	symbol.	The	quaternity	presents	psychic	wholeness,	his	highest	valued	concept	and	named
the	Self.	Jung	elaborated	fourness	in	a	variety	of	works	apart	from	alchemy	–	typology,	dream
interpretations,	mandala	symbolism,	in	distinction	from	Trinitarian	thinking	(CW	11),	in	connection
with	Mercurius	(CW	13),	and	into	his	late	work,	Aion	(CW	9.2),	and	his	account	of	synchronicity	as	a
fourth,	acausal	principle	at	work	in	the	cosmos	(CW	8).
Regarding	the	colors	of	alchemy,	however,	Jung	lets	the	tradition	of	threeness	prevail.	Yet	colors,
no	less	than	numbers,	must	be	considered	archetypal	powers.	“They	provide	a	kind	of	primordial
classification	of	reality.”	They	are	like	“forces”	“biologically,	psychologically,	and	logically	prior,”
says	Victor	Turner. [66]
Consequently,	I	am	led	to	propose	that	the	omission	of	yellow	as	the	neglected	fourth	color
eliminates	the	earthly	stasis	and	inherently	dark	(even	“devilish”)	(CW	11: 243–95)	materiality	of	the
quaternity.	This	neglect	or	denial	influences	even	Jung’s	own	psychology	of	alchemy	and	those	in	his
footsteps	(von	Franz,	Edinger).	Alchemical	hermeneutics	remains	confined	by	the	Trinitarian	milieu
in	which	so	many	of	its	texts	were	composed,	offering	ascensionist,	progressivist,	and	redemptive
fantasies	that	all	too	easily	can	be	absorbed	into	the	Jungian	schema	called	“the	process	of
individuation.”
Hence	this	account	of	mine,	which,	by	restoring	the	crucial	significance	of	yellow,	returns	to	the
fourfold	model,	sticking	with	the	phenomena	of	images	and	their	inhibiting	stasis	on	progress	for
analogies	with	the	soul’s	conditions	and	motions,	neither	upward,	backward	nor	forward.
Originally	delivered	at	the	11th	International	Congress	for	Analytical	Psychology,	Paris,	September	1989,	and	subsequently	published	in
Personal	and	Archetypal	Dynamics	in	the	Analytical	Relationship,	ed.	M. A.	Mattoon	(Einsiedeln:	Daimon	Verlag,	1991),	77–96.
1 CW	12: 3 33–34.
2 The	omitted	fourth	(yellow)	in	the	Nazi	trinity	of	red,	black,	and	white	becomes	the	rejected	Other	(Jews).
3 CW	9.1: 5 82	and	588n.
4 H.	Ellis,	“The	Colour	Sense	in	Literature,”	Contemporary	Review	LXIX	(1896).
5 F.	Birren,	Color	in	Your	World	(New	York:	Collier	Books,	1962).
6 W.	Kandinsky,	Concerning	the	Spiritual	in	Art,	trans.	M. T. H.	Sadler	(New	York:	Dover,	1977),	38.
7 B.	Berlin	and	P.	Kay,	Color	Terms:	Their	Universality	and	Evolution	(Berkeley:	Univ.	of	Calif.	Press,	1969).
8 A. J.	Hopkins,	Alchemy:	Child	of	Greek	Philosophy	(New	York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	1934),	99.	Zosimos	(ca.	300	CE),	“the	first
Greek	alchemical	writer	whose	actual	writings	have	survived”	(R.	Patai,	The	Jewish	Alchemists	[Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1994,	60),
entitled	one	of	his	treatises	“The	Standard	of	Yellow	Dyeing.”	The	role	of	yellow	can	be	attested	to	even	further	back,	for	Zosimos
refers	to	the	Maza	of	Moses,”	a	metallurgical	work	purportedly	coming	from	Maria	the	Jewess	and	a	possible	school	of	Jewish
alchemists	prior	to	Zosimos	(J. G.	Gager,	Moses	in	Greco-Roman	Paganism	[Nashville:	Abingdon	Press,	1972],	154–55).	On	Maria
Hebræa,	and	the	color	yellow	in	Jewish	mysticism	in	general,	see	also	G.	Scholem,	Alchemy	and	Kabbalah,	trans.	K.	Ottmann	(Putnam,
Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2008).
9 Minerals,	193.
10 CW	14: 1 38.

11 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Sublimation.”
12 M.	Sendivogius,	“The	New	Chemical	Light	Drawn	from	the	Fountain	of	Nature	and	of	Manual	Experience	to	which	is	added	a
Treatise	Concerning	Sulfur,”	HM	2.
13 CW	14: 1 38.
14 A	man	in	analysis	dreams	that	someone	like	his	analyst	is	playfully	handing	out	yellow	paper	napkins,	trying	to	get	him	and	his
group	to	buy	them	as	memorial	tokens	of	their	years	in	the	group.	Possibly,	the	drying	is	also	accomplished	by	a	more	pleasurable,	less
nigredo-like	attitude	to	remembrances,	perhaps	by	using	paper	for	absorbing	experiences.
15 CW	14: 1 52.
16 Ibid.,	134.
17 Sendivogius,	“The	New	Chemical	Light	Drawn.”
18 CW	14: 3 88.
19 Poem	22,	in	Petrarch’s	Lyric	Poems:	The	Rime	sparse	and	Other	Lyrics,	trans.	R. M .	Durling	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	Univ.
Press,	1976),	58–59.
20 Figulus,	287.
21 Ibid.,	264.
22 Collectanea	Chemica:	Being	Certain	Select	Treatises	on	Alchemy	and	Hermetic	Medicine,	ed.	A. E.	Waite	(London:	J.	Elliot	and
Co.,	1893),	116.	See	also	Figulus,	143.
23 Hopkins,	Alchemy,	96.
24 CW	12: 3 66.
25 J.	Fabricius,	Alchemy:	The	Medieval	Alchemists	and	their	Royal	Art	(Copenhagen:	Rosenkilde	&	Bagger,	1976),	146.
26 Ibid.,	143.
27 S.	Klossowski	de	Rola,	The	Golden	Game:	Alchemical	Engravings	of	the	Seventh	Century	(New	York:	George	Braziller,	1988),
51.
28 CW	14: 6 87.
29 CW	13: 1 71.
30 CW	9.2: 1 95.
31 CW	14: 3 88.
32 Fabricius,	Alchemy,	147.
33 Saturn	and	Melancholy:	Studies	in	the	History	of	Natural	Philosophy,	Religion	and	Art,	ed.	R.	Klibansky,	E.	Panofsky,	and	F.
Saxl	(London:	Thomas	Nelson	&	Sons,	1964),	53.
34 Fabricius,	Alchemy,	147.
35	 Hopkins,	Alchemy,	97.
36 The	reference	is	to	the	story	of	Samson	(Judges	14: 5 –9)	who	killed	a	lion	and	recovered	from	its	carcass	a	hive	brimming	with
honey	–	a	story	traditionally	used	to	tell	of	the	hidden	potential	within	sulfur.	The	exultation	of	the	alchemical	lion	appears	in	Libavius’s
image	(CW	5: 2 87),	and	the	lion	appears	in	Jung’s	detailed	case,	in	the	same	volume	(276),	following	images	of	yellow	balls	and	yellow
light	(266,	270).

37 M.	Ficino,	The	Book	of	Life,	trans.	C.	Boer	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	1994),	146–47.
38 Figulus,	287.
39 Ibid.
40 Ibid.,	296.
41 Cf.	G.	Bachelard,	Earth	and	Reveries	of	Will:	An	Essay	on	the	Imagination	of	Matter,	trans.	K.	Haltman	(Dallas	Institute
Publications,	2002),	308.
42 The	pen	and	watercolor,	half-length	self-portrait	is	in	the	collection	of	the	Kunsthalle	Bremen,	Germany.	It	is	reproduced,	with
commentary,	in	Saturn	and	Melancholy,	fig.	145.
43 M.	Proust,	“The	Captive,”	in	Remembrance	of	Things	Past,	vol.	3,	trans.	C. K. S.	Moncrieff,	T.	Kilmartin,	and	A.	Mayor	(New	York:
Vintage	Books,	1982),	185–86.
44 CW	13: 2 99.
45	 “Origin”	comes	from	orire	=	to	arise,	from	which	orient,	east,	sunrise.
46 In	HM	1.
47 Fabricius,	Alchemy,	140.
48 W.	Shakespeare,	Macbeth,	5.3.
49 Philalethes,	in	Klossowski	de	Rola,	The	Golden	Game,	27.
50 C. G.	Jung	Speaking:	Interviews	and	Encounters,	ed.	W.	McGuire	and	R. F. C.	Hull	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1977),	228.
51 Ibid.
52 T.	Burckhardt,	Alchemy:	Science	of	the	Cosmos,	Science	of	the	Soul,	trans.	W.	Stoddart	(London:	Stuart	&	Watkins,	1967),	188.
53 See	J.	Hillman,	“From	Mirror	to	Window:	Curing	psychoanalysis	of	its	Narcissism,”	in	City	&	Soul,	UE	2: 6 6–79.
54 Burckhardt,	Alchemy,	90–91.
55 E.	Edinger,	Anatomy	of	the	Psyche:	Alchemical	Symbolism	in	Psychotherapy	(La	Salle,	Ill.:	Open	Court,	1985),	228.
56 CW	13: 2 99.
57 Cf.	ibid.,	383–91.
58 See	below,	chap.	9:	“The	Imagination	of	Air	and	the	Collapse	of	Alchemy.”
59 Figulus,	293.
60 Ibid.,	295.
61 C. G.	Jung,	Dream	Analysis:	Notes	on	the	Seminar	Given	in	1928–1930,	ed.	W.	McGuire	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1984),	268.
62 The	yellow	traffic	light	means	neither	“go”	nor	“stop”	but	a	transitional	median	between	them.
63 J.	Ruska,	Tabula	Smaragdina:	Ein	Beitrag	zur	Geschichte	der	Hermetischen	Literatur	(Heidelberg:	C.	Winter,	1926),	156–57;
cited	in	P.	Dronke,	“Tradition	and	Innovation	in	Medieval	Western	Colour-Imagery,”	Eranos	Yearbook 41	(1972),	76.
64 Jung,	Dream	Analysis,	259.
65 Maria	Hebræa	(aka	Maria	the	Jewess):	“One	becomes	two,	two	becomes	three,	and	out	of	the	third	comes	the	one	as	the	fourth.”	C. 

G.	Jung,	“Psychology	and	Alchemy,”	CW	12: 2 6.	Source:	M.	Berthelot,	Collection	des	anciens	alchimistes	grecs	(Paris:	Georges
Steinheil,	1888).	An	opportunity	for	reinstating	the	missing	yellow	occurs	in	Jung’s	essay	“The	Visions	of	Zosimos”	(CW	13: 1 23).	Jung	is
discussing	the	idea	of	personification	(of	alchemical	substances),	and	the	Zosimos	text	introduces	the	figure	of	a	“Yellow	Man”	who	is
“not	pretty	to	look	upon	but	you	should	not	fear	him.”	Although	the	text	explicitly	invites	the	Yellow	Man	to	speak	and	give	counsel,
Jung’s	comments	(124)	skip	to	personifications	of	red	and	white.	The	problem	of	the	three	and	four	is	constellated	by	the	colors.	Jung
next	quotes	(125)	the	vigorous	alchemical	claim	that	“Four	are	the	natures	which	compose	the	philosophical	man.”	“The	elements	of	the
stone	are	four …”	Yet	the	third,	yellow,	has	been	neglected,	which,	in	fact,	leaves	only	three.
66 V.	Turner,	The	Forest	of	Symbols:	Aspects	of	Ndembu	Ritual	(Ithaca:	Cornell	Univ.	Press,	1967),	90.

	

8
Concerning	the	Stone:
Alchemical	Images	of	the	Goal
	
Prologue
We	begin	by	offering	tribute	to	the	ancestors,	by	acknowledging	the	almost	sixty	years	of	devotion	to
an	idea	in	which	still	lies	a	large	measure	of	hope	–	that	word	is	rare	in	my	vocabulary	–	that	the
intellect	of	the	human	animal	bears	witness	to	the	cosmos,	and	that	the	good	of	society	requires	both
the	courage	of	disciplined	imagination	and	the	courage	of	the	imaginative	disruption	of	discipline.
By	ancestors	I	mean	the	dead	whose	spirits	continue	to	protect	our	work	and	urge	it	onward.	What
we	say	is	for	them	and	to	them,	in	hope	that	they	be	not	displeased	and	that	they	return	our	gesture	by
blessing	the	spirit	of	the	living,	you,	here,	who	have	made	your	way	to	take	part	in	this	Tagung,
offering	the	generosity	of	audience.
When	the	Eranos	rituals	of	mind	began	in	the	thirties,	the	historical	world	was	at	the	threshold	of
peril.	Today	the	ecological	world	is	in	equal	peril.	However,	neither	the	historical	nor	the	ecological
stand	on	their	own;	their	perils	and	all	the	others	we	live	amidst	daily	reflect	the	culmination	in	this
century	of	the	perils	of	the	soul	owing	to	the	pathologies	of	the	spirit,	its	bulimia	called	economic
consumerism,	its	manic	inflation	called	technological	progress,	its	schizoid	Wortsalat	called
information,	its	paranoia	called	interpretative	meaning.	The	contrast	between	the	dedication	of	the
ancestors	of	Eranos	to	the	passionate	intellect	and	courageous	imagination,	my	way	of	describing
“spirit”	–	and	the	apathy	of	spirit	among	official	bureaucracies	of	church,	government,	arts,	and
academia	could	hardly	be	more	extreme.	Spirit	has	become	marginal,	and	only	in	the	marginal,
liminal,	occasional	moments	such	as	Eranos	can	spirit	return	from	its	exile.	I	have	come,	as	I	have
said	at	other	Eranos	meetings,	for	the	sake	of	the	Eranos	vision,	and	to	renew	my	tie	to	the	ancestors
and	to	the	vocation	that	I	feel	their	presence	will	claim	from	us.
I.	GOALS
Our	theme	–	the	ideas	and	images	of	the	alchemical	goal	–	cannot	be	better	introduced	than	by	this
statement	from	C. G.	Jung:	“The	goal	is	important	only	as	an	idea;	the	essential	thing	is	the	opus
which	leads	to	the	goal:	that	is	the	goal	of	a	Iifetime.” [1]
“The	goal	is	important	only	as	an	idea”	de-literalizes	goals	right	at	the	beginning.	We	may	not	take
alchemy’s	images	of	the	hermaphrodite,	the	gold,	or	the	red	stone	as	actualized	events.	Nor	may	we
even	consider	these	images,	and	the	many	others,	to	be	symbolic	representations	of	psychological
accomplishments.	Not	the	goal;	the	idea	of	goal;	goal	as	idea.
We	are	thus	obliged	to	inquire	into	the	goal	idea	before	we	look	at	goal	images,	asking	why	the
psyche	invents	these	goals.	What	is	the	function	of	goal-thinking,	goal-fantasying?	What	do	goals	do
for	the	soul?	Why	does	the	psyche	need	them?	Or	does	it?	Are	goals	merely	delusions,	projections,
overvalued	ideas,	or	neurotic	fictions	as	Alfred	Adler	said?	Before	we	turn	to	some	of	the	main
images	for	the	alchemical	goal,	we	best	make	sure	we	have	placed	them	in	the	acid	bath	so	that	not	a
trace	of	their	actuality	remains,	that	they	are	wholly	recognized	as	fantasies,	projects	of	the	psyche,

serving	some	pragmatic	purpose.	I	read	Jung	to	be	saying	the	purpose	of	the	goal-idea	is	to	impel	the
psyche	into	the	opus.	We	shall	have	extraordinary	and	marvelous	goals,	like	gold	and	pearls,	elixirs
and	healing	stones	of	wisdom,	because	then	we	shall	be	motivated	to	stay	the	course,	that	via
longissima	called	a	lifetime.	Were	the	goal	not	imagined	as	gold,	the	highest	value	possible,	were	the
goal	not	healing,	were	redemption	and	immortality	not	promised	in	the	image	at	the	outset,	who
would	risk	the	leaden	despair,	tortured	mortifications,	ageing	putrefactions,	the	sludge,	and	the
corrosive	fires?	An	inflated	vision	of	supreme	beauty	is	a	necessary	fiction	for	the	soul-making	opus
we	call	our	lifetime.
Moreover,	the	goal	(telos)	is	one	of	the	four	Aristotelian	causes, [2]	entering	into	the	consistency	of
each	event.	Telos	is	the	long-range	aim,	the	ultimate	final	purpose	or	“that	for	the	sake	of	which”	any
thing	or	act	exists.	These	goals,	as	inherent	to	the	work,	need	to	be	kept	interior	to	it,	as	the	toward
pull,	the	urging	impetus,	without	ever	being	exteriorised	into	an	objective	literal	aim.	The	purpose	of
the	work	is	purposiveness	itself,	not	this	or	that	formulated	purpose,	which	quickly	degenerates	into
an	ideology	and	just	as	quickly	loses	effectiveness	as	motive	power.	Not	the	attainable	but	the	idea	of
the	unattainable	stirs	the	course	of	action	–	in	fact,	the	task	set	by	the	theme,	resurrection,	is	not	to	be
attained.	Rather,	it	is	the	beauty	of	the	idealized	goal	that	has	brought	us	here.	One	such	idea	of	the
goal	is	the	Pearl	of	Great	Price,	the	name	of	an	early	printed	text	of	alchemy	by	Petrus	Bonus	of
Ferrara	(flor.	ca.	1323–30).
The	pearl	as	goal	expresses	the	idea	that	the	materia	prima,	the	worthless	gritty	bit	we	call	a
symptom	or	problem,	when	worked	on	constantly,	slowly	becomes	coated.	An	organic	process	turns
the	bit	of	grit	into	a	coagulated	jewel.	The	work	goes	on	in	the	depths	of	the	sea,	where	light	does	not
reach,	inside	the	hermetically	closed	oyster.	Then	it	must	be	fished	up	and	pried	loose,	extracted.	It	is
not	enough	to	have	a	pearl	in	the	depth	of	the	sea,	not	enough	to	be	gifted	with	riches	and	blessed	with
talents.	For	they	may	remain	there,	still	sealed	away	in	the	oyster	when	we	are	sealed	away	in	the
coffin.	It	is	a	“goal	hard	to	attain”	–	it	must	be	worked	at	as	does	the	oyster,	and	it	must	be	dived	for,
deep	into	the	dissolving	waters.
Moreover,	pearls	must	be	worn.	Pearls	kept	in	a	jewelry	box	lose	their	luster;	they	need	skin.	Skin
is	the	best	polishing	agent	for	pearls.	They	must	be	exposed,	taken	out,	into	life,	carried	about,	shown,
their	beauty	delighted	in.	Alchemy	spoke	of	the	congelation,	or	exposing	a	substance	to	cooling	in	the
air,	which	is	more	than	“reality	testing.”	Bringing	forth	to	shine	refers	as	well	to	the	revelation	of
beauty,	no	hiding	of	the	Venusian,	the	sensate	skin	as	the	place	of	the	pearl,	the	final	goal	of	the
magnum	opus,	the	sensitive	incarnate	nudity	of	our	aesthetic	reality	–	exposure.	Bonus	writes:
“Freely	ye	have	received,	freely	give.”	What	is	the	use	of	concealed	diamonds,	or	a	hidden	treasure,	to	the	world?	What	is	the	use
of	a	lighted	candle	if	it	be	placed	under	a	bushel?	It	is	the	innate	selfishness	of	the	human	heart	which	makes	these	persons	seek	a
pious	pretext	for	keeping	this	knowledge	from	mankind. [3]

Bonus’s	language	seems	to	say	that	the	esoteric	is	not	the	goal.	Despite	the	endless	warnings	in
alchemy	against	the	vulgar,	and	alchemy’s	deliberately	arcane	mystifications,	the	goal,	evidently,	is
display,	and	this	gives	another	sense	to	the	psychology	of	alchemy.	Rather	than	emphasis	upon	the
closed	vessel	as	the	modus	for	self-knowledge,	we	are	to	”freely	give.”	Revelation.
If	the	goal	is	an	idea	that	motivates	the	opus	all	along	the	way,	then	ideas	of	display	and	exposure
must	lead	the	mind.	Extraverted	display	not	as	the	last	stage	of	a	long	process	of	introverted	secrecy;
instead,	disclosure.	Man	revealed	is	man	known;	as	if	self-knowledge	were	only	truly	that	in	the	act	of
revealing	that	self;	oneself	and	the	glass	vessel,	the	vas	hermeticum,	one.	The	conjunction	between
container	and	contained.	Then	containment	becomes	the	transparency	of	each	act.	As	if	transparency
was	containment.	My	substance	is	my	appearance.	My	inner	is	my	outer.	No	hidden	inner	truth	behind
outer	pretense.	Remember	Adolf	Portmann	and	the	idea	of	Selbstdarstellung	(self-display)	as	the

presentation	of	each	animal’s	Innerlichkeit	(inwardness).	Jung,	using	the	language	of	alchemy,	writes
of	an	innate	extraversion	in	the	sulfur	of	the	opus:	it	will	out.	And,	Bonus	gives	the	reason	with	his
phrase:	“What	is	the	use	of	concealed	diamonds	…	to	the	world?”	To	the	world,”	that	little	phrase,
suggests	a	wholly	social,	political,	ecological,	communal	aspect	to	the	entire	opus,	an	unnamed	goal
named”	world.”	We	shall	come	back	to	this.
Bonus	mentions	the	diamond.	Diamonds	are	not	usual	alchemical	symbols,	but	as	the	most	perfect
and	most	precious	stone,	they	deserve	our	notice.	The	root	of	the	word,	dama,	expresses	power.	It	is
related	to	“dominate,”	“tame”;	“adamant”	means	an	impregnable	hardness,	and	hard	as	steel.	In
Western	natural	history,	which	has	become	for	us	mere	folklore	and	symbolism,	the	diamond	had	the
properties	of	the	lapis	in	that	it	was	both	a	poison	and	a	cure.	Pliny,	for	instance,	claimed	the	diamond
“overcomes	and	neutralizes	poisons,	dispels	delirium	and	banishes	groundless	perturbations	of	the
mind.” [4]	Like	Vajra,	Indra’s	thunderbolt,	or	the	Buddha’s	diamond	ecstasy	or	diamond	throne,	or
that	diamond	throne	on	which	the	Angel	of	God	sits	in	Dante’s	Purgatorio	(Canto	 :	104–5),	the
diamond	mind	can	overpower	and	subject	disorder	to	spiritual	crystallization	and	perfected	clarity.
Not	just	the	mind:	the	Japanese	Shin	sect	speaks	of	a	heart	strong	as	diamond,	which	I	read	to
correspond	with	Henry	Corbin’s	himma	of	the	heart,	the	power	which	perceives	imaginal	realities	as
hard	and	luminous	and	fixed	as	a	diamond.
These	precious	stones	are	gathered	in	the	Valley	of	Diamonds.	Alchemical	texts	often	describe	the
geographies	for	locating	the	metals	and	minerals	and	discriminating	one	kind	of	sulfur	or	salt	from
another	according	to	geography.	The	geographical	descriptions	symbolize	with	psychological	states.
For	instance,	the	inaccessible	diamond	valley	is	a	place	of	intense	heat,	where	the	diamonds	are	in	the
power	of	serpents	or	adhere	to	sheep’s	flesh.	Great	birds	of	prey,	vultures	and	eagles,	eat	the	flesh	and
carry	the	diamonds	up	to	their	nests.	They	are	even	called	“eagle-stones.”
I	have	written	about	eagle	images	in	dreams,	and	how	this	great	bird	of	the	spirit	can	visit	a	human
life	not	only	with	transcendent	revelation	but	also	with	intimations	of	paranoia. [5]	Precisely	here	the
toxic	and	the	curative	become	indistinguishable.	What	is	impregnable	is	also	self-satisfied	and	seIfenclosed,	as	the	lore	says	of	the	eagle;	it	dies	because	its	powerful	beak	never	stops	growing	so	that
the	beak’s	slowly	increasing	curvature	eventually	prevents	the	bird	from	taking	in	food,	until	finally	it
punctures	its	own	throat.
Fierce,	impregnable,	unbreakable,	steel-willed.	In	the	Moslem	world,	and	in	China	as	well,	there
are	close	and	interchangeable	expressions	for	diamonds	and	swords.	The	Arabic	word	for	diamond	is
almas,	and	in	Khirgiz,	almas	also	means	steel.	For	the	warrior,	the	children	of	eagles,	to	live	and	die
by	the	sword	is	also	to	live	and	die	by	the	diamond-body,	to	be	fully	self-realised.
In	order	that	the	diamond	satisfy	the	alchemical	requirements	for	the	goal,	adamantine	hardness	is
not	enough.	Not	enough	to	shine	in	the	dark,	as	the	lore	says;	not	enough	that	it	be	the	most	luminous
and	powerful	presentation	of	self-sure	enlightenment;	not	enough	that	it	dominate	confusions.	It	must
as	well	be	vulnerable.	Else	this	adamantine	quality	of	soul	be	poisonous	as	described	by	the	PseudoAristotle,	by	medieval	Muslim	writers,	and	also	by	Hindu	texts. [6]
What	then	prevails	against	the	diamond?	Pliny	(and	Augustine,	in	The	City	of	God,	 : 4)	say	that	it
can	be	softened	by	goat’s	blood	and	ram’s	blood	though	it	is	unassailable	by	iron,	fire,	and	smoke.
Sacrificial	blood	–	for	ram	and	goat	are	sacrificial	animals	–	has	more	effect	than	the	furious
intensities	of	the	iron	will.	Dioscorides,	in	the	first	century	ce,	claims	that	lead	can	pulverize	a
diamond;	later	Syriac	and	Arabic	writers	state	that	lead	“makes	the	diamonds	suffer”;	and	a	Persian
text	by	Muhammed	Ibn	Mansur	of	the	thirteenth	century	states	that	lead	breaks	the	diamond. [7]
Of	course,	lead,	the	softest	of	the	alchemical	metals	would	make	no	mark	on	an	actual	diamond,	let
alone	break	it;	but	in	alchemical	psychology,	sorrow,	solitude	and	misery	can	break	even	the	most
indomitable	spirit;	and	the	indomitable	spirit	in	its	inaccessible	valley	or	in	its	eagle	eyre,	with	its	allIX

XXI

clear	paranoid	certitude	will	indeed	be	subject	to	just	these	attacks	of	leaden	despair.
The	alchemical	idea	of	gold	is	difficult	to	recapture	today	except	through	fantastical	language,
since	gold	has	been	debased	to	mean	vulgar	gold,	gold	of	so	many	francs	a	kilo,	dollars	an	ounce.	As
Bonus	says:	“The	gold	of	Alchemy	is	not	true	but	fantastical	gold.” [8]	Only	language	retains	the
golden	touch,	the	heart	of	gold,	the	winner ’s	gold,	the	golden	lads	and	lassies,	golden	hair	and	crown
of	gold,	golden	apples	of	the	sun,	golden	age,	golden	key …
Once	it	was	imagined	that	the	corporeal	substance	of	the	gods	was	gold.	Pythagoras,	the	story	goes,
had	a	golden	thigh,	which	he	exhibited	in	the	theater	showing	that	his	origins	were	suprahuman,
immortal.	For	gold	is	the	incorruptible	not	because	like	a	diamond	it	is	hard	but	because	it	is	the	very
body	of	the	divine.	Homer	uses	“golden”	as	an	epithet	for	the	divine,	and	not	only	Apollo	and
Aphrodite	are	golden;	Dionysus	has	golden	hair	(Hesiod),	as	does	Zephyrus	(Alceus)	and	Eros
(Anacreon).	Truly,	when	we	travel	in	the	realms	of	gold,	we	are	leaving	the	mortal	condition,	and	so
gold-making	as	a	telos	of	alchemy	clearly	touches	upon	the	theme	of	resurrection.
The	two	ancient	methods	of	gilding	(until	the	high	Middle	Ages)	involved	the	two	components	we
notice	again	and	again:	on	the	one	hand,	intense	heat,	fire-gilding;	on	the	other	hand,	suffering,	or
gilding	by	means	of	lead.	In	the	first,	an	amalgam	of	gold	and	mercury	covers	the	material.	Fire
drives	out	the	mercury	by	vaporizing	it,	leaving	the	substance	coated	with	gold.	The	second	method
dips	the	substance	in	a	molten	lead	bath,	a	corrosive	acid	removes	the	lead,	again	leaving	the
substance	gilded.	Both	methods	run	the	risk	of	poisoning,	either	by	mercury	or	by	lead.	The	iosis,	the
process	of	reddening	or	purpling	corresponding	with	the	gold-work,	means	also	poison.
A	gilded	object,	say	a	statuette	of	a	divinity,	had	a	higher	value	than	one	of	pure	gold,	because	the
gilded	object	had	been	transmuted.	It	was	an	achieved	gold,	having	moved	from	the	mundane	to	the
extramundane,	from	the	thnetos	condition	of	mortality	or	naturalness	to	the	gilded	condition	of
eternal	godlikeness.	Pure	gold	as	given	by	nature	in	fragments	and	nuggets	had	not	been	worked,
merely	given,	the	opus	contra	naturam	not	accomplished.
Other	modes	of	refining,	reported	by	Forbes [9]	as	having	been	invented	after	1100	 	are	equally
metaphorical.	We	can	hear	through	the	metallurgical	descriptions	to	the	psychological	resonances.
Gold	ore	was	melted,	fragments	of	sulfur	laid	on	the	molten	gold,	stirred	by	a	black	stick	of	charcoal
(which	itself	does	not	contain	moisture),	and	then	poured	into	a	rigid	iron	mould,	its	form	fixed	by
iron.	When	cooled	and	solidified,	the	piece	was	beaten	on	an	anvil	to	get	all	the	black	out	of	it.	The
black	was	the	sulfur	that	had	drawn	the	silver	from	the	ore,	leaving	the	gold	pure.	These	methods	used
salt,	nitric	acid,	alum,	sal	ammoniac,	that	is,	bitter,	pungent,	and	corrosive	agents	in	order	to	raise
gold	to	its	finest	condition.
Did	the	alchemists	make	gold?	How	often	that	question	returns	and	how	the	mind	clots	trying	to
give	reply.	Clearly,	the	question	sets	up	a	literalist	answer:	either	yes	or	no.	All	of	our	Cartesian	and
positivist	history	is	packed	into	the	question.	The	literalist	answer	emphasizes	the	gold	as	the	end	of
the	work	and	the	making	as	a	means	to	it.	A	psychological	answer	collapses	the	goal	into	the	way,	the
substance	into	the	process,	the	fact	into	its	fantasy,	the	gold	into	the	making	(poesis).	Then	the	end
(gold)	serves	the	means	(making),	the	idea	of	gold	motivates	the	making,	justifies	the	struggles,	and
gives	them	the	highest	value.
Once	we	release	gold	from	its	financial	materialization,	we	can	imagine	the	desire	for	gold	as
feelings	already	familiar:	to	be	good	as	gold,	ourselves	and	our	golden	hair	at	last	one,	to	be
permanently	glowing	and	untarnished,	to	have	a	consciousness	ever-shining	like	dawn,	like	the	sun,
without	fits	of	darkening,	moods	and	meltings,	to	have	the	lucky	golden	touch,	warm,	radiant,
cheerful,	spreading	light,	and	a	value	beyond	corruption	and	beyond	price.	Gold	is	the	lion	and	the
crown	and	the	king,	the	key	to	the	kingdom,	one’s	own	kingdom	come,	to	come	into	one’s	own.	Able
to	be	beaten	and	beaten,	yet	never	crack	under	the	hammer,	to	be	bent,	thin	as	a	leaf	and	so	cover
CE

mundane	things	with	the	shine	of	glory.
By	imagining	the	goal	as	feelings	already	familiar,	we	are	reiterating	my	goal	of	this	talk	about
goals,	that	is,	we	are	deliteralising	the	goal	by	removing	it	from	a	temporal	presence	and	activating	it
as	an	idea	already	present	in	the	human	condition	and	intermittently	available	to	our	feelings,
spurring	the	desire	for	supreme	values.
It	takes	a	supreme	fiction	to	present	the	supreme	value.	The	spirit	approach	takes	these	fictions	of
value	as	metaphysical	realities,	and	measures	progress	toward	them	in	literal	stages.	The	soul
approach	maintains	the	images	as	supreme	values	but	takes	them	always	as	fictions,	thereby
protecting	the	values	from	the	inflating	eagle’s	talons.	The	precious	goals	of	alchemy	are	neither
physical	achievements	(they	did	not	make	concrete	gold)	nor	metaphysical	truths	(they	did	not	redeem
themselves).	We	are	not	in	the	realm	of	metaphysics	or	physics.	The	opus	is	neither	physical	nor
metaphysical	–	as	alchemy	itself	declares	in	one	of	its	sagest	warnings:	“Beware	of	the	physical	in	the
material.”
It	does	not	say	beware	of	the	material,	for	the	material	is	the	concrete,	the	laboratory,	the	fire	and
stove,	the	charcoal	and	the	acid,	the	lead	and	mercury,	the	tough	struggle	with	the	actual	mess	of	life.
“Beware	of	the	physical	in	the	material”	warns	about	the	physis,	whether	physical	or	metaphysical,	the
literalizing,	substantiating	mind	which	forgets	the	primacy	of	imaginatio.
When	alchemists	insist	that	everything	at	the	beginning	is	not	the	ordinary,	the	vulgar,	the	common,
they	are	saying	we	are	not	dealing	with	the	natural	but	with	the	sophisticated.	The	literal	physis,	the
substance	as	such,	is	washed	so	that	its	interiority,	its	imaginative	principle	stands	forth.	We	must	start,
as	Benedictus	Figulus	says,	in	the	caelum,	the	skyblue	firmament	over	our	heads,	the	mind	already	in
the	blue	of	heaven,	imagination	opened.	The	blue	caelum	of	imagination [10]	gives	to	the	opus	a	rockhard	standpoint	from	above	downward,	just	as	firm	and	solid	as	literal	physical	reality.	A	sapphire
stone	already	at	the	beginning.	The	sophic	activity	of	the	mind	–	and	sophia	also	is	clothed	in	blue	–
when	dealing	with	concrete	matters	must	be	anchored	in	the	imagination	else	it	be	lured	into
identifying	the	material	with	the	physical.	Since	imaginatio	is	both	goal	and	a	starting	point,	the	goal
as	idea	serves	to	remove	the	mind	at	the	very	beginning	to	a	utopic,	non-physis	condition,	comparable
with	Henry	Corbin’s	many	descriptions	of	the	imaginal.	The	risk	all	through	alchemy,	and	which	this
warning	about	physical	points	to,	is	the	loss	of	imagination	to	the	physical	spirit,	the	risk	of
poisoning	by	literalisms	of	the	spirit	as	we	work	with	the	material.
The	Christian	spiritual	allegorization	of	the	alchemical	opus,	emphasized	by	Jung,	is	nowhere
more	evident	than	in	these	images	of	the	goal	achieved	after	torturous	sufferings.	But	my	intention	is
somewhat	different.	For	if	we	regard	alchemy	through	the	Christian	lens,	that	is,	mainly	as	a	spiritual
discipline,	then	it	becomes	merely	another	–	even	if	highly	differentiated	and	materialized	–	allegory
for	the	Christian	opus.	Then,	why	alchemy,	why	bother	with	it,	learn	it;	why	can	we	claim,	as	did
Jung,	its	essentiality	for	psychological	work?	If	it	is	merely	another	version	of	the	Christian	opus,
then	the	Christian	opus	is	the	essential	and	alchemy	a	mere	variation,	an	accresence,	not	fundamental.
The	basic	story	of	the	synoptic	gospels	suffices.
Instead,	I	prefer	to	read	alchemy,	and	its	goals,	as	images	of	psychic	conditions	always	available.
Then	the	pathologized	aspects	of	the	grit	and	the	pearl,	the	lead	and	the	diamond,	the	hammer	and	the
gold	are	inseparable.	The	pain	is	not	prior	to	the	goal,	like	crucifixion	before	resurrection,	but	pain
and	gold	are	coterminous,	codependent,	corelative.	The	pearl	is	also	always	grit,	an	irritation	as	well
as	a	luster,	the	gilding	also	a	poisoning.
This	accords	with	life,	for	we	are	strangely	disconsolate	even	in	a	moment	of	radiance;	we	suffer
an	inmost	irritation	simultaneous	with	exhibition,	for	display	harbours	as	well	the	feelings	of	shame
and	awkwardness.	The	superiority	of	clear-sighted	surety	–	when	we	truly	see	and	know,	brilliant	as	a
diamond,	as	an	eagle	–	always	carries	with	it,	unredeemed,	the	loneliness	of	distance	and	the

insensitivity	of	certitude.	So,	too,	gold,	again	and	again	will	press	for	testing	in	the	fire,	ever	new
blackness	appearing,	dark	crows	with	the	yellow	sun,	calling	for	ever	more	corrosions	and	salts,
alums,	and	hammerings.
Each	moment	of	shining	forth	invites	the	hammer.	Gold’s	perfection	is	always	at	risk,	the	risk	in
fact	determines	gold’s	value,	else	how	prove	its	incorruptibility?	Yet,	the	perfected	condition	with	its
internal	glow	is	also	a	poisonous	state	of	splendid	solar	isolation	that	drives	out	the	black	and
separates	itself	from	the	lunar	silver.	Ever	thinner,	ever	more	spread,	touching	into	all	things	in	this
world,	its	beauty	lies	precisely	in	this	friable,	delicate,	stretched-out	state	that	allows	it	to	gild	the
world,	giving	a	glow	of	the	incorruptible	to	the	decay	inherent	in	all	matters.
II.	OPERATIONS
The	images	of	the	goal	–	pearl	of	great	price,	jade	body,	diamond,	gold,	elixir,	lapis	philosophorum	–
correlate	with	particular	operations.	For	instance,	when	one	employs	the	askesis	of	torturing,	this
mortificatio	brings	about	the	complete	blackening	called	nigredo.	The	life	of	the	material	must	be
wholly	and	fully	mortified,	that	is,	killed	dead.	All	usual	responses	no	longer	effective,	not	even	as
possibilities.	Then	the	nigredo,	blacker	than	black,	like	the	crow’s	head,	has	been	achieved.
The	state	of	blackness	corresponds	with	the	reductive	work	of	psychological	examination,	mainly
memorial:	searching	out	old	roots,	pounding	the	past	for	its	shames	and	traumas,	grinding	the
smallest	seeds	so	that	they	not	spring	up	with	fresh	illusions	and	fresh	despairs.	The	mortificatio
means	going	back	and	down	into	the	dark	pathologized	deeps	of	the	soul.	The	nigredo	mind’s	activity
is	characterized	by	explanations,	especially	those	that	search	out	origins	and	causal	explanations
which	are	concrete,	material,	historical,	and	fateful.	The	nigredo	and	its	mortification	occur	not	just
once.	The	mind’s	explanatory	attacks	on	the	soul	occur	each	time	an	accomplishment	falls	apart	–	and
another	descensus	ad	inferos	begins.	Once	again,	remorse,	repentance,	self-punishment,	and	a	turn	to
fate.	The	fateful	turn	reveals	the	hidden	purpose	of	the	mortificatio	and	the	nigredo:	the	objectification
of	psychic	events	beyond	personal	worth	and	intention.	Something	is	being	done	to	me	beyond	my
doing.	What	is	happening	is	a	divine	or	natural	process;	I	am	its	victim;	fiat	mihi.	Not	I	occasioned
this	despair	by	my	faults;	fate	has,	and	so	eventually	I	come	to	the	dawning	recognition	that
something	beyond	my	soul	has	intentions	with	my	soul	that	the	blackened	mind	cannot	envision.	A
basic	level	of	psychological	understanding	is	characterized	by	nigredo:	causal,	reductive,	depressing,
or	incomprehensibly	dark.
Other	operations	correlate	with	other	states	of	soul.	For	instance,	the	separatio	distinguishes	the
elemental	seeds	within	the	massa	confusa,	that	primary	condition	in	which	sulfuric	desires,	mercurial
intuitions,	and	salt-bitter	pains	are	all	mixed	together.	Separation	disconnects,	allowing	ideas,
insights,	and	intuitions	to	appear	as	such,	free	of	the	sting	of	recriminations	and	remorse,	and	freed	as
well	of	the	sulfuric	compulsion	to	rush	insights	into	action.	Mercury	loses	its	sulfuric	smoky
urgency,	sulfur	its	mercurial	sporadic	fragmentation,	and	salt	both	the	fantasies	of	attachment	that
feed	its	self-abused	feeling	and	the	willfulness	that	urges	revenge.	In	other	words,	the	substances
become	themselves	by	separating	them	one	from	another.
And	so	with	the	operation	of	putrefaction,	which	works	particularly	on	and	with	sulfur.	Putrefaction
refers	to	the	inner	heat	that	brings	about	decay.	It	is	an	organic	fantasy	of	disintegration,	as	if	ripening
and	rotting	can	hardly	be	distinguished.	Those	encrustations	that	psychology	calls	fixations,
resistances,	and	compulsions,	give	up	their	habitual	routines.	The	psyche	surrenders	its	unity	and
identity,	falling	into	a	messy	yet	fecund	disarray,	like	a	compost	pile.	Putrefaction	is	particularly
suited	to	the	inner	change	of	any	well-established	form.	It	is	especially	necessary	when	life	loses	its
organic	imagination	and	instead	has	become	mechanical,	literal,	and	spiritual.

Remember:	it	is	the	nature	of	each	bit	of	psyche	to	want	to	persist	as	it	is.	What	succeeds	wants	to
continue	as	it	is.	The	drive	to	persist	and	resist	alteration	is	the	very	nature	of	substance,	according	to
Spinoza.	Thus	there	will	always	be	a	profound	and	natural	resistance	to	the	psyche’s	own	innate
movement.	That	alchemy	imagines	movement	in	soul	by	means	of	the	repulsive	rot	of	putrefactions
and	the	killing	torture	of	mortification	shows	how	obdurate	and	compacted,	shall	we	say	stone-like,	is
the	stuff	of	the	psyche	and	how	hard	indeed	it	is	to	bring	about	change.
I	have	mentioned	only	a	few	of	the	operations:	separation,	mortification,	putrefaction.	Some	texts
have	as	many	as	forty-eight,	all	lined	up	in	an	order,	from	first	to	last.	From	an	alchemical	dictionary
you	could	collect	many	more.	The	differentiation	of	techniques	and	tools,	methods	and	processes,	and
giving	each	particular	bit	of	hand-work	its	instrument,	its	intensity,	and	its	own	name	belongs
essentially	to	the	craft	of	any	work.	When	the	plumber	arrives	or	the	car	breaks	down,	a	florid	new
vocabulary	blooms	from	the	disaster.
Of	all	the	terms,	I	must	mention	especially	one	pair	of	operations	that	have	come	to	stand	for	the
work	of	alchemy	in	general:	solve	et	coagula.	Dissolve	and	coagulate.	Whatever	is	permanent	and
habitual	must	be	dissolved	by	heat	or	water,	and	whatever	is	wishy-washy,	floating,	uncertain,	and
vaporous	must	be	thickened,	hardened,	fixed	and	reduced.
These	forty-eight	operations	conceived	as	one	process	through	rime	reflect	another	of	the
fundamental	fantasies	which	permeate	alchemical	thinking:	alchemy	as	an	art	of	time.	What	makes	the
work	actually	work	is	knowledge	of	the	secret	of	time.	Just	how	long	does	each	operation	take?	How
much	time	is	required	for	the	gold-making	work	to	be	completed?	Bonus	of	Ferrara,	in	a	chapter	on
the	“Chief	Difficulties	of	Alchemy,”	writes:
The	time	required	for	the	whole	work	is	stated	by	Rasis	to	be	one	year;	Rosinus	fixes	it	at	nine	months;	others	at	seven;	others	at
forty,	and	yet	others	at	eighty	days. [11]

Part	of	knowing	the	secret	of	the	time	is	knowing	which	steps	precede	and	which	follow	others.	Time
shall	be	ordered.	Stages.	Success	in	the	work	depends	upon	succession;	procedures	proceed	through
processes;	the	opus	is	made	of	operations.	Albertus	Magnus	insists	that	specific	steps	follow	upon
others:
Above	all	I	exhort	you	to	be	careful	not	to	make	any	mistake,	first	in	the	pounding,	then	in	sublimation,	then	in	the	fixation,	then	in
the	calcination,	then	in	the	dissolution,	then	in	the	distillation,	then	in	the	coagulation.	Perform	all	operations	properly,	in	their
correct	order,	and	you	will	not	go	wrong.	If	you	reverse,	or	interfere	with	the	order	in	any	way,	you	are	sure	to	get	into
difficulty. [12]

Here	we	see	the	obsessive	literalism	of	laboratory	magic.	Albertus	seems	to	present	an	infallible
method	utterly	independent	of	the	condition	of	the	material,	the	quality	of	heat,	the	nature	of	the
vessel.	His	orders	sound	like	an	instruction	book.	“Perform	all	operations	properly,	in	their	correct
order,	and	you	will	not	go	wrong.”
However,	starting	points	differ	since	the	materia	prima	differs	from	case	to	case.	For	instance,	if
the	primary	material	(or	presenting	complaint	as	psychology	now	names	the	originating	condition)
that	starts	the	alchemical	opus	is	listless	abulia,	neurasthenic	lassitude	and	somnolence,	then	one	can
hardly	begin	by	pounding.	Pounding	is	effective	as	a	first	step	only	if	the	material	is	hard-shelled	and
thick-skinned.	Pounding	the	dissolved	watery	flux	of	a	childlike	psyche	will	not	produce	anything.	If
the	condition	shows	a	preponderance	of	sulfur,	hot-tempered	and	willful,	then	sublimation,	or	“rising
to	the	upper	part	of	the	vessel”	(as	sublimation	is	alchemically	defined),	may	have	to	occur	again	and
again	in	between	and	along	with	other	procedures	and	not	merely	once	as	one	step	in	an	order	of
steps.
Of	course,	in	the	alchemical	laboratory,	like	in	any	kitchen	of	the	house	or	of	the	soul,	certain

operations	come	before	others.	You	don’t	boil	before	you	chop;	you	don’t	wield	the	cutting	sword	of
acid	criticism	until	you	have	first	consolidated	some	matter	in	a	vessel;	you	can’t	evaporate	until	you
have	first	turned	up	the	heat,	just	as	you	cannot	coagulate	into	a	relationship	until	you	have	first
dissolved	in	passionate	fusion.
Nonetheless,	“first	things	first”	means	priorities	(a	prioris)	as	well	as	sequences	(in	time).	What
comes	first	and	what	comes	after	depends	not	merely	on	the	rules	of	techne	and	praxis.	Priority	refers
as	well	to	value.	To	what	we	give	first	place	therefore	returns	us	to	our	starting	point,	those	ideal
goals	of	highest	value	that	all	operations	serve.	And	since	these	goals	–	diamond	and	pearl,	rubedo
and	lapis,	elixir	of	immortality	–	are	imaginal	and	mythical,	they	are	beyond	time,	dissolving	the
literalism	of	the	laboratory	and	its	measures	of	time	into	images,	rather	than	temporal	steps,	images
of	drying	and	moistening,	distilling	and	condensing,	therewith	moving	the	method	of	alchemy	itself
into	myth.
Then	we	recognize	that	we	are	in	one	or	another	of	these	mythical	places,	enduring	the	torture	of
being	flayed	alive,	or	volatilizing	into	empty-headed	thin	air,	or	fixating	upon	a	despairing	memory.
Not	sequence	of	steps	but	the	idea	of	sequence	serves	to	remind	the	practitioner,	first,	that	there	are
other	places	to	be	and,	second,	that	each	and	every	single	place	connects	with	the	overriding	goal	of
the	opus.	This	mode	of	viewing	the	phases	of	the	work	could	be	called	mercurial	(and	Mercurius	was
one	name	for	the	goal),	because	it	values	each	moment	for	its	multiple	possibilities,	its	potential	for
transformation	in	any	direction	without	prescribed	course.
Even	if	the	illustrated	texts	sometimes	show	the	twelve,	sixteen	or	forty-eight	technical	operations
as	actual	steps	like	a	ladder	of	ascent,	each	stage	the	ground	of	the	one	above	it,	nonetheless	each	step
is	a	separable	moment.	Terms	for	the	processes	are	therefore	descriptions	of	actions	as	images.	Each
provides	recognition	of	what	one	is	doing	and	where	one	is	standing	rather	than	only	prescriptions	of
what	should	follow	upon	what.	The	operations	appeal	to	imagination,	to	reflection,	and	to	mythical
amplifications	of	the	craft	of	action	rather	than	to	the	moral	will	of	instruction.
I	regard	each	rung	for	itself	and	apart	from	the	ladder,	each	step	a	necessary	standing	place
offering	understanding	for	where	one	is	and	what	one	is	undergoing.	And,	therefore,	I	understand	the
operations	of	alchemy	as	topoi	rather	than	as	pieces	of	a	system	for	achieving	the	utopic.	The	best
support	for	this	disjunctive,	asystematic,	and	imagistic	reading	of	the	texts	are	the	texts	themselves
which	can	never	solve	the	question	of	time,	neither	in	regard	to	the	length	of	the	opus,	nor	through
agreement	as	to	which	operations	precede	and	succeed	others.
If	we	literalize	the	ordering	of	time	through	phases	towards	a	goal,	we	remain	entrapped	in	what	I
cautioned	against	earlier:	the	notion	of	goal	as	a	state	achieved	over	time	rather	than	as	a	mythical
idea:	goal	as	an	end	state	rather	than	a	telos	or	impelling	image.	The	literalism	of	goal	and	the
literalism	of	spiritual	progress	through	steps	and	stages	is	the	bane	of	alchemical	language,	capturing
the	imagination	of	alchemical	thinking,	and	the	depth	psychology	that	has	followed	from	it.	Steps	and
stages	in	alchemy	represent	the	historical,	developmental	thinking	that	permeates	the	Judeo-Christian
tradition.	The	imprisonment	of	thinking	historically,	chronologically,	developmentally	necessitates
that	other	aspect	of	the	same	tradition:	freedom	from	history	–	eschatology,	apocalypse,	and
resurrection	as	a	condition	beyond	time.	Were	we	to	abandon	historical	thinking,	we	might	also	no
longer	be	so	engaged	in	freedom	from	it.	We	can	break	out	of	history,	out	of	time	and	process	and
development,	the	moment	we	think	in	images,	engaged	in	each	thing	as	it	presents	itself,	each	step	for
itself,	rather	than	linked	by	a	process	of	individuation.
III.	THE	STONE
Why	stone?	What	is	stoneness;	stonitude	?	What	in	particular	does	this	image	of	the	goal	say	to	the

soul	and	what	does	it	have	to	do	with	resurrection? [13]	Are	we	to	come	back	as	stones?	Are	the
stones	lying	about	our	feet,	paving	our	streets	and	stuck	into	our	walls	reincarnated	ancestors?	Is	that
where	the	dead	now	live:	in	the	pebbles	and	cobbles	we	pass	by	with	little	care?	Are	the	cemetery’s
gravestones	placed	there	to	secure	the	dead	from	rising,	to	separate	two	worlds,	or	are	the	dead
already	risen	into	the	perduring	condition	of	granite	and	marble?	If	we	lived	in	the	dreamtime	of
Australia	and	each	held	a	Tjurunga	in	the	hand,	perhaps	we	would	feel	that	resurrected	life	indeed
lives	in	stones.
To	begin	with,	the	stone	brings	facticity,	objectivity.	It	stands	there	emblematic	of	the	final	freedom
from	subjectivity.	To	be	stonelike	is	to	be	in	the	world	like	everything	else,	among	everything	else,
hard,	simple,	one,	compact,	defined,	unambiguous,	occupying	definite	space	and	of	indisputable
durée.	Yet,	each	stone	different	from	every	other	stone,	fully	individualized,	like	a	self-enclosed
monad,	a	solid	presentation	of	this	place	and	no	other.
That	stones	give	rise	to	philosophical	metaphors	–	the	eachness	of	William	James;	Johnson’s
famous	refutation	of	Berkeley;	the	durée	of	Bergson;	the	monad	of	Leibniz	–	also	states	something
about	their	importance	for	intellectual	fantasy.	There	is	something	intellectual	about	the	stone.	It
offers	itself	as	exemplar	of	philosophical	permanence	–	a	dream	as	old	as	Parmenides,	as	old	as	the
pyramids	–	for	stasis	and	basis.	To	have	thoughts	as	indestructible	as	a	stone,	to	have	arguments	like
builder ’s	blocks,	indisputable	and	infrangible,	to	buttress	with	rock-solid	foundations	–	this	is	what
the	mind	in	its	countless	attempts	to	fiction	the	cosmos	so	diligently	desires.	The	power	of	the	stone
impregnates	fantasy	to	find	meanings	for	the	petra	genetrix.	The	mind	turns	back	on	itself	by	this
stubborn	unthinking	thing	to	search	out	the	reason	in	the	stone	for	the	fantasies	it	fosters.	This	search
for	meaning	and	its	frustration	was	brilliantly,	overwhelmingly	presented	at	Eranos	in	1988	by	David
Miller, [14]	surely	one	of	the	most	extraordinary	pieces	of	intellectual	amplification	ever	to	have
graced	the	Eranos	conferences.
Of	all	that	one	learns	from	Miller ’s	essay,	one	thought	stands	very	clear:	the	stone	does	not	allow
itself	to	be	held	in	meaning.	It	does	not	yield	to	understanding.	Its	capacity	to	resist	mental	penetration
is	the	primary	wound	to	human	hybris.	Like	Sisyphus	and	his	stone,	like	Prometheus	and	his	rock,	it
defeats	all	human	effort,	and	therefore	no	word	better	symbolizes	with	stone	than	God.
The	stone	wounds,	even	the	smallest,	like	gravel	in	the	shoe	or	in	the	kidney.	Ignored	and	common,
nonetheless	to	be	a	stone	requires	that	you	be	taken	into	account.	Even	a	river	must	take	account	of	the
stones	in	its	bed.	The	flowing	water	alters	its	course	simply	because	you,	the	stone,	are	there.	You	lie
still,	no	action,	yet	the	river	diverts	accordingly.	If	you	are	a	stone	in	the	ground,	the	roots	of	the
hugest	tree	must	find	a	way	around	you.	Growth,	organic	movement,	the	process	of	life	must	adapt	to
your	being	even	if	you	are	utterly	passive.	Beharrlichkeit	ist	alles;	stur,	stumm,	still,	even	stupid:	such
stony	silence.
The	alchemical	lapis	was	considered	a	ripened	metal,	a	seed	that	had	been	brought	to	maturity	by
the	opus;	it	was	the	made	soul.	But,	before	it	could	be	ripened,	it	had	already	been	in	nature	for	a
long,	long	time,	the	Stone	Age	(not	the	Golden	Age	of	Hesiod).	The	stone	has	time	in	it,	filled	with
time,	a	long	life,	the	time	of	the	world	itself.	Having	been	present	through	all	time,	it	must	of	course
be	a	lapis	philosophorum,	a	philosophical	stone,	stone	as	philosopher,	stone	of	wisdom.	Because	its
body	condenses	in	one	solid	object	the	history	of	time,	it	can	overcome	the	conditions	of	history	and
serve	as	elixir	to	give	longevity.
All	the	basic	operations,	whether	48,	24,	16,	or	12,	and	all	the	basic	substances	–	salt,	sulfur,	lead,
mercury,	the	tetrasoma	–	are	embodied	in	the	stone.	The	opus	stops	here.	As	the	operations	on	the
substances	conclude	here,	so	the	substances	reach	their	goal	and,	by	looking	back	on	them	from	their
achieved	telos	in	the	lapis,	we	can	see	more	clearly	why	each	was	so	essential.	It	must	be	composed	of
lead	so	that	the	alchemical	stone	will	have	weight,	gravity,	density,	ponderousness;	that	is,	the	ability

to	ponder	and	outstay	whatever	events	befall	it,	and	the	depth	that	only	saturnine	tragedy,	isolation	and
melancholy	can	reach.	So,	too,	it	is	made	of	salt,	for	it	remembers	and	has	the	interiority	of	blood,
sweat,	urine,	and	tears,	a	sensibility	that	keeps	pain	acute	and	the	volatile	imagination	from
dissipating.
The	stone	is	made	of	sulfur	else	it	would	not	be	rich	and	fat,	vital	and	combustible,	and	so	would
not	be	able	to	tincture	and	multiply.	Without	sulfur	it	could	bear	no	progeny,	be	but	plain	matter,
colorless,	odorless,	a	sanctified	concept	of	pure	spirit	only.	As	well,	the	stone	is	the	perfection	of
mercury,	a	compositum	oppositorum,	unable	to	be	captured	by	definition,	though	nothing	in	nature	be
more	sharply	defined.	Light	and	heavy,	poisonous	and	healing,	huge	in	effect	and	miniscule	in	size,
bearing	innumerable	messages	and	lying	about	in	multiples	of	millions,	though	differently	unique	in
each	instance,	the	lapis	is	able,	because	of	mercurial	fusibility,	to	participate,	conjoin,	dissolve,	mean
anything	without	loss	of	essence.
The	two	major	operations	that	mark	the	beginning	of	the	work,	the	calcinatio	and	the	solutio,	are
also	incorporated	in	the	stone,	giving	it	further	specifications.	The	drying	performed	by	calcination
leaves	the	stone	secco,	sec,	trocken,	torr,	cleared	of	moistures	–	marvelous	sensate	words	that	have
been	conceptualized	into	the	term	“objective.”	The	stone’s	dryness	bespeaks	the	psyche’s	move	from
subject	to	object,	the	subjective	person	no	longer	stuck	to	identifications,	the	gluey,	gooey	moisture
dried	to	ashen	powder,	desert	sand.	Personal	life	reflects	the	objective	psyche,	thatness	rather	than	meness,	or	better	said,	a	me-ness	that	is	simply	thatness.	Spiritual	disciplines	might	call	this	compassion
“that	thou	art,”	a	kind	of	unity	of	feeling	with	any	thing.	Yet	I	believe	the	stone’s	feeling	is	yet	more
strange.	It	feels,	let	us	imagine:	“there	is	just	that,”	“even	I	am	just	that.”	All	that	other	people	are	and
the	world	is,	from	rivers	and	elephants	to	teacups	and	toasters	is	essentially	what	I	call	“me”	as	part	of
an	ensouled	anima	mundi	and	yet	utterly	depersonalized	as	molecules	dancing	in	dry	air.
The	solutio,	that	other	major	initial	operation	mentioned	in	every	text	I	have	encountered,	affects
stone	by	reducing	all	its	parts	into	consistent	and	equalized	homogeneity.	You	will	recall	that	the
solution	is	defined	as	the	dissolution	of	a	prime	matter	in	water,	according	to	the	familiar	maxim:
“Perform	no	operation	until	all	has	become	water.”	That	is,	until	all	has	been	permeated	with
emotion,	until	mood	permeates	all	parts,	until	whatever	is	the	matter	that	was	solidly	fixed	into
definite	diagnosis	loses	its	sure	definition	and	melts	into	indiscriminate	fluidity.	Instead	of	sloshing
about	in	waves,	the	flux	of	emotions	stabilize	and	the	stone	is	self-same	all	through,	no
compartments,	no	divisions,	no	internal	oppositions.
A	new	scale	of	values	occurs	because	of	the	solutio.	That	most	precious	faculty,	discrimination,	the
very	faculty	by	which	we	define	consciousness,	dissolves.	The	stone	is	without	distinctions	and
degrees	of	valuations.	Sameness	supersedes	differences,	and	so	the	stone’s	self-sameness,	its	lack	of
inherent	differentiations	makes	it	seem	utterly	dull,	boring.
In	our	usual	lives,	especially	our	usual	psychologically	introspective	and	therapeutic	lives	that	so
characterize	the	last	decades	of	this	century,	we	track	every	trace	of	emotion,	wringing	experience	for
every	drop	of	moisture	in	great	fear	of	desiccation	and	petrification.	We	work	earnestly	at
differentiating	the	components	of	the	psyche.	We	do	not	live	as	these	stones	are	described.	We	are	not
on	earth	simply	as	a	fact	but	imagine	ourselves	as	subjective	primal	movers.	We	are	Sisyphus
pushing,	not	his	stone.	We	imagine	possibilities	of	further	differentiation,	“growth”	as	it	is	popularly
called,	tapping	the	flow	of	subjective	events	to	provide	the	succus	vitae	for	our	romantic	fantasy	of
organic	expansion.	Yet	the	stone	indicates	a	crystallization,	even	a	petrification	of	subjectivity;	all	that
passes	through	the	heart	and	mind	condensed	into	thingness.	The	psyche	not	fluid,	not	cloudy,	not
winged,	but	hard	and	real	and	dumb	as	any	stone:	the	subject,	you	and	me,	studies	in	mineralogy.
I	have	already	mentioned	the	metallic	origin	of	the	stone	flowing	from	the	idea	that	metals	are
seeds	of	the	planets	scattered	deep	in	the	earth.	These	seeds,	or	metals,	ripen	through	time,	all	metals

seeking	to	become	gold.	Their	ripening	can	be	hastened	by	the	concentrated	heat	of	the	alchemist’s
art.	Though	the	stone	may	be	dry	and	dumb,	it	is	nonetheless	not	quiescent.	Its	motion	is	of	another
sort	than	one	appropriate	to	trees	and	flowers.	The	organic	fantasy	no	longer	dominates	psychic	life
and	so	the	soul’s	stony	motion	must	be	imagined	in	accord	with	its	metallic	nature.
“Metal”	etymologically	means	“mine,”	the	verb	“to	mine,”	from	the	Greek	mettallao,	means	to
search,	inquire.	The	stone’s	movement	is	not	growth,	development,	or	metamorphosis	but	rather
intellectual	curiosity.	Pray	and	study,	work	and	read,	oratory	and	laboratory,	one	book	opens	another,
explain	the	unknown	by	the	more	unknown	–	these	were	the	maxims	for	the	stone,	or	of	the	stone,	the
stone’s	own	teachings.	Not	grow,	become	healthier	in	mind	and	body,	develop	and	transform	but	the
seeking	and	searching	of	the	awakened	mind,	the	light	of	the	intellectus	agens,	like	a	burning	jewel	in
the	stone.	Learning	is	the	key.	Study.	Experiment.	Travel.	Read.	These	are	the	processes	that	work	the
stone	and	follow	from	the	idea	of	its	metallic	seeds.	Dig.	Mine.	Quarry.
However,	and	I	believe	this	caution	to	be	important,	the	philosophy	taught	by	the	stone’s	intellectual
challenge	seems	to	be	saying:	beware	of	confusing	significance	with	size.	Not	the	hewn	megalithic
pyramid,	Moses’s	Mountain,	Peter ’s	Rock,	the	Kaaba,	Uluru	(Ayres	Rock),	the	Dome	on	the	Rock	–
the	pilgrim’s	distant	goal	that	lifts	the	mind	off	the	earth.	Not	the	pragmatic	saws	and	general	truths
we	have	come	to	believe	are	wisdom	following	from	our	addiction	to	handed-down	written
abstractions.	The	stone	does	not	ask	about	life,	or	answer.	It	advises	no	way	forward,	pointing	not	to
what’s	next,	but	what’s	nearest,	what’s	right	at	hand,	time	become	a	specific	place.	Its	philosophy
seems	altogether	accidental,	casual,	taking	daily	pleasure	in	reactions	to	occurrences,	as	if	lying	in
wait	for	kicks	and	hooves,	plough	blade	and	spade,	roots	and	water,	a	kind	of	obstacular	wisdom	to
life’s	events	as	they	touch	the	stone	and	are	taught	a	lesson	by	it.
The	obstacular	wisdom	of	the	stone	confronts	and	demands	response.	It	acts	like	a	learned	teacher
disguised	in	ordinary	dress.	Alchemy	speaks	of	the	stone	as	the	lapis	philosophorum.	What	is	the
philosophy?	What	is	its	wisdom?	It	is	the	wisdom	of	the	“ultimate	actuality”	of	the	“singularity	of
individuals,” [15]	first	put	forth	by	that	subtle	thinker	of	the	medieval	Church,	John	Duns	Scotus	(c.
1266–1310),	and	called	by	him	haecceitas,	haecceity	or	“thisness.”	It	is	the	wisdom	that	logically
establishes	each	thing	as	itself,	individualized.	In	fact,	“haecceity	for	Scotus	is	the	principle	of
individualism.” [16]
For	Charles	Sanders	Peirce	(1839–1914),	haecceitas,	which	he	calls	“secondness,”	is	the	“shock”
of	experiencing	the	“brutal	fact”	of	the	Other:	“We	are	constantly	bumping	up	against	hard	fact.” [17]
The	stubborn,	indubitable	presence	of	“thisness”	provides	a	founding	rock	for	William	James’s
philosophical	favoring	of	eachness	over	Idealism’s	allness,	oneness,	and	wholeness.
David	Ignatow	put	the	haecceity	of	the	stone	into	a	short	poem:
Each	stone	its	shape
each	shape	its	weight
each	weight	its	value
in	my	garden	as	I	dig	them	up
and	I	say,	lifting	one	at	a	time,
There	is	joy	here
in	being	able	to	handle
so	many	meaningful
differences. [18]

The	factual,	confrontational	eachness	of	the	stone	teaches	the	mind	to	study	and	appreciate	each
contrary	event	more	closely	beyond	comparison,	concept,	or	category	and,	as	well,	to	become	wily
and	mercurial	in	searching	for	ways	through	and	around	each	obstacle.
There	is	a	third	kind	of	movement,	besides	the	organic	and	the	intellectual.	The	quality	of	this
motion	we	might	call	the	sensitivity	of	the	stone.	Sir	George	Ripley,	the	Yorkshire	alchemist,	writing

in	the	second	half	of	the	fifteenth	century	tells	how	to	keep	a	Philosopher ’s	Stone	once	you’ve	got
one:
These	stones	must	be	kept	by	themselves,	in	several	glasses,	or	fair	boxes,	in	a	warm	place,	or	dry	at	the	least,	as	you	would
keep	sugar,	because	they	are	of	so	tender	and	oily	substance,	as	they	are	apt	to	dissolve	in	every	moist	place,	which	therefore
preserve	as	is	here	showed. [19]

Let’s	review	Ripley’s	advice,	for	it	reveals	more	about	the	stone	than	we	have	so	far	discovered.	First,
it	is	well	to	keep	it	warm,	a	certain	gentle	attentiveness,	an	affection,	like	the	care	one	gives	a	small
child,	or	a	pet	animal.	Second,	it	is	sensitive	and	so	best	kept	in	a	glass	vessel,	present,	yet	once
removed;	apart	as	a	precious	object,	yet	in	full	view.	Third,	since	it	is	apt	to	dissolve	in	every	moist
place,	it	must	be	kept	dry.	Here	we	are	given	the	advice	dear	to	philosophers	as	far	back	as	Heraclitus
who	claimed	that,	though	souls	love	moisture,	the	dry	soul	is	the	best.
Evidently	the	stone	is	of	such	an	oily	and	tender	nature	that	it	can	melt	on	any	occasion.	It	is	easily
affected.	Imagine:	after	all	the	labor,	the	goal	is	not	strength,	power,	and	certitude	but	a	stone	tender,
oily,	easily	dissolved.	What	sort	of	stone	is	this?	Ripley	explains	how	the	stone	becomes	oily:
By	pouring	on	it,	as	it	were,	drop	by	drop	until	the	stone	be	oilish;	then	congeal	it,	and	again	imbibe	it,	and	in	this	manner	iterate	this
work,	until	this	stone	will	flow	in	fire	like	wax,	when	it	is	put	upon	a	plate	of	copper	fiery	hot,	and	not	evaporate,	and	congeal	it	up
until	it	be	hard,	white,	and	transparent	clear	as	crystal. [20]

Ripley	is	here	describing	the	ceratio	(ceration),	a	process	that	makes	a	substance	softer	while	giving
it	a	waxy	appearance	and	invented,	according	to	Albertus	Magnus,	“to	mollify	a	body	with	a	view	to
permit	penetration	of	other	substances.” [21]
Now	we	have	an	idea	of	the	goal	that	is	tender,	soft,	like	sugar,	malleable	as	wax.	This	stone	melts
easily;	it	receives	impressions	like	a	tabula	rasa	and	then	just	as	easily	lets	them	go	again.	It	asks	to
be	affected,	penetrated	and,	because	transparent,	seen	through.	As	its	borders	are	not	fixed,	its	defense
is	yielding	and	its	answers	always	indefinite.	It	allows	itself	to	be	pushed	around	without	altering	its
substance.	Like	wax,	its	condition	reacts	to	the	climate	of	its	surroundings.	With	the	warmth	of	the
human	touch,	it	takes	the	shape	of	the	hands	that	hold	it,	remaining,	nonetheless,	self-consistent
despite	the	repeated	meltings	and	congealings	that	wipe	away	all	the	struck	and	engraved	typological
characteristics.	Any	moment	offers	the	fresh	start,	the	innocence	of	a	slate	wiped	clean:	solve	et
coagula.
I	used	the	term	“typological	characteristics”	because	both	words,	“type”	and	“character,”	refer	at
their	Greek	root	to	defined	engraved	markings.	Ceration,	making	wax-like,	seems	intentionally
designed	to	obliterate	a	psychological	episteme	of	types,	traits,	characteristics	–	anything	that	would
rigidify	the	idea	of	the	goal	into	categories	of	knowledge.
An	oily	stone	is	lighter	than	water	and	can	float	upon	it.	Christos,	Messias,	the	anointed	one	who	is
of	oil,	walks	on	water.	The	oil	that	walks	on	water,	the	stone	that	floats,	gives	a	wholly	surprising	idea
of	the	goal	should	we	expect	the	heavy-weight	rock	of	ages	emblematic	of	senex	seriousness.	It	would
seem,	therefore,	that	the	stone	as	goal	invites	the	archetypal	program	of	the	senex;	and	so	the
deliberate	emphasis	upon	soft,	oily,	tender,	and	waxy	subverts	the	rigidities	of	the	senex,	which
always	threaten	alchemy	with	petrifications:	such	as	dogma,	as	images	of	wise	old	men	and
magicians,	of	scholars	of	Greek	and	Arabic;	as	geometric	diagrams	and	mathematical	formulae;	as
moral	remonstrances,	pious	cautions	and	instructive	warnings;	as	long-winded	histories	and	maxims
like	the	via	longissima,	which	champions	old	age;	as	metaphysical	and	theological	appeals	in	secret
isolate	language;	as	the	reference	to	the	dead,	to	history,	to	authoritative	masters;	as	cryptic	rebus
codes,	wisdom	initiations,	madness	and	melancholy	–	that	elaborate	paraphernalia	of	senex
consciousness. [22]

Alchemy’s	true	wisdom,	it	seems	to	me,	is	that	it	is	wise	to	itself,	imagining	operations	of	the	goal,
like	ceratio,	rotatio,	and	rubedo,	which	soften,	sweeten,	excite,	loosen,	and	make	impossible	any	fixed
position,	thereby	countering	the	senex	propensity	to	crystallize	the	goal	in	doctrinal	truths.	Let	us	say,
the	ceratio	saves	the	stone	from	stoniness,	that	literalization	of	its	compact	density	to	mean
“simplicity,”	“strength,”	“solidity,”	“unity,”	as	the	symbol	dictionaries	declare.	The	stone’s	oiliness
lets	it	slip	that	grip	of	Begriffe,	which	would	capture	it.	Its	waxiness	lets	it	receive	endless
literalizations	without	being	permanently	impressed.	Subject	to	change	without	notice.
It	is	the	senex	stoniness	–	and	again	I	refer	to	David	Miller ’s	exposition:	hard	of	heart	and	hard	of
hearing,	ungiving	and	unyielding,	stones	instead	of	bread	–	that	seems	the	major	disease	of	the	opus
major.	If	this	diagnostic	conjecture	is	right,	then	we	must	note	carefully	maxims	and	operations	that
preclude	the	rigidities,	which	indicate	usurpation	of	the	idea	of	the	goal	by	the	archetypal	senex	.
One	mollifying	example	is	this	dictum:	as	the	work	goes	on	toward	the	lapis,	“its	love	will
increase.”	Is	this	love	for	the	work?	Does	this	increase	refer	to	the	progress	of	love	from	the
vilification	and	orphanhood	of	the	primary	matter,	through	the	abject	despair	and	self-hatred	of	the
nigredo	to	the	smooth	comfort	of	the	lunar	albedo?	Or	does	this	increase	of	love	symbolise	with	the
higher	heat	required	for	the	goal:	as	the	work	intensifies,	the	degrees	of	fire	become	doubled	and
redoubled.	Perhaps	these	are	parallels	to	love’s	“increase,”	yet	the	source	of	this	love	seems	to	be	the
increasing	reality	of	the	stone,	as	if	a	love	rising	from	the	stone.
A	stone-like	love,	a	love	utterly	dehumanized,	as	if	there	is	something	about	me	that	loves
something	about	you,	like	the	love	of	two	stones.	Cool,	distant,	apathetic?	As	if	our	planetary	bodies
were	asteroids	sharing	a	mythical	affinity?	Rather,	I	feel	this	notion	of	love	is	not	so	much	cold	as
simply	unconcerned	with	love,	stone-focused	rather	than	love-focused.	It	is	indeed	a	fevered
concupiscence,	engaged	in	a	coupling	conjunction	soul	to	soul	as	the	alchemical	images	show	–
naked,	sexual,	crazy	–	yet	having	nothing	to	do	with	anybody	anywhere.	Let	us	imagine	it	as	a	love	of
two	stones.	Externally	solitary,	yet	interiorly	they	are	not	distant	from	one	another	because	they	are
not	different.	They	are	akin	in	their	impersonal	stony	essence,	descendents	of	a	common	body,	Gaia,
brothers	and	sisters,	their	love	the	incestuous	passion	of	kinship	libido,	that	calor	inclusus	which
urges	all	things,	including	humans,	to	participate	in	the	cosmos.	We	love	the	world	unspeakably
because	of	what	burns	within	our	silent,	lapidary	essence.
Gabriel	Marcel	writes	of	fidelity	as	a	permanent	faith	in	loving.	Alche-my	speaks	of	an	aqua
permanens,	the	steady	emotional	state	brought	about	by	the	solutio.	This	love	lives	and	flows
regardless	of	vagrant	desires.	It	is	without	pothos,	or	that	yearning	for	elsewhere	beyond	the	given.	It
is	without	the	anteros	of	love	returned,	a	love	that	lasts	like	a	stone	and	is	constant	in	soul,	whether
alive	or	dead,	as	the	gemstones	in	our	finger	rings	of	loving	unions.	This	is	not	all	of	love,	of	course,
nor	is	this	“increase	of	love”	the	transmutation	of	passion	into	agape	and	the	person	into	perfection.
No,	the	lion’s	paw	and	the	bear ’s	clutch,	the	eagle’s	eye	and	the	strutting	peacock’s	pageant	are	ever
active	alchemical	figures	in	the	heart’s	imagination.	They	do	not	go	away.	But	as	the	stone	ripens,	so
does	the	idea	of	love	increase,	says	the	text,	referring,	I	suppose,	to	the	love	for	the	work	and	work’s
love	for	the	worker,	the	artifex.
For	after	all,	what	can	possibly	sustain	the	via	longissima,	the	absurdities	and	loneliness	of	the	opus
major	of	the	soul-making	unless	it	be	the	love	it	gives	us.
Not	only	do	I	love	this	work,	not	only	does	my	love	increase	for	it	and	increase	the	stone	but	the
stone’s	increase	loves	my	work.	Something	firm	and	forever	keeps	faith	with	me.	Something	in	my
nature	is	ever	in	love	with	the	materials	of	the	world,	a	libidinal	attachment,	a	desire	that	alchemical
texts	call	Sulfur,	ever	ready	to	ignite,	a	bit	of	it	lurking	in	every	object	out	there,	luring	my	love	to	the
world	of	sense	and	matter,	a	love	that	Freud	called	the	”object	libido.”	So,	too,	there	is	something	in
the	world	of	sense,	in	the	matter	with	which	the	artifex	works	that	increases	its	love	for	the	artifex,

drawing	him	and	her	passionately	into	the	opus	by	its	increasing	love.	Curious	to	find	that	I	am	more
and	more	“in”	love	as	I	imagine	myself	more	and	more	stony,	mineralized.
IV.	RUBEDO	AS	RESURRECTION
Let	us	go	back	to	the	early	operation	called	calcination	and	the	dry	objectivity	to	which	it	leads,	and
let	us	remember	that	dryness	means	neither	siccitas,	nor	acedia:	not	an	aridity	of	spirit,	exhaustion	of
imagination,	a	deserted	soul.	It	is	not	burn-out,	and	it	is	not	cold	irony	or	remote	detachment.
Rather,	calcination	left	an	alum	or	salt	as	a	dry	white	powder.	These	residual	powders	are	the
objectified	substances	that	have	been	calcinated.	They	could	be	reactivated	by	the	adjunction	of
moisture.	One	smile,	one	touch,	a	drop	of	humor,	an	instant	of	rending	pain	refreshes	the	essence	of
an	objectified	experience	and	makes	it	an	aqua	vitae,	flowing	with	the	water	of	life.	A	memory	lies
utterly	quiescent,	merely	a	distant	cameo	of	history	until	moistened	by	some	sudden	motion	of	the
soul,	stirred	by	a	similarity	or	a	poignant	nostalgia.	The	residual	powders	of	objectified	emotions
remain	available	as	everyday	potentials,	but	all	the	subjectivity,	the	me-ness	has	been	cooked	out	of
them.
The	objectification	of	the	subject	seems	to	be	a	major	intention	of	all	alchemy,	as	well	as	of
spiritual	disciplines	and	psychotherapy.	Soul-making	takes	place	where	me-ness	once	was,	in	inverse
proportion,	so	goes	the	basic	theory	of	depth	psychology	whether	in	Freud’s	lifting	of	repressions	or
Jung’s	relativizing	of	the	ego.
In	brief:	the	psychotherapeutic	cure	of	“me”	–	the	desire	for	improvement;	to	become	better,	grow
whole	–	would	thus	seem	to	be	a	subjectivized	and	secularized	version	of	the	archetypal	urge	toward
salvation	or	resurrection,	a	completed	condition	where	there	is	no	further	development.	Thus	we	may
claim	that	the	end	of	improvement,	its	subversion,	that	condition	imagined	as	“resurrection,”	must	be
the	main	telos	of	the	opus	major.	The	images	we	reviewed	earlier	–	gold,	pearl,	diamond	–	each
envision	a	superior	condition	that	cannot	be	improved	upon.	No	further	addition,	only	multiplication;
rotation,	circulation,	iteration,	again	and	again.
Once	we	can	recognize	that	the	subjective	urge	to	develop	is	an	idea	of	a	goal	and	not	a	goal	as
such,	then	process	thinking	itself	comes	to	a	halt	and	another	motion	takes	over.	Plotinus	contrasts	the
linear	motions	of	what	I	have	been	calling	the	one-ness	of	developmental	psychology	with	the
circular	motion	of	the	soul	(Ennead,	 :	2.2).	The	goal	images	correlate	precisely	with	this	motion	of
circularity,	since	the	iteratio	(repetition,	or	as	the	maxim	goes,	“one	operation	does	not	make	an
artist”),	circulatio,	and	rotatio	are	often	considered	among	the	last	operations	of	the	opus.
The	rotatio,	like	a	turning	wheel,	announces	that	no	position	can	remain	fixed,	no	statement	finally
true,	no	end	place	achieved.	Development	makes	little	sense	when	no	place	is	better	or	worse,	higher
or	lower.	As	the	wheel	rotates	what	was	up	is	now	down,	what	was	inferior,	now	superior	and	will
become	again	inferior.	What	rises,	falls,	repeatedly:	“Only	the	fool,	fixed	in	his	folly,	may	think	he
can	turn	the	wheel	on	which	he	turns.” [23]	Linear	motion	as	a	line	of	development	from	any	point	of
the	rotation	only	goes	off	at	a	tangent.	Developmental	process	actually	moves	away	from	the	soul’s
goal	which	is	turning	in	circles.	As	Figulus	says:	“What	we	seek	is	here	or	nowhere.” [24]
The	rotatio	also	returns	telos	itself	to	its	root	meaning.	Telos	does	not	simply	mean	end,	goal,
purpose,	finis.	“Instead,”	says	Onians,	“I	would	suggest	that	with	this	root	notion	of	‘turning	around’
τέλος	meant	‘circling’	or	‘circle.’ ” [25]	The	goal	itself	circles,	because	it	is	a	psychic	goal;	or,	the
goal	is	psyche	itself	obeying	the	laws	of	its	own	motion,	a	motion	that	is	not	going	somewhere	else;
no	journey,	no	process,	no	improvement.	And	so	the	images	of	the	goal	put	to	final	rest	the	subjective
urge	that	has	impelled	the	entire	work	from	the	start.	We	awaken	to	the	fact	that	the	goal	of	the	work	is
nothing	else	than	the	objectification	of	the	very	urge	that	propels	it.
II

Let	me	say	it	again:	the	result	is	not	merely	the	objectification	of	subjective	“me-ness,”	but	the
objectification	of	its	material	basis.	This	has	been	dissolved,	calcined,	tortured,	putrefied,	and
distilled	to	a	clarity	that	can	be	completely	seen	through,	as	if	it	were	not	there	at	all,	not	a	speck	of
literalism	remains,	not	even	spiritual	literalism.	The	libidinal	compulsion,	the	organic	towardness	of
hope	and	desire	that	would	always	go	further	for	a	faraway	grail,	turns	around	on	itself	and	dissolves
itself.	The	snake	eats	its	own	tail	–	another	goal	image	of	deconstructive	subversion.	The	snake	of
healing,	transformation,	and	rebirth,	the	goals	most	dearly	desired,	and	the	artifex’s	obedient	service,
all	dry	to	dust,	mineralized.	The	uroboric	motion	poisons	(iosis) [26]	the	very	idea	of	cure.	Or,
poison	is	the	cure.
What	is	actually	accomplished	by	the	alchemical	work?	According	to	my	psychological	fantasies,
it	is	the	objectification	of	the	libido	–	our	lives	are	not	our	lives.	The	alchemical	goal	is	the
realization	in	its	complete	sense	of	Freud’s	“object	libido.” [27]	The	libido	as	a	cosmic	erotic
dynamic	that	permeates	the	world	because	it	loves	the	world	of	matter,	even	though	it	has	been	caught
in	the	personal	delusions	of	subjectivity,	so	that	we	believe	we	love	the	world,	or	can	be	improved	or
instructed	to	love	the	world.	Whereas	it	is	the	object	libido	that	loves	the	world	through	us,	despite	us.
The	anima	in	chains	in	the	matter	of	“me,”	and	we	place	it	there	each	time	as	we	ask	psychologically,
what	is	the	matter	with	me?	Alchemy	answers,	saying:	you,	I,	everyone,	the	world	is	matter,	elemental
material,	and	we	indulge	in	the	materials,	as	the	artifex	in	the	laboratory,	all	along	believing	that	you
are	working	on	you,	your	life,	your	relations,	your	processes	until	the	day	dawns,	aurora.	You
awaken	within	the	idea	of	the	goal,	the	goal	not	somewhere	else	out	there	calling	for	attainment,	but
you	are	within	the	idea.	But	because	the	mind	is	still	trapped	in	me-ness,	we	shamelessly	assert	that	the
idea	is	in	me	when	your	mind	is	in	the	idea.	You	awaken	to	the	recognition	that	you	are	already	in	that
stone,	mineralized,	stoned	out	of	your	mind.
If	my	reading	is	on	track	and	the	telos	or	“that	for	the	sake	of	which”	is	the	de-subjectification	of
the	object	libido,	then	we	are	obliged	to	imagine	resurrection	from	this	vantage	point,	which	hardly
conforms	with	a	Christian	reading	of	either	alchemy	or	resurrection.	For	now	resurrection	would
indicate	not	the	confirmation	throughout	eternity	of	the	personal	subject	and	its	body	saved	from	the
world	and	the	devil	of	its	flesh	but	rather	the	resurrection	of	the	body	of	the	world	with	an	idea	to	its
eternity.	Not	the	lifting,	the	Aufhebung,	of	material	worldliness	but	the	fulI	realization	of	desire	for	a
world	that	pulsates	in	the	materials	of	the	elemental	psyche,	those	substances	that	compose	the	stone
and	give	it	its	enduring	life,	a	realization	that	the	world	itself	speaks	through	the	desire	in	the
materials;	that	desire	is	the	language	of	the	world,	that	the	libido	of	each	individual	human	is	indeed	a
cosmic	force,	an	eros	or	object	libido	which	yearns	toward	and	enjoys	this	world.	And	we	who	labor
in	the	garden	as	if	it	were	a	stony	ground	would	find	our	individual	resurrection	in	attachment	to	our
materials,	which	are	the	world’s	body,	this	body	becoming	a	jardin	des	délices,	the	objectification	of
pleasure.
Object	libido	finds	its	pleasure	in	the	other,	the	object,	the	world	as	a	body.	This	dry	term	“object
libido”	calls	for	a	moistened	language.	Terms	such	as	cosmogonic	eros,	desire,	jouissance,	or	unus
mundus	cannot	do	justice	to	what	is	implied.	Libido	brings	with	it	the	aura	of	pleasure	and	the
Aphroditic	world	of	the	senses.	Did	not	Plotinus	attribute	to	Plato	the	idea	that	the	soul	is	always	an
Aphrodite,	which	suggests	that	we	cannot	adequately	speak	of	the	libidinal	soul	without	shifting
immediately	to	an	Aphroditic	language? [28]	Then	we	would	imagine	that	this	libidinal	drive
throughout	the	whole	opus	of	soul-making	and	its	increasing	love	has	as	its	goal	a	resurrection	in
beauty	and	pleasure,	and	we	would	realize	that	even	such	terms	as	opus	and	operatio	are	work-words
which	distort	the	libido’s	nature.	The	Christianization	of	alchemy	nonetheless	retains	the	Aphroditic
vision	in	the	images	it	presents.	She	is	the	Golden	One,	the	pearl	is	her	jewel;	the	rose,	her	flower;	the
bath	and	the	copulations	in	the	bath	of	the	Rosarium,	her	liquid	territory.	The	translation	of	sensate

images	into	spiritual	value,	as	if	a	lifting	improvement	to	the	higher	realm	of	Aphrodite	Urania,
succeeds	only	in	losing	the	very	sensate	attraction	of	the	goal	as	a	pleasurable	pull	toward	beauty.
Hence	Ficino,	Valla,	and	other	Renaissance	Platonists	insisted	that	Voluptas	is	nearer	to	the	life	of	the
spirit	than	the	middle	region	or	mediocrity	of	ataraxic	rationality.	Voluptas,	according	to	Apuleius,
lies	curled	in	the	womb	of	Psyche	and	comes	to	birth	only	after	all	psychological	effort	is	passed.
I	beg	you	for	a	moment	to	convert	your	mind	from	Jung	to	Freud,	and	a	conversion	or	reversion
from	a	Christian	to	a	more	Pagan	vision	of	our	theme.	For	we	may	not	speak	of	libido	as	energy
only,	as	an	abstraction	equivalent	to	the	energy	concept	of	physics.	“Beware	of	the	physical	in	the
material.”	Jung	missed	something	essential,	something	essentially	non-Christian,	when	he	removed
Freud’s	principle	of	pleasure,	the	eros,	from	the	libido,	leaving	it	as	a	bare	concept	without	sensuous
content. [29]	Libido	comes	from	lips;	it	means	the	drippings	of	pleasure,	like	honeysuckle	from	the
vine,	like	the	fat	grape,	like	the	excitation	of	lust.	Libido	belongs	in	a	word	cluster	–	and	I	take	this
from	Onians [30]	–	that	includes	libation	as	pouring	of	liquid,	deliquare	(to	make	liquid,	melt);	laetus
(moist,	fat,	fruitful,	glad);	and	the	German	lieben,	to	love;	as	well	as	liber	(free),	the	god	Liber,	the
procreative	fertility	figure.
These	meanings	in	the	word	“libido”	amplify	from	another	perspective	the	oily	stone	and	even	the
oiled	one,	the	Messias	or	Christ. [31]	The	liquid	of	life	and	strength,	the	seed,	was	conceived	as	“oil”
and	a	new	“spirit,”	even	the	“spirit”	of	Yahweh,	was	believed	to	be	transmitted	to	the	head	by
anointing	it	with	holy	oil,	and	this	“oil”	=	seed	was	naturally	derived	also	from	the	thighs,	also	from
fat.	The	fat	of	the	lower	body	of	the	sacrificial	animal	was	appropriate	to	the	god,	for	that	is	where	the
life	force	resided:	“Thou	shalt	take	of	the	ram,	the	fat	and	the	fat	tail	and	the	fat	that	covereth	the
inwards …”	(Exodus	29: 22).
The	oiled	one	is	the	libidinized	one.	In	fact,	there	is	a	belief	“that	it	is	the	tail-end	of	the	spine,
which	grows	into	a	new	body	in	the	Resurrection.” [32]	This	tail	end	of	the	spine	in	Muslim	tradition
is	the	‘ajb	and	in	Rabbinic	tradition	it	is	the	Luz.	In	ours,	it	is	the	os	sacrum.	This	is	the	animal	tail	that
I	have	amplified	elsewhere [33]	at	length	in	regard	to	the	monkey	in	the	center	of	the	mandala	of	that
dream	of	which	Jung	spoke	in	his	first	lecture	on	alchemy	at	Eranos	in	1935.	In	that	dream	the	key
phrase	was	“a	gibbon	is	to	be	reconstructed.”	I	am	now	making	a	correlation	between	the
reconstruction	of	the	ape	and	the	resurrection	of	the	libido	as	a	material,	generative,	erotic	power,
which	reddens	into	life.	This	imaginative	step	was	once	literalized	by	Freud	in	his	attempts	to
rejuvenate,	i.e.	resurrect	himself,	by	means	of	the	Steinach	(of	monkey	gland	fame)	operation	on	his
testes.[34]	In	the	testes,	says	the	Zohar,	“are	gathered	all	the	oil,	the	dignity	and	the	strength	of	the
male.”[35]	In	common	speech	the	testes	are	called	“stones”	and	“rocks.”
Because	we	have	been	held	in	a	spiritualized	and	Christianized	alchemy,	the	rubedo	has	remained
enigmatic,	usually	explained	in	terms	of	Christ.	The	reddening	has	been	conceptualized	in	higher
abstractions	like	the	conjunction	of	opposites	and	the	unus	mundus.	The	brilliant	blood-red	vitality	of
the	solidification	has	been	imprisoned	in	a	lunar	albedo	vision.	By	that	I	mean	the	unus	mundus	has
been	apprehended	within	the	unio	mentalis.[36]
Therefore	the	yellowing,	so	crucial	for	the	transition	from	white	to	red,	silver	to	gold.	The
yellowing	undoes	the	white,	spoils	it,	decomposes	it	out	of	itself	so	that	the	psychologized	mind
cannot	serve	as	vehicle	for	entry	to	the	world.	The	rubedo	can	no	longer	be	conceived	to	be	a
psychological	activity	only	because	it	is	as	well	a	libidinal	one,	a	movement	in	what	Jung	called	the
infrared	end	of	the	archetypal	spectrum	where	he	said	“instinct”	prevails.[37]	“Instinct”:	another	name
for	the	first	Adam	who,	legend	says,	had	a	tail.	The	unus	mundus	is	therefore	head-cum-tail	as	the
Ouroboros	depicts,	mind	as	nature,	image	as	instinct.	The	goal	of	the	unus	mundus	occurs	not
necessarily	at	the	end	of	the	opus	but	whenever	a	mental	image	compels	with	the	force	of	a	natural
phenomenon	and	whenever	nature	appears	wholly	as	imagination.	The	end	of	the	goal	is	thus	a

spontaneous	creative	event	occurring	whenever	the	adept’s	fantasy	(violet)	is	empowered	by	(red)
certitude,	even	if	inherently	subject	to	rusting	and	bearing	poison	within	it.
The	unus	mundus	as	goal	makes	sense	only	if	it	is	sensuous,	is	felt	as	a	libidinal	reality,	an
Aphroditic	reality.	Her	pleasure	in	the	world	objectified	as	its	beauty,	the	radiance	in	earthly	things	as
Hilary	Armstrong’s	Neoplatonic	vision	beautifully	elaborates.[38]	Pleasure	objectified	as	beauty,
pleasure	perceived	as	the	attractive	enjoyable	qualities	of	things	–	this	is	the	definition	of	beauty,
according	to	George	Santayana	and	it	suggests	that	without	pleasure,	no	beauty.[39]
A	final	operation,	a	last	effect	of	the	stone,	is	called	the	tincturing.[40]	The	stone	stains	all	that	it
touches,	suffuses	brightness	and	color,	increasing	value	to	that	of	gold.	Things	show	themselves	in	a
new	light,	an	alchemical	light,	enlightened	by	the	beauty	of	imagination,	as	if	the	touch	of	Venus	is	the
final	effect	and	ultimate	aim	of	the	entire	opus.
Thus,	at	the	end	of	the	Rosarium	philosophorum,	the	text	that	Jung	examines	in	great	detail	in	his
penetrating	and	fascinating	work,	The	Psychology	of	the	Transference	(CW	16),	one	image	in	the
series	of	engravings	is	entitled	“Revivification.”	It	is	figure	18	of	a	total	of	22.	Since	Jung’s	famous
commentary	concludes	with	the	tenth	figure,	we	are	now	dealing	with	images	not	examined	by	Jung.
This	figure	of	Revivification	shows	the	female	soul	with	streaming	long	hair	diving	down	from	the
upper	right.	The	accompanying	text	says:	“The	soul	descends	here	from	heaven,	beautiful	and
glad.”[41]	“Beautiful	and	glad”	is	the	soul’s	descent	into	the	world’s	material	body.
Without	beauty	and	pleasure	of	the	world,	why	save	it?	Neither	shaming	for	past	exploitations,	nor
moralizing	about	future	generations,	nor	theologizings	about	the	great	good	mother	Gaia,	nor
sophisticated	scientific	and	economic	ecologies,	nor	romantic	sentimentalisms	and	politically
opportune	greenings	so	moves	the	individual	soul	to	re-unite	with	the	world	soul	as	does	the
Aphroditic	power	of	pleasure.	Only	the	object	libido	can	fully	reconnect	us.	Not	duty	but	beauty,	and
the	pleasuring	in	things.[42]
Hence	the	stone	is	red;	krasny,	as	the	Russians	say,	beautiful	and	red	in	one	word.	Red	as	nature	in
tooth	and	claw,	the	color	of	Adam’s	first	earth,	the	cinnabar	rock	that	compounds	sulfur	and	mercury,
the	red	flush	of	shame,	the	red	rose	of	erotic	desire,	the	red	coals	of	wrath,	of	devils,	of	Seth,	and	the
furious	gods	of	war,	the	red	of	revolution,	challenge,	danger,	the	holy	heart	of	himma’s	enthusiastic
imagination,	and	the	royal	robe	of	kings,	lords	of	this	world.	Let	us	be	quite	clear:	red	is	of	this
world.	Yet	it	correlates	with	an	operation	called	exaltation.	Exaltation	of	what?	The	Rosarium’s
penultimate	image	showing	Maria	crowned	states	the	“perfection	of	the	stone	as	the	crowning	matter.”
Matter	is	exalted.
Ruland’s	alchemical	dictionary	defines	exaltation	as	an	“Operation	by	which	a	Matter	is	Altered	in
its	inclinations,	and	is	elevated	to	a	higher	dignity	of	substance	and	virtue.”[43]	This	suggests	that	the
reddening	of	the	material	is	not	its	transformation.	It	does	not	become	something	else,	transcended,
spiritualized,	but	that	rather	a	nobler	notion	of	matter	prevails.	It	is	crowned;	and	thereby	its	virtues
are	revealed	and	its	inclinations	alter	from	being	the	lodestone	of	dumb	concrete	daily	obstruction	to
the	ruby	rocks	that	provide	our	life	with	daily	pleasure.
In	a	curious	way,	you	and	I	crown	matter,	have	been	crowning	matter,	many	times,	perhaps	since
childhood.	Recall	the	stones	that	we	have	brought	back	from	our	travels,	from	a	desert,	a	river-bed	or
seashore,	a	temple	precinct,	the	little	pebbles	smoothened,	the	striped	or	stippled	granite,	the
flintstone,	mica,	plain	grey	rock,	that	we	as	pagan	primitives	set	on	our	desks	and	tables	and	shelves,
the	unobstrusive	occasional	altars	that	have	formed	in	our	rooms,	remembering	beauty,	love,	the
dead,	mystery,	sadness,	hope,	attaching	the	soul	with	the	weight	of	stone	to	some	specific	sensate
geography.	In	this	compelling	yet	offhand	urge	to	pick	up	and	carry	home,	primordial	Adam
connects	again	with	the	material	world’s	ordinary	beauty.	He	reconnects,	is	this	not	re-ligion?	Lifted
from	the	ground,	transported	inside,	singled	out	and	raised	in	inclination,	is	this	not	that	exaltation	of

the	material	body	of	the	world,	which	religion	calls	Resurrection?
Originally	delivered	at	the	1990	Eranos	Conference	“Resurrection	and	Immortality”	in	Ascona,	Switzerland,	and	subsequently	published
in	Sphinx 5	(The	London	Convivium	of	Archetypal	Studies,	1994).
1 CW	16: 4 00.
2 Aristotle,	Physics,	II.	7.
3 Bonus,	16.
4 The	Natural	History	of	Pliny,	trans.	J.	Bostock	and	H. T.	Riley	(London:	George	Bell	and	Sons,	1898),	vol.	6,	book	XXXVII,	chap.	15.
5 J.	Hillman,	Animal	Presences,	UE	9,	chap.	1:	“The	Animal	Kingdom	in	Human	Dreams,”	24–28.
6 B.	Laufer,	The	Diamond:	A	Study	in	Chinese	and	Hellenistic	Folk-Lore	(Chicago:	Field	Museum	of	Natural	History,	1915).
7 Ibid.,	26.
8 Bonus,	67.
9 R. J.	Forbes,	Metallurgy	in	Antiquity:	A	Notebook	for	Archaeologists	and	Technologists	(Leiden:	Brill,	1950).
10 On	the	caelum,	see	below,	chap.	10:	“The	Azure	Vault.”
11 Bonus,	115–16.
12 “Extracts	of	Lacinius	from	Albertus	Magnus,	S.	Thomas,	and	Other	Great	Sages,”	in	ibid.,	415.
13 See	CW	13: 1 26–33,	on	the	stone,	immortality,	Christ,	and	redemption.
14 D. L.	Miller,	“Prometheus,	St.	Peter	and	the	Rock:	Identity	and	Difference	in	Modern	Literature,”	Eranos	Yearbook	57	(1988).
15 E.	Gilson,	History	of	Christian	Philosophy	in	the	Middle	Ages	(New	York:	Random	House,	1955),	462.
16 “John	Duns	Scotus,”	Encyclopedia	of	Philosophy,	ed.	P.	Edwards	(New	York:	Macmillan,	1967),	2: 4 31b.
17 Collected	Papers	of	Charles	Sanders	Peirce,	ed.	C.	Hartshorne	and	P.	Weiss	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	The	Belknap	Press	of	Harvard
Univ.	Press,	1960),	1: 3 24.
18 “Each	Stone,”	in	D.	Ignatow,	Whisper	to	the	Earth:	New	Poems	(Boston	and	Toronto:	Little	Brown	&	Co.,	1981),	17.
19 “The	Bosom	Book	of	Sir	George	Ripley,”	Collectanea,	141.
20 Ibid.,	138.
21 Libellus	de	alchimia	(Ascribed	to	Albertus	Magnus),	trans.	V.	Heines	(Berkeley	and	Los	Angeles:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1958),
47.
22 See	also	J.	Hillman,	Senex	&	Puer,	UE	3,	chap.	1,	9,	and	10.
23 T. S.	Eliot,	“Murder	in	the	Cathedral,”	in	The	Complete	Poems	and	Plays,	1909–1950	(New	York:	Harcourt	Brace	&	Company,
1952),	184.
24 Figulus,	273.
25 R. B.	Onians,	The	Origins	of	European	Thought:	About	the	Body,	the	Mind,	the	Soul,	the	World,	Time,	and	Fate	(Cambridge	Univ.
Press,	1951),	443.
26 The	Latin	equivalent	for	iosis	is	rubedo,	and	Jung	(CW	12: 3 33)	equates	iosis	with	the	reddening.	H.	G.	Lidell	and	R.	Scott,	A	Greek-

English	Lexicon	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1890),	define	the	Greek	word	ἰός	to	mean	both	rust	and	venom.	But	it	is	also	purple	or
violet,	the	hue	deriving,	according	to	Hopkins	(98–102),	from	the	metallurgy	of	bronzing,	a	process	that	gives	rise	to	an	ephemeral
iridescent	violet.	Iosis	appears	in	the	final	phase	of	the	famous	formula	of	Maria	the	Jewess:	“At	the	end	…	all	things	combine	into
Violet.”	A. J.	Hopkins,	Alchemy:	Child	of	Greek	Philosophy	(New	York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	1934),	99.	Since	both	rust	and	poison
describe	the	final	goal,	the	aim	of	the	work	is	its	destruction.	Or,	the	destruction	(metamorphosis)	of	physical	alchemy	into	a	sensate
display	of	imagination,	happening	not	only	to	the	mind	of	the	alchemist	but	in	the	imaginal	ground	(anima	mundi)	of	the	material	world.
Here	we	must	ask:	Did	Jung’s	long	familiarity	with	the	color	language	of	alchemy	influence	the	formulation	of	his	comprehensive	theory
of	archetype,	first	laid	out	in	1946	at	Eranos	(“On	the	Nature	of	the	Psyche,”	CW	8),	in	terms	of	the	color	spectrum’s	extreme	poles	of
ultraviolet	and	infrared	(image	and	instinct)?	There	he	writes	of	the	violet	pole	as	if	describing	the	alchemical	iosis:	“a	spiritual	goal
toward	which	the	whole	nature	of	man	strives”	(415).
27 S.	Freud,	“On	Narcissism,”	CP	4: 3 1	and	33.
28 Aesthetic	sensuality	and	judgments,	even	if	disguised	in	the	language	of	physics	(Newton’s	color	spectrum)	and	chemistry,	infiltrate
the	work	all	through,	enlivening	the	moralisms	and	obscure	formulas	with	color	and	figure.	“The	free-ranging	psyche	of	the	adept	uses	of
chemical	substances	and	processes	as	a	painter	uses	colours	to	shape	out	the	images	of	his	fancy.”	(CW	14: 6 87).
29 CW	8: 3 3.
30 Onians,	The	Origins	of	European	Thought,	473.
31 Ibid.,	189	n	2.
32 Ibid.,	484.
33 J.	Hillman,	Senex	&	Puer,	UE	3,	chap.	13,	“Of	Milk	…	and	Monkeys.”
34 See	D.	Hamilton,	The	Monkey	Gland	Affair	(London:	Chatto	and	Windus,	1986).
35 Onians,	The	Origins	of	European	Thought,	188.
36 See	above,	chap.	5,	“Alchemical	Blue	and	the	Unio	Mentalis.”
37 CW	8: 4 14.
38 A. H.	Armstrong,	“The	Divine	Enhancement	of	Earthly	Beauties:	The	Hellenic	and	Platonic	Tradition,”	Eranos	Yearbook	53	(1984).
39 “Thus	beauty	is	constituted	by	the	objectification	of	pleasure.	It	is	pleasure	objectified.”	G.	Santayana,	The	Sense	of	Beauty	(New
York:	Charles	Scribner’s	Sons,	1896),	52.
40 Tinctur	is	the	name	of	the	top	step	of	the	ascending	operations	depicted	in	the	Mountain	of	Adepts	(S.	Michelspacher,	Cabala,
Speculum	Artis	et	Naturae,	in	Alchymia	[Augsburg	1654]),	reproduced	in	E. J.	Holmyard,	Alchemy	(Harmondsworth:	Penguin	Books,
1957),	pl.	16.
41 Le	Rosaire	des	philosophes,	trans.	E.	Pérrot	(Paris:	Librairie	de	Medicis,	1973).
42 On	the	essential	role	of	libidinal	Venus	(voluptas	mundi)	for	the	rubedo,	see	CW	14: 4 15–21.
43 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Exaltation.”

	

9
The	Imagination	of	Air	and	the	Collapse	of	Alchemy
	
Air	is	the	element,”	says	Plato,	“which	raises	(airei)	things	from	the	earth	or	as	ever-flowing	(aei
rei).” [1]	Since	the	Stoics,	as	Samuel	Sambursky	has	so	well	explained,	this	ever-flowing,	continuing
air	has	been	imagined	as	an	elastic	continuum,	the	pneuma. [2]	Pneuma	pervades	all	things;	it	inheres,
coheres,	gives	structural	tension	(hexis,	tonos),	as	if	to	say	that	things	are	as	they	are	because	they	are
filled	with	an	invisible	breath.	Pneuma	or	air	is	the	body	of	the	stars,	the	froth	of	animal	sperm,	the
seed	of	the	metals. [3]	All	things	breathe.	The	entire	cosmos	manifests	the	imagination	of	air.	Even
Tartarus	is	a	blasty	place,	tossing	the	images	of	souls	hither	and	yon	in	ceaseless	animation,	sending
us	their	dreams. [4]	Geist,	Logos,	Pneuma,	Spiritus,	Prana,	Ruach,	Psyche,	Anima/Animus	–	words	of
air,	forms	of	its	imagination.	Air	makes	possible	this	perceptible	world,	transmitting	the	colors,
sounds	and	smells	that	qualify	and	inform	our	animal	immersion.	As	we	breathe	air	and	speak	air,	so
are	we	bathed	in	its	elemental	imagination,	necessarily	illumined,	resounding,	ascending.	Human	life
cannot	keep	from	flying;	“all	God’s	chillun	got	wings.”	Aspiration,	inspiration,	genius	is	structurally
inherent,	a	pneumatic	tension	within	each	soul.	The	song-bird	and	the	choked	voice,	the	hyperbole	of
the	whirlwind,	spiritual	restlessness,	and	the	dread	of	asphyxiation	are	given	with	imagination	itself.
Imagination	is	air:	the	Celestials	(the	daimones),	says	Plotinus,	“are	composed	of	air”	(Ennead,	 : 
7.11).	These	imaginative	persons	populate	the	middle	realm	of	the	imaginal,	which	consists	of	airy
stuff	and,	in	Plutarch’s	phrase,	upholds	the	“consociation	of	the	universe.” [5]	These	bodies	of	air
would	be	what	we	now	call	psychic	images.	The	alchemist	Michael	Sendivogius	(CW	12: 397–98)	says
that	air	is	“uncommonly	light	and	invisible,	but	inside	heavy,	visible,	and	solid.”	The	invisible	anima
corporalis	is	visible	and	“real”	(heavy	and	solid)	as	image	to	the	imaginatio.	Jung	comments	(ibid.),
“as	‘the	images	of	all	creatures’	are	contained	in	the	creative	spirit,	so	all	things	are	imagined	or
‘pictured’	in	air …”	Air	is	the	confluent	element	of	spiritus	and	anima, [6]	appearing	as	imagination.
Therefore	the	exercise	that	our	subject,	air,	demands	of	us	in	this	chapter	is	that	of	picturing	in	the	air,
imagining	the	sensate	world	of	empirical	chemistry	as	filled	with	airy	bodies,	psychic	images.	We
shall	be	working	with	and	by	means	of	the	anima	corporalis,	or	soul	embodied	in	imagination.
L’Air	et	les	songes	7	was	the	great	exploratory	work	in	this	medium	and	it	is	to	Gaston	Bachelard
that	we	owe	a	first	debt,	although	our	texts	shall	not	be	those	he	would	have	chosen.	Instead,	we	shall
come	in	from	his	side,	the	side	of	the	history	of	science.	His	study	of	the	flame	of	a	candle,	for
instance,	does	not	occupy	itself	with	the	works	on	this	very	subject	by	Carl	Wilhelm	Scheele,	Michael
Faraday,	or	Antoine	Lavoisier	even	though,	or	because,	Bachelard	begins	as	a	natural	scientist.	He
approaches	the	elemental	air	through	the	poetic	imagination;	we	shall	approach	this	same	air	through
the	chemical	imagination.
This	chemistry	takes	us	to	the	Enlightenment.	When	this	period	(say	from	Cromwell’s	death	to
Napoleon’s)	does	appear	here,	it	is	usually	to	contrast	it	pejoratively	with	the	Renaissance	before	and
the	Romantics	after,	or	to	point	to	alternative	currents	simultaneous	with	the	Enlightenment:	Emanuel
Swedenborg,	Johann	Kaspar	Lavater,	the	Rosicrucians,	Franz	Xaver	von	Baader,	Franz	Anton
Mesmer,	Jacob	Frank,	William	Blake	…	(The	eighteenth	century	anyway	did	not	belong	only	to	the
Encyclopedists	and	Dr.	Johnson.	Alchemical	publications	thrived:	fifty	eighteenth-century	editions	of
Paracelsus;	Jean	Jacques	Manget’s	two-volume	Bibliotheca	Chemico-Curiosa	(1702);	Friederich
VI

Roth-Scholtzen’s	Deutsches	Theatrum	Chemicum	(1728–32)	in	three	massive	volumes;	Jean	Maugin
de	Richebourg’s	four-volume	Bibliothèque	des	philosophes	chimiques	(1740–54);	five	editions	of
Basilius	Valentinus’s	fifteenth-century	Chymische	Schriften,	one	as	late	as	1775.	And	I	have	not	listed
the	Rosicrucians.)
But	instead	of	looking	into	the	occult	tradition,	let	us	look	into	the	enlightened	ratio	of	our	Western
mind,	right	into	its	blinding	self-centered	light	as	it	appeared	most	assuredly	in	the	scientific
Enlightenment,	and	there	discover,	as	Gilbert	Durand	says,	its	occulted	possibility	within	itself	–	not
as	an	offshoot	or	outcast	of	the	official	position	(Vico	against	Descartes;	the	alchemical	Newton
against	the	mechanical	Newton;	the	mystic	Pascal	against	the	mathematician	Pascal)	–	but	rather	to	see
within	the	enlightened	mind	the	occulted	configurations	of	imagination	at	work	and	expressing
themselves	by	the	very	means	of	the	age’s	own	rationalist	actions.
If	we	could	“save	the	phenomenon,”	i.e.,	the	air	of	the	Enlightenment,	we	would	be	moving	to	save
the	phenomena	that	the	Enlightenment	bequeathed:	rational	science	and	technology,	no	less;	no	less
than	the	present	world	as	left	to	us	by	the	Enlightenment.	In	attempting	this	unabashedly	heroic	move,
I	shall	be	extending	an	idea	of	Jung’s	from	personal	psychology	to	cultural	psychology.	Jung’s	idea
says	that	the	thing	we	believe	we	know	most	about,	ego-consciousness,	is	a	dark	body	full	of
obscurities.	In	the	midst	of	the	Enlightenment	there	are	thus	less	visible	images.	How	does	the	ego
look	from	the	soul,	the	Enlightenment	from	the	anima?	Not	the	whole	Enlightenment,	of	course;
merely	essential	bits	of	it	as	it	appeared	in	its	imagination	of	air.
Ballooning,	Street	Lighting,	Soda	Water
Let	us	now	take	to	the	air,	in	a	balloon,	constructed	by	the	Montgolfier	brothers,	June	5,	1783,	the	first
aerial	ascent. [8]	The	Montgolfiers,	Charles	and	Robert,	repeated	the	demonstration	by	means	of	a
hot-air	balloon	before	the	public	of	Paris	on	the	Champ	du	Mars	in	August.	Immediately	a
commission	was	appointed	to	“study”	the	phenomenon	–	a	commission	is	itself	a	phenomenon	of	the
Enlightenment.	“Frappé	par	l’expérience,”	as	they	say	in	their	report,	the	commission,	which	included
Lavoisier	and	the	Marquis	de	Condorcet,	submitted	already	in	December	its	Rapport	fait	à	l’Académie
des	Sciences	sur	la	machine	aérostatique	inventée	par	MM.	de	Montgolfier.	The	aerial	imagination
had	entered	the	public,	scientific,	official	domain.
Within	a	few	weeks	(January	16,	1784),	Benjamin	Franklin,	then	78	years	old,	penned	a	letter	to	a
scientist	physician	at	the	Imperial	Court	in	Vienna,	attesting	to	the	event	and	advising	that	if	the	good
doctor	wants	to	make	a	similar	balloon,	send	someone	who	is	“ingenious”	so	as	not	to	fail	from
“want	of	Attention	to	some	particular	circumstance.” [9]	Note	Franklin’s	use	of	ingenious.	Already	the
spirit	of	“genius,”	in	the	ancient	sense	of	a	fiery-airy	nimbus	around	the	head,	was	becoming	clever
dexterity,	ingenuity,	technological.	Franklin	goes	on	significantly:
It	appears,	as	you	observe,	to	be	a	Discovery	of	great	Importance,	and	what	may	profitably	give	a	new	Turn	to	human	Affairs.
Convincing	Sovereigns	of	the	Folly	of	Wars,	may	perhaps	be	an	Effect	of	it	…	Five	Thousand	Balloons	capable	of	lifting	two
Men	each	would	not	cost	more	than	Five	Ships	of	the	Line.

Franklin	imagines	“Ten	Thousand	Men	descending	from	the	Clouds”	making	it	quite	impossible	for
Sovereigns	to	control	the	borders	of	their	nations.	Franklin’s	letter	seizes	upon	the	hope	for	peace
within	a	fantasy	of	war	that	arises	with	this	new	move	into	air.	Already	by	1794	the	French	had	set	up
a	military	school	for	balloonists.	Curious	that	the	first	public	ascent	was	from	the	Champs	du	Mars.
Curious	that	the	Montgolfiers’	balloon	carried	a	cock,	a	dog,	and	a	duck	–	prelude	to	Sputnik	and	the
space	shots,	as	if	the	opus	contra	naturam	has	to	prove	harmless	to	the	bestial	soul, [10]	or	as	if	the
bestial	soul,	too,	had	to	be	uplifted	by	enlightened	science.

Even	more	curious	that	these	machines	of	air	–	the	Montgolfiers’	hot-air	balloon,	the	Roberts’
hydrogen	(1783),	and	then	the	Wrights’s	airplane	–	were	invented	by	pairs	of	brothers.	Mythology	has
such	brother-pairs:	the	Açvins,	the	Dioscuri,	Gemini	(first	ascent	in	June),	who	sometimes	bear	the
same	name	and	come	as	healers	and	saviors	through	the	air,	bringing	hope.	They	are	sons	of	the	sky
and	ride	the	wind	on	horses.	They	prove	themselves	especially	by	flight	over	water	(crossing	the
Channel,	the	Atlantic).
The	hope	for	peace,	the	horse	of	war	–	that	ambivalence	is	archetypally	present	in	the	sky-born
Twins. [11]	In	some	cultures	the	birth	of	twins	is	regarded	with	terror	and	marvel,	with	foreboding
over	their	freakish	unnaturalism	and	joy	over	the	prospect	of	salvation,	a	new	day. [12]	Within	the
same	image	is	salvation	upward	and	the	prospect	of	danger	from	which	to	be	saved.
By	the	end	of	the	century,	balloons	were	all	over	the	place.	Lavoisier	himself	made	several	ascents
to	study	the	atmosphere	as	did	Joseph	Louis	Gay-Lussac	in	1804.	Besides	balloons,	there	was	the	new,
“scientific,”	ascent	of	mountains.	Horace-Bénédict	de	Saussure	climbed	Mont	Blanc	in	1788,	noting
the	effects	on	respiration	of	rarified	air.
	
Next	the	literal	enlightenment:	lighting	by	gas.	Despite	the	fascination	with	sight	–	philosophical
works	on	optics,	improvements	in	telescopes,	lens	grinding	and	microscopes,	works	on	light	and
color,	the	prevalance	of	lions	and	suns	and	kings	–	the	eighteenth	century	in	physical	fact	was	a	dim
age.	Every	room,	workshop	and	palace	was	illumined	by	candles	or	oil.	Not	until	coal	gas	was	first
described	by	John	Clayton	in	England	in	1739	could	the	physical	enlightenment	begin. [13]
Robert	Boyle	had	already	worked	with	coal	gas	and	Lavoisier ’s	first	written	chemical	study	at	the
age	of	twenty	was	on	street-lighting,	which	led	him	further	into	the	chemistry	of	combustion. [14]
But	illumination	by	gas	required	more	than	chemistry;	it	took	technology	too:	valves,	filters,
wicks,	fittings;	extracting,	measuring,	separating,	transporting	and	cleaning	the	gas.	By	1792	these
problems	had	been	solved,	and	in	1798	–	the	year	of	Kant’s	Anthropologie	in	pragmatischer	Hinsicht,
and	Wordsworth’s	and	Coleridge’s	Lyrical	Ballads,	or	more	appropriate	to	our	theme	and	more
ominous,	the	year	of	Thomas	Robert	Malthus’s	Essay	on	Population,	the	birth	of	Auguste	Comte,
Alessandro	Volta’s	electric	pile,	and	the	French	conquest	of	Rome	–	gas	lights	were	installed	in	a
Birmingham	foundry.	In	the	next	decades	the	cities	were	bathed	in	a	new	light:	London’s	Pall	Mall	and
Lyceum	Theatre;	Philadelphia;	Baltimore,	where	the	first	public	company	distributed	gas	to	private
customers.	By	1819	there	were	over	fifty-thousand	gas	lights	in	London	and	hundreds	of	miles	of	gas
lines.
The	documents	of	the	time	advancing	the	new	invention	show	a	language	of	democratic	positivism
–	gas	lighting	is	labor-saving,	clean,	safe,	and	cheap,	bringing	benefits	to	all.	One	of	the	principals	of
the	new	engineering,	Friedrich	Christian	Accum	(1769–1838)	writes:	“No	dread	is	felt	of	the	darkness
of	night.	It	might	be	a	curious	speculation	to	enquire	how	far,	and	in	what	respect,	the	morals	of	men
would	become	degraded	by	the	want	of	the	contrivance.”	For	“gaslights	really	dispel	the	dominion	of
night”	whereas	oil	lamps	but	“serve	the	purpose	of	making	the	darkness	visible.” [15]
The	enlightenment	literalized	and	moralized:	deprivation	of	gas-lighting	becomes	a	privatio	boni.
To	light	the	night,	and	actually	dispel	darkness,	its	dreadful	dominion,	implies	the	upgrading	of
mankind.
	
The	spirit	in	the	bottle:	The	great	investigative	chemists	–	Scheele	in	Sweden;	Lavoisier	in	France;
Boyle,	Henry	Cavendish,	and	Joseph	Priestley	in	England	–	were	eager	to	understand	the	nature	of	the
bubbly	waters	springing	from	the	earth,	such	as	at	Bad	Pyrmont	in	Germany. [16]	Here	was	an	air
apparently	trapped	in	water.	What	sort	of	air	is	this	and	how	does	the	water	hold	the	air?	Lavoisier
and	Scheele	isolated	the	gas	in	the	water,	gaz	acide	carbonique,	and	Priestley	in	1772	published	his

Directions	for	Impregnating	Water	with	Fixed	Air.
While	the	Fathers	of	the	American	Revolution	–	Thomas	Jefferson,	James	Madison,	Benjamin
Rush	–	studied	mineral	waters,	two	enterprising	Englishmen	produced	a	technical	device	for	making
effervescent	waters	and	for	manufacturing	it	on	a	commercial	scale.	Between	1789	and	1821	bottling
plants	were	opened	in	Dublin,	Geneva,	Paris,	London	and	Dresden,	and	the	first	artificial	mineralwater	business	of	Schweppe,	Paul	and	Gosse	began	in	Switzerland.	“Soda	Water”	entered	the
language	in	1798	–	that	remarkable	year.	Experimental	chemistry,	ingenuity,	and	pop	culture	went
hand	in	hand:	Benjamin	Silliman,	a	pioneer	chemist	of	the	new	United	States	(who	learned	in	Accum’s
manufacturing	plant	in	England	and	in	whose	honor	one	of	Yale’s	twelve	colleges	is	named),	among
other	contributions	to	science,	produced	and	bottled	soda	water	on	a	commercial	basis	and	opened	a
public	place	for	dispensing	it,	a	soda	fountain.	This	democratic	artificial	spa,	a	refreshing	pause	on
main	street,	was	now	established	in	Western	social	life:	the	soft	drink	of	aerated	water	for	anyone,	the
spirit	in	the	bottle	in	a	six-pack,	and	now	in	the	United	States	consumed	more	than	milk,	coffee	or
beer:	422	twelve-ounce	containers	per	capita	in	1980	(and	by	1990,	10	gallons	more	per	capita	than
consumption	of	water).
New	soda	powders	were	dispensed	to	make	water	fizz.	Scientific	papers	stated	the	benefits	of
aerated	water.	Physicians	used	“fixed	air”	(air	of	the	laboratory)	in	treating	putrid	kinds	of	diseases
such	as	small	pox,	driving	out	the	putrefactio	by	means	of	enemas	of	fixed	air	and	carbonated
waters. [17]	Soda	water,	like	gas	lighting	by	Accum	and	ballooning	by	Franklin,	was	presented	as	a
public	boon,	hopes	for	peace	and	health,	darkness	dispelled.	It	is	as	if	the	chemical	revolution	brought
forth	advertising	as	part	of	its	effervescence,	bubbling	up	and	spewing	forth	new	words	for	new
products	and	procedures.	To	pamphlet,	pamphleteer,	and	pamphleting	as	active	verbs	entered	the
language	in	the	1700s.	Gas,	steam,	hot	air,	windy,	blowhard	–	we	still	use	these	epithets	to	mock	the
words	of	advertising,	recognizing	unconsciously	that	the	ascensionism	of	air	is	what	gives	the
original	impetus	to	advertising’s	uplifting,	improving	hyperbole,	its	educative	mission	to	inform	the
public.	A	huge	multiplication	of	words	accompanied	the	new	chemistry	in	order	to	illumine	the
citizens	and	help	them	sail	with	the	Zeitgeist. [18]
Yet	it	was	in	focusing	upon	the	questions	of	bubbly	water	that	John	Dalton	(1766–1844),	in	his	1803
treatise	On	the	Absorption	of	Gases	by	Water,	was	able	to	distinguish	clearly	between	chemistry	and
mechanics,	between	combining	things	and	mixing	them:	“All	gases	that	enter	into	water	by	means	…
of	pressure,	and	are	wholly	disengaged	again	by	the	removal	of	that	pressure,	are	mechanically
mixed	with	the	liquid,	and	not	chemically	combined	with	it.” [19]	Since	water	does	not	admit	all	gases
equally,	different	gases	have	different	ultimate	particle	weights,	which	led	Dalton	to	publish	in	that
same	volume	his	first	list	of	atomic	weights.
Intermezzo:	The	Psychology	of	Extraversion
I	could	go	on	and	on	with	the	aerial	fascination	of	the	Enlightenment:	James	Watt	and	the	steam
engine,	steam	boat,	steam	heat;	blast	furnace	improvements	under	George	III;	the	investigations	of
respiration	that	were	then	compelling	physiology; [20]	study	and	mathematics	of	wind	force	in	sails,
wind	gauges, [21]	and	the	measuring	of	storms	by	Admiral	Beaufort’s	wind	scale	(1805).	But	what	has
all	this	to	do	with	psychology	for	that	matter?	Has	my	removal	from	Europe	to	the	United	States
blown	me	off	course,	a	de-rangement	toward	American	fascination	with	gadgetry?	Or	is	it	rather	that
the	path	of	psychology	has	been	single	and	narrowed	to	subjective	experience?	Investigations	of	the
deepest	collective	unconscious	have	more	or	less	stuck	to	introverted	texts	of	theologians,	mystics,
shamans,	alchemists,	poets,	dreamers.	Even	Jung’s	definition	of	the	image,	that	starting	point	for
archetypal	psychology,	states	the	introverted	perspective:	“I	do	not	mean	the	psychic	reflection	of	an

external	object,	but	a	…	fantasy	image,	which	is	related	only	indirectly	to	the	perception	of	an
external	object”	(CW	6: 743).
What	about	the	depth	psychology	of	extraversion,	the	images	within	the	soul	of	the	world?	Does
not	the	anima	mundi	move	its	imagination	also	in	the	world	of	exterior	manifestions?	The
psychology	of	extraversion	has	been	upheld	at	Eranos	by	two	men,	Adolf	Portmann	and	Samuel
Sambursky.	For	years	here	they	examined	the	external	world	and	ideas	about	it	so	that	this	chapter	is
also	in	homage	to	them.	More	specifically	my	aim	is	psychology,	the	rectification	of	its	focus	from
an	imagination	held	narrowly	to	subjectivity	and	the	therapy	of	the	private	individual,	to	the
imagination	of	extraversion	and	the	therapy	of	the	public	world,	where	an	imminent	radical
breakdown	threatens	all	our	subjective	lives,	a	world	that	has	been	deprived	of	its	depth	and
subjectivity	by	the	prejudices	of	our	psychology.	Archetypal,	collective,	unconscious	–	these
adjectives	apply	as	much	to	phenomena	out	there	as	in	here,	providing	we	release	our	minds	from
depth	psychology’s	introverted	bias.
Please:	by	a	psychology	of	introversion	I	do	not	mean	an	extraverted	psychology,	using
behavioristic,	historical	or	sociological	perspectives	to	study	phenomenon,	whether	in	the	world	or
in	the	person.	I	do	mean	giving	due	recognition	to	the	“ascendency	of	the	object	over	the	course	of
psychic	events”	(CW	6: 569)	where	“interest	and	attention	are	directed	to	objective	happenings	…	Not
only	people	but	things	seize	and	rivet	…	attention”	(CW	6: 563).	We	can	extend	depth	psychology
from	persons	to	things,	places	and	ideas	as	manifestations	of	imagination.	The	same	imagination,	the
same	soul,	that	presented	itself	in	fifteenth-	and	sixteenth-century	alchemy	showed	itself	in	the
extraverted	psychology	of	the	explorers	seeking	gold,	the	journey	across	the	perilous	seas,	the	seven
cities,	the	impossible	passage,	the	fountain	of	youth,	the	black	man	and	lost	Atlantis	–	the	world	as
metaphor.	Thus	in	chemistry,	there	is	an	imagination	in	every	experiment	and	invention.	The	cosmos
of	things,	their	arrangement,	displays	archetypal	patterns;	the	world’s	soul	is	subject	to	depth
psychological	analysis	because	imagination	takes	places	in	the	construction	of	things	as	much	as	it
takes	places	in	the	order	of	words.	The	spirit,	that	perennial	concern	of	Eranos,	cannot	be	limited	to	a
literalization	in	events	called	spiritual;	spirit	blows	through	the	world	as	it	did	on	the	first	day	of
creation,	and	in	ever-continuing	creation.
Humphry	Davy
So	back	to	the	world,	and	to	sniffing.	This	was	the	first	means	of	differentiating	the	airs,	a	diakrisis	of
the	spirits:	marsh-gas,	coal	gas,	air	after	thunderstorms.	Imagine	the	dangers:	ammonia,	chlorine,
hydrogen	sulphide	–	and	no	warnings	on	the	bottles.	The	dare-devil	assistant	of	Lavoisier,	Pilatre	de
Rozier,	the	first	human	ever	to	ascend	in	a	balloon	also	invented	the	gas	mask	with	which	he
descended	into	beer	vats	and	the	Paris	sewers	(only	to	be	killed	soon	after	in	an	attempt	to	cross	the
Channel	by	balloon). [22]	The	chemists	were	in	wine	cellars,	cesspools,	swamps,	breweries,	prisons,
collecting	various	airs.	Volta	(1745–1827,	born	and	died	in	Como)	worked	with	a	new	gadget,	the
eudiometer,	discovering	methane	in	the	bubbles	of	Lago	Maggiore	in	November	1776.
But	I	want	to	tell	you	specifically	about	nitrous	oxide,	the	laughing	gas	that	Joseph	Priestley	had
“discovered”	in	1772	but	was	considered	a	noxious	substance	until	a	lad	of	twenty,	Humphry	Davy
(1778–1829)	tried	it	on	himself	in	his	attic	bedroom	near	Bristol	in	1798.	After	ten	months	of
experimentation	and	three	more	of	writing,	Davy	published	his	Researches,	Chemical	and
Philosophical;	Chiefly	Concerning	Nitrous	Oxide. [23]
Davy	writes	that	his	early	experiments	were	“attended	by	a	highly	pleasurable	thrilling,	particularly
in	the	chest	and	the	extremities.” [24]	Davy	induced	at	least	eighteen	others	to	try	the	gas	and	they
contributed	descriptions	of	their	sensations	to	his	research.	One	said	“I	felt	like	the	sound	of	a

harp.” [25]	Davy	took	moonlight	walks,	composing	verse	under	influence	of	the	gas;	Coleridge,	a
close	friend	of	Davy’s,	enjoyed	“a	highly	pleasurable	sensation	of	warmth	over	my	whole
frame.“ [26]	And	the	poet	Robert	Southey,	then	twenty-five,	wrote	his	brother:
Oh,	Tom!	Such	gas	has	Davy	discovered,	the	gaseous	oxide!	Oh,	Tom!	I	have	had	some;	it	made	me	laugh	and	tingle	in	every	toe
and	finger	tip.	Davy	has	actually	invented	a	new	pleasure	for	which	language	has	no	name.	Oh,	Tom!	I	am	going	for	more	this
evening. [27]

Humphry	Davy	bears	attention	because	he	provides	an	illustrative	example	of	the	imagination	of	air
in	its	turn	to	the	world.	In	Davy	two	character	streaks	appear	together,	senex	and	puer.	First,	the	puer
experimenter	with	laughing	gas,	and	poetic	hero	of	whom	Coleridge	wrote,	“the	Father	and	Founder
of	philosophic	Alchemy,	the	Man	who	born	a	Poet	first	converted	Poetry	into	Science	and	realized
what	few	men	possessed	Genius	enough	to	fancy.” [28]	For	Coleridge,	Davy	(after	Wordsworth)	was
the	greatest	man	of	the	age	because	his	chemistry	was	poetry	accomplished	in	nature,	materialized:
science	was	a	poetic	undertaking,	a	songe	of	the	air.	With	Davy	we	move	from	the	Enlightenment	to
the	Shelleyian	vision	and	Byronic	stance:	at	age	seventeen,	Davy	had	written	his	The	Sons	of	Genius,	a
puer	testament	in	which	science	carries	one	on	wings	above	terrestrial	cares:
To	scan	the	laws	of	Nature,	to	explore
The	tranquil	reign	of	mild	Philosophy;
Or	on	Newtonian	wings	sublime	to	soar
Through	the	bright	regions	of	the	starry	sky. [29]

In	his	early	twenties	we	see	the	two	streaks	in	his	daily	schedule:	he	worked	on	his	epic	Lover	of
Nature	before	breakfast	and	The	Feelings	of	Eldon	just	after,	followed	by	five	hours	straight	of
experimentation	–	Science	and	Poetry	together.	He	could	play	with	nitrous	oxide	and	laboriously
write	the	details	and	see	it	into	print.
It	was,	however,	his	other	character	streak,	a	hesitant	and	practical	attention	to	“the	minute
alterations	in	the	external	world,” [30]	that	made	him	famous	in	his	time	and	renowned	in	the	history
of	science.	He	invented	the	safety	lamp	for	coal	mines.	He	had	immense	influence	on	farming. [31]	By
1813	Davy	had	identified	forty-seven	of	the	new	chemical	elements,	having	himself	isolated	by
electrical	experimentation,	sodium,	potassium,	calcium,	strontium,	barium,	magnesium, [32]	and
pointed	further	to	beryllium	and	aluminium.
What	precisely	tames	the	puer	spirit	of	laughing	gas	and	epic	verse,	placing	it	in	the	service	of	the
public	good?	The	question	is	both	psychological	and	historical,	since	it	refers	also	to	the	spirit	of	an
age	that	moved	its	early	pneumatic	adventures	in	the	gaseous	realm	into	applied	technology	of
democratic	positivism.	In	Davy’s	case,	some	have	answered	“ambition,”	reputation,	or	fama,	as	it	was
called	in	the	Renaissance.	Idealism	is	inherent	to	the	imagination	of	air.	It	soars	with	lofty	superbia.
Ambition	is	applied	idealism;	it	harnesses	the	spiritual	ideals	to	practical	works	that	gain	public
recognition	–	recognition	from	the	human	world.	Puer	ambition	must	be	more	than	mere	vanity	and
opportunism. [33]	It	serves	to	bring	puer	ascensionism	into	the	social	nexus.	Davy	wrote:
The	voice	of	fame	is	murmuring	in	my	ear	–	My	mind	has	been	excited	by	the	unexpected	plaudits	of	the	multitude	–	I	dream	of
greatness	and	utility	–	I	dream	of	science	restoring	to	Nature	what	Luxury,	what	civilization	have	stolen	from	her	–	pure	hearts,	the
forme	of	angels,	bosoms	beautiful;	and	panting	with	joy	and	hope … [34]

When	addressing	the	question	of	the	public	aim	of	science,	Davy,	in	his	last	written	work,	used	the
image	of	the	alchemist.	The	difference	between	alchemical	charlatans	and	“true	alchemical
philosophers”	is	that	the	latter	were	concerned	“to	ameliorate	the	condition	of	humanity	and	to
support	the	interests	of	religion	…	[so	that]	their	discoveries	[were]	eminently	useful.” [35]	The
amelioration	of	human	conditions	coincided	with	the	aims	of	an	extraverted	religion	of	good	works;

science	could	fulfill	God’s	purpose,	less	by	defining	the	mind	of	God	and	his	universal	laws	of
Nature	in	theoretical	physics	and	more	by	furthering	God’s	redemptive	intentions	through	applied
chemistry.	Chemistry	materialized	the	aim	to	restore	to	Nature	her	angelic	anima.
This	view	must	have	led	Davy	further	from	his	earlier,	“starry	sky”	poetry	about	which	he	later
wrote:	“These	were	the	visions	of	my	youth	/	Which	fled	before	the	voice	of	Truth.” [36]	Truth	as	he
grew	older	seemed	now	to	lie	wholly	with	Locke,	for	he	asserted	that	all	knowledge	was	acquired	by
means	of	the	senses	and	declared	(in	1812)	that	“Nature	has	no	archetype	in	the	human
imagination,” [37]	implying	that	nature	can	be	known	by	direct	experimentation	only.	Coleridge	was
appalled,	complaining	that	Davy	“was	determined	to	mould	himself	upon	the	age	in	order	to	make	the
age	mould	itself	upon	him.” [38]	Coleridge	saw	only	popularity,	vanity,	and	a	fall	away	from	the
Naturphilosophie	of	Schelling	and	the	new	Romanticism.	For	Davy,	however,	there	was	no	such
polarity	–	a	favorite	term	of	Coleridge,	and	not	of	Davy	himself	who	actually	worked	with	electricity
and	electromagnetism	from	which	the	term	arose	–	between	poetic	and	scientific	genius	or	between
ideal	and	practical	action.
Davy	gives	us,	further,	a	clue	to	the	spirit	of	empiricism	that	informs	the	period	from	Jan	Baptist
van	Helmont	and	Robert	Boyle	through	Davy.	These	men	played	even	as	they	measured: [39]
Benjamin	Franklin	with	his	kite;	Robert	Hooke	with	his	gadgets;	Stephen	Hales	examining	his
animals	and	plants;	Joseph	Louis	Gay-Lussac	ascending	to	7,000	meters	in	a	balloon;	Humphry	Davy
and	his	crowd	sniffing.	It	was	not	merely	that	magical	tricks	and	alchemical	transformations	still
pervaded	the	new	chemistry,	but	that	the	occupation	with	air	constellated	its	elemental	force:	risk,
flight,	fancy.	The	spirit	of	experimentation	–	the	puer	impulse	had	not	yet	succumbed	to	the	prearranged	intentions	of	what	experiments	came	to	be	in	later	science.
A	lab	experiment	now	is	a	senex	ritual	repeating	what	is	already	known.	Less	an	investigative	act	of
curiosity,	it	is	more	an	initiation	into	the	scientific	paradigm	by	an	imitative	performance	of	what	the
figures	of	science,	now	senex	patriarchs	of	scientific	laws,	did	centuries	ago.	Even	a	research
experiment	is	to	test	a	law	or	gain	evidence	for	(or	against)	it.	Puer	experimentation	–	let’s	try	and	see
what	happens;	Davy	in	his	attic	chamber;	the	game	and	fun	of	it	–	this	is	now	all	but	missing.	Again,
think	of	the	puer	risk	of	handling	gases:	methane,	ethylene,	chlorine,	hydrogen	cyanide,	carbon
monoxide,	nitrogen	–	the	noxious	fumes,	explosions,	asphyxiations,	collapse	of	balloons.	The	very
dangers	taught	care;	scientific	method	is	not	a	pure	senex	invention.	It	arises	as	a	protective	necessity
within	the	puer	drive	and	it	begins	in	the	loyalty	one	gives	to	one’s	poetic	excitement.	Empirics	is	not
only	a	senex	preserve;	it	can	lift	a	wing	as	well.
	
Balloons,	soda	bubbles,	laughing	gas	–	they	demonstrate	the	new,	extraordinary,	and	mundane
imagination	of	air	of	the	time.	These	examples	also	serve	to	demonstrate	my	method	here.
Psychological	method	requires	that	one	go	to	the	phenomenon	itself,	judgment	suspended.	We	enter
the	material	with	the	patient,	as	the	chemist	in	the	beer	vat,	the	cesspool.	Our	discipline	requires	that
we	go	where	the	air	itself	went,	wherever	it	went.	Just	here,	the	spiritual	attitude	contrasts	with	the
psychological.	Where	spirit	can	regard	mundane	phenomena	against	a	background	of	eternal	verities,
reminding	the	mundane	of	its	origin	in	the	transmundane,	calling	the	fallen	phenomena,	in	outrage,
compassion,	or	nostalgia,	to	rise	up	to	redemption,	the	psychological	method	follows	the	phenomena
downward	into	their	pathologized	condition,	as	did	Freud	and	Jung	with	their	cases,	attempting
redemption	of	the	mundane	and	the	material	from	within	itself.	From	the	psychological	viewpoint,
precisely	there	where	the	symptom	is	most	crass,	most	manifest	and	embarrassing,	is	where	the	soul
clamors	for	understanding.
Phlogiston	or	Oxygen

So	what	was	in	the	wind?	How	did	the	elemental	air	inspire	these	inventions	and	transform	itself	into
these	useful	tools:	guns	and	pumps,	lamps	and	drills,	balloons	and	bubbly	water?
The	answer	is	well-known.	Probably	no	scientific	revolution	has	been	so	thoroughly	documented
as	the	foundations	of	modern	chemistry [40]	by	Joseph	Black,	James	Watt,	Cavendish,	Priestley,
Scheele,	and	Lavoisier	who	himself	used	the	term	“chemical	revolution.” [41]	Sometimes	the
revolution	is	called	the	overthrow	of	the	phlogiston	theory,	or	the	death	knell	of	alchemy.	It	occurred
concurrently	with	the	American	and	French	revolutions.	Both	Priestley	and	Lavoisier	were	political
“revolutionaries”:	Priestley,	a	highly	active	dissident	theologian,	finally	driven	to	take	refuge	in
Pennsylvania	in	old	age;	Lavoisier,	though	originally	part	of	the	republican	administration,	executed
during	the	Terror.
Lavoisier ’s	work	ran	parallel	with	and	culminated	the	differentiation	of	air	that,	let	us	say,	began
with	Robert	Boyle’s	New	Experiments,	Physico-mechanicall,	touching	the	Spring	of	the	Air	and	its
Effects	(1660)	and	his	tract	on	the	Relation	betwixt	Flame	and	Aire	(1672),	John	Mayow’s	On
Respiration	(1668),	and	John	Evelyn’s	Fumifugium	(1661)	on	the	pollution	of	the	air	of	London.	With
the	eighteenth	century	came	“A	Specimen	of	an	attempt	to	analyze	the	Air	by	a	great	variety	of
chymio-statistical	Experiments,”	a	long	chapter	in	Hales’s	Vegetable	Staticks	(1727);	Black’s
“Experiments	upon	Magnesia	Alba,	Quick-lime,	and	some	other	Alcaline	Substances”	(1756,	his
study	of	effervescence	or	“fixed	air”	(carbon	dioxide);	Daniel	Rutherford’s	dissertation	(1772),
which	described	nitrogen;	Torbern	Bergman’s	Om	Luftsyra	(1773);	Cavendish’s	“Three	Papers
Containing	Experiments	on	Factitious	Air”	(1766)	and	his	“Experiments	on	Air”	(1784);	Marsilio
Landriani’s	Ricerche	fisiche	intorno	alIa	salubrità	dell’aria	(1775);	Watt’s	“Thoughts	on	the
constituent	parts	of	water	and	of	dephlogisticated	air”	(1784);	Scheele’s	description	of	his
experiments	in	Sweden,	“Chemical	Treatise	on	Air	and	Fire”	(1777);	and	Priestley’s	three-volume
Experiments	and	Observations	on	different	kinds	of	Air	(1774–77).
Priestley’s	chapters	dealt	with	vitriolic	air,	vegetable	acid	air,	marine	acid	air,	mephitic	air,	red
nitrous	vapor,	putrid	air,	and	on	and	on.	It	is	hard	for	us	to	realize	what	assiduous	devotion	it	needs	to
examine	and	distinguish	the	components	of	the	common	air	we	breath.	By	means	of	their	techniques
and	apparatus	the	ancient	element	of	air	was	being	rapidly	dismembered	into	components	and
individual	gases	identified. [42]
Much	as	the	subterranean	earth	and	its	minerals	had	fascinated	the	alchemical	writers	earlier	and
the	celestial	bodies,	ether,	light,	and	optics	had	fascinated	the	mathematical	and	physical	philosophers
(Spinoza,	Galilei,	Descartes,	Newton),	air	was	the	focus	of	the	chemical	imagination.	It	was	subject	to
the	human	hand:	the	invisible	elastic	fluid,	the	soul	breath,	could	be	pumped,	expanded,	exploded,
evacuated,	condensed,	poisoned,	separated	and	weighed.	Air	had	become	one	of	the	new	tria	prima	of
matter:	solid,	liquid,	gas.	Chemistry	arises	as	the	materialization	of	air.
Let	me	demonstrate	the	paradigm	shift,	the	death	knell	of	alchemy,	before	your	imagining	eyes.	If	a
strip	or	bar	of	metal	is	calcined,	that	is,	dry	roasted	in	the	intense	heat	of	a	burning	glass	–	the	old
alchemical	operation	of	calcinatio [43]	–	the	calx	or	powdery	residue	of	the	metal	weighs	more	than
the	original	metal.	Does	this	heavy	calx	remaining	mean	that	something	volatile	in	the	metal	has	been
burned	away,	subtracted,	leaving	a	heavy	deposit?	If	this	is	your	account,	then	you	belong	to	the
school	of	Stahl	and	would	call	the	“something	volatile”	that	has	burned	away	phlogiston.
If,	however,	you	consider	the	heavier	residue	to	indicate	that	calcining	has	added	something	to	the
metal	that	is	present	in	the	calx	and	was	not	present	in	the	metal	(at	all	or	to	the	same	degree),	then
you	belong	to	the	school	of	Lavoisier	and	the	“something	added”	is	oxygen.	Although	Scheele	and
Priestley	had	earlier	isolated	“dephlogisticated	air,”	Lavoisier	recognized	its	significance,	naming	it
“oxygen”	in	1779.	Burning	is	oxidation,	the	residues	of	metals	are	oxides,	combustion	is	a
combinatory	process,	hence	the	body	left	after	the	conflagration	is	heavier.	Phlogiston	became

superfluous	to	chemical	explanation.
Phlogiston	had	been	imagined	to	have	a	negative	weight	or	at	least	to	be	exempt	from	the	laws	of
gravity. [44]	As	such	it	was	akin	to	the	Stoic’s	pneuma,	Aristotle’s	absolute	lightness,	and	to	the
vitalistic	anima	in	Georg	Ernst	Stahl’s	(1660–1734)	chemical	medicine.	Alchemy	finally	collapsed
when	this	last	breath	of	the	religious-alchemical	imagination	expired.	Its	aerial	fantasies	burned	out.	It
stopped	imagining	itself	further	and	the	new	images	appeared	in	chemistry.
Priestley	clung	to	a	notion	of	phlogiston	to	the	end,	perhaps	because	of	its	roots	in	an	ancient
religious	sense	of	the	material	world.	Moreover,	the	idea	of	phlogiston	spoke	to	common	sense,	like
the	idea	of	the	sun	rising	and	setting	as	it	revolved	around	the	earth.	Girolamo	Cardano	(De
subtilitate,	1547)	and	Leonardo	da	Vinci,	for	instance,	had	believed	that	burning	adds	weight	to	things
because	in	the	process	they	lose	their	celestial	lightness,	their	innate	breath	of	the	world	soul;	hence
for	Leonardo	a	corpse	is	heavier	than	a	living	body.	(Today’s	materialism	reads	death	otherwise:
recent	experiments	attempt	to	compute	weight	loss	at	the	moment	of	death	as	evidence	for	the
departure	of	a	material	soul. [45])
Besides	this	archetypal	trace	of	the	celestial	pneuma	still	to	be	found	in	phlogiston,	it	more	directly
derives	from	the	sulfur	of	the	Paracelsian	tria	prima	(sulfur	phlogistos),	and	Johann	Joachim	Becher
(1635–1682), [46]	from	whom	Stahl	took	the	idea,	was	an	alchemist.	Stahl	says	that	phlogiston	“is
chiefly	found	in	fatty	materials.”	Its	name,	meaning	brennlich [47]	(combustible),	he	says,	derives
from	its	action	within	compounds,	since	it	does	not	appear	by	itself.	Phlogiston	is	that	invisible,
ubiquitous,	inflammable	richness	in	all	things,	its	burning	compulsion	to	life,	using	air	as	its	medium,
and	like	sulfur	acts	as	the	joyful,	fat,	and	oily	vivifier. [48]
Oxygen	has	a	different	ancestry.	The	word	comes	from	the	Greek	prefix	oxy-,	from	oxys,	acute,
sharp,	hasty,	pungent,	shrill,	bright,	sour.	It	is	an	epithet	of	Ares	(Iliad	2: 440).	Lavoisier	asserted	that
oxygen	is	the	necessary	component	in	all	acidity.	(Hence,	Sauerstoff	in	German	for	oxygen.)
Lavoisier	was	wrong	in	his	wide	claim,	and	Davy,	Richard	Kirwan,	Louis-Bernard	Guyton	de
Morveau,	and	especially	Priestley,	did	not	go	along	with	the	elevation	of	oxygen	into	a	single
explanatory	principle	for	acidity,	a	universal	elemental	essence	much	like	the	phlogiston	it	was
replacing. [49]	When	Lavoisier	designed	the	shorthand	symbol	for	his	principe	oxygine,	he	drew	it
with	sharp	points [50]	because	acids	were	imagined	in	the	eighteenth	century	to	be	composed	of	atoms
with	spikes,	hence	their	biting,	corrosive	effect.
Phlogiston,	through	its	sulfuric	ancestry,	was	warm,	oily,	and	generous;	oxygen,	through	its	acidic
ancestry,	was	corrosive	and	aggressive.	The	chemical	revolution	brightened,	and	soured,	the	air.	The
exchange	of	alchemy	for	chemistry	was,	in	short,	an	exchange	of	phlogiston	for	oxygen.	What	went
was	vitalism	and	the	final	cause;	what	came	was	atomism	and	the	material	cause.	What	went	was
Stahl’s	anima;	what	came	was	Lavoisier ’s	methode.	What	went	was	the	meaning	in	chemical
transformations;	what	came	was	their	explanation.
The	soured	air	occurs	together	with	the	triumph	of	a	nominalist	theory	of	matter. [51]	For	the
Stahlians,	the	stuff	of	the	world,	however	particularized	it	may	be	on	analysis,	yet	depends	upon
fundamental	essences	that	should	not	be	confused	with	the	particulars	themselves	as	they	are	in	atomic
theory.	And	the	resistance	of	some	chemistry	of	the	time	(Davy,	for	instance)	to	the	table	of	atomic
weights	was	the	multiplication	of	elements	seeming	to	indicate	a	multiplication	of	essences.	The
sharp,	acidic	eye	was	analyzing	into	ever	more,	ever	smaller	and	more	abstract	particulars;	in
explanation,	dissolution	took	precedence,	and	“element”	lost	its	elemental,	essential	sense.	The	acid
pollution	of	the	world,	its	dissolution	into	particulates,	and	the	loss	of	the	essential	sense	of	soul	in
the	material	world	are	all	prefigured	in	the	imagination	of	air	as	oxygen.
A	shift	in	the	significance	of	air	is	a	shift	in	the	anima	mundi,	a	change	of	cosmos.	The	seventeenth
century,	largely	owing	to	Helmont	and	Boyle,	had	dismissed	air	as	a	true	element.	Alchemy	was

mainly	occupied	with	the	discrimination	of	earths	(metals),	alterations	of	waters	(distilling,
condensing,	dissolving,	tincturing)	and	the	art	of	fire.	In	eighteenth-century	chemical	thought,
wherever	the	four	elements	did	appear,	earth,	water,	and	fire	remain	while	air	is	conspicuously
missing.	It	was	merely	a	facilitator,	a	pressure	to	keep	a	flame	steady,	a	medium	for	refraction,	a
vehicle	for	phlogiston.	The	souffleur	did	not	feed	the	fire	with	his	bellows,	for	air	itself	did	not	enter
into	combustion.	The	invisible	imagination,	air,	had	been	excluded	from	participating	in	the
Cartesian-Newtonian	world.	Hence	Enlightenment	rationalism,	mechanism,	and	turgid
sentimentalism:	it	had	no	air	in	it.
Then	came	the	chemical	revolution.	Air	became	the	prime	element	in	combustion	and	combustion
the	essence	of	chemistry.	Where	Helmont	had	eliminated	air	in	favour	of	water,	Cavendish	could	now
show	that	water	dissolved	into	gas.	For	Lavoisier,	water	was	simply	an	oxide	of	hydrogen.	The
archetypal	fantasy	of	the	processional	transformation	of	elements,	familiar	since	the	Presocratics,
ever-continues	as	the	air,	and	so	does	the	archetypal	argument	concerning	priority	among	them.
As	technology	could	now	be	applied	to	air,	it	became	materialized	and	took	on	weight.	The	powers
dormant	within	it	–	demons,	images,	pneumatic	tensions,	underworld	subtleties	–	also	materialized.
They	did	not	materialize	literally	as	in	medieval	visions	but	kept	their	invisibility	as	the	pneumatic
impetus	within	the	Zeitgeist.	The	demons	and	angels	of	the	aerial	imagination	took	wing	and	filled	the
air	with	new	notions,	inventions,	positive	expansionism,	a	heavenward	hope	as	explosive	as	aerial
nitre [52]	–	our	common	air	is	mainly	nitrogen.	Upward,	onward	–	the	roots	of	revolution	and
romanticism	lie	in	the	air.	Imagination	itself	became	positivist,	progressivist,	material,	active.
Weighing	the	Air
With	this	we	come	to	Henry	Cavendish	(1731–1810),	the	crucial	figure	in	the	mathematization	of	air.
His	first	published	works	were	his	“Three	Papers,	Containing	Experiments	on	Factitious	Air,” [53]	i.
e.,	air	produced	through	laboratory	arts.	He	isolated	hydrogen	(inflammable	air)	and	accurately	set
forth	its	weight	in	comparison	with	the	density	of	common	air.	He	synthesized	water,	thereby	showing
that	it	is	not	an	element,	but	arises	from	two	distinct	airs.	He	theorized	that	cold	is	generated	from
substances	transmuting	into	air.	And	among	other	extraordinary	accomplishments	he	performed	the
task	of	“weighing	the	world,”	as	he	called	it,	calculating	the	density	of	this	planet	and	arriving	at	a
number	remarkably	close	to	the	present	estimate.	This,	called	the	Cavendish	experiment,	was	also
published	in	that	year	1798.	As	well,	he	collaborated	with	John	Michell’s	attempt	to	determine	the
weight	of	the	stars. [54]	Cavendish	has	been	considered	the	most	brilliant	and	accurate	experimenter
in	physics,	electricity,	thermodynamics,	and	chemistry	of	the	eighteenth	century,	but	I	want	to	spend	a
few	moments	on	his	character.
When	Henry	Cavendish	was	two,	his	mother	died;	he	resided	with	his	father,	also	a	scientist.	The
father	lived	until	Henry	was	fifty-two,	immediately	after	which	he	opened	his	only	longer	term
correspondence,	with	Michell	and	with	Priestley,	and	engaged	his	scientific	assistant,	Charles
Blagden. [55]	Science	was	the	content	and	spirit	of	these	relationships.	For	as	a	recent	biographer
writes:	“All	who	knew	him	were	agreed	about	his	striking	deficiencies	as	a	human	being	…	‘he	did
not	love;	he	did	not	hate;	he	did	not	hope;	he	did	not	fear.’ ” [56]	The	lack	of	affection	appears
especially	in	his	morbid	shyness	regarding	women.
Cavendish	“ordered	his	dinner	daily	by	note,	which	he	left	at	a	certain	hour	on	the	hall	table”	and
“would	never	see	a	female	servant.” [57]	Once	he	was	so	disconcerted	by	bumping	into	a	maid	on	the
stairs	that	he	immediately	had	constructed	a	second	staircase	so	as	never	to	be	faced	with	this
phenomenon	again.	At	the	Club	one	evening,	the	gentlemen	were	assembled	before	an	undraped
window,	peering	out.	Cavendish	joined	the	group	assuming	they	were	studying	the	moon;	but	when

Cavendish	discovered	it	was	a	“very	pretty	girl”	he	“turned	away	with	intense	disgust.” [58]	His
biographer	writes	in	1851:
To	the	other	objects	of	common	regard	which	excite	and	gratify	the	fancy,	the	imagination,	the	emotions,	and	the	higher	affections,
he	was	equally	indifferent.	The	Beautiful,	the	Sublime,	and	the	Spiritual	seem	to	have	lain	altogether	beyond	his	horizon.	The
culture	of	the	external	senses,	which	the	prosecution	of	researches	in	the	physical	sciences,	secures	…	did	nothing	in	Cavendish’s
case,	to	quicken	the	perception	of	beauty,	whether	of	form	or	sound	or	colour.	Many	of	our	natural	philosophers	have	had	a	strong
and	cultivated	aesthetical	sense;	and	have	taken	great	delight	in	…	the	fine	arts.	For	none	of	these	does	Cavendish	seem	to	have
cared.	 [59]

Even	his	interest	in	his	experimental	instruments	remained	functional,	a	concern	for	accuracy	only.
Unlike	Black	or	Accum,	he	took	no	care	about	elegance	of	form	or	value	of	material. [60]	On	his
geological	researches	in	open	country,	we	find	no	response	to	the	natural	scenery	or	observations
about	the	inhabitants	or	historical	associations	with	the	different	localities.	Cavendish	had	his	eye	only
on	his	instruments,	crossing	the	country,	says	his	biographer	“like	a	railway	surveyor.”
When	he	found	himself	dying	in	1810,	nearly	eighty,	an	observer	writes:
He	gave	directions	to	his	servant	to	leave	him	alone,	and	not	to	return	till	a	certain	time	…	by	which	he	expected	to	be	no	longer
alive.	His	servant	…	was	anxious	about	him,	opened	the	door	of	the	room	before	the	time	specified	…	Mr.	Cavendish	…	was
offended	at	the	intrusion,	and	ordered	him	out	of	the	room	…	commanding	him	not	by	any	means	to	return	till	the	time	specified.
When	he	did	come	back	at	that	time,	he	found	his	master	dead. [61]

When	Cavendish’s	trunks	and	cupboards	were	inspected	for	report	to	the	next	of	kin,	“they	found
parts	of	embroidered	dresses,	and	much	valuable	jewellery,	including	a	lady’s	stomacher,	richly
decorated	with	diamonds.“ [62]
Let	us	say	that	the	“striking	deficiencies”	mentioned	by	Cavendish’s	biographers	would	today	be
referred	to	as	an	“anima	problem.”	Some	criteria	of	anima	are:
–	a	sense	of	beauty:	of	which	Cavendish	was	devoid;
–	sensuousness:	Cavendish	ate	mutton	most	nights	of	his	life;
–	vanity:	Cavendish	refused	to	sit	for	a	portrait,	and	so	we	have	no	sure	depiction	of	his	face;	he
wore	the	same	unchanging	outmoded	fashion	his	life	long;
–	fantasy:	impelled	by	the	flow	of	life,	Cavendish	was	always	concise	and	precise,	living	by	the
clock;
–	delight	in	women,	indolence,	gossip:	biographers	and	acquaintances	report	a	void;
–	affection	for	nature:	Cavendish	weighed	it	and	surveyed	it;
–	fascination	with	death:	he	died	on	schedule,	fulfilling	a	matter-of-fact	prediction,	his	face	to	the
wall.
My	purpose	here	is	neither	to	ridicule	Cavendish	nor	to	diagnose	him. [63]	Nor	is	it	to	judge.	Judge
not	lest	ye	be	judged	by	your	very	judgment.	I	have	told	this	story	to	suggest	that	the	Cavendish
phenomenon	–	obsession	with	density,	weight,	number,	and	measure	–	was	necessary	to	materialize
the	air,	which	in	turn	was	necessary	to	differentiate	it	into	a	complexity	of	constituents,	leading	to
Priestley’s	classic	work	on	the	Different	Kinds	of	Air. [64]
Certainly,	the	act	of	weighing	is	a	reductive	move.	Macrobius	says:	“Nature	always	draws	weights

towards	the	bottom;	obviously	this	was	done	that	there	be	an	earth	in	the	universe.”	 [65]	By	weighing
the	air,Cavendish	took	the	ascensionism	out	of	it.	His	move	is	prototypical	for	what	today	is	called
reductionism	or	“bottom-line”	thinking	–	valuing	invisible	things,	spiritual	things,	in	terms	of	their
weight	in	a	material	scale.	The	movement	is	toward	the	bottom	and	the	effect	on	the	ascensionism	of
spirit	is	depressing,	and	of	course	the	justification	for	the	“bottom-line”	reduction	is	in	the	rhetoric	of
earth	–	common	sense,	solid	facts,	hard	reality.
May	we	not	link	the	rise	of	nineteenth-century	economics	and	the	domination	of	economics	over
the	Western	mind	today	with	the	procedures	of	weight,	measure,	and	number	introduced	to	perfection
by	Cavendish	and	the	chemical	revolution.	(I	must	set	aside	the	relations	between	the	new	technology
and	its	immense	demands	for	capital,	and	also	set	aside	Cavendish’s	relation	to	his	personal	wealth	–
supposedly	the	wealthiest	scientist	who	ever	lived.)	The	barometric	language	used	by	economics	for
its	basic	directions	–	inflation	and	depression	–	seems	to	belong	to	what	I	am	calling	the	Cavendish
phenomenon,	that	is,	reduction	to	a	mode	of	thinking	that	is	both	abstract	and	material,	presenting
what	seems	concrete	and	tangible	–	material	or	economic	“realities”	–	altogether	abstracted	by
mathematization.	As	such,	the	Cavendish	phenomenon	is	a	symptom	formation,	a	compromise	with
the	material	element	of	earth,	using	its	rhetoric	to	measure	all	things,	yet	never	touched	by	it	by	virtue
of	the	measuring	act	itself.
Nonetheless	–	even	as	air	is	reduced	by	the	Cavendish	phenomenon	it	is	also	differentiated.	This
suggests	that	the	recognition	of	the	complexity	of	an	invisible	seems	to	require	materialization.	The
reduction	to	matter	is	not	necessarily	a	fall,	a	defeat	of	the	wing;	materialization	is	a	means	by	which
spirit	becomes	differentiated,	makes	itself	knowable.	The	mind’s	invisible	complexity,	the	air	of	its
logos,	its	Geist,	recognizes	itself	in	the	precision	of	the	senses;	and,	action	in	the	material	world,
rather	than	a	mere	acting-out,	an	escape,	presents	the	sense-display	of	the	spirit.	In	Adolf	Portmann’s
language:	the	material	world	is	where	Selbstdarstellung,	self-representation,	takes	place.	As	such,	all
action	is	aesthetic,	and	materialization	is,	as	the	Scholastics	insisted,	necessary	to	individuation.
Cavendish	performed	the	materialization	of	air	by	means	of	counting,	but	the	accounting	or	recounting	of	a	story,	a	recit	in	Corbin’s	sense,	also	brings	invisibles	down	into	the	world	of	sense	and
differentiates	them.	Cavendish’s	mode	was	numerical	counting	by	which	air	became	precisely
accountable	for	its	various	behaviors.	In	other	words,	counting	is	more	than	mere,	sheer
quantification:	it	is	one	mode	of	making	differentiation	visible,	of	precise	description,	of	giving	an
account,	a	tale	of	things.
Even	the	angels	dancing	on	a	pinhead	seemed	subject	to	counting	if	the	very	air	was	susceptible	to
measure.	Stephen	Hales	earlier	in	the	century	had	introduced	the	book	containing	his	work	on	air,
Vegetable	Staticks,	with	that	verse	from	Isaiah	4: 12	about	God	measuring	the	waters,	the	earth,	and
weighing	the	mountains	(which	Cavendish	performed	in	a	divine	feat	of	mathematical	literalism	by
means	of	a	mountain	in	Perthshire).	Hales	said:
Since	we	are	assured	that	the	all-wise	Creator	has	observed	the	most	exact	proportions,	of	number,	weight,	and	measure,	in	the
make	of	all	things;	the	most	likely	way	therefore,	to	get	any	insight	into	the	nature	of	those	parts	of	the	creation	…	must	in	all
reason	be	to	number,	weigh	and	measure. [66]

Cavendish’s	motto	was	precisely	this:	“To	weigh,	number,	and	measure” [67]	(as	later,	J. B.	Richter
[1762–1807]	was	to	use	the	motto	on	the	title	page	of	his	major	work).	Counting	had	now	become	an
imaginal	carrier	with	as	much	force	as	a	demonic	possession.
With	the	materialization	of	air,	fantasies	became	inventions.	Elixirs	and	tinctures	available	at	the
soda	fountain;	the	alchemical	exaltatio,	laughing	gas;	and	the	spirit’s	acclivitas	rose	up	in	balloon
ascents,	while	the	air ’s	light-transmitting	mission	became	gas-lit	avenues	in	Baltimore.	With	the
collapse	of	the	ascensional	principle,	the	pneumatic	impetus	spread	horizontally	–	the	anemoi	of

ideologies	(congregationalism,	republicanism,	utilitarianism),	which	are	vertical	ideas	in	horizontal
clothings.	The	alchemical	multiplicatio,	as	a	lofty,	idealized	end-stage	of	the	work,	became	literalized
in	the	method	of	counting,	and	moved	as	an	axiomatic	principle	to	touch	all	things:	counting	heads,
counting	votes,	counting	money;	Bentham	and	Mill.	The	rubedo	finally,	utterly,	exteriorized	in	the	red
bonnet	phrygien	of	revolution.
Is	the	lady’s	stomacher	studded	with	jewels	left	behind	in	Cavendish’s	cupboard	a	clue	to	the	way
the	Cavendish	phenomenon	still	works	in	science,	and	in	us	each	when	we	enter	this	mode	of	thought?
Does	anima	become	both	densely	concrete	and	rationally	abstract	when	driven	out	from	nature,
beauty,	sensuousness,	history,	and	personal	affairs	–	the	middle	realm	between	concrete	and	abstract?
The	soul	returns	through	the	same	door	of	its	exile.	If	exiled	by	means	of	abstractions	and
materializations,	then	it	returns	in	the	very	modes	of	its	repression,	insinuating	into	numbers	and
weights	the	fascination	that	maintains	the	repression.	The	examination	of	the	return	of	the	repressed	–
a	main	task	of	depth	psychology	is	not	only	an	examination	of	the	repressed	content,	but	of	the	style
of	the	repression.	The	style	reveals	the	content;	it	is	the	content	as	its	form.	This	is	what	Freud	meant
when	he	spoke	of	symptoms	as	compromises.	This	is	what	Jung	meant	when	he	said	the	unconscious
shows	the	face	you	show	it.	If	the	new	chemistry	materializes	the	airy	soul,	then	that	soul	will	return
in	a	materialized	manner.	We	must	look	into	the	very	style	of	repression:	the	method	and	apparatus
itself,	by	means	of	which	the	materializing	operations	were	performed	to	find	where	the	fantasies	of
the	airy	soul	now	were	lodged.	For	the	soul	is	never	lost	nor	the	air	forever	dissipated.	Air	is	“evercontinuing,”	says	Plato.	It	merely	becomes	engrossed	in	matter	in	another	style.	The	alchemical
attempt	to	disengage	and	combine	spirit	and	matter	(solve	et	coagula)	is	evercontinuing	even	if	the
locus	of	the	attempt	changes.	We	can	imagine	that	the	soul	might	come	and	go	through	a	door
marked,	as	it	was	at	Liebig’s	famous	laboratory	in	Giessen:	“Thou	hast	ordered	all	things	in	measure
and	number	and	weight.	”	(Book	of	Wisdom,	11: 20).	Over	the	door	into	Jung’s	house,	his
“laboratory,’ ”	is	another	motto:	“Invoked	or	not,	the	god	will	be	present”	(vocatus	atque	non	vocatus
deus	aderit).	Then	why	not	present	as	well	in	measure	and	number	and	weight?
God	can	thus	be	present	in	the	method	and	not	only	in	the	material	as	alchemy	thought.	This	is	the
watershed	between	alchemy	and	chemistry:	where	alchemy	sought	the	secret	in	matter,	chemistry
imagined	the	secret	in	the	modes	of	examining	the	matter	–	measure,	weight,	and	number.	Hence	the
importance	of	technical	apparatus,	mathematical	models,	laboratory	experiment	–	these	were	divine
instruments.	To	call	this	merely	quantification	or	technology	or	applied	science	is	to	lose	the
inspiration,	aspiration,	effervescence,	illumination,	and	ascension	–	the	gas	–	that	suffuses	the
discoveries	and	the	heights	of	vision	to	which	the	methods	led.
The	collapse	of	phlogiston	freed	the	spirit.	It	had	been	held	in	an	alchemical	vestige,	for	phlogiston
was,	as	Stahl	insisted,	a	kind	of	matter,	yet	one	which	no	method	could	analyze.	Lavoisier ’s	accurate
method	overcame	that	subtle	matter,	releasing	spirit	from	that	style	of	alchemical	materialization.
Now	the	place	of	spirit	was	in	the	method	of	“free”	scientific	inquiry,	which	together	with	the	social,
religious	and	technical	revolutions	that	inseparably	accompanied	the	new	method,	breathed	the	aerial
soul,	and	its	inflations,	into	the	free-thinking	spirit	of	the	times	whose	watchwords	were	both
measure,	weight,	number	and	liberté,	egalité,	fraternité.
	
Before	we	go	on,	we	need	to	go	back	before	Cavendish	and	Davy	to	the	1600s,	when	a	cluster	of
events	began	the	movement	from	air	to	gas.	The	air	pump	by	Guericke	of	Magdeburg	(1656),	and
improved	by	Hooke	and	Boyle	in	Oxford	in	1658,	produced	powerful	vacuums	from	which	the	air
gun	was	developed.	The	universal	elastic	fluid	of	air	could	be	driven	out,	voided	–	space	without	air.
Moreover,	air	could	be	used	as	a	weapon.	Robert	Boyle’s	The	Spring	of	the	Air	(1660)	laid	the
groundwork	for	his	famous	law,	which	states	that	the	volume	of	air	varies	inversely	as	the	pressure

upon	it.	The	more	the	pressure,	the	smaller	the	volume.	This	too-simple	rule	established	the
mathematics	for	condensing	air.	Boyle’s	law	placed	the	air	in	servitude,	reduced	in	size,	and	then
released	at	one’s	pleasure.	Air ’s	elasticity	was	wholly	passive,	suffering	compression;	he	does	not
speak	of	it	as	exerting	pressure	itself.	These	were	early	steps	in	imagining	air	as	a	passive	material.	It
was	also	through	Boyle	that	air	lost	its	elemental	nature, [68]	not	even	entering	into	the	composition
of	fire	but	merely	providing	the	containing	environment	for	it.
The	control	of	air	was	demonstrated	before	the	courts	of	the	continent	and	fashionable	folk:
extinguishing	the	life	of	birds	and	mice	under	bell	jars,	explosions	when	a	vacuum	was	pierced,
raising	water	with	suction	pumps,	making	little	wooden	figures	dance	and	spin	inside	glass	tubes.
Hooke	opened	a	dog’s	thorax,	applied	a	bellows	to	show	the	mechanics	of	respiration;	Hales	cut	apart
horses	to	study	air. [69]	The	manipulation	of	air	was	like	the	capture	and	release	of	Ariel	by	Prospero
in	Shakespeare’s	The	Tempest	(1610–11),	a	play	whose	name	itself	derives	from	the	imagination	of
air	and	in	which	the	words	spirit	and	air-airy	occur	more	often	than	in	any	other	of	Shakespeare’s
plays.
Also	in	the	seventeenth	century	(1686),	Edward	Halley	published	his	first	map	of	the	winds	of	the
globe,	accounting	for	the	winds	and	monsoons	in	terms	of	the	laws	of	heat	distribution	over	the
earth’s	surface.	The	old	maps	showed	great	heads	in	the	four	corners	with	winds	whose	names	like
gentle	Zephyr	of	the	West,	like	blowy	Boreus,	the	Northwind,	appear	as	far	back	as	Plato’s	Phaedrus.
Now	maps	could	have	directional	arrows	instead;	the	air	had	lost	the	faces	of	its	gods.
I	might	also	mention	the	publication	in	1678	of	Alessandro	Capra’s	La	Nuova	architettura
famigliare,	which	sets	forth	devices	for	freshening	rooms	with	cool	air	by	fans	and	drafts	drawn	over
water.	Here	begins	the	early	domestication	of	air	by	air-conditioning	which	can	so	tame	and
denaturalize	the	elemental	force	that	we	may	draw	our	daily	breath	wholly	independent	of	the	weather.
Van	Helmont’s	Gas
Our	focus	now	must	be	upon	another	extraordinary	figure,	the	Flemish	alchemist,	chemist,	and
physician	Johannes	Baptista	van	Helmont	(1579–1644),	who	coined	the	term	“gas”	–	though	it	did	not
find	its	way	into	chemistry	as	the	third	state	of	matter	until	the	later	eighteenth	century,	mainly
through	Lavoisier. [70]	What	Van	Helmont	means	by	gas	appears	in	this	passage	published
posthumously,	as	were	all	his	works,	by	his	son	Franciscus	Mercurius	(himself	a	kabbalist):
…	the	live	coal,	and	generally	whatsoever	bodies	do	not	immediately	depart	into	water,	nor	yet	are	fixed	[i.	e.,	combustible
materials]	do	necessarily	belch	forth	a	wild	spirit	or	breath.	Suppose	thou,	that	of	62	pounds	of	Oaken	coal,	one	pound	of	ashes	is
composed:	Therefore	the	61	remaining	pounds	are	the	wild	spirit …
 I	call	this	spirit,	unknown	hitherto,	by	the	new	name	of	Gas,	which	can	neither	be	constrained	by	Vessels,	nor	reduced	into	a
visible	body	…	But	bodies	do	contain	this	Spirit,	and	do	sometimes	wholly	depart	into	such	a	Spirit. [71]

Some	say	by	“gas”	Van	Helmont	may	have	meant	Geist;	or	he	may	have	derived	it	from	gaesan,	a
Paracelsian	term	like	the	German	gären,	for	fermentation	of	food	in	the	stomach.	Charles	Singer	says
“gas”	was	the	Flemish	pronunciation	of	the	Greek	word	chaos. [72]	The	demonstration	makes	clear
enough	what	Van	Helmont	intended	by	“gas.”	It	was	the	uncontrollable	61	pounds	that	had	escaped.
Van	Helmont	himself	says:	“Gunpowder	doth	most	nearly	express	the	History	of	Gas,	…	for	there	is
not	a	vessel	in	nature	which	being	close	shut	up	doth	not	burst	by	Reason	of	Gas.” [73]	This	was	a
wild	spirit,	or	spiritus	silvestris	in	the	original	Latin.
Van	Helmont’s	experiment	with	oaken	charcoal	shows	his	chemical	reasoning,	while	the
experiment	in	the	closed	vessel	is	alchemical.	The	figure	as	a	whole	is	imaginational.	You	surely
remember	the	Grimms’	fairy	tale	of	the	spirit	in	the	bottle	with	which	Jung	opens	his	essay	on
Mercurius	spoken	first	at	Eranos	in	1942	(CW	13: 239).	A	woodcutter ’s	son	comes	to	huge	old	oak

where	he	hears	a	voice	calling	from	the	ground:	“Let	me	out,	let	me	out.”	The	boy	digs	into	the	roots
of	the	tree	and	finds	a	well-sealed	glass	bottle.	He	opens	it.	The	spirit	rushes	out	and	grows	immense
and	frightening.	(Boyle’s	law:	expansion	of	gas	as	pressure	is	lessened.)	The	tale	goes	on:	boy	and
spirit	each	out-tricking	the	other.	The	spirit,	like	Ariel,	seeking	its	release;	the	boy	desiring	to	keep
the	spirit	imprisoned.	Finally	he	is	rewarded	with	technological	gains:	a	wound-healing	cloth	and	the
transformation	of	his	iron	axe	into	silver.
Psychotherapy	has	made	this	tale	a	root	parable.	We	are	told	to	bottle	the	spirits	–	anima	or	animus
–	in	the	vessel	so	that	they	remain	as	voices	without	visible	bodies,	seen	into	and	seen	through	(kept	in
glass),	and	thus	prevented	from	expanding	into	giant	inflations	in	the	world,	running	free	and	wild:
chaos.	Whereas	in	the	vessel,	their	gären	or	digestive	fermentation	generates	the	new	self
(homunculus).	We	work	with	a	paradigm	of	alchemist	as	imprisoner.	Let	us	not	forget	that	the	spirit
itself	wants	out.
The	term	spiritus	silvestris,	the	wild	spirit	that	now	became	gas,	had	already	been	used	by
Paracelsus.	His	Sylvani	or	Sylvestres	are	“Airy	men	or	Airy	Spirits.” [74]	The	natural	world	abounds
with	these	Lufftleute.	Each	is	endowed	by	God	with	a	quality	and	a	specific	task.	They	have	a	“subtle
flesh,”	give	birth,	eat,	drink,	talk	and	walk	about,	and	die.	Their	realm	is	intermediate	between	the
invisible	immaterial	world	and	the	world	of	flesh	and	blood	–	like	the	daimonic	metaxy	of	Platonism,
or	what	we	call	today	psychic	reality.	The	spirits	of	Fire	are	salamanders,	those	of	Water	are	nymphs,
those	of	the	Earth	are	like	goblins,	gnomes,	and	sylphs.
The	spirits	of	the	airy	element	are	sylvani.	Curious	–	since	“sylvan”	means	most	simply	forested.
So	it	is	in	the	woods	and	wilds	that	the	airy	spirits	abound.	Since	they	are	sylvan,	of	course	they	could
be	trapped	and	weighed	in	the	oaken	coals	of	Van	Helmont’s	experiment.	Van	Helmont	insisted	that
the	gas	“is	the	body	itself”	in	its	volatile	form.	Hence	when	the	coals	were	burned	to	ash	both	their
body	and	their	gas	were	gone.	From	Van	Helmont’s	notion	that	gas	is	a	body	to	Cavendish’s	weighing
this	body	is	a	logical	step.	Also,	Van	Helmont’s	notion	that	each	of	these	wild	spirits	had	its	own
quality	and	purpose	was	but	one	step	away	from	the	divisibility	of	the	single	elemental	air	into	its
component	gases	and	Dalton’s	proportional	table	of	atomic	weights.
Instead	of	taking	these	historical	steps	forward,	we	could	take	a	mythological	step.	We	could
understand	this	invisible	body	of	wood	that	is	a	gaseous	soul	as	the	body	of	the	nymph	in	the	wood,
what	Greek	myths	called	the	hamadryad.	Classical	literature	shows	many	occasions	where	the	wood
nymphs	are	one	and	the	same	as	the	tree	they	inhabit,	living	and	dying	with	it.	They	too	are	not
visible,	only	audible,	as	for	instance	the	oracle	of	Dodona	spoke	through	the	Priestess	from	an	oak
tree. [75]	(We	cannot	take	the	time	to	go	into	the	special	role	of	the	oak	–	Van	Helmont’s	choice	of
wood;	Graves,	Jung,	Cook,	and	Frazer	have	exhaustively	discussed	it.)	Important	for	us	is	the
cosmological	implication	of	Van	Helmont’s	idea,	for	it	is	a	vision	of	matter	(hyle,	which	means
originally	in	Greek,	wood,	copse,	brushwood,	forest)	in	whose	body	is	a	wild	spirit,	a	gas.	Van
Helmont’s	vision	says	the	material	world	is	not	merely	wooden,	but	speaks;	each	coal,	each	thing	is
composed	of	a	subtle	flesh,	is	constituted	of	a	sylvanic	nymph,	a	hylic	anima	with	a	specific	quality
and	task.
What	moves	each	thing	in	its	specific	way,	its	vis	motus,	or	motive	power,	is	its	blas	(a	term	Van
Helmont	invented	and	defined	in	his	Ortus	Medicinae [76]).	The	blas	originates	in	the	stars.	It	is	the
dynamic	impulse	within	natural	phenomena	such	as	air	motions,	weather,	storms,	and	the	subtle
dynamics	of	human	beings	in	their	neurovegetative	symptoms.	Yes,	we	are	affected	by	the	weather
(whose	root	means	“blow”),	since	a	blas	moves	in	the	spirits	of	the	soul	as	in	the	atmosphere.
Weather	is	simply	the	“middle	realm”	in	our	everyday	lives,	and	the	climate	(climax)	is	like	a
diagonal	ladder	sloping	between	above	and	below,	higher	and	lower,	anagogical	and	concrete
meanings.	Weather	talk	cannot	help	but	be	metaphorical.	John	Dalton’s	last	words	as	he	died,	“little

rain	this	day,”	is	a	scientist’s	observation	and	also	a	report	on	the	state	of	psychic	affairs,	the	climate
of	his	dying	nature.
The	blas	works	within	things	as	an	Odor	(also	called	by	Van	Helmont	a	Ferment	and	an
Image). [77]	It	gives	to	the	seed	of	each	thing	its	“time”	and	its	“notion	of	what	has	to	be	done.”	Or,	let
us	say,	the	image	of	its	purpose.	The	imagination	of	gas	and	blas	shifts	the	object	of	perception	from
the	visible	to	the	invisible,	and	thus	the	organ	of	perception	to	ear	and	nose	so	that	images	can	be
imagined	as	airy	events,	climates,	atmospheres,	vibrations,	timings,	pressures,	vapors,	odors. [78]	Not
only	mass,	motion,	gravity	and	direction	of	Newtonian	physics	determine	the	vectors	of	change	in
physical	bodies	and	so	in	our	lives,	but	odors.	Chemistry	as	a	science	of	airs,	the	determination	of	the
blas	in	the	world,	a	truly	pneumatic	study.
I	must	interpose	something	here	about	the	forests,	home	of	the	hamadryads.	Eighteenth-century
science	encouraged	vast	deforestation,	especially	in	America. [79]	Was	this	an	attack	on	the	hylic
anima,	the	spiritus	silvestris?	Like	the	air,	driven	out	by	vacuum,	made	to	dance	and	whistle,
harnessed	to	pump,	compressed,	turned	acid,	so	too	the	air	associated	with	woodlands,	especially	in
America,	required	enlightened	intervention.	It	was	considered	cold,	damp,	and	bilious,	a	source	of
diseases,	and	a	place	of	gloom	and	daimonic	temptation	back	to	the	amoral	liberty	of	nature	(a
frequent	trope	in	early	American	novels). [80]	By	clearing	the	forests,	man	could	have	a	warmer,
dryer	and	lighter	earth,	hence,	a	healthier	climate.	By	affecting	our	relation	to	trees,	the	siècle	des
lumières	also	affected	the	Luftleute	in	the	trees.	Perhaps	these	hamadryads	turned	into	sylvan	demons
are	the	sources	of	our	images	of	savages	living	in	primeval	forests	–	from	sauvages,	sylvani.	Forest
animism [81]	was	now	both	brutalized	and	sentimentalized	(Rousseau)	at	the	same	time.	In	the
eighteenth	century,	the	word	savage	began	to	be	used	more	frequently	as	a	verb:	to	savage	something
or	someone.	May	I	refer	you	here	to	Portmann’s	insightful	piece	on	the	Urmenschenmythos? [82]
Thus,	Van	Helmont’s	experiment	with	coals	of	oak	out	of	which	came	the	concept	of	gas	has
profound	mythological	underpinnings	and	implications.	Gas	arose	from	the	funeral	pyre	of	the	wood
nymph.	There	was	a	death	of	soul	and	its	rebirth	in	a	new	form,	from	mythic	body	to	chemical	body.
And	it	was,	as	I	believe	we	are	coming	to	understand,	this	gaseous	vapor	of	the	anima	that	was	the
fascinating	and	elusive	object	pursued	in	the	chemical	revolution.
Anima
I	am	suggesting	that	what	escaped	the	vessel	was	the	old	phlogiston,	that	this	mysterious	combustible
substance	was	the	aerial	soul	or	anima,	and	that	this	escape	produced	those	escapades	of	mountain
ascents,	laboratory	explosions,	laughing	gas	–	and	the	attempts	to	recapture	this	soul	by	weight,
measure,	and	number.	Besides	the	lightweight	fascinations	were	the	turbulent	revolutions	in	science,
politics	and	society.	What	goes	on	in	the	individual	soul	also	takes	place	in	the	world	soul,	and	vice
versa.	What	goes	on	in	the	soul	of	chemistry	goes	on	in	the	chemists’	souls.	A	Platonic	view	does	not
divide	psyche	into	subjective	and	objective,	so	that	changes	in	the	air	of	the	times	show	also	as	anima
phenomena	in	the	principals	involved.	This	means	we	must	attend	to	the	role	of	anima	in	the
development	of	a	science;	paradigm	shifts	will	manifest	themselves	as	much	in	anima	symptoma	–
her	mystifications,	obsessions	and	dramatizations	–	and	may	be	their	result,	as	in	societal	and
theoretical	phenomena.	For	science	to	consider	itself	also	subject	to	anima	means	examining	the	roots
of	its	disputes,	inspirations	and	formulations	with	a	more	subjective,	though	not	personalistic,	eye;	an
eye	which	scientific	method	is	designed	to	exclude.
A	case	to	point	is	psychoanalysis.	Think	of	the	role	in	the	development	of	its	thought	played	by	the
behaviors	of	Charcot’s	and	Bernheim’s	suggestible	women. [83]	Think	of	the	remarkable	women
patients	by	means	of	whom	Freud’s	theories	developed,	and	the	figures	in	Jung’s	thought,	Helly, [84]

Sabina, [85]	Babette, [86]	and	Miss	Miller	(CW	5).	In	fact,	it	was	only	at	the	culmination	of	this
development	of	ideas,	refined	through	confrontation	with	the	dramatic	expressions	and	mystifications
of	these	women	and	their	symptoms,	that	the	idea	of	anima	itself	appeared	and	could	be	distinguished
from	actual	women.
What	we	saw	of	Cavendish	gave	us	a	clue	to	the	behavior	of	the	aerial	anima	in	experimental
chemistry.	His	absolute	disjunction	from	women	and	his	senex	peculiarities	seem	to	epitomize	what
was	happening	in	the	soul	of	the	chemical	revolution	as	its	air	turned	sour	and	grew	heavy,	becoming
more	physical,	mathematical	and	industrial.	Does	the	figure	of	Cavendish	indicate	that	enlightened
technical	science	requires	dissociation	from	anima?	Evidently	the	mind	of	experimental	pneumatics	is
peculiarly	detached	from	women.
Here	Cavendish	may	be	extreme	but	no	exception.	Louis	Vauquelin,	a	major	figure	in	the	Lavoisier
school,	was	cared	for	by	two	old	ladies. [87]	He	never	married.	The	great	German	mathematical
chemist	Jeremias	Benjamin	Richter	never	married.	Joseph	Black,	who	first	named	“fixed	air”	and
whose	experiments	were	“the	first	intensive	study	of	a	chemical	reaction”	never	married.	Alessandro
Volta	never	married.	Stephen	Hales,	whose	capture	of	gases	in	his	“pneumatic	trough” [88]	made
possible	their	isolation	and	identification,	lived	all	of	eighty-four	years;	he	was	married	for	one	of
them.	The	Swedish	chemist	Jöns	Jacob	Berzelius,	who	determined	the	molecular	weight	of	hundreds
of	substances,	did	marry	at	age	fifty-six;	Guyton-Morveau	married	at	sixty-one.	Both	couples
remained	childless.	Of	Carl	Wilhelm	Scheele,	the	German-Swedish	genius,	whose	name	we	associate
with	oxygen,	chlorine,	and	innumerable	compounds	such	as	hydrogen	sulfide,	hydrogen	flouride,
glycerol,	oxalic	acid,	etc.,	it	is	written:	“He	literally	had	no	private	life.	In	his	entire	correspondence
there	is	…	hardly	one	note	which	is	not	devoted	or	does	not	refer	to	his	work.	There	never	was	a
woman	in	his	life.” [89]	(He	did	marry	on	his	death	bed	to	assure	his	elderly	housekeeper	an	income.)
John	Dalton	never	married.	He	wrote	this	of	his	temptation	to	it	by	a	widow	of	great	intellectual
ability	and	personal	charm:	“During	my	captivity,	which	lasted	about	a	week,	I	lost	my	appetite	and
had	other	symptoms	of	bondage	about	me,	as	incoherent	discourse,	etc.,	but	have	now	happily
regained	my	freedom.” [90]	Lavoisier,	a	biographer	writes,	had	“for	twenty-seven	years	…	verily
shunned	all	womankind	except	his	devoted	Aunt	Constance	and	his	great	aunts,	who	had	given	his
undivided	attention	to	scientific	labors,	and	had	passed	by	with	case	the	love	fancies	of	youth …” [91]
He	married	a	girl	of	thirteen	who	was	his	translator	and	aide;	they	remained	childless.	After	his
beheading	she	was	accused	by	some	for	not	having	made	the	right	effort	to	save	him.	That	she	could
be	so	blamed	furthers	my	case	that	there	is	a	disjunction,	a	soured	air,	between	the	new	chemistry	and
the	notion	of	anima	as	relationship	to	woman.	Humphry	Davy’s	marriage	“deteriorated	after	about
two	years	and	some	sort	of	separation	was	worked	out	between	them.”	The	satirical	magazine	John
Bull	gossiped:	“They	never	interchange	a	word	but	…	are	continually	talking	at	one	another	…	He
considers	her	as	having	grown	too	old,	and	therefore	a	bore;	she	evidently	looks	upon	him	as	an
ass.” [92]	It	is	said	of	both	Priestley	and	Faraday	that	they	enjoyed	long,	affectionate	marriages.	Yet
Priestley	wrote:	“It	has	been	a	happy	union	to	me	…	so	that	I	have	been	able	to	give	all	my	time	to	my
own	pursuits.	I	always	said	I	was	only	a	lodger	in	her	house.” [93]	And	Sarah	Faraday	said,	when
asked	why	she	didn’t	study	chemistry	to	be	closer	to	her	husband:	“Already	it	is	so	absorbing	and
exciting	to	him	that	it	often	deprives	him	of	his	sleep	and	I	am	quite	content	to	be	the	pillow	of	his
mind.” [94]
Of	these	examples	Robert	Boyle	may	yield	the	most	insight	since	he	at	least	wrote	his	theory	of
woman	and	love. [95]	Boyle	never	married.	He	was	an	apprehensive	hypochondriac,	haunted	by	fear
of	early	death	though	he	lived	to	be	sixty-four.	“He	ate	and	drank	only	enough	to	keep	his	body	in
health	…	never	from	choice	or	indulgence.”	Even	the	air	seemed	an	enemy:	he	was	terrified	of
thunder	and	“kept	a	range	of	cloaks	to	wear	according	to	varying	temperature,	selecting	the

appropriate	one	for	the	moment	with	the	aid	of	a	thermometer.	“ [96]
Boyle’s	experiments	were	serious	and	entertaining,	a	curious	mixture	of	carelessness	and
exactitude	(not	that	obsession	with	method	as	experimental	science	proceeds	into	senex
professionalism).	“Distinguished	foreign	visitors	counted	Mr.	Boyle	and	his	air-pump	one	of	the
sights	of	London.” [97]	On	the	Spring	and	Weight	of	the	Air	was	not	his	first	book:	that	was	a	religious
romance,	The	Martyrdom	of	Theodora,	a	theological	novel	written	when	Boyle	was	twenty.	In	it,
Boyle	displays	through	the	voice	of	a	woman	character	his	arguments	against	marriage	and	his
mistrust	of	human	love	compared	with	the	love	of	and	for	God.	In	another	early	work,	Seraphick
Love,	Boyle	shows	the	delight	he	found	in	service	of	God	as	amateur	scientist,	whereas	love	of
woman	is	“devotion	misaddressed	…	for	when	you	give	your	mistress	the	style	of	a	goddess,	and	talk
of	offering	up	of	hearts,	adoring,	sacrifices,	martyrdoms,	does	not	all	this	imply	that	it	is	meant	to	a
divinity?” [98]
The	clue	is	clear:	the	divinity	to	whom	went	the	“adoring,	sacrifices,	martyrdoms”	was	the	invisible
soul	in	the	world	of	matter.	The	fascinating	mistress	was	not	woman,	but	the	mystery	within	the
natural	world;	the	laboratory	 [99]	was	the	thalamus,	and	the	experiment,	the	rite.
When	Boyle	refuses	to	worship	anima	embodied	in	woman,	it	was	not	that	he	was	utterly	estranged
–	he	wrote	his	thoughts	to	his	elder	sister	throughout	his	life,	living	with	her	for	thirty	years	and
dying	within	a	week	of	her	death.	Also,	he	records	a	moment	of	anima	enchantment,	watching	a
milkmaid	drilling	her	pail	in	a	green	pasture	singing	to	her	cow	“with	the	melody	of	larks	in	her
voice.” [100]
What	did	claim	his	eros	was	the	invisible	soul	of	the	world	and	the	“invisible	College” [101]	as	he
called	his	fellow	thinkers	and	tinkerers	at	Oxford	who,	under	Charter	from	Charles	ii	became	the
Royal	Society	of	which	Boyle	was	several	times	President.	(Charles	“was	reported	to	have	laughed	at
his	gentlemen	of	the	Royal	Society	for	spending	their	time	only	in	weighing	air.” [102])
If	air	was	the	object	of	eros,	then	air	was	the	locus	of	soul;	or	vice	versa,	since	air	was	the	locus	of
the	hiding	soul,	then	it	was	the	object	of	seeking,	curious	eros.	The	new	weightiness	of	air
corresponded	with	a	new	substantiation	of	soul	in	the	material	world.	Physical	experiment	made	the
invisible	more	visible.	No	longer	the	mottoes	of	alchemy:	to	explain	the	obscure	by	the	more
obscure;	the	secret	art,	blacker	than	black;	the	hidden	treasure.	The	vessel	was	opened	by	Boyle,	and
by	Helmont,	through	public	demonstration,	discussion	among	colleagues,	and	the	airing	of	ideas	in
the	language	of	the	layman.	The	enemy	was	not	merely	the	old	paradigms	of	thought	–	Aristotle,
Galen,	Paracelsus,	the	Scholastics,	the	Vitalists.	The	enemy	was	thinking	itself	as	deductive	reasoning
in	difficult	language	closed	into	the	head,	without	hands,	without	visibilities.	Newton’s	writing	was
obscure;	he	lived	in	an	academic	atmosphere	and	wrote	in	Latin.	Boyle’s	forty-two	books	went	into
two-hundred	editions.	He	employed	professional	editors	and	proofreaders	to	keep	pace;	the	opus	now
had	democratic	intention.	Of	Scheele,	a	century	later,	a	biographer	writes:	“… esoteric	discussion	of
the	abstract	was	superseded	by	the	democratic	search	for	the	concrete	…	with	no	inclination	to
generalize,	he	occupied	himself	mainly	with	experiments.” [103]	This	statement	represents	not	merely
the	new	Baconian	method	but	the	new	Boylean	love	that	supports	the	method.
In	examining	the	case	of	the	chemists’	anima	we	could	use	the	perspective	of	feminism.	Then	the
exclusive	maleness	and	singular	traits	of	the	puer-senex	pattern	does	indeed	stand	out.	The	dandyness
of	Davy	and	his	sudden	aging;	Lavoisier,	Noble	Martyr;	Cavendish,	obsessive	misogynist,	and	Stahl,
too,	called	a	misogynist; [104]	Kirwan	with	his	pet	eagle,	odd	clothes,	and	chemical	study	of	manures;
Faraday,	withdrawing	from	social	affairs,	ending	senile	and	amnesiac	in	a	chair;	Priestley,	firebrand,
then	retreating	to	Pennsylvania,	writing	religious	tracts	and	clinging	still	to	the	old	theory	of
phlogiston;	Black’s	“scrupulous	frugality;”	Hooke,	unproductive	after	the	age	of	forty-two,	in	the
same	room	for	forty	years,	a	dedicated	hypochondriac,	“who	never	permitted	himself	the	luxury	of

feeling	well	for	the	length	of	a	full	day.” [105]	Boyle	was	“often	ill”	and	when	not,	believed	himself
so;	Black	was	“feeble;”	Kirwan	for	years	ate	only	ham	and	milk	as	Cavendish	mainly	ate	mutton;
Scheele	supposedly	wasted	away.	This	estrangement	from	the	body.	And	their	voices:	Boyle’s
tammered	seriously;	Priestley	had	a	speech	impediment	for	which	he	took	breathing	lessons;	Kirwan
had	a	“weak	throat;”	Vauquelin,
a	“weak	voice”	that	prevented	his	lecturing	career;	Dalton	spoke	with	mumbling	diction	and	an
indistinct	voice;	the	voice	of	Cavendish	was	squeaky,	shrill,	or	wispy.	Witnesses	evidently	were	struck
by	these	vocal	distortions.	Ficino [106]	says	that	the	voice	pertains	directly	to	the	soul,	a	primary
attribute.	Could	the	air	be	taking	its	revenge?
The	French	Encyclopedie	(Diderot	&	D’Alembert,	1753)	says	that	the	Chemists	“are	a	distinct
people,	very	few,	with	their	language,	their	laws,	their	mysteries,	and	living	almost	isolated.”	Men,	all
men,	says	the	feminist	perspective,	in	the	company	mainly	of	men,	generous	to	their	friends,	faithful
to	their	clubs,	exhibiting	their	apparatus	to	one	another,	little	boy’s	games	with	valves	and	troughs	and
asphyxiations	and	explosions;	experiments	on	animals,	ascents	in	balloons,	fascination	with
gunpowder.	And	the	disputes,	the	vanity	over	priorities	mixed	with	patriotism,	the	paradigm	of	which
is	the	discovery	of	oxygen	(Scheele	or	Watt	or	Priestley	or	Lavoisier);	discovery	of	the	gaseous
composition	of	water; [107]	of	nitrogen	(Rutherford	or	Cavendish	or	Scheele);	the	constancy	of	the
co-efficient	of	the	expansion	of	air	(Boyle	or	Volta	or	Gay-Lussac);	the	steam-engine;	the	steam-boat;
iodine	and	chlorine	–	who	was	first?	Or	the	many	new	names,	new	systems	of	atomic	relations,	of
classification	of	compounds.	Whose	was	best	?	Who	won? [108]
From	the	feminist	perspective,	the	chemists’	anima	reveals	the	anima	of	chemistry,	that	chemistry	is
estranged	from	anima	owing	to	the	archetypal	constellation	of	the	puer-senex	whose	method	of
exploring	air	removed	soul	from	it,	leaving	both	it	and	them	fanciful,	eccentric,	dry	–	and	in	the	long
run	destructive.
Air	plays	a	singular	role	in	both	senex	and	puer	phenomenology:	the	puer ’s	wings,	inflations	and
collapses;	Saturn,	lord	of	foul	air,	chronic	ailing	of	the	spirit,	concretization	of	the	invisible
mind. [109]	Our	discussion	showed	also	that	the	puer	revolts	against	sensuous	nature	and	must
overcome	it,	while	Saturn,	the	senex,	rules	with	scientific	instruments	and	systematic	classification,
taking	his	delights	in	abstraction,	laws,	and	the	extreme	reduction	of	body	to	its	bones.	Neither	was
ever	“in	favor	with	woman	or	wife”	as	the	old	lore	said.	Anima	was	the	major	problem	and	only
solution	of	that	puer-senex	constellation.
As	chemical	science	continues,	we	cannot	expect	otherwise	than	suffering	in	the	soul	of	the	world:
puer	explosions	and	senex	poisons.	The	very	definition	of	air	implies	that	all	things	it	touches
oxidize;	its	constituents	are	violent,	noxious	and	sharp.	Stratospheric	pollution,	acid	rain,	exhaust
fumes,	pneumatic	drills,	commercial	air	waves,	aerial	heroics	and	gas	warfare,	soda-pop	culture,
forests	become	packaging	and	ephemeral	words,	freon	climates	and	neon	lights	–	and	above	all	the
sense	that	the	world	no	longer	breathes	with	soul,	the	air	gone	out	of	it;	gas,	chaos.
Such	is	the	contemporary	view	–	sometimes	called	feminist	or	ecological,	a	rhetoric	of	the	element
earth,	expressing	its	soul.	We	are	all	pervaded	with	it.	It	moves	us	to	sadness	and	outrage,	a	fear	of
technological	doom,	a	feeling	we	must	go	back	before	the	chemical	revolution.	This	view	appears	in
several	guises;	for	instance,	in	phenomenological	metabletics	with	its	nostalgia	for	prereformational,	pre-scientific	consciousness	–	the	restoration	of	innocence;	man,	nature,	and	God	not
fallen	apart.	It	appears,	too,	in	some	Jungian	psychology	with	its	longing	for	a	restoration	of	a	unus
mundus,	contemptuous	of	extraverted	modernity	and	distrustful	of	the	spirit	escaped	from	the	bottle.
But	we	can	take	another	tack,	borrowing	Stahl’s	own	motto:	“Where	there	is	doubt,	whatever	the
greatest	mass	of	opinion	maintains	…	is	wrong.” [110]	Or,	as	a	modern	scientist,	G. H.	Hardy,	says:	“It
is	never	worth	a	first	class	man’s	time	to	express	a	majority	opinion.”

Actually,	there	are	two	majority	opinions:	the	nostalgic,	feminist	one	we	have	just	sketched,	and	the
one	we	learned	in	school,	the	heroic,	progressivist	view	taught	by	science	about	its	history.
We	can	move	from	both	these	majority	opinions,	from	opinion	altogether,	by	returning	to	the
images	we	have	been	examining.	What	happened	to	the	imagination	of	air	once	alchemy	collapsed?
Once	the	bottle	came	unstoppered,	where	did	the	anima	of	the	chemical	enlightenment	appear?	This
question	belongs	to	the	ordinary	procedure	of	psychological	inquiry.	We	do	not	tell	a	patient	where
the	anima	should	be	–	in	wife,	or	daughter	or	friend.	It	may	be	in	his	boat,	his	cabin	in	the	woods.	But
we	do	assume	that	as	archetypal	numen	anima	does	appear,	somewhere.	Clearly,	in	the	chemical
revolution,	the	anima	did	not	appear	in	“the	feminine,”	as	it	is	usually	conceived,	not	in	marriage,
woman,	relationships,	nor	in	the	sensuous	body.	We	saw	the	aerial	soul	go	into	the	world	–	into
fascination	with	air	itself	in	soda	fountains,	steam	engines,	winds	and	gases.	We	may	discover	where
the	aerial	anima	actually	was	by	searching	the	intention	in	the	inventions	of	these	men.
The	last	thirty	years	of	Stephen	Hales	was	devoted	to	alleviating	human	problems.	Chemical	and
mechanical	solutions	for	kidney	and	bladder	stone;	installation	of	his	ventilators	on	merchant	ships
and	slave	ships,	prisons	and	hospitals.	He	rebuilt	the	church	in	his	parish,	and	engineered	a	new	water
supply	for	his	village.	His	major	work	on	the	respiration	and	mechanics	of	plants	would,	he	was
confident,	improve	agriculture	and	gardening.	Hales’s	writings	on	the	effects	of	spirituous	liquors	led
to	the	passage	of	the	Gin	Act	in	1736.
Humphry	Davy	attempted	to	reform	the	Royal	Society	itself	by	expanding	it	to	include	women	and
to	improve	the	relations	between	science	and	government.	His	work	in	tanning,	on	the	corrosion	of
ship	bottoms,	the	miner ’s	safety	lamp,	and	especially	in	agricultural	chemistry,	fulfilled	his	intention
to	make	science	immediately	useful.
Usefulness	was	the	result	of	even	Hooke’s	mechanical	eccentricity:	he	invented	the	cross-hair	sight
for	the	telescope,	its	screw	adjustment	and	iris	diaphragm;	he	perfected	the	air-pump,	the	weather
clock,	the	wheel	barometer	and	founded	scientific	meteorology.	He	coined	the	term	“cell”	for	botany,
advanced	geology,	set	the	freezing	point	at	zero,	and	invented	the	universal	joint.	Robert	Hooke	added
something	to	every	important	instrument	developed	in	the	seventeenth	century,	and	like	it	is	said	of
Bach,	he	left	no	form	as	he	found	it.
Lavoisier ’s	“whole	adult	life	had	been	given	to	public	service.” [111]	He	was	engaged	in	press,
prison	and	hospital	reform,	unemployment	insurance;	he	was	a	founder	of	the	society	of	scientific
agriculture	and	farm	credit,	addressed	problems	in	gas-lighting,	plaster	of	Paris,	porcelain,	soda
water,	ballooning,	tobacco	preservation.	As	prominent	and	active	member	of	the	Academy	of
Sciences	he	was	instrumental	in	initiating	the	metric	system.	The	standard	metric	bar	of	platinum	and
the	definition	of	a	kilogram	were	finally	established,	by	the	way,	in	that	year	1798.
I	could	add	further	examples	of	usefulness.	But	we	are	better	served	by	understanding	the
overriding	intention	in	the	inventions.	Walter	Pagel	says	this	of	Helmont:	“His	was	the	desire	to	help
his	fellow	Creatures	by	detecting	and	opening	up	the	divine	resources	in	Nature.”	Pagel	calls	this
“religious	pragmatism.” [112]	These	men	were	not	mechanists,	materialists,	atheists.	In	them	was	no
warfare	between	science	and	religion,	no	two	worlds	such	as	we	find	later	in	Shaw	and	Snow.
Helmont	was	a	mystic:	he	had	retreated	from	the	world	for	seven	years;	read	Epictetus,	Johannes
Tauler,	Thomas	à	Kempis,	“all	Avicen.”	For	him	empirical	research	was	a	divine	vocation.	God
himself	is	a	chemist	with	nature	as	his	laboratory.	In	1633,	at	age	forty-six,	Helmont	visualized	his
soul,	which	appeared	as	a	light	in	human	shape	with	its	own	radiance.	He	identified	this	epiphany	with
an	apparition	of	“something	indescribable”	announcing	his	vocation	to	chemistry	that	had	appeared	in
the	wall	of	his	room	twenty-three	years	earlier. [113]	Anima	appeared	to	Boethius	as	Philosophy;	to
Helmont	as	Chemistry.	Chemical	pragmatism	was	a	religious	call	of	soul.
Boyle	was	an	orthodox	Anglican.	His	apologia	for	religious	pragmatism	is	entitled:	The	Christian

Virtuoso:	shewing	that	by	being	addicted	to	Experimental	Philosophy	a	man	is	rather	assisted	than
indisposed	to	be	a	good	Christian.	Dalton	was	an	earnest	Quaker	schoolteacher;	Hales,	a	Vicar;	Stahl,
a	devout	Pietist;	Priestley,	a	founder	of	and	preacher	in	the	new	Unitarian	Church;	Kirwan	had	been	a
Jesuit;	Volta	wrote	a	defense	of	religion	against	science	(1815);	Faraday	was	an	Elder	of	the
Sandemanian	Church	and	a	devout	practitioner	of	its	beliefs	his	entire	adult	life.	Most	were	deeply
concerned	with	finding	medical	solutions	for	the	miseries	of	human	health.	Unlike	physics	and
mechanics,	chemistry	had	from	its	inception	in	alchemy	a	close	tie	with	medicine;	it	had	a	therapeutic
concern.
Love	for	the	World
Alfred	Adler	considered	the	aim	of	psychotherapy	to	be	Gemeinschaftsgefühl,	translated	as	“social
interest,”	“the	feeling	of	intimate	belonging	to	the	full	spectrum	of	humanity.”	In	Adler ’s	view,	“a
man	of	genius	is	primarily	a	man	of	supreme	usefulness.”	“Mankind	only	calls	those	individuals
geniuses	who	have	contributed	much	to	the	common	welfare.	Contribution	is	the	true	meaning	of
Life.” [114]	Humphry	Davy	believed	that	genius	“consisted	in	the	perpetuation	of	individual	existence
through	ideas	that	in	their	application	transformed	society.” [115]
In	my	essay	on	Adler	I	brought	the	case	of	a	sophisticated	psychotherapist	who	held	dialogues	in
imagination.	The	alter-voice	with	whom	he	spoke	was	his	breath-soul.	It	spoke	from	his	chest	and	was
called	anima.	When	he	asked	this	soul	what	it	wanted,	it	replied,	“I	want	out.”	It	demanded	release
from	his	bottling	like	the	spiritus	silvestris.	He	was	afraid	of	releasing	it	for	the	wildness,	the	chaos	it
had	caused	and	might	cause	again.	As	the	conversations	progressed,	he	found	himself	surrounded	by
its	presence,	“an	air	that	had	density.” [116]	The	psychological	development	in	him	compared	with
“the	coagulatio	of	the	soul	in	alchemy;	its	becoming	thickened,	sensed	as	a	presence.	This	had
evidently	happened	like	a	chemical	process.	After	long	cooking,	stirring,	and	containing,	suddenly	…
a	coagulation	takes	place.” [117]
It	is	as	if	the	process	that	went	on	in	that	individual	case	took	place	in	the	world	soul	during	the
chemical	revolution.	After	a	long	period	of	concentrated	attention	–	for	what	else	is	the	weighing,
measuring,	experimenting	–	which	cooked	and	stirred	the	aerial	soul,	the	hamadryads	returned	to	the
physical	phenomena,	to	hyle,	the	world	of	material	things.	We	can	read	the	collapse	of	alchemy	and
the	transformation	of	chaos	into	the	differentiation	of	gases	as	the	aerial	soul’s	own	intention	–	to	be
out,	public,	free,	and	to	invest	itself	in	objects,	giving	them	a	new	intention.	Objects	became
instruments	of	its	upward	aspiration,	ascensionism,	now	called	–	by	the	rationalist	French	minds	of
Turgot,	Condorcet,	and	then	Comte	–	“progress.”
Dreams	of	progress,	liberalism,	humanitarianism,	religious	pragmatism	was	where	the	old	element
of	the	air	now	lodges.	New	dreams.	L’air	et	les	songes.	The	atmospheric	metaphors	of	Wordsworth,
the	revolutionary	dreams	of	Shelley, [118]	that	master	phenomenologist	of	the	poetics	of	air;	the
progressivist	dreams	of	Priestley	who	wrote	in	1790:
While	so	favourable	a	wind	is	abroad,	let	every	young	mind	expand	itself,	catch	the	rising	gale,	and	partake	of	the	glorious
enthusiams;	the	great	objects	of	which	are	the	flourishing	state	of	science,	arts,	manufactures,	and	commerce,	the	extinction	of	wars
…	the	abolishing	of	all	useless	distinctions	…	so	that	the	world	would	be	“re-christianized.” [119]

Even	the	conservative	answer	to	Priestley	employed	the	same	metaphor.	Edmund	Burke,	speaking	of
the	revolution	in	France	and	against	its	supporters	in	England,	said:	“The	wild	gas,	the	fixed	air	is
plainly	broke	loose.” [120]	Burke	tried	to	put	the	spirit	back	in	the	bottle:	“We	are	resolved	to	keep	an
established	church,	an	established	monarchy,	an	established	aristocracy,	and	an	established
democracy,	each	in	the	degree	it	exists,	and	in	no	greater.” [121]

The	imprisonment	of	Van	Helmont	by	the	Inquisition,	the	reactionary	orations	of	Burke,	the
persecutions	of	Priestley	–	the	violent	destruction	of	his	house,	church,	books,	and	the	laboratory	–	,
and	the	beheading	of	Lavoisier	could	not	put	the	new	air	back	into	old	bottles.	As	Jung	writes	about
the	objective	wilfulness	of	the	Spirit:	“The	crucial	point	is	that	so	long	as	the	…	spirit	cannot	be
proved	to	be	a	subjective	psychic	experience,	then	even	trees	and	other	suitable	objects	would	have,
once	again,	to	be	seriously	considered	its	lodging	places.”	(CW	13: 249)
The	air	was	out	of	the	subjective	mysticism	of	alchemy.	It	got	out	first	through	those	transitional
alchemists,	Van	Helmont	and	Boyle,	and	their	skeptical	attacks	on	the	element	itself.	It	got	out	in	the
puer	play	of	experimenting:	“I	shall	not	scruple,”	says	Boyle,	“to	confess	to	you	that	I	disdain	not	…
even	of	Ludicrous	Experiments,	and	think	that	the	‘Play	of	Boys’	may	sometimes	deserve	to	be	the
Study	of	Philosophers.” [122]	The	alchemical	ludus	puerorum	(CW	12: 302	and	fig.	95),	the	play	of	the
puer	spirit	in	public	exhibition,	was	the	image	within	Boyle’s	experimental	method.	The	airy	element
was	playing	freely;	even	iron	vessels,	says	Van	Helmont,	could	not	hold	it.	Now	it	lit	the	darkness,
bubbled	up	at	soda	fountains,	and	whistled	through	the	steamboat.
All	these	inventions	facilitated	the	air ’s	release,	but	where	did	they	originate?	The	Grimms’	story
says	they	come	from	the	air	in	the	bottle:	the	invisible	spirit	itself	gives	the	boy	the	wound-healing
rag,	the	silvered	axe.	The	imagination	of	air	invents	its	own	technology	by	means	of	which	it	can
return	to	the	material	world.	The	technological	achievements	of	Hales	and	Black,	Scheele	and	Davy,
on	which	the	new	chemical	theories	themselves	depended,	where	after	all	did	they	come	from?
Genius?
It	is	easy	enough	to	attribute	inventions	to	genius,	but	genius	is	also	an	air,	a	nimbus	around	the
head.	Genius	was	the	Roman	word	for	psyche	or	daimon,	for	a	vapor-like	spirit	that	“blows.” [123]	It
is	not	an	ego,	but	breaks	in	upon	it	–	invenio	–	a	gift	of	the	genie	in	the	bottle	who	speaks	to	the	“boy,”
a	guiding	presence	telling	the	attentive	worker	how	next	to	move	his	hand,	waking	him	in	the	night
with	flashes	of	intuition	as	to	how	best	respond	to	the	demands	of	the	invisible	to	become	visible	by
means	of	invention.	Of	course,	these	men	were	often	solitaries;	they	reserved	their	ears	for	the	subtle
“invenio”	of	the	airy	genius. [124]	“I	do	not	think	I	could	work	in	company,”	Faraday	said,	“or	think
aloud,	or	explain	my	thoughts.” [125]	The	genius	of	making,	poesis:	apparatus	as	poem.	Their
thought	and	enquiry	were	focused	by	technological	images.	Volta	was	“a	genius	for	instrumentation
and	measurement.” [126]	James	Watts	(1736–1819)	started	as	an	instrument	maker;	his	engineering
inventions	fed	the	imagination	of	others,	just	as	the	engraved	drawings	of	apparatuses	in	the	texts	of
the	period,	and	the	public	demonstrations,	visualized	extraordinary	new	images.	Lavoisier ’s	Elements
of	Chemistry	(1789)	revolutionized	the	field	largely	because,	it	is	said,	he	described	in	such	excellent
detail	the	technical	instruments	of	chemistry	and	their	uses.	The	aerial	soul	was	registering	itself	in
the	patent	office.	“The	poem,”	says	Bachelard,	“is	essentially	an	aspiration	toward	new	images.” [127]
“The	poet	of	fire,	of	water,	or	of	earth	does	not	convey	the	same	inspiration	as	does	the	poet	of
air.” [128]
We	must	therefore	read	the	chemical	revolution	neither	with	progressivist	heroics	for	what	had
been	conquered	nor	with	nostalgia	for	loss	of	feminine	soul.	The	genius	of	air	was	still	imagining	by
making	new	images,	and	these	men	were	still	serving	soul	as	it	seems	to	have	asked	to	be	served.
Should	Mrs.	Faraday	have	become	a	chemist	too,	or	Cavendish	tried	to	get	on	better	with	servants,	or
Dalton	caved	in	to	the	widow?	Love	was	there	in	the	work	itself	because	psyche	was	there	when,
following	Jung,	we	see	that	“suitable	objects”	can	be	“lodging	places”	of	psychic	events.	The
experiment,	the	laboratory,	the	apparatus, [129]	and	the	paper	(Black,	Davy,	Dalton,	Faraday,	Boyle
each	wrote	hundreds	of	papers	or	delivered	hundreds	of	popular	and	scientific	lectures):	here	was
eros,	anima,	joy;	and	an	aesthetics	of	usefulness.	When	Davy	first	isolated	potassium,	he	danced
furiously	through	the	laboratory.	Boyle	called	his	laboratory	“a	kind	of	Elysium”	where	he	was

“transported	and	bewitched.” [130]	Read	the	experiments	themselves	as	documents	of	loving-care,	of
patience,	of	appreciation	of	the	qualities	and	respect	for	life	in	things;	read	of	the	relations	of	the	men
with	their	instrument	makers.
Technology
We	are	led	by	these	thoughts	to	technology.	Technology	is	widely	bemoaned	as	the	logical	and
terrible	consequence	of	empirical	science.	Robot,	Golem,	Frankenstein’s	monster	–	is	this	technology
or	a	view	of	it?	That	we	speak	of	technology	with	these	fantasy	images	ought	to	tell	us	that	it	too	is	a
psychic	expression.	Not	the	apparatus	is	a	soulless	machine,	but	the	Cartesian-Newtonian	world	view
that	declares	things	so.	As	long	as	soul	had	been	removed	from	the	world	of	res	extensa,	anima	could
not	appear	in	worldly	things	or,	if	it	did,	it	was	fallen,	in	projection,	in	need	of	redemption.	Things
had	to	be	robots,	monsters,	the	apprentice’s	demonic	broom.	That	demonic	broom	at	least	reminded
us	that	it	was	not	dead,	as	Descartes	had	said.
Technology	is	cursed	by	our	mechanical	idea	of	it.	It	is	the	great	repressed,	the	unconscious,	the
realm	of	the	dead,	forced	to	carry	the	egocentric	unimaginative	demands	we	put	on	it:	labor-saving,
cost-efficiency,	productivity,	uniformity,	speed.	It	may	not	break	down	–	only	wear	out	and	be	thrown
away.	If	the	chemical	revolution	was,	finally,	the	restoration	of	an	imagination	of	air	to	material
things	by	means	of	technical	inventions,	then	technical	things	may	still	harbor	that	imagination.
Technical	things	are	neither	silent,	obedient	slaves,	nor	mere	manufactured	products	of	other
machines,	the	dead	creating	the	dead,	obsolescent	litter	in	a	throwaway	culture.	They	are	concrete
images	of	animation,	locations	of	the	hylic	anima	with	names	and	faces	whose	natures	need	to	be
perceived	individually,	subjectively.	Each	is	a	potential	objet	parlant.
It	is	not	the	dead	who	create	the	dead	mechanical	world	but	we,	our	subjectivism.	Our	private	sense
of	soul	deprives	things	of	their	images,	leaving	mere	objects	out	there,	without	subjectivity,	calcined,
impersonal,	dead.	These	things	have	taken	their	revenge.	The	repressed	always	does,	by	insinuating
our	notion	of	them	into	our	notion	of	ourselves:	ourselves	as	mechanical	functions,	assemblies	of
parts,	enduring	stress	and	friction,	attempting	objectivity,	until	we,	too,	oxidize	in	“burn-out.”
Moreover,	if	the	world	is	already	dead,	then	our	present	cataclysmic	fantasies	are	simply	statements
of	the	case	–	even	if	their	pathologized	imagery	does	announce	a	new	concern	of	soul,	a	new	return
of	love	to	the	suffering	things	of	the	world.
The	Newtonian	Weltbild	no	longer	rules;	technology	can	be	freed	from	its	mechanism.	The	soul	of
the	world	returns	to	the	world.	A	vast	cosmological	shuffle	is	taking	place,	new	Aquarian	dance	steps
in	heaven	called	The	Paradigm	Shift.	Anima	mundi	is	moving	from	her	clean	celestial	attic.	La	folle
du	logis	is	descending	the	staircase,	nude,	radiant,	descending	even	into	the	streets.	Anima	mundi	now
means	soul-in-the-world,	which	means	also	a	new	anima	sense	of	technology.	Only	as	we	appreciate
the	beauty	in	the	things	of	the	world	can	our	love	return	to	the	world.
Again,	our	minds	must	keep	pace	with	what	our	hands	construct.	Boyle’s	invisible	college	of
virtuosi	that	became	the	Royal	Society	presented	a	new	mode	of	education	within	the	material	world:
“To	apply	the	eyes,	and	the	hands	of	Children,	to	see,	and	to	touch	all	the	several	kinds	of	sensible
things.“ [131]	“It	is	matter,	a	visible	and	sensible	matter,	which	is	the	object	of	their	labours,” [132]
wrote	the	historian	of	the	Society.	“Matter	would	make	its	own	patterns	of	meaning	[by]	the	hands	and
eyes	of	the	virtuosi …,” [133]	handling	and	watching	the	hylic	anima.
The	chemical	enlightenment	also	proceeded	from	hand	to	mind.	Experiment	and	invention,
technical	poesis;	making	taught	thinking.	Thus	today:	cheery,	friendly	R2 D2	has	replaced	soulless
Robot.	The	maintenance	of	your	motorcycle,	the	Apple	on	your	desk,	and	the	calculator	in	your
breast	pocket	imply	that	Dr.	Frankenstein	has	died	because,	like	Nietzsche’s	god,	he	has	become

superfluous.	Though	our	minds	are	still	ruled	by	the	mechanical	enlightenment,	animation	works	in
the	laboratory	hands,	elaborating	fantasy,	inspiring	things	with	new	life,	like	the	puer	spirit	now
playing	in	computers.	Alchemy,	therefore,	did	not	collapse	–	if	we	mean	by	alchemy	a	poesis	of
matter.
As	we	have	distinguished	genius	from	ego,	so	we	can	view	the	chemical	enlightenment,	not	from
the	ego	in	enlightenment	terms,	but	from	the	imagination	of	air.	We	learn,	as	children,	from	the
enlightened	hands, [134]	from	what	they	did	rather	than	what	they	said	they	did.	Their	formulations
can	deceive	us:	Lavoisier	prefaces	his	Elements	with	an	epistemological	account	taken	straight	from
Condillac’s	theory	of	language.
Because	the	chemical	enlightenment	required	an	imagination	of	air,	the	chemists	were	not	merely
weighing	and	naming	the	gases.	They	were	as	well	inspiring	the	world	with	a	new	vision	of
things,that	balloons	and	ventilators,	wind	charts	and	air	pumps	were	carriers	of	highest	aspirations,	a
pneumatic	vision	parallel	with	free-thinking,	public	knowledge,	and	the	Bill	of	Rights. [135]
Their	inventions	were	the	new	mode	of	access	for	the	genie,	the	invenio	of	the	daimon.	The
technical	thing,	moving	with	its	own	pneumatic	power	like	the	statues	and	icons	of	the	gods,	was	now
the	numen,	acting	like	a	spiritus	rector,	the	invention	leading	the	inventor	to	think	new	thoughts,	to
imagine	more	deeply	into	the	soul	of	the	world.
We	can	turn	to	these	men	for	guidance	through	the	present	technological	crisis.	Remember
Helmont:	each	thing	has	its	blas,	its	atmosphere	that	comes	from	the	stars	and	must	be	studied	as	such,
for	in	each	thing	there	is	an	odor	or	a	seed	or	an	image	by	which	its	specific	nature,	timing,	value,
and	purpose	can	be	known.	The	turn	to	matter	means	concern	with	specifics;	as	the	main	Scholastic
tradition	insisted,	matter	is	the	individuating	principle.	Each	thing	differs	from	each	other	thing.
Scheele,	Davy,	Boyle	pressed	toward	specifics.	“Per	nudam	observationem,”	said	Helmont,	“quaerere
et	pulsare.” [136]	“Matter	[	…	]	is	not	subordinated	to	soul	but	is	the	active	vector	of	specificity.” [137]
The	individuation	of	our	soul	requires	recognition	of	the	individuality	of	soul	in	things,	that	each
thing	has	its	own	‘privacy,’	distinct	from	the	public	and	uniform	laws	of	physics. [138]	Because	there
is	soul	in	things,	even	our	modern	hi-tech	things,	they	can	be	received	into	our	souls,	imagined	as
images,	their	“odors”	perceived	with	aesthetic	sensitivity,	considered	animistically.	Such	is	the
thought	of	the	heart. [139]
At	the	close	I	should	distinguish	what	I	have	been	doing	from	what	I	have	not	been	doing	in	this
chapter.	Although	we	have	dug	into	a	period	of	time,	we	have	not	been	engaged	in	an	archeology	of
Enlightenment	chemistry	à	la	Foucault;	we	have	not	been	engaged	in	a	phenomenological	metabletics
à	la	Van	den	Berg.	Such	would	be	to	historicize,	to	consider	the	interrelations	of	political	revolution,
scientific	method,	technical	invention,	religious	philosophy,	and	poetic	expression	as	phenomena	of	a
single	Zeitgeist,	one	idea	manifesting	in	many	phenomena.	This	approach,	which	literalizes	the
historical	period	into	the	fundamental	determinant,	leads	back	to	Hegel	and	the	objectivation	of	air	as
Geist	in	its	historical	procession,	and	eventually	to	the	literalisms	of	Marx.
For	us,	an	archetypal	idea	such	as	air,	and	its	phenomenology	in	a	segment	of	time,	does	not
require	an	approach	through	the	spirit.	The	phenomena	can	as	well	be	reflected	by	means	of	anima,
by	means	of	an	airy	imagination	which	is	both	the	subject	and	object	of	the	method,	appearing	in	our
own	anima	fantasies	as	we	work	as	well	as	in	the	personal	lives,	chemical	ideas,	and	actions	in	the
world	of	those	we	work	with.	History	is	not	the	determining	factor;	psyche	is	–	the	timeless,	the
archetypal	psyche	is	what	manifests	in	the	phenomenology	of	air,	requiring	the	approach	of	an
archetypal	psychology.	As	such,	the	phenomena	we	have	been	witnessing	–	transposition	of	soul	from
self	to	public	world;	materialization,	souring	and	collapse	of	air	as	a	primordial	element;	its	rebirth
in	method,	apparatus	and	progressive	aspirations	–	are	psychological	events	taking	place	in	soul,	in
individualized	anima	corporalis	and	collective	anima	mundi.	Its	movement	“out”	is	the	soul’s	own

psychology	of	extraversion,	an	archetypal	movement	that	is	not	the	result	of	historical	conditions	as
much	as	the	condition	of	historical	results.	History	is	inside	us,	as	Henry	Corbin	always	insisted,	not
we	inside	history.	History	is	a	psychological	material	where	the	eternities	of	soul	leave	their	traces	in
time.	As	the	soul	moves	in	circles,	so	does	history	display	the	soul’s	ricorsi	as	records.	The
enlightenment	phenomena	we	have	been	witnessing	continue	to	circle,	to	return,	in	our	souls.	We	run
the	same	risks	of	puer	playful	destruction	and	intoxication,	of	senex	abstraction	and	abstractedness,	of
materialistic	blindness	and	aggressive	souring	of	atmospheres,	wherever	soul	moves	out	from
private	concern	to	animation	of	matter.	Soul	can	always	be	lost,	for	that	is	its	nature; [140]	lost	even	as
it	is	found	in	the	noblest	intentions	of	fraternité	or	Gemeinschaftsgefühl.	Soul	is	necessarily
shadowed,	its	enlightenment	never	accomplished.
These	historical,	biographical	reflections	have	not	been	merely	historical	and	biographical,	about
those	men	in	those	two	hundred	years	of	the	extended	Enlightenment.	They	have	been	about	our	own
enlightenment	as	a	psychological	phenomenon.	The	virtuosi	I	have	evoked	did	not	die	with	their
period.	They	are	eminences	who	haunt	the	soul	as	psychic	attitudes	in	the	imagination	of	air.	History
does	not	simply	go	on	then;	it	is	also	psychology	going	on	now.	Otherwise	why	examine	the	facts?
We	study	history	to	find	a	way	out	of	it.	Its	paradigmatic	figures	of	science	present	imaginative	modes
of	working	the	elemental	powers.	Engagement	with	the	elemental	constellates	elemental	responses,
heightening	a	biography	to	archetypal	proportions.	The	figure	of	Coleridge,	who	has	been
shadowing	our	theme	like	an	ancient	mariner	himself,	is	yet	with	us	as	an	archetypal	questioner.	He	is
the	Romantic	voice	who	identifies	the	poesis	of	experimental	science	with	its	philosophical	ideas
rather	than	seeing	through	to	the	poesis	of	the	laboratory	hands,	their	methods	and	technical
apparatus.	Biographies	of	historical	giants	thus	become	mythical	tales	in	which	we	trace	archetypal
patterns.	These	biographies	show	how	air	can	blow	within	an	individual	life,	take	up	its	lodging	and
make	its	demands.
We	have	seen	that	the	elemental	force	of	air	constellates	puer	and	senex,	requiring	revolution	in
thought,	experiment	in	action,	precision	of	detail,	differentiation	by	quality,	and	a	solitary’s	devotion
to	an	invisible	fascination.	And,	a	further	trait	of	major	importance:	an	imagination	of	extraversion,
the	perception	of	depth	in	the	object,	focus	upon	the	public	physical	world,	and	the	apparatus	of
realization	–	technology.	Even	Cavendish,	most	painfully	introverted	as	a	person,	shows	this
imagination	of	extraversion,	a	life	given	to	the	soul	in	the	physical	world.	His	house	“had	a
laboratory	in	the	drawing	room,	a	smith’s	forge	in	the	adjoining	room,	the	upper	part	being	an
observatory.” [141]	He	lived	in	the	crucible;	designed,	built	and	tested	his	instruments	with	his	own
hands,	like	an	alchemist.	Unlike	an	alchemist,	the	concern	of	his	imagination	was	the	world.
We	have	also	seen	in	the	accumulated	denials	of	marriage	that	the	anima	of	air	requires	impersonal
attachment,	a	higher	husbandry.	The	adored	mistress	(Boyle),	the	woman	in	the	window	(Cavendish)
become	distractions	from	Helmont’s	religious	pragmatism,	Boyle’s	seraphic	love,	Lavoisier ’s
betterment	of	human	conditions,	Priestley’s	courageous	idealism,	Davy’s	usefulness.	You	remember
our	patient	mentioned	above:	after	his	airy	anima	“got	out,”	he	entered	public	service;	the	end	of
personal	analysis	as	Gemeinschaftsgefühl. [142]	Similarly,	in	cultural	psychology	the	end	of	chemical
analysis	was	public	concern.
Gemeinschaftsgefühl	is	even	more	impersonal	than	Adler	foresaw.	It	expands	beyond	unselfish
action	intending	the	common	good.	The	soul	in	the	world	of	things	calls	our	feelings	to	recognize
their	participation	in	that	common	good,	things	not	just	for	our	sake	but	also	for	theirs,	thereby
restoring	a	psychological	appreciation	to	constructed	things	left	too	long	for	dead,	returning	soul	to
the	world.	Progress,	that	airy	dream	turned	sour,	now	means	ricorsi,	return	to	the	anima	mundi. [143]
Davy’s	statement	that	“the	progress	and	improvement	of	civil	society	is	founded	in	mathematical	and
chemical	inventions” [144]	takes	us	only	half	way.	The	other	half	is	psychological,	or	cosmological:

returning	soul	to	those	inventions.	An	invisible	spring	of	air,	a	combustible	phlogiston,	a	wild	gas
still	imbues	each	thing,	making	possible	the	animation	of	the	actual	world	of	things	among	which,	or
whom,	we	live.
Originally	published	in	Eranos	Yearbook 50	(1981),	273–333.
1 Cratylus	410b.
2 Cf.	S.	Sambursky,	Physics	of	the	Stoics	(New	York:	Macmillan,	1959),	1–16,	41–48,	from	which	the	substance	of	my	paragraph	is
derived;	also	J. M .	Rist,	Stoic	Philosophy	(Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1969),	86–88;	M.	Putscher,	Pneuma,	Spiritus,	Geist:	Vorstellungen
vom	Lebensantrieb	in	ihren	geschichtlichen	Wandlungen	(Wiesbaden:	F.	Steiner,	1973).
3 The	locus	classicus	for	the	connection	between	pneuma,	vital	heat	(thermos),	and	the	stars	is	Aristotle,	De	generatione	animalium,
II : 3.736b–737a.	Cf.	F.	Solmsen,	“The	Vital	Heat,	the	Inborn	Pneuma	and	the	Aether,”	Journal	of	Hellenic	Studies 77	(1957),	119–23.
4 Agrippa	von	Nettesheim,	Natural	Magic	(London:	Aquarian	Press,	1971),	48:	“Whence	it	is	that	many	philosophers	were	of	the
opinion	that	Air	is	the	cause	of	dreams,	and	of	many	other	impressions	of	the	mind,	through	the	prolonging	of	Images,	or	similitudes,	or
species	(which	are	fallen	from	things	and	speeches,	multiplied	in	the	very	Air)	until	they	come	to	the	senses,	and	then	to	the	phantasy,	and
soul	of	him	who	receives	them.“
5 Plutarch,	De	defectu	oraculorum,	13:	“Now	if	the	air	that	is	between	the	earth	and	the	moon	were	to	be	removed	and	withdrawn,	the
unity	and	consociation	of	the	universe	would	be	destroyed,	since	there	would	be	an	empty	and	unconnected	space	in	the	middle …”
(Moralia	416e,	trans.	F. C.	Babbitt).	Plutarch	goes	on	to	make	the	analogy	between	the	middle	realm	of	air	and	the	middle	realm	of
daimones.
6 Cf.	Putscher,	Pneuma,	38–77,	on	the	close	connections	of	spiritus	and	anima	in	Medieval	and	Renaissance	thought.
7 G.	Bachelard,	Air	and	Dreams:	An	Essay	on	the	Imagination	of	Movement,	trans.	E. R.	Farrell	and	C. F.	Farrell	(Dallas:	The	Dallas
Institute	Publications,	2002).
8 The	way	had	been	prepared	in	1755	in	a	small	treatise	by	M.	Gallien,	L’art	de	naviguer	dans	les	airs,	amusement	physique	et
geometrique.	Joseph	Black,	one	of	the	first	to	examine	air	in	the	laboratory,	had	shown	his	friends	in	1767	a	balloon	filled	with	hydrogen
that	rose	to	the	ceiling.	Black	said	they	would	never	be	useful	for	aerial	voyages.
9 B.	Franklin,	On	Balloons:	A	Letter	Written	from	Passy,	France,	January	16,	1784,	privately	printed	for	his	friends	by	W. K.	Bixby
(Saint	Louis:	Merrymount	Press,	1922).
10 A	cat,	dog,	cock,	sheep,	etc.	were	sent	on	another	balloon	flight	from	Ecouen	to	Paris;	they	survived	the	flight	“with	no	damage	to
their	reproductive	powers.”
11 J.	Rendel	Harris,	The	Cult	of	the	Heavenly	Twins	(Cambridge:	At	the	University	Press,	1906).
12 During	this	period	(1797),	the	MS.	of	Leonardo	depicting	flying	was	discovered.	Erasmus	Darwin	in	his	The	Botanic	Garden	(1789)
wrote	these	lines:	“Soon	shall	thy	arm,	unconquer’d	steam!	afar	/	Drag	the	slow	barge,	or	drive	the	rapid	car;	/	Or	on	wide-waving	wings
expanded	bear	/	The	flying	chariot	through	the	field	of	air.”
13 Cf.	J.	le	Clezio,	L’Industrie	du	Gaz	(Paris:	PUF,	1947);	W. V.	Farrar,	et	al.,	“William	Henry,	Hydrocarbons	and	the	Gas	Industry,”
Ambix 22/3	(1975),	186–96.
14 A. N .	Meldrum,	“Lavoisier’s	Early	Work	in	Science,”	Isis 19	(1933),	337.	The	Academy	of	Sciences	offered	prizes	for	a	study	on
lighting	a	city	at	night.	Lavoisier	won	a	gold	medal,	and	his	study	took	up	such	questions	as	materials,	wicks,	costs,	optics,	reflectors,
lantern	design,	treating	the	oils,	etc.	This,	in	the	1760s:	how	close	to	today	and	how	far	from	the	alchemy	of	the	same	period.
15 F. C.	Accum,	Description	of	the	Process	of	Manufacturing	Coal	Gas	(London:	Thomas	Boys,	1820).
16 On	the	history	of	soda	water	and	its	early	chemistry,	see	J. J.	Riley,	A	History	of	the	American	Soft	Drink	Industry:	Bottled
Carbonated	Beverages,	1807–1957	(Washington,	D.C.:	American	Bottlers	Carbonated	Beverages,	1958;	C. A.	Mitchell,	Mineral	and
Aerated	Waters	(London:	Constable),	1913.
17 Some	curious	pneumatic	treatments	are	described	by	W. V.	Farrar,	et	al.,	“The	Henry’s	of	Manchester:	Part	I,”	Ambix 20/3	(1973),

200–205.	Humphry	Davy	(see	below),	while	a	very	young	man,	was	Superintendent	at	the	“Pneumatic	Medical	Institution”	near	Bristol
from	where,	probably,	he	acquired	the	nitrous	oxide.	An	aim	of	the	work	at	the	Institution	was	to	improve	the	health	of	factory	workers
with	oxygen.
18 Advertising	and	pamphleteering	were	radically	advanced	by	the	invention	of	the	paper	machine	in	France	in1798.	Hitherto,	all	paper
had	been	handmade.
19 Published	in	Memoirs	of	the	Literary	and	Philosophical	Society	of	Manchester,	Second	Series,	vol.	1	(Manchester:	S.	Russell	for
R.	Bickerstaff,	1805).
20 For	two	excellent	examinations	of	respiration	theories,	see	L. G.	Wilson,	“The	Transformation	of	the	Concepts	of	Respiration	in	the
Seventeenth	Century,”	Isis 5 1	(1960),	161–72;	C. A.	Culotta,	“Respiration	and	the	Lavoisier	Tradition:	Theory	and	Modification,	1777–
1850,”	Transactions	of	the	American	Philosophical	Society,	New	Series,	vol.	62,	no.	3	(1972),	3–41.
21 Cf.	Col.	Beaufoy,	F.R.S.,	“Experiments	on	the	Resistance	of	Air	and	on	Air	as	a	moving	Power,”	Annals	of	Philosophy,	vol.	8,	ed.	T.
Thomson	(London:	Baldwin,	Cradock,	and	Joy,	1816),	94–108.
22 Cf.	C. N . A.	Duval,	“Pilatre	de	Rozier	(1754–1785),	chemist	and	first	aeronaut,”	trans.	R. E.	Oesper,	Chymia 12	(1967),	99–117.
23 H.	Davy,	Researches,	Chemical	and	Philosophical;	Chiefly	Concerning	Nirtous	Oxide,	or	Dephlogisticated	Nitrous	and	its
Respiration	(London:	J.	Johnson,	1800).
24 Ibid.,	458.
25 Ibid.,	496.	The	harp	simile	has	the	profound	cosmological	implications	of	the	anima	mundi	as	air,	as	this	well-known	passage	from
Coleridge’s	“The	Eolian	Harp”	(1795)	shows	(Selected	Poetry	[Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1997],	28):
And	what	if	all	of	animated	nature
Be	but	organic	harps,	diversely	framed,
That	tremble	into	thought,	as	o’er	them	sweeps
Plastic	and	vast,	one	intellectual	breeze,
At	once	the	Soul	of	each,	and	God	of	All?
26 E. B.	Smith,	“A	Note	on	Humphry	Davy’s	Experiments	on	the	Respiration	of	Nitrous	Oxide,”	in	S.	Forgan,	Science	and	the	Sons	of
Genius:	Studies	on	Humphry	Davy	(London:	Science	Reviews	Ltd.,	1980),	233.
27 Ibid.
28 Collected	Letters	of	Samuel	Taylor	Coleridge,	6	vols.,	ed.	E. L.	Griggs	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	2000–2002),	5: 8 09.
29 T. H.	Levere,	“Humphry	Davy,	‘The	Sons	of	Genius,’	and	the	Idea	of	Glory,”	in	Forgan,	Science	and	the	Sons	of	Genius,	35.
30 The	Collected	Works	of	Sir	Humphry	Davy,	9	vols.,	ed.	J.	Davy	(London:	Smith,	Elder	and	Co.,	1839–40),	2: 3 11.
31 W. D.	Miles,	“Sir	Humphrey	Davie,	the	Prince	of	Agricultural	Chemists,”	Chymia	7	(1961),	134:	“Davy	was	a	prophet	who	showed
farmers	what	might	be	gained	from	science	…	Few	chemistry	books	have	had	as	much	influence	on	the	layman	as	[his]	Elements	of
Agricultural	Chemistry.“
32 C.	Singer,	A	Short	History	of	Scientific	Ideas	to	1900	(Oxford:	At	the	Clarendon	Press,	1959),	346.
33 Davy	was	criticized	for	typically	puer	traits.	We	find	these	words	in	his	biographers	and	in	comments	by	his	adversaries	and	critics:
“mercurial,”	“fragmentary,”	“tentative	suggestions	rather	than	comprehensive	theories,”	“reformer,”	“lifelong	anti-materialism,”
“opportunist,”	“love	of	social	glamour,”	“popular	idol,”	“rebel,”	“romantic,”	“exuberance,”	“brilliant	but	unfocussed	life.”	His	last	years
showed	a	typical	senex	conversion:	he	worked	on	corrosion	of	ships’	bottoms,	chemical	archeology	at	Herculaneum,	geology,	and
suffered	a	stroke	in	Geneva	leaving	him	crippled	at	the	end.	See	further,	J. Z.	Fullmer,	“Humphry	Davy’s	Adversaries,”	Chymia	8	(1962),
147–65.	On	the	psychological	characteristics	of	puer	and	senex	,	see	J.	Hillman,	Senex	&	Puer,	UE	3.
34 Levere,	“Humphry	Davy,”	43.
35 Ibid.,	37.
36 Fragmentary	Remains,	Literary	and	Scientific,	of	Sir	Humphry	Davy,	ed.	J.	Davy	(London:	John	Churchill,	1858),	13.

37 Levere,	“Humphry	Davy,”	40.
38 The	Notebooks	of	Samuel	Taylor	Coleridge,	Volume	2: 1 804–1808,	ed.	K.	Coburn	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1961),	1855.
39 Cf.	L.	Thorndike,	A	History	of	Magic	and	Experimental	Science,	8	vols.	(New	York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	1947–1953),	8: 6 01n 
56.
40 J. B.	Conant,	Overthrow	of	the	Phlogiston	Theory:	The	Chemical	Revolution	of	1775–1789	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	Univ.
Press,	1950);	see	also	T. S.	Kuhn,	The	Structure	of	Scientific	Revolutions	(Univ.	of	Chicago	Press,	1970),	53–56.
41 “All	young	chemists	adopt	the	theory	and	from	that	I	conclude	that	the	revolution	in	chemistry	has	come	to	pass”	(1791),	quoted	in
the	Introduction	to	the	Dover	Edition	of	Lavoisier’s	1790	Elements	of	Chemistry	in	a	New	Systematic	Order	containing	all	the	Modern
Discoveries	(Mineola,	N.Y.:	Dover	Publications,	1965),	xxix.
42 A	century	earlier,	Boyle	had	already	regarded	it	as	a	composite,	a	“confused	aggregate;”	“there	is	scarce	a	more	heterogeneous
body	in	the	world”	(Suspicions	about	Some	Hidden	Qualities	of	the	Air,	1674).	Hales	continues	the	same	idea:	“It	is	well	known	that	air
is	a	fine	elastic	fluid,	with	particles	of	very	different	natures	floating	in	it …“	(Vegetable	Staticks,	1727).	Once	the	idea	that	air	was	a
compositum	took	hold	of	consciousness,	it	became	fascinated	with	the	differentiation	and	naming	of	its	“particles.”
43 The	crucial	operation	of	the	transition	to	chemistry	was	calcination;	the	crucial	material,	mercury.	Cf.	C. E.	Perrin,	“Prelude	to
Lavoisier’s	Theory	of	Calcination:	Some	Observations	on	Mercurius	Calcinatus,	per	se,”	Ambix 16	(1969),	140–51.	From	the
psychological	viewpoint,	the	calcinatio	is	the	operatio	that	dries	out	the	emotional	humors	and	moistures,	rendering	the	material	sec	(dry)
and	objective,	i.e.,	scientific;	thereby,	Mercurius,	the	fugitive	spirit	of	alchemy	and	God	of	its	imagistic	transformations,	received	a	new
fixation	in	the	objectivity	of	the	chemical	method.
44 Cf.	J. R.	Partington,	A	History	of	Chemistry,	4	vols.	(London:	Macmillan,	1961–70),	3: 6 14.	Jeremias	Benjamin	Richter	(1762–
1807),	who	considered	chemistry	applied	mathematics	and	was	so	important	to	the	shift	of	chemistry	toward	physical-mathematical
models,	applied	his	mathematics	and	determined	the	“weight”	of	phlogiston.
45 See	Ian	Sample,	“Is	there	lightness	after	death?”	http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2004/feb/19/science.science	(accessed	14	July
2010).
46 On	Becher	as	alchemist,	see	Thorndike,	A	History	of	Magic	and	Experimental	Science,	7: 5 78ff.
47 Stahl’s	relevant	passages	on	phlogiston	are	given	in	English	in	A	Source	Book	in	Chemistry,	1400–1900,	ed.	H. M .	Leicester	and	H. 
S.	Krickstein	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	Univ.	Press,	1968),	59–62.
48 “Sulfur	is	a	formative,	partly	gaseous,	partly	fiery,	partaking	of	an	ethereal	nature;	it	is	that	whence	strength	proceeds,	and	life
inheres	in	things.”	Lexicon,	s.	v.	“Sulfur.”	Cf.	Jung’s	compact	chapter	on	Sulfur	in	CW	14: 4 2,	and	his	remarks	on	Sendivogius’s	De	Sulfure
(CW	12: 3 96–98)	concerning	imagination,	which	we	referred	to	at	the	beginning	of	this	chapter,	and	my	passages	on	sulfur	elsewhere	in
this	volume.	Further	on	the	close	relation	of	sulfur	and	phlogiston,	see	H. M .	Leicester,	“Lomonosov’s	Views	on	Combustion	and
Phlogiston,”	Ambix 22	(1975),	1–9.
49 “Several	of	[Lavoisier’s]	contemporaries	…	shared	the	view	that	the	oxygen	theory	of	acidity	was	in	the	tradition	of	explanation-byprinciple	dating	back	to	Stahl	and	probably	to	Paracelsus …”	H. E.	Le	Grand,	“A	Note	on	Fixed	Air:	The	Universal	Acid,”	Ambix 20
(1973),	94.	“We	may	accuse	Lavoisier	of	having	made	a	whole	philosophy	out	of	oxygen,”	M. P.	Crosland,	“Lavoisier’s	Theory	of
Acidity,”	Isis 64	(1973),	325.	“Lavoisier’s	oxygen	theory	was	from	the	beginning	as	much	a	theory	of	acidity	as	a	theory	of	combustion”
(Ibid.,	306),	since	the	term	he	coined	for	air	(oxygen)	means	“principle	of	acidity	rather	than	principle	of	combustibility	[phlogiston]”
(Ibid.,	307),	implying	that	sour	air	is	indeed	the	root	metaphor	of	the	chemical	revolution.	The	metaphor	was	“right”	even	if	the	material
was	“wrong,”	which	raises	questions	about	the	place	of	mistakes	–	as	they	are	called	–	in	changes	of	Weltbild:	“who”	makes	them;	why
do	they	“catch	on”;	and	why	are	they	necessary?	In	defense	of	Lavoisier,	see	H.	Guerlac,	Lavoisier	–	The	Crucial	Year:	The
Background	and	Origin	of	His	First	Experiments	on	Combustion	in	1772	(Ithaca,	N.Y.:	Cornell	Univ.	Press,	1961).
50 Cf.	M. P.	Crosland,	Historical	Studies	in	the	Language	of	Chemistry	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	Univ.	Press,	1962).
51 Crosland,	Historical	Studies	in	the	Language	of	Chemistry,	170–71.	This	nominalism	went	together	with	the	mathematization	of
chemistry	pursued	so	successfully	by	the	French,	Jeremias	Benjamin	Richter,	and	John	Dalton	to	whom	Coleridge	passionately	objected,
struggling	to	keep	his	vision	of	chemistry	as	“poetry	…	substantiated	and	realized	in	nature:	yea,	nature	itself	disclosed	to	us	…	as	at
once	the	poet	and	the	poem!”	The	Friend:	A	Series	of	Essays,	vol.	3	(1818),	in	The	Collected	Works	of	Samuel	Taylor	Coleridge
(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1969),	4: 4 71.	Against	Dalton,	Coleridge	wrote:	“an	attempt	to	destroy	chemistry	itself.”	“Thus	the	theorist	who
reduces	the	chemical	process	to	the	positions	of	atoms,	would	doubtless	thereby	render	chemistry	calculable	…	by	destroying	the
chemical	process	itself,	and	substitute[s]	for	it	a	mote	dance	of	abstractions …”	Lay	Sermons,	Collected	Works	of	Coleridge,	6: 1 73–

74n.
52 “Aerial	nitre”	or	the	explosive	“air”	in	gunpowder	played	a	devastating	role	in	the	persecution	of	both	Priestley	and	Lavoisier.
Priestley	had	used	a	gunpowder	metaphor	in	one	of	his	dissident,	pro-revolution	writings	leading	some	to	take	him	literally,	and	the
charges	against	Lavoisier	laid	blame	on	him	for	mismanaging	the	powder	magazine	at	the	time	of	the	Bastille	riot.	The	chemical	and
political	revolutions	were	fatefully	entwined.	Ironically,	one	of	the	major	accusations	brought	by	brought	by	Marat	against	Lavoisier	was
that	the	construction	of	the	city	walls	around	Paris,	which	Lavoisier	authorized,	polluted	the	air.
53 Published	in	Philosophical	Transactions	56	(1766).
54 R.	McCormmach,	“John	Michell	and	Henry	Cavendish:	Weighing	the	Stars,”	British	Journal	for	the	History	of	Science 4	(1968),
126–55.
55 Ibid.,	129	n11.
56 A. J.	Berry,	Henry	Cavendish:	His	Life	and	Scientific	Work,	London:	Huchinson,	1960,	22.
57 G.	Wilson,	The	Life	of	the	Hon.	Henry	Cavendish	(London:	Cavendish	Society,	1851),	169.
58 Ibid.,	170.
59 Ibid.,	178.
60 Ibid.,	178n.
61 Ibid.,	182.
62 Berry,	Henry	Cavendish,	24;	cf.	Wilson,	The	Life	of	the	Hon.	Henry	Cavendish,	184n.
63 For	an	attempt	at	revising	the	eccentric	view	of	Cavendish	as	an	“incessant	measurer,”	so	as	to	perceive	the	originality	and	logic	of
his	thought	and	a	“whole	life	dedicated	to	science	without	precedent,”	see	R.	McCormmach,	“Henry	Cavendish:	A	Study	of	Rational
Empiricism	in	Eighteenth-Century	Natural	Philosophy,”	Isis 60	(1969),	293–306.
64 J.	Priestley,	Experiments	and	Observations	on	Different	Kinds	of	Air,	3	vols.	(London:	J.	Johnson,	1775).
65 Macrobius,	Commentary	on	the	Dream	of	Scipio,	trans.	W. H.	Stahl	(New	York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	1990),	182.
66 S.	Hales,	Vegetable	Staticks	(London:	W.	&	J.	Innys,	1727),	“Introduction.”
67 Wilson,	The	Life	of	the	Hon.	Henry	Cavendish,	186.
68 “But	The	Spring	of	the	Air	was	more	than	a	new	departure	in	scientific	writing	and	the	fore-runner	of	the	accepted	form	of	modern
technical	papers	…	by	his	43	experiments	[he]	conclusively	demolished	the	traditional	view	that	air	was	an	essential	element,	a
mysterious	all-pervading	and	almost	mystical	entity	…	the	very	stuff	of	Nature	herself.”	Roger	Pilkington,	Robert	Boyle:	Father	of
Chemistry	(London:	John	Murray,	1959),	145.	Boyle	gave	the	first	modern	definition	to	element:	“I	now	mean	by	elements	…	certain
primitive	and	simple,	or	perfectly	unmingled	bodies;	…	of	which	all	those	called	perfectly	mixt	bodies	are	immediately	compounded,	and
into	which	they	can	be	ultimately	resolved.”	The	Skeptical	Chymist	(1661),	in	The	Works	of	Robert	Boyle	(Hildesheim:	Olms,	1966),	1: 
562.	This	definition	of	element	led	to	its	substantiation	and	identification	with	atom,	thus	moving	the	idea	from	elemental	to	elementary
(primitive	and	simple).	Air,	of	course,	failed	the	definition.
69 Alexander	Pope	complained	of	Vicar	Hales:	“He	commits	most	of	these	barbarities	with	the	thought	of	being	of	use	to	man;	but	how
do	we	know	that	we	have	the	right	to	kill	creatures	that	we	are	so	little	above	as	dogs,	for	our	curiosity,	or	even	for	some	use	to	us,”	in
The	Works	of	Alexander	Pope,	8	vols.	(London:	Longman,	Brown,	and	Co.,	1847),	1: 4 47.	Pope	is	picking	on	Hales	less	for	vivisection
than	for	curiosity,	a	primary	Catholic	sin	(Fénelon)	and	a	primary	impulse	in	the	experimental	method.	A	century	later,	another	poetphilosopher,	Coleridge,	used	a	similar	metaphor	regarding	Davy’s	galvanic	experiments:	“To	bind	down	material	nature	under	the
inquisition	of	reason,	and	force	from	her,	as	by	torture,	unequivocal	answers	to	prepared	and	preconceived	questions.”	Coleridge,	The
Friend,	4: 5 31.
70 Lavoisier,	Elements	of	Chemistry:	“Henceforwards	I	shall	express	these	elastic	äeriform	fluids	by	the	generic	name	gas …”
71 W.	Pagel,	“The	‘Wild	Spirit’	(Gas)	of	John	Baptist	van	Helmont	(1579	–1644)	and	Paracelsus,”	Ambix 10	(1962),	1–2.

72 Singer,	A	Short	History	of	Scientific	Ideas,	269.
73 From	A	Source	Book	in	Chemistry,	26.
74 Pagel,	“The	‘Wild	Spirit’	(Gas)	of	Van	Helmont,”	8.	See	also	Lexicon,	s.v.	“Sylvestres	or	Sylvans”:	“Sylvestres	are	Men	of	the	Air,
Spirits	of	the	Air,	Aerial	Spirits	which	inhabit	the	woods …”
75 Lexicon,	s.v.	“Nymphae”;	H. W.	Parke,	The	Oracles	of	Zeus	(Oxford:	Blackwell,	1967),	chap.	3	and	4;	CW	13: 4 18–20	on	the
feminine	tree	numen.
76 Originally	published	in	Latin	in	1648	and	translated	into	English	as	Oriatrike,	Or,	Physick	Refined	in	1662.
77 “The	‘Odour’	is	also	called	‘Ferment’	or	‘Image’	of	the	thing	which	is	to	be	formed	or	‘Notion	of	what	has	to	be	done.’	”	W.
Pagel,	“The	Religious	and	Philosophical	Aspects	of	Van	Helmont’s	Science	and	Medicine,”	Supplements	to	Bulletin	of	the	History	of
Medicine 2	(1944),	17.
78 Cf.	the	discussion	of	smell	in	my	The	Dream	and	the	Underworld	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1979),	185–88	and	notes.
79 This	complicated	subject	is	illumined	in	C. J.	Glacken,	Traces	on	the	Rhodian	Shore:	Nature	and	Culture	in	Western	Thought	from
Ancient	Times	to	the	End	of	the	Eighteenth	Century	(Berkeley:	Univ.	of	California	Press,	1976),	esp.	318–45	and	659–81.
80 R. W. B.	Lewis,	The	American	Adam:	Innocence,	Tragedy,	and	Tradition	in	the	Nineteenth	Century	(Univ.	of	Chicago	Press,	1955).
81 Cf.	Alexander	Porteous,	Forest	Folklore,	Mythology,	and	Romance	(London:	Allen	&	Unwin,	1928),	chap.	4.
82 A.	Portmann,	“Vom	Urmenschenmythos	zur	Theorie	der	Menschwerdung,”	Eranos	Yearbook	38	(1969).
83 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	The	Myth	of	Analysis	(Evanston,	Ill.:	Northwestern	Univ.	Press,	1972),	part	III.
84 Cf.	J.	Hillman,	“Some	Early	Background	to	Jung’s	Ideas,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought
(1976),	123–36.
85 Cf.	Aldo	Carotenuto,	“Sabina	Spielrein	and	C. G.	Jung,”	Spring:	An	Annual	of	Archetypal	Psychology	and	Jungian	Thought
(1980),	118–45.
86 Cf.	CW	3: 1 98–316;	MDR	125–30.
87 About	Vauquelin,	Davy	writes:	“Nothing	could	be	more	singular	than	his	manners,	his	life	&	his	menage.	Two	old	ladies,	the
Mademoiselles	Fourcroy,	sisters	of	the	Professor	[a	major	successor	of	Lavoisier]	…	kept	his	house	…	the	first	time	I	entered	it,	I	was
ushered	into	a	sort	of	bed	chamber	which	likewise	served	as	a	drawing	room.	One	of	the	ladies	was	in	bed	but	employed	in	preparations
for	the	kitchen	&	was	actually	paring	truffles.”	J. Z.	Fuller,	“Davy’s	Sketches	of	his	Contemporaries,”	Chymia 1 2	(1967),	136.
88 See	J.	Parascandola	and	A. J.	Ihde,	“History	of	the	Pneumatic	Trough,”	Isis 60	(1969),	351–61,	on	this	crucial	apparatus	invented	by
Hales	by	means	of	which	gases	are	collected	by	displacement	of	water.
89 G.	Urdang,	Carl	Wilhlem	Scheele:	A	Pictorial	Biography	(Madison,	Wis.:	American	Institute	of	the	History	of	Pharmacy,	1958),	13.
90 Partington,	A	History	of	Chemistry,	3 :760;	cf.	756:	Dalton	contributed	an	early	piece	on	love	to	the	periodical	Ladies’	Diary.
91 S. J.	French,	Torch	&	Crucible:	The	Life	and	Death	of	Antoine	Lavoisier	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1941),	53.
92 Fullmer,	“Davy’s	Adversaries,”	155.
93 F. W.	Gibbs,	Joseph	Priestley:	Revolutions	of	the	Eighteenth	Century	(New	York:	Doubleday,	1967),	231.
94 L. P.	Williams,	Michael	Faraday:	A	Biography	(London:	Chapman	&	Hall,	1965),	99.
95 Pilkington,	Robert	Boyle,	107–26.
96 Ibid.,	107,	128.	A	visitor	to	Boyle	reported	how	Boyle	“had	chemical	cordials	calculated	to	the	nature	of	all	vapours	that	the
several	winds	bring;	and	used	to	observe	his	ceiling	compass	every	morning	that	he	might	know	how	the	wind	was,	and	meet	the

malignity	it	brought	by	a	proper	antidotal	cordial.	So	that	if	the	wind	shifted	often	he	was	in	danger	of	being	drunk.”	M.	Boas,	Robert
Boyle	and	Seventeenth-Century	Chemistry	(Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1958),	18–19.	Another	Irish	pneumatic	philosopher	uncomfortable
with	the	climate	was	Richard	Kirwan	(1733–1812)	who	wore	his	hat	and	overcoat	always	indoors.	His	marriage	was	brief;	he	lived
forty-seven	years	as	a	widower.
97 Boas,	Robert	Boyle,	207;	cf.	Pilkington,	Robert	Boyle,	135.
98 Pilkington,	Robert	Boyle,	122.
99 Cf.	Boas,	Robert	Boyle,	21,	where	Boyle	compares	crossing	the	threshold	into	the	laboratory	with	Lethe	–	forgetting	the	world	and
entering	the	realm	of	souls.
100 Pilkington,	Robert	Boyle,	100.
101 Ibid.,	76–77.
102 Boas,	Robert	Boyle,	185.
103 Urdang,	Carl	Wilhlem	Scheele,	7.	Coleridge	could	not	comprehend	the	new	method,	much	as	he	was	fascinated	by	chemistry,
keeping	up	with	it	in	some	detail.	Rather	than	Scheele’s	(and	others’)	“democratic	search	for	the	concrete	…	with	no	inclination	to
generalize,”	Coleridge	considered	the	materials	“of	the	Laboratory	…	to	be	symbols	of	elementary	powers,	and	the	exponents	of	a	law,
which,	as	the	root	of	all	these	powers,	the	chemical	philosopher,	…	is	instinctively	labouring	to	extract	…	striving	after	unity	of	principle
through	all	the	diversity	of	forms.”	Coleridge,	The	Friend,	4: 4 70.
104 Dictionary	of	Scientific	Biography,	ed.	C. C.	Gillispie,	16	vols.	(New	York:	Scribner’s,	1970–80).
105 Ibid.
106 M.	Ficino,	Commentary	to	Plato’s	Symposium,	V: 2.	Perhaps	the	earliest	connection	of	voice	and	psyche	occurs	in	a	fragment	of
Xenophanes	(Burnet,	7):	“Once	they	say	that	he	[Pythagoras]	was	passing	by	when	a	dog	was	being	beaten	and	spoke	this	word:	‘Stop!
don’t	beat	it!	For	it	is	the	soul	[psyche]	of	a	friend	that	I	recognized	when	I	heard	its	voice.’ ’’
107 Cf.	S. M .	Edelstein,	“Priestley	settles	the	Water	Controversy,”	Chymia 1	(1948),	123–37	on	the	“discovery”	of	the	composition	of
water	and	the	various	priority	claims	among	Waltire,	Monge,	Watt,	Priestley,	Cavendish,	Macquer,	and	Volta.
108 Priority	disputes	need	to	be	re-imagined.	To	consider	them	as	vanity	and	opportunism	is	to	read	spirit	phenomena	(genius)	in	ego
terms.	(Opportunism	belongs	to	the	puer	spirit,	necessary	to	seeing	and	seizing	insights;	cf.	J.	Hillman,	“A	Note	on	Opportunism”	in	Senex
&	Puer,	96–112.)	If	the	aerial	spirit	was	now	out	in	the	world	it	demanded	its	recognition	in	outward	ways.	Public	recognition	of	priority	is
simply	the	outer	way	of	recognizing	the	originating	power	of	spirit,	where	and	when	its	primacy	and	generativity	manifest	in	the	world.
109 Cf.	Hillman,	Senex	&	Puer.
110 Dictionary	of	Scientific	Biography.
111 A. J.	Ihde,	The	Development	of	Modern	Chemistry	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1964),	82.
112 Pagel,	“The	Religious	and	Philosophical	Aspects	of	Van	Helmont’s	Science	and	Medicine,”	12	and	38.
113 Pagel,	“The	‘Wild	Spirit’	(Gas)	of	Van	Helmont,”	9–10,	referring	to	Helmont’s	Imago	Mentis.
114 These	quotations	from	Adler’s	psychology	are	documented	in	J.	Hillman,	Healing	Fiction	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,
2005),	107–8;	124–25.
115 Levere,	“Humphry	Davy,”	49.
116 Hillman,	“Psychotherapy’s	Inferiority	Complex,”	166.
117 Ibid.
118 For	an	extraordinary	documentation	of	Shelley’s	imagination	of	air,	see	J.	Perrin,	Les	structures	de	l’imaginaire	shelleyan	(Presses
Universitaires	de	Grenoble,	1973).

119 Gibbs,	Joseph	Priestley,	195.
120 E.	Burke,	Reflections	on	the	Revolution	in	France	and	on	the	Proceedings	in	Certain	Societies	in	London	Relative	to	that	Event
(London:	J.	Dodsley,	1790),	8.
121 Ibid.,	135–36.
122 Thorndike,	A	History	of	Magic	and	Experimental	Science,	8: 1 81.
123 R. B.	Onians,	Origins	of	European	Thought	(Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1954),	129–32.
124 G. J.	Holton,	“On	Trying	to	Understand	Scientific	Genius,”	American	Scholar 41,	no.	1	(1971),	96,	includes	these	traits	among
those	essential	to	men	of	scientific	genius:	“a	tactile	coexistence	with	natural	phenomena:	sometimes	the	mind	seems	to	move	into	a
problem	of	nature	as	if	it	were	a	hand	slipping	into	a	glove	…	intensity	and	wide	scope	of	his	alertness,	for	example,	to	small	signals	in
the	large	‘noise’	of	any	experimental	situation	…	extraordinary	energy	and	persistent	dedication	–	in	manipulation	of	equipment,	in	the
making	of	apparatus	or	tools,	in	computing	or	writing	…	ability	to	…	give	his	whose	life	over	…	to	near	exclusion	of	satisfactions	of
drives	other	men	find	irresistible.”	As	paradigmatic	figure,	Holton	depicts	Einstein,	a	quote	from	whom	is	relevant	to	Holton’s	thesis	and
to	one	of	mine	here:	“My	passionate	sense	of	social	justice	and	social	responsibility	has	always	contrasted	oddly	with	my	pronounced
lack	of	need	for	direct	contact	with	other	human	beings	and	human	communities”	(ibid.,	97).	One	more	trait	in	Einstein	needs	mentioning,
since	we	have	seen	it	in	the	chemists:	“The	objects	of	imagination	were	to	him	evidently	persuasively	real,	visual	materials,	which	he
voluntarily	and	playfully	could	reproduce	and	combine	…	The	key	words	are	Bild	[image]	and	Spiel	[play]”	(ibid.,	103).
125 Dictionary	of	Scientific	Biography.
126 Ibid.
127 Bachelard,	Air	and	Dreams,	2.
128 Ibid.,	4.
129 Even	the	exception	that	proves	the	rule	turns	out	to	be	a	false	exception:	Dalton	is	usually	considered	to	have	had	the	least,	the
cheapest	Quaker-style	equipment	–	chemistry	in	“penny	ink-bottles.”	This	was	not	at	all	the	case;	cf.	K. R.	Farrar,	“Dalton’s	Scientific
Apparatus”	in	John	Dalton	and	the	Progress	of	Science,	ed.	D. S. L.	Cardwell	(Manchester	Univ.	Press,	1968),	159–86.
130 Boas,	Robert	Boyle,	21.
131 T.	Sprat,	History	of	the	Royal	Society	(1667)	(London:	Routledge,	1959),	329.
132 Ibid.,	339.
133 Ibid.,	xxx	(introduction	by	J.	Cope	and	H. W.	Jackson).
134 J.	Brun,	La	main	et	l’esprit	(Paris:	Presses	universitaires	de	France,	1963),	whose	profound	and	broad	study	restores	the	hand	to	its
primary	place	in	human	comprehension.
135 Bentham’s	utilitarian,	popularist	phrase,	“The	greatest	good	for	the	greatest	number”	was	admittedly	derived	from	a	similar	phrase
in	Priestley’s	An	Essay	on	the	first	Principles	of	Government	(1768).	See	A	Scientific	Autobiography	of	Joseph	Priestley,	ed.	R. E.
Schofield	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	MIT	Press,	1966),	348.
136 Pagel,	“The	Religious	and	Philosophical	Aspects	of	Van	Helmont’s	Science	and	Medicine,”	11.
137 Pagel,	“The	‘Wild	Spirit’	(Gas)	of	Van	Helmont,”	27.
138 Ibid.,	6–8:	“Helmont	asks	with	Plotinus,	how	can	variety	in	nature,	how	can	specificity	be	ever	explained	by	uniform	motion	and	its
laws.	Motion	…	must	take	place	in	something	…	and	it	is	this	something	which	has	to	be	investigated.”	Because	“a	modification	of	matter
[is]	different	in	each	individual	being	…	Helmont	reserved	for	things	vital	the	‘private’	right	and	privilege	of	specificity,”	leading	to	a
cosmology	of	“vitalistic	Pluralism.”
139 J.	Hillman,	The	Thought	of	the	Heart	and	the	Soul	of	the	World	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2007).
140 Hillman,	Healing	Fiction,	128–29.

141 Partington,	A	History	of	Chemistry,	3: 3 03.
142 Hillman,	Healing	Fiction,	124.
143 For	the	restitution	of	Air	to	its	primordial	authority,	see	D.	Abrams,	The	Spell	of	the	Sensous:	Perception	and	Language	in	a
More-Than-Human	World	(New	York:	Vintage	Books,	1997).
144 Levere,	“Humphry	Davy,”	50.	Cf.	this	statement	of	practical	idealism	with	another	from	Davy	during	the	nitrous	oxide	period
(1799)	as	recorded	by	Southey:	“A	paradise	wholly	immaterial	–	trees	of	light	growing	in	a	soil	of	ether	–	palaces	of	water	refracting	all
rich	colours.”	The	Notebooks	of	Samuel	Taylor	Coleridge,	2: 1 91.

10
The	Azur	Vault:	Caelum	as	Experience
	
We	shall	begin	along	two	parallel	paths,	one	aesthetic,	one	psychoanalytic;	the	first,	a	poem	by	Lisel
Mueller	called	“Monet	Refuses	the	Operation”	–	a	cataract	operation;	the	second,	a	moment	in	the
analysis	of	Anna	O.	reported	by	Josef	Breuer,	Freud’s	friend,	mentor,	and	co-author	of	Studies	in
Hysteria.
These	paths	intend	toward	the	azure	vault,	particularly	the	experience	of	the	alchemical	caelum,	a
blue	intimated	earlier	in	Chapter	5	above,	and	here	to	be	more	brightly	illumined	and	more	clearly
contrasted	with	the	blues	of	that	earlier	chapter.	The	Latin	word	means	the	blue	sky;	heaven;	the	abode
of	the	gods	and	the	gods	collectively;	the	sky	as	the	breath	of	life,	the	air;	and	also	the	upper
firmament	or	covering	dome,	including	the	Zodiac.	The	alchemical	caelum	or	coelum	is	expanded
upon	especially	in	Jung’s	last	great	work,	Mysterium	Coniunctionis,	and,	as	he	says,	the	caelum	has	“a
thousand	names.”	These	few	will	also	help	us	as	we	proceed:	“a	Heavenly	Spirit	that	makes	its	way
into	the	essential	forms	of	things” [1];	the	“anima	mundi	in	matter,”	“the	truth	itself,”	“a	universal
medicine,”	“a	window	into	eternity,”	radiating	“a	magic	power,”	“the	unus	mundus”	as	a	“unio
mystica	with	the	potential	world,	or	mundus	archetypus”	and	the	final	realization	of	the	alchemical
opus. [2]	We	are	headed	to	the	edge.	Now	to	the	poem,	and	the	first	of	many	stories:
Doctor,	you	say	there	are	no	haloes	around	the	streetlights	in	Paris	and	what	I	see	is	an	aberration	caused	by	old	age,	an	affliction,
I	tell	you	it	has	taken	me	all	my	life	to	arrive	at	the	vision	of	gas	lamps	as	angels,	to	soften	and	blur	and	finally	banish	the	edges
you	regret	I	don’t	see,	to	learn	that	the	line	I	called	the	horizon	does	not	exist	and	sky	and	water,	so	long	apart,	are	the	same	state
of	being.	Fifty-four	years	before	I	could	see	Rouen	cathedral	is	built	of	parallel	shafts	of	sun,	and	now	you	want	to	restore	my
youthful	errors:	fixed	notions	of	top	and	bottom,	the	illusion	of	three-dimensional	space,	wisteria	separate	from	the	bridge	it	covers.
[	…	]
I	will	not	return	to	a	universe	of	objects	that	don’t	know	each	other,	as	if	islands	were	not	the	lost	children	of	one	great	continent.
The	world	is	flux,	and	light	becomes	what	it	touches,	becomes	water,	lilies	on	water,	above	and	below	water,	becomes	lilac	and
mauve	and	yellow	and	white	and	cerulean	lamps,	small	fists	passing	sunlight	so	quickly	to	one	another	that	it	would	take	long,
streaming	hair	inside	my	brush	to	catch	it.	To	paint	the	speed	of	light!	Our	weighted	shapes,	these	verticals,	burn	to	mix	with	air	and
change	our	bones,	skin,	clothes	to	gasses.	Doctor,	if	only	you	could	see	how	heaven	pulls	earth	into	its	arms	and	how	infinitely	the
heart	expands	to	claim	this	world,	blue	vapor	without	end. [3]

Now,	Anna	O.	as	told	by	Josef	Breuer:
She	told	me	there	was	something	the	matter	with	her	eyes;	she	was	seeing	colors	wrong.	She	knew	she	was	wearing	a	brown	dress
but	she	saw	it	as	a	blue	one. [4]

Breuer	tested	her	color	vision;	it	was	not	impaired.	Breuer	interprets	this	curious	“misperception”	as
an	incursion	of	a	secondary	state	of	mental	functioning	into	“her	first,	more	normal	one.”	Breuer
writes:	“She	had	been	very	busy	with	a	dressing-gown	for	her	father,	which	was	made	with	the	same
material	as	her	present	dress,	but	was	blue	instead	of	brown.”	The	visual	mistake	–	or	visionary
experience?	–	is	reduced	by	Breuer	to	the	blue	material	of	the	father ’s	dressing	gown.
Could	there	be	something	more?	Could	the	patient’s	own	avowal	that	she	saw	blue	despite	knowing
“she	was	seeing	colors	wrong”	indicate	a	wish,	not	for	the	father	only,	and	for	dressing	his	body,	but
for	clothing	hers	in	blue?	And,	what	might	it	imply	for	her,	for	that	analysis,	for	the	field	of	analysis
itself	–	since	Anna	O.	is	a	fons	et	origo	of	our	psychoanalytic	heritage	–	for	the	body	of	the	patient,	of

every	analytical	patient,	the	opus	itself	to	be	clothed	in	blue?	We	shall	return	to	both	Monet	and	Anna
O.	But	first	a	few	more	blue	stories.
Again	one	from	the	beginnings	of	our	field,	the	devastating	crisis	starting	at	age	thirty-nine	in	the
life	and	work	of	Gustav	Theodor	Fechner	(1801–1887),	to	whom	both	Sigmund	Freud	and	William
James	pay	effusive	tribute,	claiming	him	to	be	the	most	valuable	thinker	in	psychology	of	the
nineteenth	century.	Fechner	was	a	brilliant	physical	psychologist,	observer,	micro-measurer,
laboratory	experimenter.
Then	his	eyes	gave	out.	He	couldn’t	observe,	he	couldn’t	read.	He	was	not	blind,	but	he	could	no
longer	see.	Nor	could	he	eat	or	drink.	His	digestion	gone,	shriveled,	despairing,	sleepless	and	silent,
he	protected	his	eyes	with	lead	cups	and	retreated	into	a	blackened	room,	kept	alive	by	his	wife.	After
close	to	three	years	in	this	black	hole,	gradually	recovering	physically,	he	emerged,	lifted	the
bandages	and	allowed	light	into	his	eyes:
I	stepped	out	for	the	first	time	from	my	darkened	chamber	and	into	the	garden	…	It	seemed	to	me	like	a	glimpse	beyond	the
boundary	of	human	experience.	Every	flower	beamed	upon	me	with	a	peculiar	clarity,	as	though	into	the	outer	light	it	was	casting	a
light	of	its	own.	To	me	the	whole	garden	seemed	transfigured,	as	though	it	were	not	I	but	nature	that	had	just	arisen.	And	I	thought:
So	nothing	is	needed	but	to	open	the	eyes	afresh.
 The	picture	of	the	garden	accompanied	me	into	the	darkened	chamber;	but	in	the	dusk	it	was	all	the	brighter	and	clearer	and
more	beautiful,	and	at	once	I	thought	I	saw	an	inward	light	as	the	source	of	the	outward	clarity	…	and	the	shining	of	the	plants’
souls. [5]

Fechner	felt	giddy	with	joy	of	this	moment	of	the	multi	flores.	Fechner	went	on	to	live	healthily	to	age
eighty-six,	immensely	productive,	exchanging	his	professorship	from	natural	science	to	the
philosophy	of	nature.	The	first	lectures	he	delivered	after	his	recovery	were	devoted	to	pleasure,
form	ulating	for	psychology	the	pleasure	principle	later	expanded	upon	by	Freud.  [6]	The	book	on
the	soul	that	followed	his	return	to	life	was	subtitled	“a	walk	through	the	visible	world	in	order	to	find
the	invisible.”	Fechner	now	wore	blue	glasses.	To	protect	his	eyes?	Or	to	protect	his	vision	from	the
materialist	perspective	that	preceded	his	blindness	and	which	he	now	called	the	“night	world”,	i.e.,	the
nigredo	from	which	he	had	emerged.
Two	stories	from	childhood,	one	from	an	Irish	poet,	the	other	from	an	American	musician.	“Æ”
(George	William	Russell),	friend	of	Yeats	and	pivotal	figure	in	the	Irish	literary	revival,	describes	a
moment	when	about	four	or	five	years	old,	he	was	lying	flat	on	some	grass	recalling	a	story	of	“a
magic	sword	with	a	hilt	of	silver	and	a	blade	of	blue	steel”:
The	word	“magic”	stirred	me,	though	I	knew	not	what	it	meant	…	It	lay	in	memory	…	until	a	dozen	years	later	its	transcendental
significance	emerged	as	a	glittering	dragon-fly	might	come	out	of	a	dull	chrysalis.	The	harmony	of	blue	and	silver	at	once
bewitched	me.	I	murmured	to	myself	“blue	and	silver!	Blue	and	silver!”	And	then,	the	love	of	color	awakened	…	one	color	after
another	entered	the	imagination	…	This	love	of	color	seemed	instinctive	in	the	outer	nature. [7]

Here,	says	Æ,	is	“the	birth	of	the	aesthetic	sense,”	in	harmony	with	the	natural	world	and	its	colors
that	were,	as	he	says,	“of	its	nature	and	not	of	that	unthinking	child’s.”
“The	very	first	thing	I	remember	in	my	early	childhood,”	says	the	incomparable	Miles	Davis,
is	a	flame,	a	blue	flame	jumping	off	a	gas	stove	…	I	remember	being	shocked	…	by	the	suddenness	of	it	…	that	stove	flame	is	as
clear	as	music	is	in	my	mind.	I	was	three	years	old.
 	I	saw	that	flame	and	felt	that	hotness	of	it	close	to	my	face.	I	felt	fear,	real	fear	…	But	I	remember	it	also	like	some	kind	of
adventure,	some	kind	of	weird	joy,	too.	I	guess	that	experience	took	me	someplace	in	my	head	I	hadn’t	been	before.	To	some
frontier,	the	edge,	maybe,	of	everything	possible	…	The	fear	I	had	was	almost	like	an	invitation,	a	challenge	to	go	forward	into
something	I	knew	nothing	about	…	everything	I	believe	in	started	with	that	moment.	I	have	always	believed	and	thought	since	then
that	my	motion	had	to	be	forward,	away	from	the	heat	of	that	flame. [8]

“Away	from	the	heat	of	that	flame”	and	into	the	“cool”:	his	inventive	use	of	the	mute,	his	solos	as
“thinking”	the	music,	the	titles	of	his	great	pieces	such	as	“Kind	of	Blue,”	“Blue	in	Green,”	his

wearing	“shades”	already	in	the	1940s.	I	can	imagine	that	both	Goethe	and	Kandinsky	would	approve
of	Miles	Davis’s	feeling	for	blue.	“Blue,”	says	Goethe,	“gives	us	the	impression	of	cold	…	and
reminds	us	of	shade.	A	Blue	surface	seems	to	recede	from	us	…	it	draws	us	after	it.”	Kandinsky	adds,
“[B]lue	…	retreat	from	the	spectator	…	turning	in	upon	its	own	center	…	active	coolness.”	For	Davis,
a	challenge	to	go	to	the	edge;	for	Æ,	the	sympathy	for	revolt.
The	call	of	Æ’s	aesthetic	sense	and	the	spirit	of	revolt	marked	the	Romantic	impulse	of	which
Novalis’s	“blue	flower”	is	the	undying	example	–	although	he	himself,	as	Friedrich	von	Hardenberg,
died	at	twenty-nine.	That	famous	blue	flower	appears	in	Novalis’s	novel	of	the	poetic	education	in
which	the	hero,	Heinrich,	dreams	a	vision.	Climbing	through	a	strange	geography,	the	hero	comes	to
a	place	filled	with	“a	holy	stillness,”	where	“a	basin	of	water	emits	a	faint	blue	light.” [9]	Blue,	veined
cliff	…	The	sky	was	blue,	clear,	and	he	was	“drawn	to	a	tall	light-blue	flower.	The	flower	then	leaned
towards	him	and	…	upon	a	great	blue	corolla,	hovered	a	delicate	face.” [10]
Novalis	regarded	the	blue	flower	as	“the	visible	spirit	of	song.”	Curious	that	Æ	entitles	the	little
book	describing	the	evolution	of	his	poetic	calling	Song	and	its	Fountain.	Novalis	writes:	“One	thing
recalls	all	…	” [11]	“No	more	the	order	of	time	and	space	…	the	great	soul	of	the	world	moves
everywhere,	blooms	ceaselessly	…	World	becomes	dream,	dream	becomes	world.” [12]
Another	report	from	the	history	of	our	field.	This	time:	Wilhelm	Reich.	Reich	combined	the	libido
of	Breuer	and	Freud	with	the	physical	science	of	Fechner.	Reich	imagined	that	the	libidinal	charge
flowing	through	the	body	is	the	orgone	energy	of	the	cosmos.	Freud’s	later	theory	of	Eros	as	a
cosmic	force	Reich	would	capture	in	a	box	in	which	a	patient	could	receive	orgone	radiation.	The
radiation,	according	to	Reich,	came	in	three	variations	of	blue. [13]	Whether	Reich	was	a	crackpot	or
a	brilliant	therapist	does	not	concern	us	here:	but	his	witness	to	blue	as	the	color	of	libidinal	Eros	that
embraces	the	phenomenal	world	adds	another	page	to	our	collection	of	stories.	Besides,	why	not
imagine	libidinal	desire	as	blue?	Weren’t	porn	shows	once	called	“blue	movies”	and	the	suppression
of	libido	attributed	to	puritans	named	“blue	stockings”?
Reich’s	blue	orgone	shifts	the	source	of	erotic	arousal.	Instead	of	blood	and	glands,	arousal
becomes	an	impulsion	from	the	sky,	a	bolt	from	the	blue	imagination.	Hence,	perhaps,	that	sense	of
immutable	destiny	in	sexual	attractions,	as	if	ordained	by	Heaven	–	and	Hell.
Backing	for	Reich’s	blue	Eros	as	the	universal	energy	that	joins	phenomena	together	comes	from
Cézanne.	I	quote	from	one	of	his	most	astute	and	studious	biographers:	“Cézanne	gave	blue	a	new
depth	of	meaning	…	by	making	it	the	foundation	of	the	world	of	objects	‘existing	together.’	Blue	was
now	recognized	as	belonging	to	a	deeper	level	of	existence.	It	expressed	the	essence	of	things	and
their	abiding,	inherent	permanence.” [14]
Cézanne	himself	wrote:	“Blue	gives	other	colors	their	vibration,	so	one	must	bring	a	certain
amount	of	blue	into	a	painting.” [15]	Zola,	referring	indirectly	to	Cézanne,	writes:	“The	flesh	colors
are	blue,	the	trees	are	blue,	surely	he	went	over	the	whole	picture	with	blue.” [16]	In	his	old	age,
Cézanne	drew	with	a	brush	loaded	with	aquamarine.	May	we	say	Cézanne	painted	with	the	color	of	the
caelum	in	order	to	present	the	unus	mundus?
Again	from	the	history	of	our	field.	Two	stories	from	Jung’s	biography.	In	1944	Jung	suffered	a
heart	attack:
I	experienced	dreams	and	visions	which	must	have	begun	when	I	hung	on	the	edge	of	death	…	I	had	reached	the	outermost	limit	…
It	seemed	to	me	that	I	was	high	up	in	space.	Far	below	I	saw	the	globe	of	the	earth,	bathed	in	a	gloriously	blue	light.	I	saw	the
deep	blue	sea	and	the	continents	…	its	global	shape	shone	with	a	silvery	gleam	through	the	wonderful	blue	light. [17]

Jung’s	vision	goes	on	for	pages.	It	made	his	return	to	the	normal	hospital	situation	disappointing	and
difficult.	He	writes:	“Now	I	must	return	to	the	‘box	system’	again.	For	it	seemed	to	me	as	if	behind	the
horizon	of	the	cosmos	a	three-dimensional	world	had	been	artificially	built	up.” [18]	Again	that

theme:	cosmos	without	horizon,	without	partitions,	as	if	a	deeper	layer	of	existence,	which	is	“the
foundation	of	the	world	of	objects,”	and	is	initiated	by	the	blue	experience.
When	Fechner	subtitled	his	revisioning	book	“a	walk	through	the	visible	world	in	order	to	find	the
invisible,”	did	he	know	Hölderlin’s	poem	“The	Walk”	(Der	Spaziergang)	and	the	phrase	“Divinity
escorts	us	kindly,	at	first	with	blue	(Die	Gottheit	freundlich	geleitet	/	Uns	erstlich	mit	Blau)? [19]
A	particular	moment	in	the	three-week	course	of	Jung’s	vision	needs	remarking.	He	felt	the
presence	of	“inexpressible	sanctity”	that	had	a	“magical	atmosphere.” [20]	“I	understood	then	why	one
speaks	of	the	odor	of	sanctity,	of	the	‘sweet	smell’	of	the	Holy	Ghost.” [21]
Here	I	want	to	use	poetic	license	by	inviting	Heidegger	to	explicate	Jung’s	moment	of	sanctity,	the
presence	of	holiness	in	the	hospital	room.	Heidegger	writes:	“Blue	is	not	an	image	to	indicate	the
sense	of	the	holy.	Blueness	itself	is	the	holy,	in	virtue	of	its	gathering	depth	which	shines	forth	only	as
it	veils	itself.” [22]	Robert	Avens	explains	Heidegger ’s	holiness	of	blue:	“Holiness	is	not	a	property	of
a	God	…	but	a	name	for	all	entities	insofar	as	they	display	a	numinous	aspect;	it	is	an	ingredient	that
awakens,	ensouls,	and	vivifies	everything.	Specifically,	the	holy	[in	Heidegger]	is	identified	with	the
blueness	of	the	sky.” [23]
The	next	tale	of	Jung’s	encounter	with	blue	occurs	in	Ravenna	on	entering	the	Baptistry	of	the
Orthodox.	“Here,	what	struck	me	first	was	the	mild	blue	light	that	filled	the	room	…	I	did	not	try	to
account	for	its	source,	and	so	the	wonder	of	this	light	without	any	visible	source	did	not	trouble	me.”
It	was	here	that	Jung	and	his	companion	envisioned	“four	great	mosaic	frescoes	of	incredible	beauty
…	and	to	this	day	I	can	see	every	detail	before	my	eyes:	the	blue	of	the	sea,	individual	chips	of	the
mosaic	…” [24]
These	mosaics	on	the	walls	of	the	Baptistry	did	not	exist,	simply	not	there	–	though	they	were	seen
and	remembered	in	detail	by	both	viewers.	The	light	which	introduced	the	vision	was	blue;	the	most
vivid	of	the	images:	“the	blue	of	the	sea.”
The	last	of	these	stories	of	the	azure	vault	I	take	from	Marcel	Proust	in	Time	Regained,	the
concluding	part	of	his	many-volumed	masterpiece,	the	author	as	himself	and	as	character	reflecting
on	his	lifelong	literary	effort	recounts	the	rising	of	his	psyche	to	joy	from	“gloomy	thoughts”	about
the	“life	of	the	mind”	which	he	calls	“unfertile,”	“boring,”	“tedious,”	“useless,”	“sterile,”	and
“melancholy.” [25]
While	crossing	a	courtyard	he	stumbles	on	an	uneven	paving-stone,	and	suddenly	the	oppressive
blue	mood	becomes	visual	and	visionary:	“A	profound	azure	intoxicated	my	eyes,	impressions	of
coolness,	of	dazzling	light,	swirled	around	me.” [26]	Then,	“a	new	vision	of	azure	passed	before	my
eyes,	but	an	azure	that	this	time	was	pure	and	saline	and	swelled	into	blue	and	bosomy	undulations,
and	so	strong	was	this	impression	that	the	moment	to	which	I	was	transported	seemed	to	be	the
present	moment.” [27]	No	sooner	is	Proust	out	of	this	sentence	then	the	cauda	pavonis	appears:	“The
plumage	of	an	ocean	green	and	blue	like	the	tail	of	a	peacock.	And	what	I	found	myself	enjoying	was
not	merely	these	colors	but	a	whole	instant	of	my	life	on	whose	summit	they	rested.” [28]
Recording	his	reflections,	he	concludes	with	a	cogitation	about	time	past	and	present	“and	I	was
made	to	doubt	whether	I	was	in	the	one	or	the	other.” [29]	Experiences	that	so	moved	him	and	had
given	him	such	felicity	were	those	that	joined	past	and	present,	“outside	time.” [30]	The	doubt	about
the	life	of	the	mind	as	writer	and	“anxiety	on	the	subject	of	my	death	had	ceased	…	since	the	being
which	at	that	moment	I	had	been	was	an	extra-temporal	being.” [31]	“The	being	which	had	been
reborn	in	me	…	with	a	sudden	shudder	of	happiness	…	is	nourished	only	by	the	essences	of	things	…
A	minute	freed	from	the	order	of	time	has	recreated	in	us,	to	feel	it,	the	man	freed	from	the	order	of
time.” [32]	The	azure	vision	had	brought	together	the	pleasures	of	the	world	and	the	life	of	the	mind,
placing	time	within	the	timeless,	the	timeless	within	time.	And	with	joy	he	can	now	say,	“My	appetite
for	life	was	immense.” [33]	Proust	presents	this	azure	vision	in	temporal	terms,	where	time’s

ineluctable	continuity	is	intersected	(as	in	a	flash	of	lightning [34])	by	the	joyful	certitude	of	his	extratemporal	essence	beyond	the	reach	of	death.
The	harmony	of	world	and	mind,	resolving	doubt	and	death,	brings	us	to	Wolfgang	Pauli’s	dream
vision	of	the	world	clock,	a	centerpiece	of	Jung’s	1935	Eranos	Lecture	published	more	fully	in	Jung’s
Terry	Lectures	at	Yale	(Psychology	and	Religion),	and	later	in	his	Psychology	and	Alchemy. [35]
Allow	me	to	recapitulate	only	that	component	of	Pauli’s	vision	bearing	on	our	theme:	the	vertical
blue	disk	that	intersects	the	horizontal	one,	each	disk	having	its	own	pulse	or	time	rhythm.	A	letter
from	Pauli	to	Jung	shows	Pauli	still	working	on	the	world-clock	dream	of	several	years	before.	On
15	October	1938	Pauli	writes:
I	have	come	to	accept	the	existence	of	deeper	spiritual	layers	that	cannot	be	adequately	defined	by	the	conventional	concept	of
time.	The	logical	consequence	of	this	is	that	death	of	the	single	individual	in	these	layers	does	not	have	its	usual	meaning,	for	they
always	go	beyond	personal	life. [36]

Pauli	emphasizes	the	“sense	of	harmony”	bestowed	by	the	word-clock	vision,	much	as	Proust	wrote
of	joy	and	an	appetite	for	life	and	Fechner	of	the	beauty	of	the	garden.
What	intersects,	breaks	into	the	normal	(to	use	the	word	from	Breuer)	world	of	time’s	minutes	and
three-dimensional	existence,	what	moves	one	outside	that	“box”	(to	use	Jung’s	language	of	his	own
vision	after	the	heart	attack)	is	blue’s	verticality.	The	break	in	Proust’s	step-by-step	forward	motion,
his	stumble,	parallels	Jung’s	late	unusual	definition	of	God:
This	is	the	name	by	which	I	designate	all	things	which	cross	my	willful	path	…	all	things	which	upset	my	subjective	views,	plans,
intentions	and	change	the	course	of	my	life	for	better	or	worse. [37]

	
Proust’s	was	the	last	of	the	stories	I	have	collected	so	far.	There	are	surely	more	waiting	in	the	wings.
Now	the	temptation	arises	to	form	the	scattered	occurrences	into	a	metaphysical	conclusion.	It	would
be	expected	now	to	leave	the	earth	for	the	blue	yonder	and	a	literalization	of	the	spirit,	outside	of
time,	outside	the	body.	Don’t	the	stories	support	a	hypothesis	of	earthly	transcendence?	Have	we	not
been	encountering	the	Celestial	Kingdom,	the	“effulgent	blue	light	of	the	Buddha	body,” [38]
visitations	of	ethereal	Sophia,	of	Mary	in	her	blue	dress,	the	ultimate	transcendent	anima? [39]
Not	quite;	not	yet;	not	today.	I	shall	go	on	insisting	until	I	am	blue	in	the	face	that	Miles’s	music
stayed	dark,	that	blue	is	the	color	of	the	deeps,	as	Heidegger	says,	that	the	poetic	fantast	Æ	was	earthborn	and	earth-bound,	invited	by	the	United	States	Department	of	Agriculture	to	lecture	on	rural
economy;	that	Cézanne	stood	day	in	and	day	out	in	the	fields	among	rocks	and	mountains,	painting
peasants	and	apples	of	this	earth;	that	Novalis,	whose	degree	was	in	mining,	felt	called	“to	cultivate
the	earth,” [40]	and	that	he	took	the	pen	name	Novalis	from	the	Latin	for	“newly	ploughed	field” [41];
and	that	Fechner	acknowledged	the	earth’s	consciousness	to	be	far	superior	to	that	of	humans;	and
that	Proust	captured	every	fiber	of	the	earthly	emotions	in	touch	and	smell	and	taste;	indeed
embodied,	and	very	much	in	the	natural	world	of	phenomena.	Embodiment:	is	that	not	what	is	meant
by	macrocosm	and	microcosm	together,	a	unus	mundus?	If	embodiment	is	presaged	already	in	the
“blues”	that	sing	of	sadness	and	pull	the	soul	down	into	the	body’s	longings	and	mournings,	then	the
caelum	expands	skyward	(Jung’s	vision	in	the	hospital,	Pauli’s	cosmic	clock),	the	senses	awakened	to
the	presence	of	the	whole	wide	world,	urged	forward	as	Miles	Davis	felt,	enlivened	as	Proust	says,	as
Fechner	perceiving	the	dazzling	flowers.	Blue	initiates	“the	birth	of	the	aesthetic	sense.” [42]
The	aesthetic	–	aisthesis	,	Greek	for	sensation [43]	–	born	from	the	caelum’s	blue	is	marvelously
elaborated	by	Maurice	Merleau-Ponty	who	uses	this	one	hue	to	lay	out	his	theory	of	sensation.	A	body
or	attitude	corresponding	with,	influenced	by,	under	the	aegis	of	blue	is	utterly	different	from	one	of
red,	for	instance,	for	a	person	“adopts	the	bodily	attitude	corresponding	to	blue.”

As	I	contemplate	the	blue	of	the	sky	I	am	not	set	over	against	it	as	an	acosmic	subject;	I	do	not	possess	it	in	thought,	or	spread	out
toward	it	some	idea	of	blue	…	I	abandon	myself	to	it	and	plunge	into	this	mystery,	it	‘thinks	itself	within	me,’	I	am	the	sky	itself
[my	italics]as	it	is	drawn	together	and	unified	…	my	consciousness	is	saturated	with	this	limitless	blue. [44]

“I	am	the	sky	itself	…	drawn	together	and	unified.”	How	better	express	the	unus	mundus	experience,
which	occurs,	as	he	writes,	when	his	“consciousness	is	saturated	with	this	limitless	blue.”	MerleauPonty’s	use	of	blue	for	the	demonstration	of	his	theory	of	sensation	(or	perception)	expresses	the	blue
thinking	within	him,	the	archetypal	caelum	embodied	in	his	being.
If	spiritual	ascension	is	not	my	intention	with	these	tales,	what	am	I	intending	to	convey?	First	of	all
I	am	elaborating	a	method	for	psychology	of	storytelling.	Stories	claim	neither	proof	nor	truth.
Instead	of	argument,	anecdote;	individual	cases	circumambulating	a	theme.	The	theme?	The	caelum
of	alchemy	in	actual	lives,	particularly	lives	open	to	fresh	perception.	The	method	follows	Jung’s
method	of	amplification:	building	the	power	of	a	theme	by	amplifying	its	volume	with	similarities,
parallels,	analogies.	The	method	is	also	empirical	in	that	it	starts	and	stays	mainly	with	actual
experiences.	Further,	the	method	is	phenomenological:	let	the	event	speak	for	itself,	bracketing	out
concepts	of	spirit,	of	the	numinous,	the	coniunctio,	and	the	self.
Most	valuable	of	all,	I	believe,	is	the	aesthetic	of	the	method	which	I	am	attempting.	I	am	employing
a	rhetorical	device,	peitho,	as	the	Greeks	sometimes	called	Aphrodite,	to	invite,	seduce,	charm,
enhance,	and	convince	by	rhetorical,	even	poetic,	means.	An	aesthetic	method	relies	on	texture,
images,	language,	emotion,	and	sudden	mysterious	arrivals.	The	method	complies	with	and	submits
to	the	content.	Logos	in	the	embrace	of	psyche.	Like	blue	itself,	an	aesthetic	method	conceals	and
reveals,	withdraws	from	our	prehension,	tempts	us	to	follow	after	it,	and	connects	invisibly,
analogously,	all	the	stories	and	persons	existing	together	in	the	same	field.	The	method	is	relieved	of
interpretations	and	personalistic	contexts.	It	aims	to	present	things	as	they	are	and	also	as	played	upon
the	blue	guitar	–	to	use	Wallace	Stevens’s	famous	phrase, [45]	following	also	his	statement	“I	am
thinking	of	aesthetics	as	the	equivalent	of	aperçus	which	seems	to	have	been	the	original
meaning.” [46]	Sudden	openings	of	the	heart	and	mind	and	senses,	especially	of	the	eyes;	insights,
aha’s,	analogies,	unique	epiphanies	that	shake	the	soul,	carry	it	to	an	edge,	and	free	it	from	the	box.
The	box	is	also	psychology:	not	psyche,	but	the	“ology,”	the	parasitical	suffix	that	sucks	the	psyche
dry.	Long	before	there	was	a	field	called	psychology,	there	were	tales,	old	wives’	tales,
grandmothers’	tales,	oral	accounts	of	origins	and	great	deeds,	theater	of	tragedy	and	comedy,	the
gossip	of	the	day	carried	by	messenger,	lessons	learned	at	the	feet	of	a	teacher,	stories	passed	down
rich	in	the	ways	of	the	world	and	the	ways	of	the	soul.	Long	before	psychology	there	were	the	bedside
observation	of	physicians	and	nurses,	of	captains	on	the	field	of	battle,	painters	of	portraits,	breeders
of	animals,	and	of	trappers,	of	midwives	and	judges	and	executioners.	Psychology’s	case	reports	are
too	often	botched	attempts	to	continue	the	storytelling	tradition.	Too	soon	we	draw	theoretical
conclusions	obliged	by	“ology”	to	package	psyche	in	a	box.	We	would	win	from	every	story	the
trophy	of	meaning.
An	aesthetic	method,	if	I	may	call	it	that,	ideally	would	let	the	beauty	of	an	event,	its	sweet	shock,
instruct	the	soul,	educate	it	by	leading	it	to	an	edge,	out	of	the	box	of	the	already	conceived	and	into
pondering	and	enjoying.	The	method	suits	the	correspondences	that	compose	the	cosmos	itself,	each
thing	implicating	other	things	by	likeness	rather	than	only	by	causality,	in	an	implicit	order	of	the
world.	Metaphors	and	analogies	abounding.	The	display	of	images	addresses	the	“poetic	basis	of
mind,” [47]	which	is	our	most	native	mode	of	comprehension.
Display:	The	display	of	the	cosmos	beyond	the	box	of	mind,	beyond	even	metaphor.	This	is	the
shift	from	the	blues	of	the	unio	mentalis	to	the	caelum	of	the	unus	mundus.	If	the	first	conjoins	mind
and	imagination,	the	caelum	displays	a	world	wholly	embraced	in	blue.	“I	am	the	sky	itself.”
Mind/imagination/world	conjoined	without	necessitating	conceptual	structures	to	hold	them	together

–	valid	as	these	may	be	for	a	mind	in	search	of	comprehension	(Pauli’s	clock).
Display:	“Things	as	they	are”	call	to	be	noticed.	Display	speaks	aesthetically,	provoking	and
pleasuring	the	senses,	and	the	aesthetic	response	becomes	the	favored	method	for	working	the	opus.
Hence	Æ	can	write	that	the	assault	of	blue	gave	birth	to	the	aesthetic	sense,	and	hence	we	have	here
turned	particularly	to	great	aesthetic	practitioners	–	Proust	and	Davis,	Novalis	and	Stevens,	and,	yes,
Merleau-Ponty	and	Jung	–	for	evidence	of	the	azure	experience.
Alchemy	caught	me	and	taught	me	with	its	aesthetics	–	its	colors	and	minerals,	its	paraphernalia,
freaks,	and	enigmatic	imagistic	instructions.	It	is	like	a	vast	collective	artwork	built	through	centuries.
It	offers	an	aesthetic	psychology:	a	myriad	of	aperçus,	images,	sayings,	stories,	formulae;	and	all	the
while	engaged	with	the	matters	of	nature.	It	tells	us	to	throw	away	the	book	of	conceptual	systems;	no
need	for	male	and	female,	typology,	stages,	opposites,	transference,	self.	Conceptual	systems	may	be
useful	as	a	scaffolding	for	better	access	to	the	massa	confusa,	which	alchemy	presents	to	a
logocentric	mind.	Too	soon,	however,	the	conceptual	scaffold	replaces	alchemy	itself,	reducing	it	to
merely	providing	examples	to	support	the	conceptual	scaffold.	¡Que	lastima!
	
Allow	me	one	more	story,	one	more	from	Jung.	This	is	the	moment	in	the	articulation	of	our	field
when	Anna	O.’s	poetic	blue	is	saved	from	Breuer ’s	prosaic	brown.
It	is	the	moment	of	Jung’s	“steep	descent,”	when	he	felt	he	was	“in	the	land	of	the	dead.”	“The
atmosphere	was	that	of	the	other	world.”	First,	he	met	Salome	and	Elijah	which	he	interpreted	as
Logos	and	Eros,	but	then	retreated	from	this	intellectualization.	Then,	“another	figure	rose	out	of	the
unconscious	…	I	called	him	Philemon.” [48]	Jung	had	already	met	Philemon	in	a	dream:
There	was	a	blue	sky,	like	the	sea,	covered	not	by	clouds	but	by	flat	brown	clods	of	earth.	It	looked	as	if	the	clods	were
breaking	apart	and	the	blue	water	of	the	sea	were	[sic]	becoming	visible	between	them.	But	the	water	was	the	blue	sky.	Suddenly
there	appeared	from	the	right	a	winged	being	sailing	across	the	sky	…	He	had	the	wings	of	the	kingfisher	with	its	characteristic
colors.” [49]

These	pages	in	Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections	are	legendary	–	more:	they	belong	to	the	“creation
myth”	of	Jungian	psychology	because	it	was	Philemon	who	taught	Jung	“that	there	are	things	in	the
psyche	…	which	produce	themselves	and	have	their	own	life.” [50]	Here,	too,	I	would	claim,	begins
Jung’s	alchemical	authority	based	not	only	on	his	scholarship,	insight,	and	accumulated	cases	of
evidence	from	his	practice.	Here	begins	his	blue	visionary	mind,	that	opening	to	the	vault	that	makes
alchemy	and	his	work	mutually	comprehensible. [51]
Jung	later	placed	a	kingfisher ’s	wing	in	one	of	his	paintings,	a	wing	whose	color	has	given	its
name	to	a	particularly	brilliant	blue.	That	blue	with	its	shimmer	of	coppery	gold	recalls	Stevens’s
poetic	way	of	stating	psychic	objectivity:	“When	the	sky	is	so	blue,	things	sing	themselves.” [52]	The
painted	image	of	a	blue	wing	sailing	across	the	sky	announces	the	arrival	of	Jung’s	new	knowledge
of	the	autonomy	of	the	psyche.
The	autonomy	of	the	psyche	is	preserved	by	an	aesthetic	method.	Jung’s	term	“the	objective
psyche”	refers	to	more	than	the	spontaneous	production	of	“internal”	events.	Psychic	events	are	not
atomistic	particulars	only;	they	bode	forth	analogous	affinities	such	as	Freud	sought	in	free
associations.	Events	“sing	themselves”	further,	dream	the	myth	onward,	even	“infinitely”	as	Mueller ’s
poem	says,	and	in	this	way	they	are	objective,	freed	from	the	given	–	the	feeling	or	fact	or	fantasy	–
by	their	analogous	embodiments.	Events	dissolve	their	own	edges	and	overreach	themselves,
creatively	objectifying	psyche	in	the	production	of	complex	forms	that	bring	their	own	norms	which
seem	to	usual	judgments	as	irrational,	amoral	or	abnormal,	and	give	rise	to	the	prejudice	that	the
aesthetic	and	the	ethical	are	incommensurables.
To	the	great	misfortune	of	our	tradition,	Josef	Breuer	could	not	hear	the	transposition	to	psychic

objectivity,	the	singing	of	things	themselves.	Despite	his	arduous	devotion	to	his	case,	he	did	not
recognize	the	poetic	basis	of	mind.	He	called	Anna	O.’s	seeing	blue	a	“secondary	state”	invading	the
“more	normal	view.”	Her	dress	was	simply	brown	–	basta	la	musica,	enough	said.	Yet	Anna’s
fantasies	were	breaking	into,	and	her	out	of,	the	historical,	literal,	and	personal.	Her	symptoms	were
mainly	bodily	and	the	analysis	was	wrapping	her	body	in	blue	material.	Breuer	describes	Anna	as
“markedly	intelligent	with	penetrating	intuition	[and]	powerful	intellect	…	She	had	great	poetic	and
imaginative	gifts.” [53]	The	patient	was	being	led	by	her	very	eyes	and	the	call	of	her	symptoms	to
follow	the	blue	in	keeping	with	her	gifts.	(The	only	recourse	the	psyche	seems	to	have	had	for
moving	her	analysis	toward	the	promise	of	blue	was	to	bring	into	play	blue’s	erotic	energy	[Reich],
constellating	the	sexualized	transference	from	which	Breuer	fled.)
The	blue	incursion	early	in	the	case	of	Anna	O.,	upon	whose	psyche	our	field	is	founded,	requires
us	to	make	a	small	correction	to	the	poem	about	Monet’s	cataracts	with	which	I	began.	Lisa	Mueller
has	Monet	saying:	“I	tell	you	it	has	taken	me	all	my	life	to	arrive	at	the	vision	of	gas	lamps	as	angels.
Fifty-four	years	before	I	could	see	Rouen	cathedral	is	built	of	parallel	shafts	of	sun …”	Fifty-four
years!	Jung,	too,	places	the	caelum	at	the	end	of	his	opus	maior	and	the	end	of	his	scholarly	life.	And
an	implication	from	Proust	requires	a	correction.	Is	it	only	as	death	enters	our	thoughts	and	we	are
near	the	last	page	of	that	novel’s	via	longissima	that	the	azure	vision,	with	peacock	tail,	flowers,	and
joy	finds	us?
Others	tell	a	different	story.	Miles	Davis	as	a	tiny	boy;	Little	Æ	with	the	silver	and	blue	of	the
magic	sword;	Anna	O.	barely	out	of	her	teens.	Fechner	in	his	early	forties;	Jung	with	Philemon	also
in	midlife	–	not	at	the	end	of	an	opus	contra	naturam,	a	work	that	struggles	to	arrive.	Rather,	we	learn
that	the	“arrival,”	if	it	be	that,	is	outside	of	time	altogether	and	what	is	outside	of	time	cannot	be
achieved	through	time.	Either	the	achievement	is	never	reached:	analysis	“interminable”	to	use
Freud’s	term.	Or,	timelessness	is	eternally	present	from	the	beginning	and	potential	in	each	moment
of	the	work.	Far	out	is	where	we	start	from!	Hence,	caelum	is	one	of	the	names	of	the	materia	prima,
the	starting	stuff	and	permanent	basis	of	the	work. [54]	The	striving	toward	healing	on	the	via
longissima	is	present	from	day	one	in	the	very	fantasy	of	wholeness	as	an	impulsion	of	the	caelum	as
unus	mundus.	The	fantasy	that	things	are	“coming	together,”	integrating,	and	Jung’s	synthetic	or
prospective	method,	too,	are	modes	of	stating	in	terms	of	time	the	caelum	that	is	always	there	as	the
mundus	archetypus,	that	potential	to	which	all	things	desire	to	return.
Although	the	caelum	as	quintessence	is	often	presented	at	a	later	stage,	it	is	also	said	(Paracelsus,
Figulus)	to	be	the	prerequisite	for	alchemical	operations	of	any	kind.	The	mind	from	the	beginning
must	be	based	in	the	blue	firmament,	like	the	lapis	lazuli	and	sapphire	throne	of	mysticism,	the	azure
heaven	of	Böhme,	philos-sophia.	The	blue	firmament	is	an	image	of	cosmological	reason;	it	is	a
mythical	place	that	gives	metaphorical	support	to	metaphysical	thinking.	Metaphysics	in	image	form.
These	upper	vaults	of	stone	confirm	the	solidity	of	invisible	thought	in	a	mythical	manner;	they
reveal	the	mythical	foundations	of	thought.	They	allow,	even	command,	a	philosophy	that	reaches	to
just	such	cosmological	heights	and	depths,	the	full	extension	and	glory	of	imagination	as	philosophy,
philosophy	as	imagination	in	the	terra	alba	of	the	imaginal	as	described	by	Henry	Corbin.
A	warning	is	here	in	order.	Alchemical	authors	love	to	warn	–	about	heat,	about	sudden	change,
about	wrong	colors	at	the	wrong	time	such	as	red	rising	to	the	surface	or	the	surface	occluded	by
black.	So	I	would	add	a	warning	about	blue,	although	I	have	never	come	across	one	in	a	text.
Psychological	alchemy	remains	within	the	psyche.	It	is	an	alchemy	of	imagination	and	built	of	sensate
metaphors	and	poetic	concretisms.	The	psychologist	may	never	forget	that	the	blue	firmament,	azure
stone	and	sapphire	throne	are	mystical.	Hard	and	solid	these	images	may	be:	nonetheless	they	are	not
literal.	Here	we	must	keep	in	mind	the	basic	alchemical	caution:	“Beware	the	physical	in	the	material.”
The	hardening	of	imaginal	vision	into	program	(the	vitrification	discussed	above,	in	Chapter	6)

coagulates	the	transparency	of	a	process	or	phenomenon	into	a	fixed	idea,	an	immutable	law,	or	a
final	state.	Most	simply	defined,	the	caelum	is	the	blue	sky	in	which	the	world	has	its	home;	but	the
sky	is	not	the	world,	not	physically	mundified.	The	durabilities	of	the	unus	mundus	are	supernal
durabilities	that	infuse	things	as	they	are	with	imaginal	vitality.
This	warning	is	especially	relevant	for	Yves	Klein’s	remarkable	experiments	with	blue	pigments
and	his	truly	blue	vision	of	unus	mundus,	announced	in	lectures	and	manifestos. [55]	Though
prompted	by	an	alchemical	impetus	and	himself	a	devotee	of	Bachelard’s	poetics	of	the	material
imagination,	Klein’s	“Blue	Revolution”	aims	to	incorporate	the	metaphysical	into	the	physical	(and
vice	versa),	a	unus	mundus	for	all	nations	and	achieved	in	society.	A-	and	H-bombs	to	be	colored
blue;	oceans	renamed	their	true	color	rather	than	seas	marked	on	maps	as	Red,	Yellow,	and	Black;
human	flesh	put	in	service	to	the	monochromatic	cause	(using	the	bodies	of	his	models	as	“living
brushes”	saturated	with	blue	paint,	and	his	own	body	(the	famous	leaping	vault	into	blue	air):	“We
shall	become	aerial	men.	We	shall	know	the	forces	that	pull	us	upwards	to	the	heavens …” [56]
Compare	Klein’s	“body”	with	Merleau-Ponty’s,	which	remains	noetic,	body	contained	within
consciousness	“saturated	with	this	limitless	blue.” [57]	No	physical	leap	required.	But	then,	Klein’s
obsession	with	the	physical	body	correlates	with	out-of-body	metaphysics.	Two	literalisms	inciting
each	other.
Clinicians	might	conceive	Klein’s	extraordinary	insights	and	breakouts	to	be	signs	of	an	archetypal
possession	by	the	caelum	as	one	may	be	possessed	by	the	nigredo	or	the	albedo.	I	would	rather	argue
that	Klein	did	not	pursue	his	alchemy	diligently	enough,	remaining	monochromatic,	too	truly	blue,
not	incorporating	the	innumerable	and	interminable	processes	of	solve	et	coagula,	forgetting	that
alchemy	is	never	monochromatic,	never	“mono”	anything.	In	the	blue,	yellow	is	present;	in	the	white,
black;	and	in	the	red	are	the	multiflores	and	eyes	of	the	many-hued	peacock’s	tail,	rotating	in
multiplication.
If	the	caelum	must	be	present	to	begin	with,	then	to	do	alchemy	one	must	be	confirmed	in	imaginal
durabilities.	The	metaphorical	twist	that	the	adjective	blue	gives	in	the	immense	variety	of	its	uses	in
vernacular	speech,	removing	ordinary	things	from	their	ordinary	sense,	is	only	the	beginning	of	the
epistrophic	return	of	all	things	to	their	imaginal	ground.	The	mind	itself,	embodied	in	shadows,	must
be	drenched	in	blue,	cosmological,	transcending	psychology.
Alchemy	begins	before	we	enter	the	mind,	the	forge,	the	laboratory.	“For	before	the	sapphire
existed	there	was	no	arcanum,”	says	Paracelsus. [58]	A	precondition	for	the	arcane	practices	of
psychoanalysis	is	a	mind	established	in	the	blue	vault,	in	the	deep	seas;	a	mind	thinking	in	both
images	and	analogies,	in	words	that	turn	things	into	flashing	ideas	and	ideas	into	lively	little	things
that	crawl	across	the	paper	like	inked	letters	and	brush	strokes,	the	blue	streak	of	free	association.
Freud’s	“talking	cure,”	which	locates	this	verbal	consciousness	in	the	voicing	throat	of	the	vishuddha
chakra	whose	dominant	hue	is	a	smoky	bluish	purple	with	a	central	blue	area. [59]
The	idea	“blue”	as	formed	into	a	color	word	“was	probably	borrowed	by	prose	from	poetry.” [60]
“Blue”	–	a	poetic	invention	that	trickled	down	from	the	azure	vault,	splitting	itself	into	many
descriptive	shades	and	hues	(indigo,	ultramarine,	cerulean,	turquoise,	cobalt,	prussian	.	.	.),	but	in
origin	vanishing	to	the	grasp	like	the	blue	of	bird	feathers,	the	blue	of	the	sky,	the	blue	tremor	on	the
surface	of	water.	No	blue	stuff	there	at	all;	all	in	the	mind.
The	caelum,	then,	is	an	aesthetic	condition	of	mind,	on	which	the	entire	opus	depends.	Envision	it	as
a	night	sky	filled	with	airy	bodies	of	the	gods,	those	astrological	images	that	are	at	once	beasts	and
geometry [61]	and	participate	in	all	things	of	the	world	as	their	imaginal	ground.	The	caelum	does	not
take	place	in	your	head,	in	your	mind,	but	your	mind	moves	in	the	caelum,	touches	the	constellations.
The	thick	and	hairy	skull	opens	to	let	in	more	light,	their	light,	making	possible	a	grand	new	idea	of
order,	a	cosmological	imagination	whose	thought	speaks	for	the	cosmos	in	the	aesthetic	forms	of

images.
Because	the	sapphire	belongs	to	Venus	according	to	Paracelsus, [62]	blue	infuses	the	work	with
beauty,	with	love	for	the	work	and	erotic	delight	in	its	pursuit.	A	blue	mind	may	be	a	deep	mind	and	a
wide	mind,	but	also	it	is	a	place	of	pleasure,	the	pleasure	of	thinking,	the	libidinal	pleasures	of	secret
study,	of	teasing	meanings	in	the	dark;	revelations,	uncoverings,	fresh	insights	laid	bare.
Practitioners	of	analysis	who	carry	an	alchemical	imagination	in	their	devotion	will	keep	faith	with
the	primordial	firmness	of	their	vision.	Like	Fechner	they	will	wear	blue	glasses	and	like	Cézanne
they	will	hold	a	blue	brush	in	their	hands,	hearing	things	as	they	are	played	upon	Stevens’s	blue
guitar.	Practitioners	will	be	remembering	that	practice	itself	is	an	aesthetic	activity	that	awakens	the
soul	from	anesthesia	by	re-visioning	from	the	first	hour.	And,	like	Miles	Davis,	they	will	feel	the	blue
flame	pushing	forward	to	some	frontier,	the	edge,	and	out	of	the	box,	loosed	from	the	logic	of
opposites	and	the	coercion	of	centering,	without	tops	and	bottoms	and	lines	of	horizons.	Certitude	and
trepidation,	both;	and	like	Proust,	with	an	immense	appetite	for	life.
	
All	along	our	blue	theme	has	been	haunted	by	nostalgia,	Heimweh,	a	nest	from	which	we	have	flown,
the	harbor	where	we	have	not	arrived,	a	longing	that	imagines	an	elsewhere	that	is	“not	here.”	Not
here:	that	is	the	essential	plaint	of	the	émigré,	of	the	mercenary	by	the	campfire	in	a	foreign	land,	of
the	displaced,	the	exiled.	A	mood	of	wishing,	“mixing	memory	and	desire,”	and	the	disconsolate
regret	of	heartbreak.	Nostalgia	gives	a	particular	hollow	ache	to	the	“missing	blue”	mentioned	by
Jung	in	his	Psychology	and	Alchemy. [63]
Though	the	opus	is	dominated	by	black,	white,	yellow,	red,	and	blue	is	not	missing,	for	it	is	present
in	the	missing	–	the	“not	here,”	not	yet,	or	long	ago	and	faraway	–	those	feelings	of	pothos	or
longing,	which,	too,	was	also	a	blue	flower. [64]
The	“soulful	awareness	that	glows	with	a	vision	of	blueness” [65]	is	the	moistened,	saddened	eye.
“Tears,”	writes	Derrida,	“are	the	essence	of	the	eye	–	and	not	sight.” [66]	Or,	rather,	the	eye	sees	by
means	of	tears.	The	caelum	vision	reclaims	the	blues	of	melancholic	nostalgia.
Blue	withdraws	from	us,	says	Goethe;	it	is	the	absence	shadowing	the	alchemical	process,	the
essentially	missing.	Not-hereness	profoundly	motivates	the	work	all	along	the	way:	not	enough,	not
right,	not	fulfilling,	something	else,	something	more.	Intensely	present	in	its	utter	absence,	reminding
the	soul	of	its	exile.	The	inevitability	of	exile	as	the	necessary	ground	for	removal	of	all	supportive
identities:	the	very	idea	of	identity,	of	self-identity,	of	self	itself	are	the	structural	straws	to	which
loneliness	clutches.	Exile	reveals	that	we	are	each	foundlings	and	that	there	is	no	other	home	but	the
cosmos	itself	from	which	no	single	particle	can	be	severed,	to	which	all	aches	belong,	and
homecoming	takes	place	continually	–	Proust	crossing	the	courtyard,	Fechner	entering	his	garden	–
occurring	in	our	very	breathing	the	globe’s	blue	air.	Cézanne	drenched	all	things	in	blue,	keeping
them	from	separateness,	making	visible	“how	heaven	pulls	earth	into	its	arms.”	The	azure	vault	folds
hard	edges	into	its	cosmic	comprehension.	No	elsewhere,	no	exile,	no	nostalgia.
Precisely	here	we	can	make	yet	another	a	distinction,	between,	on	the	one	hand,	the	blue	of	the	unio
mentalis	that	occurs,	writes	Jung,	before	the	unus	mundus	and,	on	the	other,	the	celestial	blue	of	the
caelum.	That	first	blue	is	more	mood	than	effulgence.	Its	blue	roses	are	intertwined	with	lunar
subjectivity,	called	“pleurosis”	in	the	case	of	Laura	in	Tennessee	Williams’s	Glass	Menagerie.	That
first	blue	emerges	as	the	nigredo	clears	into	the	albedo	and	the	mute	mind	finds	voice,	lightens	up,	can
sing	the	blues,	and	express	melancholy.	But	now,	as	the	famous	song	“Blue	Skies”	announces,	“Blue
days,	all	of	them	gone	/	Nothin’	but	blue	skies	from	now	on	.	.	.”	In	painting,	the	two	blues	show	in	the
contrast	saturated	blue	like	Matisse’s	late	cut-out	shapes	of	lively	blues,	dancing	and	swimming	in
white.	This	azure	blue	is	the	“visible	spirit	of	Song,”	wrote	Novalis, [67]	the	source	of	song	itself
(Æ),	of	vision	beyond	reflection.	If	the	unio	mentalis	signifies	the	confluence	of	understanding	and

imagination,	an	understanding	by	means	of	images,	the	caelum	is	beyond	understanding	–	though	we
may	work	at	it	as	did	Pauli.	It	feels	unimaginable,	incomprehensible	–	as	to	Jung	after	Ravenna.
Magical.	It	simply	happens,	out	of	the	blue,	simple	and	evident	and	truthful	as	the	sky	happens,	as
death	happens,	unfathomable	and	undeniable	both.	A	universal	given,	a	gift.	The	eyes	no	longer	able
to	grasp	what	they	see;	the	eyes	become	the	ungraspable	air	by	which	they	see.	It	is	vision.
Jung	declared	his	blue	visions	of	1944	“the	most	enormous	experiences”	he	ever	had. [68]	Yet
another	is	described	in	a	letter	to	Victor	White	following	a	heart	embolism	a	month	previous:	“A
marvelous	dream:	One	bluish	diamond,	like	a	star	high	in	heaven,	reflected	in	a	round	quiet	pool	–
heaven	above,	heaven	below.	The	imago	dei	in	the	darkness	of	the	earth,	this	is	myself	…	The	dream
meant	a	great	consolation.	I	am	no	more	a	black	and	endless	sea	of	misery …” [69]
“No	more	…	endless	sea	of	misery”	correlates	with	Proust’s	shift	from	self-centered	despair	to
joy,	perhaps	Cézanne’s	move	from	furious	frustrations	to	the	blue	of	Mont	Ventoux.	What	makes	this
transcending	of	misery	possible	is	the	vision	of	transcendence	itself.	The	bluish	diamond	(Jung),	the
blue	flower	(Novalis),	the	azure	and	bosomy	undulations	(Proust)	are	each	the	ungraspable
objectified.	The	caelum	consoles	the	present	not	by	taking	experience	away	from	what	is,	but	by
offering	the	box	an	image	of	transcendence,	so	that	vision	is	delivered	from	its	pain	and
circumstance,	freed	even	from	the	very	desire	to	transcend	the	misery	simply	by	the	prospect	of
transcendence,	the	inquiry	it	evokes,	the	light	it	sheds,	and	the	balm	delivered.
Science	fosters	separations	into	boxes.	Science,	its	root	scire,	to	know,	has	a	further	root	in	Greek,
schizo	(cleft,	splinter,	separation)	and	further,	Sanscrit	chyati	(divides).	Science	splinters	the	unus
mundus.	Instead	of	“science,”	why	not	“séance”	for	these	sessions	that	invoke	our	common	ancestor?
Séance	is	defined	by	the	dictionary	as	a	meeting	of	a	learned	society	and	also	a	meeting	that	attempts
to	connect	with	the	dead.	Jung’s	expansive	vision	in	hospital	took	him	to	the	edge	of	death.	Return	to
life	meant	divisions,	separations:	“the	grey	world	with	its	boxes.” [70]	But	there	are	other	ways	out	of
the	box,	other	ways	for	the	grey	world	to	discover	a	blue	vision.
In	this	vision,	the	world	appears	as	analogies.	All	things	refer,	imply,	connote.	Likenesses
everywhere	and	so	things	cure	one	another	by	means	of	similarities.	“Objects	existing	together”	(Badt
on	Cézanne).	Edges	banished,	says	Monet	in	Mueller ’s	poem:	“I	will	not	return	to	a	universe	of
objects	that	don’t	know	each	other.”	“The	human	soul	recognizes	itself	in	the	world,	as	the
world.” [71]	Descartes’s	separations	dissolve.	Analogy,	says	William	James, [72]	is	the	mark	of
Fechner ’s	method	and	genius,	for	it	reaches	in	all	directions	and	finds	subtle	strands	of	implications.
“Attentiveness	to	subtle	signs	and	traits,”	writes	Novalis. [73]	The	method	of	discovering	analogies
carries	further	than	symbols,	further	than	images	as	such.	It	is	a	poetic	connection.	Reich	might	add,
“an	erotic	connection.”	“Poetry,”	writes	Wallace	Stevens,	“is	almost	incredibly	the	outcomes	of
figures	of	speech.” [74]	So	incredibly	is	healing.	Analogy	disrespects	definitions,	leaps	over	defenses,
listens	through	walls	to	overhear	reverberations.	The	poetic	mind	resolves	the	need	for	meaning,
Jung’s	underlying	reason	for	psychotherapy.	“The	poet	is	the	transcendental	doctor,”	wrote
Novalis. [75]
Is	the	transcendent	move	not	precisely	the	poetic	sleight-of-hand,	the	healing	magic	of	art?	Jung’s
term,	“the	objective	psyche,”	refers	to	the	psyche’s	unboxed	spontaneity	and	autonomy.	But	more,	the
term	indicates	the	power	of	the	psyche	to	objectify	itself,	transcend	the	given	by	means	of	analogies
(imagistic,	linguistic,	sensate)	that	are	strange	and	alien,	outlandish,	as	are	those	prescriptions	and
figures	of	alchemy	that	have	supported	the	condemnation	of	alchemy	as	amoral	and	crazy.	Alchemy
is	therefore	singularly	able	to	reveal	the	“transcendent	function” [76]	of	the	psyche,	its	native
overreach	and	its	delight	in	excursions	out	of	every	box,	including	the	formulations	of	alchemy	itself.
James	goes	on	to	describe	Fechner ’s	unus	mundus:	“All	things	on	which	we	externally	depend	for
life	–	air,	water,	plant	and	animal	food,	fellowmen,	etc.	–	are	included	in	her	[the	earth]	…	She	is	self-

sufficing	in	a	million	respects	in	which	we	are	not	so.” [77]	Then,	like	an	astronaut’s	vision	of	the
globe,	and	like	Jung’s	vision	from	his	hospital	bed,	James	captures	Fechner ’s	vision	with	this
paragraph:	“Think	of	her	beauty	–	a	shining	ball,	sky-blue,	sunlit	over	one	half,	the	other	bathed	in
starry	night	…	she	would	be	a	spectacle	of	rainbow	glory	…	Every	quality	of	landscape	that	has	a
name	would	be	visible	in	her	at	once	…	a	landscape	that	is	her	face.”	Novalis	saw	the	face	of	the	blue
flower.	“Yes,”	writes	James,	“the	earth	is	our	great	common	guardian	angel	who	watches	over	all	our
interests	combined.” [78]
Fechner	perceived	this	through	his	blue	glasses,	the	unus	mundus,	the	earth	as	angel.	The	deep
ecology	of	the	Gaia	Hypothesis	becomes	truth	because	seen	and	felt,	not	because	believed	in	or
scientifically	buttressed.	“We	are	called	to	form	the	Earth,”	wrote	Novalis. [79]	“Doctor,	if	you	could
only	see	.	.	.”	This	vision	is	the	caelum	experience,	and	“without	vision,”	continues	James	famously	at
the	end	of	his	rapture	recapitulating	Fechner ’s,	“the	people	perish.” [80]	And	we	perish,	the	patients
perish,	our	psychology	perishes	without	reminiscence	of	the	vision	that	impelled	us	to	Jung	in	the
first	place,	a	vision	that	is	there	from	start	to	finish	as	materia	prima	and	unus	mundus,	a	recollection
that	gives	reason	for	Jung’s	turn	to	alchemy	for	the	amplification	and	substantiation	of	his	life’s
extraordinary	work,	leaving	us	with	the	charge	to	recollect	that	our	work,	however	boxed	and
clocked,	however	bandaged	our	eyes,	is	always	under	an	azure	vault.
Originally	appeared	in	Edges	of	Experience:	Memory	and	Emergence:	Proceedings	of	the	16th	International	IAAP	Comgress	for
Analytical	Psychology	(Barcelona	2004),	ed.	L.	Cowan	(Einsiedeln:	Daimon	Verlag,	2006),	43–57.
1 Lexicon,	10.
2 CW	14: 7 61–70.
3 Second	Language:	Poems	by	Lisel	Mueller	(Baton	Rouge:	Louisiana	State	Univ.,	1986).
4 J.	Breuer,	“Case	Histories:	Fräulein	Anna	O.,”	in	S.	Freud,	SE	2: 3 3.
5 W.	Lowrie,	Religion	of	a	Scientist:	Selections	from	Gustav	Th.	Fechner	(New	York:	Pantheon,	1946),	211.
6 H. F.	Ellenberger,	The	Discovery	of	the	Unconscious:	The	History	and	Evolution	of	Dynamic	Psychiatry	(New	York:	Basic	Books,
1970),	217f.
7 Song	and	its	Fountains	(Burdett,	N.Y.:	Larsen	Publications,	1991),	12–13.
8 Miles:	The	Autobiography	(New	York:	Simon	and	Schuster,	1990),	11.
9 C.	Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace:	The	Passionate	Pursuit	of	Wisdom	in	the	West	(New	Paltz,	N.Y.:	Codhill	Press,	2003),	228.
10 Ibid.,	229.
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.,	230.
13 M. V.	Adams,	The	Fantasy	Principle:	Psychoanalysis	of	the	Imagination	(Hove	and	New	York:	Brunner-Routledge,	2004),	89.
14 K.	Badt,	The	Art	of	Cézanne,	trans.	S. H.	Ogilvie	(New	York:	Hacker	Art	Books,	1985),	82.
15 Ibid.,	57.
16 Ibid.,	56.
17 MDR,	273.

18 Ibid.
19 F.	Hölderlin,	Sämtliche	Werke,	Briefe	und	Dokumente,	ed.	D. E.	Sattler,	vol.	12	(Munich:	Luchterhand	Literaturverlag,	2004),	44.
20 MDR	275.
21 Ibid.
22 M.	Heidegger,	On	the	Way	to	Language,	trans.	P. D.	Hertz	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1971),	166.
23 R.	Avens,	The	New	Gnosis:	Heidegger,	Hillman,	and	Angels	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2003),	56.
24 MDR,	265–66.
25 M.	Proust,	“Time	Regained,”	in	Remembrance	of	Things	Past,	vol.	3,	trans.	C. K. S.	Moncrieff,	T.	Kilmartin,	and	A.	Mayor	(New
York:	Vintage	Books,	1982),	898.
26 Ibid.,	899.
27 Ibid.,	901.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid.,	904.
30 Ibid.
31 Ibid.
32 Ibid.,	905–6.
33 Ibid.,	905.
34 Ibid.,	905.
35 CW	12.
36 Atom	and	Archetype:	The	Pauli/Jung	Letters,	1932–1958,	ed.	C. A.	Meier,	trans.	D.	Roscoe,	with	a	preface	by	B.	Zabriskie
(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	2001).
37 C. G.	Jung	Letters,	5	December	1959.
38 CW	11: 8 52.
39 Cf.	Jung’s	dream	of	Toni	Wolff	after	her	death:	“On	Easter	Sunday	he	dreamed	that	Toni	visited	him,	garbed	in	a	dress	of	many
brilliant	hues	whose	primary	color	was	royal	blue.	He	remembered	her	carriage	as	regal	and	floating,	majestic	and	like	a	bird,	a
kingfisher	or	a	peacock.”	(D.	Bair,	Jung:	A	Biography	[Boston:	Little,	Brown,	2003],	559.)
40 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	198.
41 Ibid.
42 Æ,	Song	and	its	Fountains.
43 F. E.	Peters,	Greek	Philosophical	Terms:	A	Historical	Lexicon	(New	York	Univ.	Press,	1967),	s.v.	“aisthesis.”
44 Phenomenology	of	Perception,	trans.	C.	Smith	(London:	Routledge,	1998),	214.
45 The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	1978),	165.
46 Letters	of	Wallace	Stevens,	ed.	H.	Stevens	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	1972),	469.

47 J.	Hillman,	Re-Visioning	Psychology	(New	York:	Harper	&	Row,	1975),	xvii.
48 MDR,	175.
49 MDR,	176.
50 Ibid.
51 This	encounter	with	teaching	voices	also	brought	his	mind	to	aesthetics.	He	heard	a	female	voice	declare	that	his	active	imaginations
were	“art.”	As	I	have	written	elsewhere,	“had	Jung	listened	more	receptively	to	that	voice	of	the	soul	…	Jungian	psychology	might	have
taken	a	different	tack:	less	division	between	aesthetics	and	science,	aesthetics	and	nature,	art	and	morality,	less	distrust	of	beauty	and
anima	–	and	more	sense	for	aesthetics.”	(The	Thought	of	the	Heart	and	the	Soul	of	the	World	[Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,
2007],	54,	where	the	“aesthetic”	difficulty	in	Jung	is	discussed	more	fully.)
52 “Debris	of	Life	and	Mind,”	in	The	Collected	Poems	of	Wallace	Stevens,	338.
53 Breuer,	“Case	Histories,”	21.
54 C. G.	Jung,	“Lecture	VIII,	20	June	1941,”	in	Alchemy:	E. T. H.	Lecture	Notes,	ed.	B.	Hannah	(mimeograph,	Zurich,	1960).
55 See	Overcoming	the	Problematics	of	Art:	The	Writings	of	Yves	Klein,	trans.	K.	Ottmann	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring	Publications,	2008).
56 Ibid.,	64.
57 Merleau-Ponty,	Phenomenology	of	Perception,	214.
58 Cited	by	Jung	in	CW	14: 6 41.
59 M.	Eliade,	Yoga:	Immortality	and	Freedom,	trans.	W. R.	Trask	(New	York:	Pantheon,	1958),	242.
60 C.	Rowe,	“Conceptions	of	Color	and	Color	Symbolism	in	the	Ancient	World,”	Eranos	Yearbook	41	(1972),	351.
61 Plato,	Timaeus	55c.
62 CW	13: 2 34.
63 CW	12: 2 87	and	320.
64 See	J.	Hillman,	“Pothos:	The	Nostalgia	of	the	Puer	Eternus,”	in	Senex	&	Puer,	UE	3: 1 82.
65 S.	Marlan,	“The	Metaphor	of	Light	and	its	Deconstruction	in	Jung’s	Alchemical	Vision,”	in	Pathways	into	the	Jungian	World:
Phenomenology	and	Analytical	Psychology,	ed.	R.	Brooke	(London	and	New	York:	Routledge,	2000),	185.
66 Ibid.
67 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	229.
68 Bair,	Jung,	500.
69 Jung	Letters,	18	December	1946.
70 MDR,	275.	Worth	noting: Miles	Davis’s	“Kind	of	Blue”	couldn’t	quite	be	boxed.	“The	truth	is	that	no	two	editions	of	‘Kind	of	Blue’
have	sounded	exactly	the	same	…	undetected	problems	with	the	speed	of	one	of	the	tape	recorders	resulted	in	a	quarter-tone	sharpness
of	pitch	…	the	tonal	ambiguity	…	created	the	seductive	illusion	of	music	that	inhabited	its	own,	dreamlike	space.”	(F.	Davis,	“Blue
Heaven,”	The	New	Yorker	[December	4,	2000],	96.)
71 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	230,	on	Novalis.
72 W.	James,	“Concerning	Fechner,”	in	A	Pluralistic	Universe	(London:	Longmans,	Green,	and	Co.,	1909),151.
73 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	224.

74 “Effects	of	Analogy,”	in	W.	Stevens,	The	Necessary	Angel:	Essays	on	Reality	and	the	Imagination	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,
1951),	117.
75 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	220.
76 CW	8: 1 31–93.
77 James,	“Concerning	Fechner,”	157.
78 Ibid.,	164.
79 Bamford,	An	Endless	Trace,	220.
80 James,	“Concerning	Fechner,”	65.

	

Abbreviations
	
Bonus	=	Bonus	of	Ferrara,	The	New	Pearl	of	Great	Price,	trans.	A. E.	Waite	(London:	J.	Elliot	&
Co.,	1894).
Collectanea	=	Eirenæus	Philalethes	[George	Starkey],	Collectanea	Chemica,	trans.	A. E.	Waite
(London:	J.	Elliot	&	Co.,	1893).
CP	=	Sigmund	Freud,	Collected	Papers.	Authorized	translation	under	the	supervision	of	Joan
Riviere,	5	vols.	(London:	The	Hogarth	Press	and	the	Institute	of	Psycho-Analysis,	1924–50).
CW	=	Collected	Works	of	C. G.	Jung,	trans.	R. F. C.	Hull,	20	vols.	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1953–
79),	cited	by	paragraph	number	unless	indicated	otherwise.
Figulus	=	Benedictus	Figulus,	A	Golden	and	Blessed	Casket	of	Nature’s	Marvels	(London:	J.
Elliot	&	Co.,	1893).
HM	=	The	Hermetic	Museum,	Restored	and	Enlarged,	trans.	A. E.	Waite,	2	vols.	(London:	J.	Elliot
&	Co.,	1893).
Jung	Letters	=	C. G.	Jung	Letters:	Volume	2,	1951–1961,	ed.	G.	Adler,	trans.	J.	Hulen	(Princeton
Univ.	Press,	1976).
KY	=	C. G.	Jung,	The	Psychology	of	Kundalini	Yoga:	Notes	of	the	Seminar	Given	in	1932	by	C. G.
Jung,	ed.	S.	Shamdasani	(Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1996).
Lexicon	=	Martin	Ruland	the	Elder,	A	Lexicon	of	Alchemy,	trans.	A. E.	Waite	(London:	J.	Elliot	&
Co.,	1893).
MDR	=	C. G.	Jung,	Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,	recorded	and	edited	by	Aniela	Jaffé,	trans.	R.
and	C.	Winston	(New	York:	Vintage	Books,	1989).
Minerals	=	Albertus	Magnus,	Book	of	Minerals,	trans.	D.	Wyckoff	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,
1967).
Paracelsus	=	The	Hermetic	and	Alchemic	Writings	of	Paracelsus	the	Great,	trans.	A. E.	Waite,	2
vols.	(London:	J.	Elliot	&	Co.,	1894).
SE	=	The	Standard	Edition	of	the	Complete	Psychological	Works	of	Sigmund	Freud,	ed.	J.
Strachey,	24	vols.	(London:	The	Hogarth	Press	and	the	Institute	of	Psycho-Analysis,	1953–74).
UE	=	The	Uniform	Edition	of	the	Writings	of	James	Hillman,	11	vols.	(Putnam,	Conn.:	Spring
Publications,	2004	–	).
	

Table	of	Contents
Title	Page
Author ’s	Preface
1/	The	Therapeutic	Value	of	Alchemical	Language:	A	Heated	Introduction
2/	Rudiments
3/	The	Suffering	of	Salt
4/	The	Seduction	of	Black
5/	Alchemical	Blue	and	the	Unio	Mentalis
6/	Silver	and	the	White	Earth
7/	The	Yellowing	of	the	Work
8/	Concerning	the	Stone:	Alchemical	Images	of	the	Goal
9/	The	Imagination	of	Air	and	the	Collapse	of	Alchemy
10/	The	Azur	Vault:	Caelum	as	Experience
Abbreviations

