Running head: Integrating Whole Brain

Integrating Whole Brain Teaching Strategies to Create a More Engaged Learning Environment
Teacher as Researcher
Jesame Torres Palasigue

In partial fulfillment of the requirements of EDU 699
Dr. Dalton
Professor Littman
Marygrove College
Detroit, Michigan
December 8, 2009

Integrating Whole Brain

1

Abstract
In today’s post-modern society, it is getting harder and harder to get the students get
engaged in classroom instruction and learning. The purpose of this research project was to seek
ways to create a more engaged learning environment for the students. The teacher-researcher
integrated the most current educational reform “Whole Brain Teaching” method in classroom
instruction and management for one whole week of research. It continued on to the succeeding
weeks up until the present time. There were 26 fifth graders participated in this study. The
research study began on Monday, October 19, 2009 and concluded on Friday, October 23, 2009.
To document evidence of the problem of student disengagement to the lesson, the student
behavior observation tally sheet was used in this research. A week prior to research study, the
teacher researcher conducted a pre-observation by putting tallies whenever one of the nine (9)
listed behaviors was observed. The data were gathered and interpreted and after a week of
experimentation, a post-observation of the behaviors listed on the pre-observation, was
conducted.
I integrated the “Whole Brain Teaching” (formerly “Power Teaching”) approach for one
full week of teaching and managing the classroom to address a need to create a more engaged
learning environment. After one week of studying these students, the behaviors observed (Figure
1) decreased tremendously as they became more engaged in the learning process.

Integrating Whole Brain

2

Introduction
I am Jesame Torres Palasigue, currently a graduate student at Marygrove College (SAGE
– Master of Education in Teaching), finishing up my program leading to a Michigan Provisional
Teacher Certificate in Elementary Education with English Language Arts endorsement. I am
thrilled to be at this point of my teacher preparation program. Prior to my acceptance at
Marygrove College (SAGE) second degree teacher preparation program in 2004, I taught in the
Philippines for 8 years. I got my initial teaching license from the State of Nevada but found
myself moving from Nevada to Michigan. I worked with the Detroit Public Schools in the
capacity of a long-term substitute teacher from 2001 to 2006. After 2006, I was able to teach at
Thomas-Gist Academy, a Charter School in Inkster, Michigan as a Computer Applications
Instructor for Middle School from 2006 to 2008 on a special one year temporary certificate. In
the Fall 2009, I taught at Franklin Road Christian School, a private Christian school in Novi,
Michigan. At this juncture, I am fortunate to be at the last phase of my teacher’s education
program.
It is my distinct privilege to be student teaching at Louis Pasteur Elementary School in
Detroit, Michigan until December 18, 2009. My assignment would be assisting my cooperating
teacher, Ms. Nina Harris in her fifth grade class in teaching core subjects such as English
Language Arts, Reading, Writing, Social Studies, and Mathematics. My students comprised of
26 energetic and hyperactive African-American children.
Pasteur Elementary School is a Prek-6 Comer school with a clear vision and mission. The
school’s vision is to become competitive leader in academic achievement by empowering

Integrating Whole Brain

3

students to become successful participants in the advancing society of today and tomorrow
regardless of status or handicapping situations.
Moreover, Pasteur prides in itself its programs of innovation. Within the educational
community, it had several unique milestone and accomplishments to boast of. The student’s
MEAP scores have risen above the District in Math, Reading, Writing, and Science. Providing
students with research-based instruction along with external resources like the MEAP buy in
programs with the Children’s Museum, Academic games, Curriculum Fair, Omni Arts, ArtCentered Education, and Alumni tutors are instrumental in making these accomplishments
possible.

Integrating Whole Brain

4

Interest Statement
During the first week of school, one thing I noticed as I observed the students’ learning
styles and routines: students were disengaged from the learning process. During the teacher’s
instruction, various patterns of behaviors such as fidgeting, scribbling, doodling, yawning, doing
different things but listening, and saying “boring” were onserved. These behaviors might be
signs of disengagement on students from the lesson.
As a student teacher, I believe I have a challenge right in front of me to address this
concern when I begin to teach the class. Because of this, I began to look for possible strategies
on how to create a more engaged learning environment. The first thing that came into my mind
was to implement different approaches from educational reforms to help teachers in classroom
instruction and management. In September 2009, I became a member of the “Whole Brain
Teaching” movement. I planned to experiment this approach in my student teaching and see for
myself, firsthand the impact of this method to the teacher instruction and classroom
management. I will incorporate, if I may, the strategies I learned from “Whole Brain Teaching”
formerly known as “Power Teaching” workshop I attended in the fall. It is an educational
reform, which is a participatory instruction method, created in 1999 by Crafton Hills College
philosophy teacher Chris Biffle and elementary school teachers Jay Vanderfin and Chris
Rekstad. “Whole Brain Teaching” techniques keep students engaged in learning and makes
classrooms easy to manage because it combines auditory, verbal, and visual elements of teaching
instruction.

Integrating Whole Brain

5

Related Literature
Buzan (1976) believes that whole-brain teaching is an instructional approach derived
from neurolinguistic descriptions of the functions of the brain’s left and right hemispheres.
Neurolinguistic findings about the brain’s language functions show that in the integrated brain,
the functions of one hemisphere are immediately available to the other, producing a more
balanced use of language. Whole-brain teaching emphasizes active process of learning, in which
the learner makes connections that tap both hemispheres.
Schuster and Vincent (1980) add that another aspect of whole-brain teaching is managing
the emotional climate, to reduce the downshifting or primal thinking, which occurs during
distress. To relax learners, instructors may offer clear, realistic predictions of barriers such as,
advancement may be sporadic and progress such as, Sooner or later, this will become easier.
Buzan (1976) states that in whole-brain learning, imaging is seen as the basis for
comprehension. For this reason, learners are encouraged to visualize, draw, and use drama as
they develop new ideas, in order to retain them. A reading teacher, for instance, might present
new vocabulary words by building a story or skit that uses them–but does not define them–in
context. The teacher then might play music while reading the definitions, leaving time for
listeners to draw images of the words. The teacher next might use guided meditation to build a
relaxed state containing memories of success before the listeners hear the definitions again. In
addition, the learners might even act out the words’ meanings or construct stories of their own.
Biffle (1999) believes that the learning methods in this system create strong retention,
and effective long term learning that lasts. The students enjoy it enormously. He added the he
had students from the previous year stopped by his classroom and asked if they could please
come back to his class because it was so much fun.

Integrating Whole Brain

6

Battle, Vanderfin, and Rekstad (1999) strongly believe that at the roots of Whole Brain
Teaching is a large amount of highly structured, educational tomfoolery. Students learn the most
when they are having fun. Whole Brain Teaching classrooms are full of task-focused laughter.
Humor and games are used to increase the number of times students repeat core information and
practice basic skills. Our classes are highly disciplined and tightly organized because students
have more fun following our rules, than ignoring them.

Integrating Whole Brain

7

Research Question
Students who are not engaged in the instruction are more likely to be mediocre
performers in academics. This study will explore to answer the following questions with regard
to the students attitude toward teacher instruction and engagement with the lesson: How does
educational reforms such as, “Whole Brain Teaching” method impacts students’ educational
learning behavior? How this method does foster a more engaged learning experience among the
students?
Research Process and Sources of Data
The instrument used to document the problem evidence included students behavior
observation tally sheet (see Appendix A). I used this tool within a one-week frame beginning
Monday, October 19, 2009 and commencing on Friday, October 23, 2009. The “Whole Brain
Teaching” method in teacher instruction and classroom management was implemented after the
data from the pre-observation (completed on October 2, 2009) were gathered and interpreted.
How does it work? At the beginning of class on October 19, 2009, the students and I recite the
“Whole Brain Teaching” classroom rules. The rules have hand motions and each day we change the style
in which we say them- squeaky voice, deep voice, sad, happy, fast, cowboy, etc. The kids love it! In fact,
if I try to skip over doing the rules, the students remind me. There is also a scoreboard to help with
classroom management. I mark “smiley faces” and “sad faces” on the board as the class earns them.
When the class earns a smile, they get to cheer. When the class earns a sad face, everyone groans. The
points are tallied at the end of each class and a gold star is awarded for more smiles than frowns, a silver
star for an equal number of smiles and frowns, or no star for more frowns than smiles.
The most effective tool I have learned from Whole Brain Teaching is getting the students
attention using the “Class-Yes” (see Appendix B) component. To get it anytime within the instruction

block, I simply say “Class!” and then they reply, “Yes!” Next, is the catch, the hook that makes

Integrating Whole Brain

8

this fun, and gets them invested in it in a way that has them looking at me and grinning rather
than continuing their conversations. When I say, “Class!” and they say “Yes!” They have to say
it the way I said it. If I say “Classity-class-class!” they have to say “Yessity-yes-yes!” If I say it
loudly, they have to respond loudly. If I whisper, they respond in a whisper. They have to match
my tone and intensity.
“Whole Brain Teaching” has five classroom rules (see Appendix C). These are rules that
will make the teacher’s life amazingly easier. One of them is a nuclear power in our hands! If
rules are only posted on the board, they are not really a part of the class. Teachers must have the
rules running around in their students’ heads for them to be effective. The following classroom
rules did wonders in our class: one: Follow directions quickly; two: Raise your hand for
permission to speak; three: Raise your hand for permission to leave your seat; four: Make smart
choices; and, five: Keep your dear teacher happy!
Instructing students in the important background information that I want them to know on
whatever subject I am covering at the moment is a challenge. I choose this time to step out from
behind the worksheets. I want to open my students’ brains and give them a learning experience
that is both effective and fun, for both them and me. Teach-Ok (see Appendix D) is the
component of “Whole Brain Teaching” that accomplishes that. This method allows me to engage
my students’ in learning in all three primary learning modes- visual, auditory and kinesthetic all
at one time!
Teach-OK works like this: Divide class into teams of two. One student is a One, the other
member of the team is designated Two. The end result is for the students to do most of the
teaching. I will give a short set of information, complete with gestures. When I finished I am
going to look at the class and clap three times, say “Teach!” and they will clap three times and

Integrating Whole Brain

9

respond “OK!” They will copy my gestures (important- kinesthetic learning), what I say, in an
excited, tone of voice (auditory), and visual (they see the gestures, and any visual aids I am
using). Give them a few seconds to finish repeating the information, and call them back to
attention with the Class-Yes! Then begin the next set. It is fine for the kids to do this
simultaneously for most of what I am doing. Part of the time I am going to be using the next
feature called “SWITCH!” I will repeat for each section of the information I am giving. I will
keep the sections fairly short. I will follow up the Teach-OK with traditional methods for
authentic connected assessments.
The “SWITCH” component is an extension of the Teach-OK, and can really enrich the students’
learning experience, and enhance my ability to assess where my kids are in whatever lesson I am working
on. The problem here is that, for learning to be really effective for all students, there is a need for

these two types to switch places frequently. I need the talkers to listen and the listeners to talk.
More importantly I need to be able to tell for certain that this is, in fact, happening. I cannot be
sure that both types of students are getting benefit from the lesson unless I know both are
teaching. This is the beauty of the “SWITCH” component. It allows me to monitor engagement
in the lesson by being able to see who is teaching and who is listening. “SWITCH” is best used
with Teach-OK when the point of the lesson I am going over is very important to the students’
understanding of the concepts I am trying to convey.
With students still in their One-Two teams, proceed as normal. I tell my students that the
point they are about to learn is important, so I want them to both make sure that they get the most
out of teaching the point to their partner. I tell them that I am going to give them the Teach
command. “Ones” will stand and teach the “Twos” the lesson with big gestures and excited
voices. “Twos” do not just sit there. They must make encouraging listening gestures that
indicates the “Ones” are brilliant, and that they, the “Two” partner want to hear more! When the

Integrating Whole Brain

10

“Ones” have had a chance to teach a bit I am going to yell “SWITCH” and the students will also
all yell “SWITCH” very loudly, or in the same fashion that I do. Then the Ones will sit and listen
and the “Twos” will teach just as the ones did before. If any balk at the silliness remind them this
way is both more fun, and more effective for them to learn in than any other method they will
ever have seen before. I give the claps, and “Teach” command, the students clap and respond
OK! The “Ones” stand and teach with big gestures and excited voices. The “Twos” listen with
encouraging gestures. I give the “Ones” a few seconds to teach, and then yell SWITCH! Now, as
I circulate around the room, (Power Teachers typically walk around a lot) I can see who is
actively participating and who is not. Remember that I don’t need to scold. As I walk around and
encounter those not working I will stop next to them and just say “Gestures, please!”
“Hands and Eyes” (see Appendix E) component is what I should say when I want the
students to pay special attention to a very important thing I am about to tell them. It
communicates that what I am about to say is very important. I look at the students, clasp your
hands, take a serious tone in your voice and I say “Hands and Eyes!” The class will mirror what I
do, clasping their hands in front of them and making eye contact, and pay close attention to me
and all talking stops, to hear the important announcement. Incidentally, a very handy thing to
develop into a habit during class is telling the class, “mirrors my gestures” or “copy my gestures”
or even “do what I do”. Doing these shows at a glance who is engaged and following along with
me and who is not. This one I will use a lot. I will use it when I want them to listen, but what we
are covering is not a significant enough concept to use Teach-OK!
One of my favorite components of “Whole Brain Teaching” method is “The Crazy
Professor”. The Crazy Professor Reading Game is a new reading system that addresses one of
the most perplexing and important questions in education, “How could we progressively and

Integrating Whole Brain

11

systematically increase students’ reading comprehension?” The Crazy Professor (see Appendix
F) is an elaborate variation on a reading technique known as Buddy Reading. In Buddy Reading,
students divide into pairs and take turns reading sentences. One reads a sentence; the other reads
the next sentence, and so on. The Crazy Professor takes this useful pattern much further, building
deeper and deeper levels of comprehension.

Integrating Whole Brain

12

The Research Process
The tool that I will utilize is the student behavior observation tally sheet. The purpose of
this tally sheet will be to observe the frequency of behaviors related to lack of students’ interest
during the teacher presentation of the lesson within a specified time frame. The pre-observation
was conducted on October 2, 2009 and the post-observation concluded on October 23, 2009. The
observation tally sheet will be used to measure the frequency of the behaviors related to the
student’s disengagement with the lesson (pre-observation) and how the pattern of behaviors
improved after remediation (post-observation).
Findings
Figure 1 demonstrates the frequency of occurrences of various behaviors observed during
teacher presentation prior to practicing “Whole Brain Teaching” method. Overall, head/hand on
the desk (13%, n=88), saying “I’m bored or boring” (11%, n=75), staring (6%, n=42), wasting
time (8%, n=54), busy doing other things (3%, n=20), fidgeting/stretching (5%, n=36),
complaining and whining (7%, n=48), raising hands in the midst of discussion (5%, n=34), and
getting out of seat (6%, n= 41) were the percentage distribution of the behaviors observed.

Figure 1. Student behavior during teacher presentation of the lesson (Pre-Observation)

Integrating Whole Brain

13

When I took over teaching the class, I began implementing the teacher instruction and
classroom management components of the educational reform known as “Whole Brain
Teaching” method. I started incorporating it into the then Open Court Reading program now
Storytown Reading Program, Writing, Social Studies, and Math.

I practice “Whole Brain

Teaching” method every single day on all the four (4) major subjects for the full week of
experimentation.
Results
Based on the data gathered as results of the first behavior observation, I concluded that
students are not engaged in the lesson. As a result of this finding, components of the current
education reform “Whole Brain Teaching” were implemented to create an environment where
students could get more involved and interested in the learning process.
Integrating “Whole Brain Teaching”
I actually began incorporating “Whole Brain Teaching” (one of the fastest growing educational
reform movements in the United States) in classroom instruction as well as classroom management when
I took over the teaching responsibilities of the class on the first week of October, 2009. “Whole Brain
Teaching” is the latest educational reform introduced by Chris Biffle, Jay Danderfin, and Chris Rekstad in
1999 based on three principles: the system should be brain based, fun, and free.The three of them realized
that they all had the common problem of flagging student engagement, and worse, it was becoming
epidemic. Everywhere they looked, everyone they talked to, the story was the same. Something had to be
done. They decided a radical change in approach was warranted. They set out to learn more about how
students should learn as opposed to the traditional ways teachers typically use. Research into whole brain
learning, and applying what they learned was the answer.
Whole Brain Teaching was the result. Whole Brain Teaching is a method that integrates an
effective classroom management system with learning approaches that tap the way your brain learns best.
This approach is amazingly effective and fun for both you the teacher, and the students. I found the

Integrating Whole Brain

14

gestures to be especially helpful in all subjects especially Math. I teach fifth grade, and used it to teach
mean, mode, median along with perimeter, area, and several other rules and formulas that they have to
know. The kids would take their tests or quizzes and I could see them doing the motions and chants
silently to themselves! I also used it for Grammar, helping verbs, linking verbs, prepositions with great
success. The kids loved the class/yes and were very creative in giving me great ideas.
The kids responded well, and it was fun for me also.

Implications
Overall, there was a 50% decrease in student negative behaviors from the pre-observation
to the post-observation. The frequency of the nine (9) listed behaviors during the pre-observation
markedly decreased during the post-observation. Figure 2 shows that head/hand on desk during
pre-observation (n=88) decreased 53% during post-observation (n=41). Saying “I’m bored or
boring” during pre-observation (n=75) decreased 72% during post-observation (n=21). Staring
into space or ceiling during pre-observation (n=42) decreased 64% during post-observation
(n=15). Wasting time during pre-observation (n=54); post-observation (n=35), decreased by
20%. Busy doing other things pre-observation (n=20); post-observation (n=16), decreased by
20%. Fidgeting/stretching during pre-observation (n=36); post-observation (n=30), decreased by
17%. Complaining and whining during pre-observation (n=48); post-observation (n=40),
decreased by 17%. Raising hands in the midst of discussion during pre-observation (n=34); postobservation (n=28), decreased by 18%. Finally, getting out seat frequently during preobservation (n=41); post-observation (n=29), decreased by 29%.

Integrating Whole Brain

15

Figure 2. Comparison of student behavior pre-observation and post-observation
Conclusion
After the analysis of pre-observation and post-observation data from the student behavior
observation tally sheet, I have observed and interpreted tremendous changes. There was an
average of 72% decrease in student behaviors in one week time. Now that the students are used
to the “Whole Brain Teaching” approach, they have become more engaged in every lesson on a
day to day basis. They not only look forward to the next day but also to the accountability that
was given to them through the “Whole Brain Teaching” “Teach-OK” method. As a matter of
fact, other students in the building were asking what we were doing differently from theirs. I
observed a complete turnaround from our students. Now, they tell me that they look forward to
the next day to come to school. They said that they especially excited about the “Teach-Ok”
component of the program.

Integrating Whole Brain

16

Now that the research is concluded, I decided to continue to incorporate “Whole Brain
Teaching” methods on a daily basis to provide them with the opportunity to engage in the
learning process on a fun environment. The 26 fifth grade students were all very excited about
the “Whole Brain Teaching” method especially the “Teach-Ok” component, which gives them
the opportunity to teach their classmates and be accountable to the teaching. Overall, throughout
this action research project, I learned that the students’ lack of interest will trigger
disengagement in the learning process and they showed through different negative behaviors.
When I get my own classroom, I will definitely implement “Whole Brain Teaching” method to
help build a more engaged learning environment.
Personal Reflection
As a teacher researcher I find my role to be a precarious one where I must negotiate my
personal pedagogy with the pedagogy of another teacher and the needs of the students. I am
often conflicted by listening to the often over simplifications given out by those who are in the
profession that suggest how effective particular strategies were. In this action research I find
myself struggling with a very important issue: one of my own philosophies of education. This
experience and even my reflections are molding and leading to my philosophy. I want this to be a
work in progress always, constantly revising and including new viewpoints and experiences into
my own philosophy.
Over the course of the past week of research study, I have learned several things about
myself, the teaching profession, and how I could hope to find multiple ways to foster learning
amongst my students. At first, I had no idea how the kids would respond to me and similarly,
how I would respond to them. The major change that I see in myself now is my increased
confidence and level of sensitivity on the needs of students. Upon observing on my first two few

Integrating Whole Brain

17

weeks, I was constantly taking everything about the student to heart that led me to do this action
research. I would never classify myself as a quitter or someone who gives up and I would never
become easily discouraged. Over the course of those two weeks, I think that I really began to
take my sense of efficacy to the next level thinking more of my students rather than reacting to
obstacles and criticisms. I learned to accept the fact that I am new at the teaching profession and
I am not perfect all of the time. I not only learned to accept, but I embraced the fact that I would
not be able to utilize instruction strategies perfectly without addressing issues and concerns about
students. Coming to this realization has really allowed me to enjoy teaching more, accept the
challenges that are ahead of me, and to relieve myself of self imposed stress.
Plan of Action
As a beginning teacher, it is my desire to implement multiple strategies, approaches, and
methods that would foster a more engaged and connected learning environment. In analyzing any
situation, I feel it’s vital to learn how to put into action effectively data-driven decisions for
teachers. I believe that all students can learn and should be able to be given the opportunity to
work towards reading on grade level. However, I am still learning the strategies and the different
modalities of teaching reading. I feel that I do a great deal of observing, listening, and asking.
I understand, however, that each teacher assembles teaching techniques in a unique
constellation that reflects his or her teaching goals. There are four major factors I believe to
consider to become successful and remain enthusiastic in teaching: strong academic programs
with a supportive, cooperative, and inspiring colleagues; understanding, supportive, and loving
family; environment that is conducive to learning; and, students who are curious with a strong
interest in learning. With this, I take pride to implement what is best for my students, and take

Integrating Whole Brain

18

whatever is out there being utilized by other teachers in the profession to address students’
unique and special needs.

Integrating Whole Brain

19

References
Battle, J. (1999). Five Classroom Rules. Downloaded on October 24, 2009 from
http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/five-classroom-rules.html
Biffle, C., Vanderfin, J., & Rekstad, C. (1999). Whole Brain Teaching Background. Downloaded
on October 24, 2009 from
http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/wholebrainteachingbackground.html
T. Buzan (1976. Use Both Sides of Your Brain. NY: Dutton.

Integrating Whole Brain
Appendix A

Student Observation Tally Sheet
Date ______________________

Behavior

Frequency of Occurrence

Head/hands on desk
Saying, “I’m bored” or “boring”
Staring into space or ceiling
Wasting time
Busy doing other works
Fidgeting/stretching
Complaining and whining
Following words yet no
understanding at all
Not interested/raising hands when not
asked
Getting out of seat frequently
Chart created by: Jesame Torres Palasigue (the teacher researcher)

Total

20

Integrating Whole Brain
Appendix B
Class-Yes: The Attention Getter

From http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/class-yes.html

21

Integrating Whole Brain
Appendix C

Five Classroom Rules (Whole Brain Teaching Method)

From http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/five-classroom-rules.html

Appendix D
Teach-Ok

From http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/teach-ok.html

22

Integrating Whole Brain
Appendix E
Hands & Eyes

From http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/hands&eyes.html

Appendix F
The Crazy Professor

From http://www.wholebrainteaching.com/index.php/First-Steps/downloads.html

23

