                                        Psyche and Matter

                                   by Marie-Louise von Franz

                                         selected passages

       "Matter and Psyche from the Point of View of the Psychology of C.G. Jung" (1974)

"There are probably many different numerical structures that repeatedly make a parallel
appearance in the psychic and physical realms. ... This is ... where further research must be
encouraged. When Jung came to this point, he said the following: 'Now I have the feeling that
I've hit my head against the ceiling. I can't get any farther than this.' This was shortly before his
death. Now, I have not tried to produce any creative new ideas, but rather, in my book Number
and Time I have tried to take this idea that Jung hinted at somewhat further and to show that the
natural numbers in fact do possess in exactly the same way in the world of psychic representations
all the qualities that they possess mathematically and that they have in physics and in the
hereditary code. Thus a real, absolute isomorphism is present. I was able to take this up to the
number four. Then it became too complicated, and at that point I also hit my head on the ceiling."
37

                              "Symbols of the Unus Mundus" (1968)

"When he created the concept of synchronicity, Jung laid a foundation which might lead us to see
the complementary realms of psyche and matter as one reality. ... Synchronistic events ... seem to
point towards a unitary aspect of existence which transcends our conscious grasp and which Jung
has called the unus mundus." 40

The "mandala is the psychological equivalent and synchronicity the parapsychological equivalent
of the unus mundus." 41

"The above-mentioned mandalas [in the writings of Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola,
Giordano Bruno, Ramon Lull] are attempts to combine the psychic equivalent of the unus mundus
(i.e., mandala) with an attempt to tap the 'absolute knowledge' (i.e., synchronicity). Some of them
are triadic, and these seem more explicitly intended to put the inner man in order, whereas others
can be turned, and these have the additional purpose of obtaining ESP knowledge or of producing
magical effects. Some of these cosmic models, such as the calendar of Guillaume de Digulleville,
which describes in Psychology and Religion and Psychology and Alchemy, have a double
structure of two circles. The same holds true for the mysterious modern vision of a world clock
which Jung published in Psychology and Alchemy. Jung suggests that this world clock might
represent the essence of the time-space union or rather its origin ... ." 44

"This complementary double aspect of number (quantity and quality) is in my opinion the thing
which makes is possible for the world of quantity (matter) and of quality (psyche) to interlock
with each other in a periodical manner (world clock!)." 57
                                                 2                               Psyche and Matter



                         "The Psychological Experience of Time" (1978)

Speaking of two dreams of a seven-year old child in which things get run over: "These two
dream-visions mean to give the child a helpful shock, in order to wake her up to our cultural time
world, to which she now has to adapt when going to school. She has to learn that all goes over
rapidly and that she now has to live in time." 128

"Probably most of you have had once or more times that typical agonizing dream of having to
catch a train, coming across one obstacle after another. This generally indicates that we are not in
harmony with time, that we are not 'up to the moment' in one way or another, but that we sleepily
drift along in life not realizing what is meant to be realized at that moment." 128

"In the realm of physics ... acausal orderedness manifests, for instance, in the time rate of
radioactive decay, which is a just-so fact, for which we cannot indicate a cause. In the realm of
the psyche an example of acausal orderedness would be the just-so-ness of individual natural
numbers, 1, 2, 3, etc." 130

"Numbers altogether in China was closely related to time. ... Numbers are not only names for
quantities but also indicate qualitative time phases in the existence of the whole." 132

"To the three great archetypal symbols of time, the river (or snake), the procession (or train), and
the wheel (or clock), we could add one more archetypal image, the God of Death." 136

                   "Psyche and Matter in Alchemy and Modern Science" (1975)

"[S]pirit and matter are two unknown realms of existence which we call inner and reality. We
have to make such a dualistic distinction because there are two archetypes at work—father-spirit
and mother-matter. ... The rationalism of the seventeenth century thus had one advantage after all;
it drove father-spirit and mother-matter so far apart that now we can reunite them in a cleaner
way." 157

The "point, Jung thought, was to investigate synchronicity further, because synchronistic events
are obviously the meeting point. In a synchronistic event something happens materially and
psychically, coincides, and is united by a common meaning." 162

Jung "pointed out that the natural numbers have completely individual mathematical qualities; and
that, he said, must account also for their magical importance. For the first time, he tried to unite
these two streams.

"Jung's idea was that one should study the individuality of these numbers—be interested in what
each has that the others have not, rather than what they have in common. ... Then he said he
                                                 3                               Psyche and Matter

couldn't do it; he felt too old. That was about two years before his death. ... [T]hat's why I have
now written this rather unreadable book, Number and Time, making at least a little attempt. I
have tried the first four integers, as you know; I counted to four and tried to assemble the
qualities of each in psychology, mythology, physics, mathematics; and it is, to me at least, quite
clear that they really have the same function—that if you compare the role of three in
mathematics and physics, there is a similar function in psychological and symbolic manifestation.
Then I discovered, to my amazement, that Chinese mathematics were completely built on this idea
of the quality of numbers." 164

"There were once eleven [Chinese] generals, and they had to vote if they should attack or retreat.
They voted, and eight were for attack and three were for going back. Therefore, they retreated.
The three had won out because three is the number of harmony; three is a better number,
qualitatively, than eight. So the people who hit the three won out." 164

"I have made endless charts, and then I have been discouraged and left it. I have left it a year, and
now my dreams say I should not leave it, that it's still there, that I've only attacked it from the
wrong angle. So now I have tp pick it up again and try from another angle. I don't know, I'm just
groping ... that's all I can say." 165

            "Some Historical Aspects of C.G. Jung's Synchronicity Hypothesis" (n.d.)

"My attempt to penetrate into the fundamental problems of mathematics has until now been nearly
entirely ignored. However, I am convinced that the next steps of creative scientific thinking will
go further in this direction ... " 199

"What creates a great problem for the acceptance of the synchronicity hypothesis is the fact that it
breaks with ago-old habitual patterns of thought. It is true that the omnipotence of causality has
been breached in such a way as to cast doubt on the simple-minded clockwork fantasy of a
deterministic universe, but in addition the hidden omnipotence of the surviving magical thought
mode is also being done away with. This amounts to a checkmate for the power drive of the
scientific intellect. What the new hypothesis of Jung has to recommend it, is the fact that it
introduces a creative element and a factor of meaning into the hard sciences of nature. But with
this, the feelings and ethical values of the observer must be taken into account by scientific
inquiry. This aspect is something that, much to our detriment, has until now been excluded by
science." 199

                        "The Synchronicity Principle of C.G. Jung" (1979)

"The numbers are probably the most primordial archetypes that there are; they represent the
actual matrix of the archetypes.1 ... Number, as it were, lies behind the psychic realm as a dynamic


       1
        "The fact is that the numbers pre-existing in nature are presumably the most fundamental
archetypes, being the very matrix of all others. Here Pythagoras was certainly on the right track
                                                  4                             Psyche and Matter

ordering principle, the primal element of that which Jung called spirit. As an archetype, number
becomes not only a psychic factor, but more generally, a world-structuring factor. In other
words, numbers point to a background of reality in which psyche and matter are no longer
distinguishable. ... [O]ne and the same ordering principle underlies both living matter and the
human psyche ... " 216

"According to Jung, the mandala is the psychic equivalent and synchronistic phenomena are the
parapsychological equivalent of the unus mundus. 218

"The coincidences between dreams and real situations seem to belong to the operative type
'attraction of related phenomena.'" 221

                              "Some Reflections on Synchronicity" (1984)

Jung uses the term psychoid "to characterize the fact that the archetypes of the objective psyche
sometimes seem to cross over into the realm of matter." 251

                                      "Meaning and Order" (1981)

"In his book on synchronicity, C.G. Jung introduces two new concepts into depth psychology
concerning the world of so-called chance. One is the concept of 'acausal orderedness' and the
other that of 'synchronistic events.' The former means a regular omnipresent just-so-ness, such as,
for instance, the specific speed of light, the quantization of energy, the time-rate of radioactive
decay, or any other constant in nature. Because we cannot indicate a cause (for these
regularities); we generally express this just-so-ness by a number ... " 267

Numbers are, "in Jung's view, ... archetypal symbols. They are also individuals and have an aspect
of just-so-ness ... " 269

"We could say that mathematics deals with the 'acausal orderedness' in our own mind, which is
based on number; and physics, among other themes, deals with the 'acausal orderedness' in nature,
such as the speed of light and the rate of radioactive decay, which could also be designated by
number." 270

Concerning synchronicity: "[T]here also exists a 'danger that meaning will be read into things
where actually there is nothing of the sort,'2 or that one misinterprets the meaning." 272



and we modern men have forgotten this aspect of the pre-existing numbers because we were only
busy manipulating numbers for the sake of calculating. But Number is a factor pre-existent to
man, with unforseen qualities yet to be discovered by him." C.G. Jung, Letters, II, 327.
       2
           C.G. Jung, Letters, II, 495.
                                                 5                               Psyche and Matter

"Physics and psychology indicate that ... numbers ... appear as qualities of matter—just as they
appear as a quality of psychic contents. The only difference, it seems to me, would lie in an
interpretation of this quality only in terms of order or also, as we do in psychology, in terms of
meaning. Up until now most physicists certainly do not associate consciously any meaning with
order." 285

The "meaningful but rather vague language of myth is in his [Jung's] view more appropriate for
the description of psychological facts. Only so can it include the vagueness of meaning and the
feeling function. This, I think, will always keep psychology separate from physics. If we try, all
the same, to meet, it is for the reason that in its fringes, where psychology reaches over to the
other fields of science, there should exist—if possible—no fundamental contradictions. A
psychology which does not keep pace with the findings of other sciences seems to me no good. I
think that Jungian psychology meets nuclear physics on a fringe via the concept of order,
especially close in the view that number is an archetype as well as a property of material
phenomena, be it quantum numbers or patterns of particle interactions. Dr. Capra writes: 'When
the particles are arranged according to their values of their quantum numbers they are seen to fall
into very neat patterns ... .' 3 Very similar patterns appear in the archetypal structures produced
by the unconscious psyche, but in contrast to the aspect of order alone we have in psychology
also to search for their 'meaning.' Number, it seems to me, unites both: order and meaning, and is
therefore ... a possible meeting point for the two fields of science." 288-9




       3
        Fritjof Capra, "Quark Physics without Quarks: A Review of Recent Developments in S-
Matrix Theory." (Reprint) Submitted to The American Journal pf Physics, p. 7.
