Norse Mythology
Definition

by Emma Groeneveld
published on 02 November 2017




Norse mythology refers to the Scandinavian mythological framework that was upheld during the
Viking Age. Complete with a creation myth that has the first gods slaying a giant and turning his
body parts into the world, various realms spread out beneath the World Tree Yggdrasil, and the
eventual destruction of the known world in the Ragnarök, the Nordic mythological world is both
complex and comprehensive. Its polytheistic pantheon, headed by the one-eyed Odin, contains a
great number of different gods and goddesses who were venerated in customs integrated into the
ancient Scandinavians’ daily lives.

Main sources
Peeling back the layers of history in order to form a properly detailed and accurate picture of the
myths, beliefs, and customs as they actually were in the Viking Age is no mean feat, especially
for an overwhelmingly oral society, as Scandinavia mostly was at the time. As such, we only
have the "tips of the narrative icebergs" (Schjødt, 219) when it comes to the Norse gods.

On the one hand, we do have some genuine pre-Christian sources that preserve elements of
Scandinavian mythology; most importantly Eddic poetry (poetry from the Poetic Edda compiled
in c. 1270 CE, but probably dating back to the pre-Christian era before the 10th century)
and skaldic poetry (Viking Age, pre-Christian poetry mainly heard at courts by kings and their
retinues), preserved in later Icelandic manuscripts. The Codex Regius found in the Poetic Edda
contains an anonymous collection of older Eddic poems, including ten about gods and nineteen
about heroes, and although some of these tell complete myths, most of them assume –
unfortunately for us – that their audience was familiar with the mythical context. The same goes
for skaldic poetry; with knowledge of the myths taken for granted, for us, using these sources to
create a full picture of Norse mythology is a bit like filling in a rather difficult Sudoku puzzle.

The integrated nature of Norse mythology in the Vikings’ daily lives is betrayed by the
word síður, meaning ‘custom’ – their closest concept to religion.

On the other hand, later medieval sources, such as Snorri Sturluson’s Prose Edda (c. 1220 CE)
and Saxo Grammaticus’ Gesta Danorum composed a few decades earlier, reworked the
changeable, enigmatic, but slightly tangled early Viking sources into much more structured
accounts. Snorri’s work is the main reason we have an inkling of Norse mythology and myths as
a whole, but should also be read critically, as he wrote from a Christian context. However, the
older Eddic and skaldic poems clearly do more justice to the dynamic and integrated role
mythology actually played in Viking Age societies.

Norse mythology in Viking society

The integrated nature of the Norse mythological framework in daily life is betrayed by the word
síður, meaning ‘custom’ – the closest concept the Old Norse language had to religion. Of course,
what it was exactly the Vikings believed with regard to all these different Norse gods and the
world they lived in is hard to pin down. However, archaeological evidence helps hint at personal
devotion to specific gods people felt connected to, with accompanying customs and rituals being
a standard part of everyday life.

In a broader sense, gods were also venerated and called upon by the whole community. There
was even a great temple at Uppsala in Sweden, known as Old Uppsala, which housed images of
Thor, Odin, and Freyr, who were sacrificed to in times of famine or disease, war, or when
weddings popped up, respectively. Every nine years people got together there to let their long
Viking tresses down during a great festival.

There were, thus, various aspects to Norse mythology’s place in Viking societies. As Anne-Sofie
Gräslund words it, "Old Norse religion should not be regarded as a static phenomenon but as a
dynamic religion that changed gradually over time and doubtless had many local variations"
(56). Ancient Scandinavia was a world in which belief in divine powers abounded, and all of
these had their own attributes and functions.




Viking Rune Stone (Sanda, Sweden)


The Norse worldview only gradually changed with the emerging influence of Christianity, which
becomes apparent by the second half of the 11th century CE. Even then, because Vikings were
polytheistic, they simply added Christ to their already rather lengthy list of gods, and different
customs and beliefs were used side by side for a good while.

Mythological worldview

The Norse worldview as we can best distill from the various sources boils down to the following
general idea. There were four phases: the process in which the world - and everything in it - was
created; a dynamic phase in which time is started; the destruction of the world in the Ragnarök;
and the arising of a new world from the sea.

Odin, Vili, and Vé kill Ymir & create the earth from his flesh, the sky from his skull, mountains
from his bones & the sea from his blood.

According to Snorri, before anything else existed there were the opposing realms of icy Niflheim
and fiery Muspelheim (which other sources simply call Muspell). Although seemingly safely
separated by the empty void Ginnungagap, the cold and heat expanded to meet after all, resulting
in Muspelheim’s fire melting the ice, from which two assumingly dripping wet figures emerged:
the (proto-)giant Ymir and the cow Audhumla. By licking the ice Audhumla uncovered Búri,
forefather of the gods, whose son Borr teamed up with giant-daughter Bestla to sire the first
gods, Odin, Vili, and Vé. These three then took advantage of Ymir’s convenient size by killing
him and using his remains to create the world; the earth from his flesh, the sky from his skull,
mountains from his bones and the sea from his blood. The first human couple, Ask and Embla,
were fashioned out of two trees or pieces of wood.

With humans popping up, a new phase begins; time has started, and all the gods and other
creatures and their respective realms are off doing their own thing up until the Ragnarök. The
World Tree Yggdrasil, the axis of time and space, stands in the gods’ home realm of Asgard
while its roots encompass all the other realms, including Midgard, where the humans reside, and
the giants’ abode Jotunheim. A dragon of death called Nidhogg chomps on said roots, all while
the three fates (known as Norns) spin the fates of human lives at the tree’s base. As the Prose
Edda tells it:

Ash Yggdrasill | suffers anguish,

More than men know of:

The stag bites above; | on the side it rotteth,

And Nídhöggr gnaws from below.

(Gylfaginning 16).

As if a giant tree were not enough, the surrounding sea is inhabited by the Midgard Serpent (also
known as Jörmungandr), a monster who twists and coils itself around the world.

Eventually, these fairly peachy worldly conditions snowball into chaos and culminate in the
Ragnarök, the ‘final destiny of the gods’, for which our main source is the 10th-century
CE Völuspá saga. It starts with a terrible winter. The earth sinks into the sea, the wolf Fenrir
(often referred to as the Fenris-wolf) breaks loose and devours the sun, and, as the icing on the
already crumbling cake, mighty Yggdrasil shakes and the bridge Bifröst – the express-way
between Asgard and Midgard – collapses. Understandably rattled, the gods hold an emergency
council to prepare for battle against the powers of the Underworld, who are closing in. The Prose
Edda heralds that:

Brothers shall strive | and slaughter each other;

Own sisters' children | shall sin together;

Ill days among men, | many a whoredom:

An axe-age, a sword-age, | shields shall be cloven;

A wind-age, a wolf-age, | ere the world totters.
(Gylfaginning 51).

Odin fights Fenrir but falls, after which the god Vidarr avenges him, while Thor destroys the
Midgard Serpent but succumbs to its poison. The gods and their foes die left, right, and centre,
until the giant Surtr goes pyromaniac and kindles the world-fire that destroys everything.

Luckily, phoenix-style, the destruction is not the end. Following a cyclical concept of the world,
a new world rises – not from the ashes, but from the sea. Only a handful of gods are still
standing, but the new world will have a new generation of gods as well as humankind, to live
happily ever after.




RagnarÃ¶k



Æsir & Vanir

The gods themselves are boxed into two families. Firstly, there is the bigger Æsir family mostly
connected with war and government, which was in practice also used as an umbrella term for the
main gods in general. It includes notables such as Odin, Thor, Loki, Baldr, Hodr, Heimdall, and
Týr.

Secondly, the smaller Vanir family contains fertility gods such as Njord, Freyr, and Freyja.
Despite them all living in Asgard, they do not always see eye-to-eye - which, admittedly, is
difficult considering Odin only has one eye, to begin with. In fact, they clash to the point of war
(the ‘Vanir wars’; or ‘Æsir-Vanir Wars’) but exchange hostages after making peace and fuse
their families through marriage.

The contrast between the Æsir and the Vanir has been argued to stem from oppositions in Viking
society, as the Vanir, with their focus on fertility, good harvests, and the climate, were popular in
farming communities, while the Æsir were seen to advise kings, lords, and their warriors in
matters of war and governance. As such, the peace made at the end of the Vanir wars might
reflect the idea that society could only function through the combined powers of both social
classes.

Finally, besides these two divine classes, there were also female deities known as Dísir, popular
in private worship, Álfar (elves), Jǫtnar (giants), and Dvergar (dwarfs); enough to keep everyone
busy, for sure. Norse mythology offers a very rich world to get lost in.




Ravens in Celtic and Norse Mythology



Submitted by Alastair Kneale on June 17, 2017 - 6:19pm
Animals and birds are a significant feature in Celtic and Norse mythology. We know that the
Celts had and continue to hold a great respect for the environment. Nature, the elements and the
other creatures which shared their land held a sacred significance. Animals and birds were vital
to everyday life and wellbeing and they feature in art, literature, rituals and religious beliefs. We
recently wrote about the horses in Celtic mythology.

In the Celtic world there have been many Scandinavian and Viking influences over the centuries
that remain evident today. The Viking incursions in the Celtic lands began in the 8th century. All
of the present six Celtic nations felt the impact of the Viking raids. They brought with them their
legends and sagas the legacies of which are found in literature, folklore and carvings in many
parts of the Celtic lands. As with the Celts animals and birds affected the everyday life of the
Norse people and held a crucial place in their belief systems. In this article we take a particular
look at the place of ravens, crows and their relatives in Celtic and Norse mythology.

Ravens and Crows

The scientific name for ravens, crows and their relatives is Corvidae. There are over 120 species
and they include ravens, crows, rooks, choughs, jackdaws, and magpies. In Celtic mythology the
Raven features in many legends. This large bird feeding as it does on carrion with its black
plumage and disturbing deep hoarse croak is often viewed with some foreboding for it can be
seen as an omen of death. It can also be associated as a source of power, straddling as it does the
worlds of the living and the dead therefore often depicted as messenger between the two. Ravens
hovering over the scenes of battle, ready to swoop down on the bodies of the fallen must have
been a fearsome sight to Celtic warriors. Little wonder then that they could be seen as having the
power of gods.




In Irish mythology the war goddess Badb features in the story of Táin Bó Cúailnge which is the
central tale in The Ulster Cycle. Taking on the form of a crow or raven she causes terror amongst
the forces of Queen Medb of Connuaght in the battles fought with Ulster and the legendary hero
Cú Chulainn. It is also said that the Morrigan, in the form of a raven, perched on Cú Chulainn’s
shoulder at the time of his death.

In Welsh mythology the figure of Bendigeidfran appears in the Welsh Triads (Welsh: Trioedd
Ynys Prydein) a set of medieval manuscripts that contain Welsh folklore. Bendigeidfran or Brân
Fendigaidd (his name can be translated as Blessed Raven) also features in the second branch of
the Mabinogi. Ravens also appear in the Dream of Rhonabwy (Welsh: Breuddwyd Rhonabwy)
and recounted in Red Book of Hergest (Welsh: Llyfr Coch Hergest) written in the fourteenth
century. The story is set at the time of Madog ap Maredudd a prince of Powys who died in 1160.
It tells the story of the dream of his retainer Rhoanbwy where he visits the days of King Arthur.
He dreams of a figure in Arthurian legend Owain mab Urien and sees the time when Owain and
Arthur were playing chess. At the same time some of Arthur’ attendants were tormenting
Owain’s ravens. Arthur ignores Owain’s request that this be stopped. In revenge Owain’s ravens
kill many of Arthur’s attendants before peace is restored.




It is said in Cornish folklore that King Arthur did not die but his spirit entered into that of a red
billed Chough, a member of the crow family. The red feet and beak of the bird are said to
represent the violence of his last battle. The red billed Chough has particular cultural connections
to Cornwall and it appears on the Cornish coat of arms. It is deemed very unlucky to kill this
bird. Although there had been a marked decline in the Cornish Chough over the years an ongoing
conservation effort continues to be under way to support and promote suitable habitats that will
see more breeding pairs.
In Norse mythology the raven holds a special place. The god of the Æsir pantheon Odin is
sometimes referred to as the Raven God. This is due to his association with the ravens Huginn
and Muninn as referred to in the Poetic Edda, a collection of old Norse poems compiled in the
13th century from earlier sources. These two birds fly around the world gathering information
and relay it all to Odin. Odin is also said to have two wolves, Geri and Freki who sit at his feet
whilst Huginn and Muninn perch on his shoulders. On the Isle of Man (Mannin) there are a large
number of carved Celtic stone crosses; many carry Celtic designs and inscriptions using an early
Celtic script called Ogham. There are also a number of Norse crosses with images of Norse
pagan mythology and runic inscriptions. One of these is Thorwalds Cross, dating to the 10th
century, which depicts Odin with a raven at his shoulder. It also shows the wolf Fenrir biting
Odin in the events of Ragnarök which fortells the death of Odin and other major Norse gods.
Ravens also feature in the stories of the Valkyrie in Norse mythology. They are female figures
that choose who will live and die in battle. Of these they select some who will go to Valhalla
(hall of the slain), located in Asgard home of the Æsir gods. Here they would prepare to aid Odin
in the forthcoming battles of Ragnarök where the old world would die and new world would
begin. In the 9th century poem Hrafnsmál a meeting is described between one of the Valkyrie
and a raven where they discuss the life and exploits of Harald Fairhair (Old Norse: Haraldr
hárfagri) first king of Norway.

The importance of the raven to Vikings is shown by how often the bird’s image is used. It
features on armour, helmets, shields, banners and carvings on longships. No doubt the intent was
to invoke the power of Odin and this would not have been lost on the enemies that they were
about to engage in battle. Many of the Norse-Gael leaders continued to use the image as did the
Norse Jarls of Orkney. Even today the yearly Viking festival of Up-Helley-Aa in the Shetland
Islands of Scotland uses the image of a raven.

Protection and Conservation




These are just some of the legends in Celtic and Norse mythology that put the raven at centre
stage. However, many other birds feature in the folklore of the Celts and Norse. Their
importance is just as great now, but not only in mythology and legend. The flora and fauna
within all of the lands of the Celtic nations is something to be celebrated and cherished. Our
environment is an important part of us as a people and needs to be protected as equally as our
language and culture. Our landscape, geographic location and wildlife has played a pivotal role
in our history, beliefs and recognition of ourselves. For our culture tells us that we are part of and
completely tied to the lands in which we live or from whence we came.
There is a pressing need to protect birds and wildlife throughout the Celtic lands and beyond.
Wherever you are in the world remember the importance of nature and the environment. Now
more than ever birds and all wildlife need our help. So, if you can, seek out those organisations
that are involved in conservation and find out the schemes that they are undertaking to protect
nature.




10 Disturbing Episodes from Norse
Mythology
BY Brian Gottesman

October 11, 2010




Most people have some passing familiarity with Norse mythology and legend. Even the days of
our modern week are named after its gods and goddesses. But there is a dark side to the Nordic
mythos that few people are aware of. Some of the episodes described below reveal
uncomfortable truths about the cosmos. Some exhibit the jaundiced eye with which the Norse
viewed life and death. And some are just gross.

1. A world made by murder

The Norse believed that the universe emerged from an empty, yawning gulf separating worlds
made of ice and fire, respectively, inhabited only by a mysterious, hermaphroditic being named
Ymir, who became the mother and father of the race of the jotuns, chaotic nature spirits that
would later be the enemies of the Norse gods. Eventually, another being, Buri, came into
existence, and his grandchildren, Vili, Ve and Odin, decided to create the world and fill it with
life. But unlike the Judeo-Christian conception of God, the Norse deities could not create
substance out of nothing, so Odin and his brothers did the only sensible thing – they
murdered Ymir and made the world out of his body and the sky out of his skull. Ymir’s
blood became the sea, his bones and teeth became rocks and mountains, and his brains the

The act of sacrifice gave great power to the three brothers, and they proceeded to give life and
intelligence to human beings. The outlook of the Norsemen, who often saw the world as a cruel
and unforgiving place, was surely influenced by the fact that they lived in a universe made
possible only by death.
2. Odin’s loses an eye (and gains a little too much knowledge)

Popular literature makes Odin the most important of the Norse gods, but in reality he was an
unpopular deity and his cult was never widespread beyond poets, shamans and kings. Odin
practiced seidr, a form of magic considered unmanly, and was the god of frenzy, betrayal and
death (in addition to inspiration and wisdom). A particular obsession of his was the hoarding of
knowledge, and he sent his servants, ravens nicknamed Thought and Memory, out into the world
to bring him news. Norse myths tell of Odin’s quest for the secrets of the universe. Wisdom
came with a price: to gain insight into the future, Odin sacrificed an eye to drink from a magical
well, but in the process learned of his own inescapable fate.

But worse was yet to come. To gain the knowledge of the runes, a magical writing system
that could give great power to the user, Odin had to stab himself with a spear and hang
himself from a tree for nine days and nights. In memory of this act, sacrifices to Odin were
killed in similar fashion – including a few kings whose subjects grew tired of their failures.

3. Loki’s cross-dressing gets carried a bit too far

Loki was Odin’s blood-brother and something of an alter-ego. A trickster whose games often
crossed the line into the malicious, Loki convinced the gods to make a wager with a giant who
promised to build them a fortress in a short span of time. If successful, the giant wanted the hand
of the goddess Freyja in marriage. When it seemed that the building would actually be finished
on schedule, the gods threatened Loki with death. The wily deity turned himself into a mare and
seduced Svaðilfari, the giant’s horse, making completion of the fortress impossible. You can
probably guess what happened next – Loki became the proud “mother” of an eight-legged
stallion, Sleipnir, who became Odin’s ride.

Loki’s malicious ways eventually caught up with him when he became responsible for the death
of Odin’s son Baldur and composed scandalous verses about his fellow-gods. The gods, tired of
putting up with him, bound him in chains made from his own son’s entrails and imprisoned him
under the earth to wait until the end of days.

4. The wild adventures of Hadding

The writer and scholar Poul Anderson called the story of Hadding “dark and violent even by saga
standards.” Hadding, a mythological king of Denmark, was sent as a child to be fostered by a
family of jotuns (Ymir’s children, see #1 above). When he grew to manhood, he became the
lover of his own wet-nurse, only to watch her torn to pieces by alien, chaotic powers beyond his
understanding.

Guided by Odin in disguise, he won back his father’s kingdom and enjoyed great success in wars
against neighboring kings. But what goes up, must come down, and Hadding, facing old age and
the death of friends, ended his life hanging himself in a grove of sacred trees as a sacrifice to his
patron, Odin.
5. It’s not always good to be the king

Domaldi, a legendary Swedish king, did not have a happy life. He became king when his two
older half-brothers murdered their father Visbur, and his stepmother cursed Domaldi with a life
of bad luck. This was one curse not made in vain; Domaldi’s reign was marked by famine and
plague. The first year of starvation, the Swedish chieftains sacrificed oxen, and when the harvest
was still terrible, they offered up human beings the following year. Because the luck of the land
was believed to be tied to the luck of the king, on the third year the chieftains reluctantly decided
they had to sacrifice Domaldi (who was generally liked and well-regarded). Superstition?
Maybe, but one saga relates that Sweden’s luck changed once the altar was splashed with
Domaldi’s blood, and the next year’s harvests were excellent.

6. Beowulf teaches Grendel’s mother that “no means no”

OK, it’s technically Anglo-Saxon, not Norse, but Beowulf comes out of the same body of
tradition as the Norse myths and takes place in Scandinavia. In one scene, the hero is locked in
mortal combat with Grendel’s mother. During their struggle, Grendel’s mother (who has been
interpreted by different scholars as a demon, a troll, a valkyrie, or some sort of fertility goddess)
pins and straddles the warrior. Some scholars interpret this scene as a depiction of an ancient
sacrificial rite, where a priestess mated with, and then killed, a victim to ensure a bountiful
harvest. But Beowulf was having none of it, and managed to slaughter his opponent and go on to
many more adventures over the course of the 3,182-line poem.

7. Signy becomes her own sister-in-law

Völsunga saga is one of the best known of the Old Norse legendary sagas. Together with the
Nieblunglied, with which it shares common source materials, it has become the inspiration for
such diverse works as Richard Wagner’s Ring Cycle and J.R.R. Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings
(Tolkien also wrote an epic poem based on the saga, published posthumously as The Legend of
Sigurd and Gudrun).

The opening chapters of the saga contain some bits usually left out of polite discussion of the
work. A princess named Signy marries Siggeir, the king of the Geats (Beowulf’s people), who
then treacherously murders Signy’s whole clan with the exception of her brother Sigmund, who
is imprisoned. Sigmund manages to escape, but he and his sister are both obsessed with revenge.
Signy sends her two sons by Siggeir to Sigmund who, with her approval, murders them both.
The siblings then sleep together, and Signy gives birth to a son, Sinfjötli, who goes on to help his
father/uncle burn Siggeir in his palace and avenge the family. But vengeance was bitter-sweet;
Signy, having accomplished her revenge, preferred to die with her hated husband than escape
with her son/nephew and brother/baby-daddy.

8. Starkad’s betrayal

Starkad is the hero of a number of legendary sagas. Descended from giants and a favored
worshipper of Odin, Starkad was blessed with the lifespan of three ordinary men. But the
blessing bore its own curse, which was that Starkad was destined to commit three heinous acts.
In the most famous of these, Starkad’s friend King Vikar of Agder (in southern Norway) was
marooned with his fleet because they could not get a favorable wind. Vikar’s men decided that a
human sacrifice was required, and when they cast lots to see who would be chosen, it was Vikar
himself who got the “honor.” Starkad convinced the king to participate in a mock sacrifice,
where he would be “hanged” with a loose noose and “stabbed” with a reed. It was an Odin-
inspired trick, however – the noose became tight and strong, the reed was magically transformed
into a spear, and Vikar, predictably, died at the hands of his best friend.

9. They don’t call him “Bad-Ruler” for nothing

Ingjald was a legendary king of the Swedes. As a small, mild-mannered child, he had been given
a wolf’s heart to eat to toughen him up. His people learned the hard way that trying to change a
person can have unintended consequences, and Ingjald became cruel and ruthless from that day
forward. Wanting no competition, he built a grand feasting hall and invited seven client-
kings over for dinner. When they showed up he locked them in and burned the hall, along
with everyone inside, to the ground. Ingjald and his men waited outside to cut down anyone
who tried to escape. For this episode he became known as “Illrádi,” or “Bad-Ruler.” Ingjald’s
daughter Aasa was no better. When Ingjald married her off to Gudrod, a neighboring king, she
convinced her new husband to kill his own brother, then arranged for Gudrod’s own death before
returning to her father’s house.

Years later the evil pair got their comeuppance, though. Ivar, Gudrod’s nephew, raised a
rebellion against Ingjald and marched on his hall. Aasa and Ingjald, realizing that all was lost
chose an appropriate exit – they set fire to their own hall and died in the flames.

10. What began in murder ends in fire

It was perhaps the most feared word in the Norse lexicon. Ragnarök, or the Doom of the Gods,
was a fate set in stone, and even the mighty and wise Odin could not escape it. The Norse
believed that there would be an “an ax age, a sword age … a wind age, a wolf age, before the
world falls.” Three years of chaos, famine and plague on earth would be followed by a mighty
war in the heavens, when the gods of the Norse pantheon would finally have to face the armies
of chaos – including jotuns, giant wolves, a world-spanning serpent, and a liberated and revenge-
hungry Loki – in battle. Most of the important Norse gods, including Odin, Thor, Frey and Tyr,
would fall, and the fire-giant Surt would burn the entire world to ashes, killing virtually
everything that lives.

Lest you be left with the impression that the Norse were complete sadsacks, one work, the
Völuspá, contains a faint glimmer of hope. In its final lines the poem describes how a new world
would arise from the ashes of the old, the surviving gods and men would rebuild their homes and
re-discover lost knowledge, and a mysterious “mighty lord” would arrive to “order rules, fix
rights, and ordain laws that shall live forever.”

Brian Gottesman is a lawyer in Wilmington, DE. He is the creator of Saga, an upcoming comic
book series set in Viking-Age Norway, Scotland and Iceland published by Archaia Comics.
ORSE MYTHOLOGY
by Neil Gaiman

Fire and ice to begin, fire and ice to end. And it’s not going to end well, friends: first come the
giants, then the all-ravening wolf, and then….

The ancient Norse had a cheerless view of the world: the gods are jealous, the elements fierce,
the enemies—trolls and giants among them—many, and if you’re lucky you’ll be killed in battle
and gathered up to Valhalla, “and there you will drink and fight and feast and battle, with Odin
as your leader.” So writes Gaiman (The View from the Cheap Seats, 2016, etc.), famed for his
intelligent fantasy novels but long under the spell of that great body of myth. As an English
schoolboy, he reveled in Roger Lancelyn Green’s Myths of the Norsemen, a somewhat stodgy
but valuable collection (as he notes, as a creature of his time, he was introduced to the Norse by
way of the Mighty Thor comic books); now, as an adult, he gets to retell the tales, drawing from
Snorri Sturluson’s Prose Edda, sagas in verse, and other sources. As he notes, rightly, that body
of work is incomplete and perhaps corrupted by later Christian intrusions, so that it has to be
viewed with some degree of suspicion; by the same token, he writes, so many of the goddesses in
particular have been “lost, or buried, or forgotten,” overshadowed by the better-known likes of
Thor, Odin, and Loki and all their busy kinfolk. Gaiman writes assuredly and evocatively and
with a precise eye for the atmospheric detail: “Niflheim was colder than cold, and the murky
mist that cloaked everything hung heavily,” he intones, catching the ancient alliteration. There’s
plenty of mayhem and gore, and once the gods have had their fun, everything comes “crashing
down and crumbling into ash and devastation.” But before that happens and Ragnarok descends,
we have this lively book to cheer us along.

Superb. Just the thing for the literate fantasy lover and the student of comparative religion and
mythology alike.




Norse Mythology and J.R.R. Tolkien in Israel's Ynet

It’s been a busy month for interviews! In addition to speaking with The Atlantic about Ásatrú theology
and The Boston Globe about Norse mythology and Ásatrú religion, I was interviewed by Amir Bogen of
Israel’s Ynet for his article about Norse mythology in today’s popular culture.

As is usually the case when a journalist interviews someone for background information, Mr. Bogen only
used a small portion of my answers in his published piece. For those interested in these subjects, I’m
posting his questions here (in large bold type) with my full answers.

You can read the article (in Hebrew) on the Ynet website by clicking here.
Lately, Norse mythology became very popular in [the work of]
American pop culture artists and filmmakers. What makes it
so appealing to comics and super-hero and geek audiences?
I’m not so sure that Norse mythology itself has become any more appealing to that particular audience.
Are comic book fans suddenly reading translations of the Old Icelandic Eddas in massive numbers?

We have yet to see a single major Hollywood feature directly based on the Norse myths. The Marvel
Thor movies are based on the comic book mythology created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby in the 1960s
and subsequently expanded by Walter Simonson and many others.

The Marvel mythos directly contradicts Norse mythology in several significant ways, not least in that
they substitute a Christian storyline that recasts Odin as Yahweh and Thor as Christ, as seen in the first
film. There is no sense in the original mythology that Thor must prove himself worthy to his father by
being willing to sacrifice himself for the good of humanity. I don’t see much in the movies that reflects
ancient pagan worldviews.

The excitement over Neil Gaiman’s retelling of the Eddas has much more to do with the dedicated
fanbase for his original fiction than it does with interest in the source material. Ditto for the recent
Norse series by Rick Riordan. I think the vast majority of those who faithfully follow these authors would
just as readily read their fantasy novels if they were based on Sumerian or Egyptian mythology.

I would love to see a big-budget Hollywood film based on the myths that were preserved in medieval
Iceland. The stories that survive are full of high drama and epic excitement alongside fascinating
characters and powerful emotions. What’s not to love?


Why is Norse mythology more attractive to the younger
audience than the classic Greek mythology, which was so well
known in the past and seems to be almost non-existent
anymore in pop culture, especially in America?
I’m also not so sure that Greek mythology has disappeared from pop culture. The Rick Riordan books
and movies incorporating Greek myth seemed to do pretty well. The kids I know who read Riordan's
Norse series did so because they loved his Greek series so much. I’d be interested to know how many
pre-teens in the United States can name Norse gods beside Thor and Odin compared to how many know
Greek gods other than Zeus and Ares.
I think kids are interested in many mythologies. When I was little, my parents told me that I could
practice any or no religion as an adult, but that I needed to know the mythologies that shaped our
culture: Greek, Jewish, and Christian. Back then, I was just as fascinated with the modern mythologies of
DC, Marvel, Doctor Who, Star Trek, and so on. If young people aren’t forced to believe that one set of
mythology is true and the rest are wicked, they’ll enjoy a much more diverse set of stories.


What misconception do we have about Norse mythology as it
is presented in comics and films?
There are a lot of basic concepts in the Marvel version that don’t reflect the mythology. Thor’s power
coming from his weapon, Thor having to prove he’s worthy, Loki being Thor’s adopted brother, and so
on. The biggest alteration is, of course, that the gods worshiped by pagans long ago and by practitioners
of Ásatrú today are really space aliens.

I don’t get tied up in knots over any of this. I love the Marvel comics and movies. I’m adult enough to
realize that they’re part of a separate fictional universe, and I’m not going to go picket them or some
such nonsense. I would simply love it if people would take the time to read the original myths and learn
about the religion and culture of which they were a part. If people want to stick with the pop culture
versions, bless them. We all have different interests!


Tolkien is always good to talk about, so if you can comment
about Norse mythology influence on The Hobbit and Lord of
the Rings, that would be great.
Like much in life, Tolkien’s use of Norse materials has positive and negative elements. I love how deeply
his fictional works integrated the material that he knew so well as a scholar and educator. I’m much
more impressed by his transformation of the mythic elements into an original creation (or, in his terms,
sub-creation) than I am by straight retellings or adaptations of the myths.

Tolkien’s process is most plain in the many volumes of The History of Middle-earth, which provide
multiple versions of the same stories as he reworked them for more than a half-century. In the earliest
texts, some of the gods of what became The Silmarillion are referred to by Norse names. Here, as in his
other works, he increasingly obscured his source material. At the time of The Hobbit’s first publication,
he very much insisted on recognition of the Norse sources that appear in his text, of which there are
many: the wisdom contest, the conversation with the dragon, the runes, the wandering wizard, and so
on. Later in life, he strongly stressed the original nature of his work.

Why the change? For one thing, the association of Norse mythology with the Nazis during the war had
made it awkward for an English professor to champion the same material in the years immediately
following the Holocaust. Similarly, Hitler’s public celebration of Wagner likely led Tolkien to deny that his
Lord of the Rings had anything to do with Wagner’s Ring. This is patent nonsense. Tolkien's legendarium
features dwarves as anti-Semitic figures pulled from Wagner, not Norse myth. The Hobbit is the worst,
drawing on the darkest stereotypes of the backstabbing large-nosed Wandering Jew consumed with
uncontrollable lust for gold.

The fact that Tolkien wrote one letter stating he was against Germany’s anti-Semitic policies does
nothing to change the fact that he praised the “obedience and patriotism” of German citizens under the
Third Reich, questioned whether a victory of “Americo-cosmopolitanism” would be any better than a
Nazi one, and put into the hands of generations of children a version of the dwarf that owed more to
German bigotry than the Eddas.

When I teach Tolkien's works, I don’t cover up or brush aside the troubling elements. I think we all need
to face the failings of the great artists of the modern age, and they are legion. I’ve been told by some
Tolkien fans that I must be a Nazi, since I notice the anti-Semitism in his work, which is anti-intellectual
and ridiculous. I’ve been told the same thing by an English opera director, when I brought up the anti-
Semitism in Wagner’s writings, which is bizarre and insane.

People want their favorite creatives to be angels, or at least they want to separate the creator’s
prejudices from their artistic creations. However, great artists deeply incorporate their beliefs into their
work. I hope we can be adult enough to discuss these issues without either burning books or burning
educators.




Norse Mythology and Ásatrú Religion in The Boston Globe




Mark Peters recently interviewed me for a column on Norse mythology and the Ásatrú religion
that he was writing for The Boston Globe. He asked very interesting questions about the allure of
Norse mythology today, about the appeal of Ásatrú, and about the influences of the Norse myths
on modern culture.

Since Mr. Peters was only able to use small segments of my answers in his relatively short
column, I am posting his questions (in large bold type) and my full responses here. I hope that
something I wrote is interesting to you!

You can read the column in The Boston Globe by clicking here.

On a literary level, what do you think, at bottom, is the
appeal of the Norse myths to so many readers, writers,
artists, etc.? What makes them such fertile ground for
novels, comics, etc.?
Iceland officially converted to Christianity over one thousand years ago, but the pagan myths
that were preserved in writing by thirteenth-century antiquarians of that northern island nation
continue to inspire people around the world today. After all these many centuries, the undying
appeal of Norse mythology works at three levels – dramatic, emotional, and spiritual.

At the dramatic level, the Norse myths are exciting tales of high adventure that are filled with
mysterious yet unforgettable characters. In the long ago time, the first gods slaughter the
primeval giant and shape the world from his enormous corpse. They set the celestial bodies on
their courses, create dwarves from earth, and make humans from trees. Across the mythic
timeline, Thor protects us from threatening giants and trolls, Loki gets up to all sorts of wicked
mischief, and Odin travels throughout the nine worlds seeking mystic wisdom. At the end of
time, the gods and giants fight their final battle at Ragnarök (“doom of the powers”), and the
world is destroyed before a new one with new gods rises once again. This wealth of dramatic
material has provided inspiration for generations of fantasy novelists, comic book artists, opera
composers, and metal bands.


At the emotional level, the myths resonate in deep places of our inner world. We see ourselves in
the gods, or we see the gods in ourselves. Many of the deities express an exuberant excitement of
the experience of existence. The twins Freyr and Freya (“lord” and “lady”) are radiant and
beautiful. He is the ruler of the world of elves, rides a golden glowing boar, presides over
prosperity and peace, and sends both rain and sunshine. She rides a chariot pulled by cats, flies
through the air on falcon feathers, loves love songs, and is greatly interested in love affairs.
Another god, Heimdall (“world tree”), is likewise bright and glorious. His horse's name and his
own teeth are golden, and his residence – the “castle of heaven” – stands by the rainbow bridge.
He guards the worlds with hearing so fine that he can hear grass growing in the fields and wool
growing on sheep. These are not the violent Viking gods of the popular imagination. Those who
take the time to really read the myths meet a host of inspiring figures with whom they may feel a
deep emotional connection.

At the spiritual level, readers of Norse mythology encounter a incredibly powerful worldview.
As he wanders the worlds seeking knowledge of the future, everything Odin learns from
powerful prophetesses, ancient giantesses, and reanimated wise women confirms that he and his
world will perish. In contrast to the gloomy Nordic worldview often portrayed in popular culture,
the wandering god never stops searching for knowledge and never ceases to rage against the
dying of the light. The old gods may die at Ragnarök, but the myth is life-affirming. We will not
live forever, but our children will survive us, and their children will survive them. The branches
of the World Tree will continue to grow as new leaves appear each springtime. This optimistic
view of the ongoing growth of life in the world, of hope and light amidst threat and darkness, can
speak powerfully to modern people at a primal spiritual level that remains unaddressed in much
that we experience in our lives today.
I'm just learning about the Ásatrú religion. Like most
religions, it seems to have people who find comfort and
wisdom in it and those who pervert it to support hateful
ideas. What would you say is the appeal of Ásatrú in both
cases, for well-meaning people and for white supremacists?
The word Ásatrú is modern Icelandic for “Æsir faith,” for belief or trust in the gods of the old
polytheistic Germanic religions. The modern religion began in 1972, when a small group of
Icelanders met in Reykjavík to found a religious organization for the revival of what the
medieval sagas call the Old Way. In the decades since, variations of the religion have spread
around the world, and various related traditions are now practiced in ninety-eight countries.
Practitioners have long disavowed missionary work, so the growth has largely been of people
discovering and learning about the faith on their own or, as many avow, being “called by the
gods.”

I can’t speak for other members of what is an incredibly diverse set of communities in a large
collection of related religious traditions, but I can tell you what first attracted me to Ásatrú. I was
raised by two philosophy professors not to be religious, but to know the myths of the religions
that largely shaped Western art and culture – Greek, Roman, Jewish, and Christian. I read Thor
comics as a kid, but it wasn’t until I was an adult that I sat down and read the original Norse
myths in their entirety. I immediately saw my father – death camp survivor, philosophy
professor, and teacher of human rights – in Odin, the god who endlessly seeks wisdom. I saw my
grandfather – farmer, bricklayer, quick to anger and quick to laughter, lover of children and
dancing – in Thor, the god of the common man. In the pagan poetry, I did not find answers to the
big questions of life; what mattered to me was that poets over a millennium ago were lying
awake at night, asking the same questions that keep me from sleeping. I’ve heard several
practitioners say that they were always Heathen, but they just didn’t realize it until they read the
myths. I’d say that’s true of me, too.


All religions have extremists clustered at their fringes. For the Heathen religions, there is a group
of folks who try to blend Norse religion with the newly resurgent white nationalism that is
rearing its ugly head in many countries right now. Historically, such people have joined groups
allied with Protestantism – like the KKK – or with extreme sects like Christian Identity. In recent
years, their gross anti-Semitism has led them to denounce Christianity itself as a Jewish
ideology, and they have turned to Ásatrú as something supposedly more “white.” This has
horrified members of the Icelandic religious organization that began the Ásatrú revival, who
want absolutely nothing to do with this hateful ideology. I’ve been accused of working with the
head of the Icelandic Ásatrú group to turn the religion gay and Jewish. So, the hang-ups these
trolls have are those typical of the generic hate groups springing up in the U.S. and abroad.
They’re just using Thor's hammer in place of a burning cross. Maybe they’ll move on to
UFOlogy in a few years. Why not? Some of them already believe in Nazi myths of Atlantis and
secret cultures inside the earth.
On a less heavy note, are there any influences of the Norse
myths in language and/or culture that most people would not
be aware of?
The influence of Norse mythology is all around us. The Marvel comics and movies are the most
obvious, since they pluck characters and plots directly from the myths, before transforming them
in what Stan Lee long ago called “the mighty Marvel manner.” I repeatedly remind my readers
and students that he and Jack Kirby created their own mythology of Thor, and many of its core
elements and relationships come from their imaginations, not from the original mythology.

Other influences are just slightly less obvious. Many people believe that Richard Wagner’s Ring
operas are based on German myth and literature, but he almost exclusively used the Norse
mythology preserved in Icelandic literature and simply Germanified the names as part of his
nationalist agenda. J.R.R. Tolkien made a similar move, incorporating elements of Norse
mythology into The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and the texts that became The Silmarillion,
but he changed the names and obscured the sources in pursuit of an original work and the
nationalist project of “a mythology for England.” The influence of those two titans is so
pervasive that parts of Norse mythology have spread throughout modern culture without people
being aware of the ultimate source.


Both Wagner and Tolkien created brilliantly original works while raiding Icelandic sources for
their own purposes, but we shouldn’t whitewash the darker elements. Despite his postwar
denials, Tolkien himself lifted Wagner’s anti-Semitic characterizations of the Old Norse dwarves
into his own work. The entire fantasy genre is largely a reworking of Tolkien's reworking of
Norse mythology (with its embedded Wagnerisms), as are old-school role-playing games like
Dungeons & Dragons and newer digital games like World of Warcraft. When modern creators
want to break free of the chains of Tolkien influences, they often turn to the same myths that
inspired him. Norse mythology is a well that never runs dry. I do hope that critical readers are
able to separate the source mythology from its later forms, with all their positive and negative
alterations.
