MYTHOLOGY AND
   FOLKLORE
         WHAT IS MYTHOLOGY?

• Mythology can refer to the collected myths of a
  group of people—their collection of stories they tell
  to explain nature, history, and customs—or to the
  study of such myths.
• Mythology is a vital feature of every culture.

• The study of myth dates back to ancient history.
• Mythology is now often sharply distinguished from
  didactic literature such as fables, but its relationship with
  other traditional stories, such as legends and folktales, is
  much more nebulous.

• Main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or
  supernatural humans, while legends generally feature
  humans as their main characters. However, many
  exceptions or combinations exist, as in the Iliad, Odyssey,
  and Aeneid. Myths are often endorsed by rulers and
  priests and are closely linked to religion or spirituality. In
  fact, many societies group their myths, legends, and
  history together, considering myths to be true accounts
  of their remote past.
• Creation myths particularly, take place in a primordial
  age when the world had not yet achieved its current
  form. Other myths explain how a society's customs,
  institutions, and taboos were established and sanctified.
• A separate space is created for folktales, which are not
  considered true by the people who tell them. As stories
  spread to other cultures or as faiths change, myths can
  come to be considered folktales, sometimes even to the
  point of being reinterpreted as one. Its divine characters
  are recast as either as humans or demi humans such as
  giants, elves, and faeries.
 THREE PRIMARY TYPES OF MYTHS

• DIVINE MYTH
• In religious terms, divinity or godhead is the state of things that
  come from a supernatural power or deity, such as a god,
  supreme being, creator deity, or spirits, and are therefore
  regarded as sacred and holy. Such things are regarded as
  "divine" due to their transcendental origins or because their
  attributes or qualities are superior or supreme relative to things
  of the Earth.
• Divine things are regarded as eternal and based in truth, while
  material things are regarded as ephemeral and based in
  illusion. Such things that may qualify as "divine" are apparitions,
  visions, prophecies, miracles, and in some views also the soul,
  or more general things like resurrection, immortality, grace,
  and salvation. Otherwise what is or is not divine may be loosely
  defined, as it is used by different belief systems.
                     LEGENDS

• A legend (Latin, legenda, "things to be read") is a
  narrative of human actions that are perceived both by
  teller and listeners to take place within human history
  and values to possess certain qualities that give the tale
  verisimilitude. Legend, for its active and passive
  participants, includes no happenings that are outside
  the realm of "possibility" but which may include miracles.
• Legends may be transformed over time, in order to keep
  it fresh and vital, and realistic. Many legends operate
  within the realm of uncertainty, never being entirely
  believed by the participants, but also never being
  resolutely doubted.
                   FOLKTALES

• A folktale (also spelled folk tale) is a story or legend
  forming part of an oral tradition. Folktales are
  generally passed down from one generation to
  another and often take on the characteristics of the
  time and place in which they are told.
• The most famous work on Filipino folktales is
  Philippine Folk Tales by Mabel Cook Cole. It is the
  first comprehensive popular collection of folk tales
  of the islands. She spent four years among the tribes
  of the Philippines in the early 20th century while her
  husband was engaged in ethnological work for the
  Field Museum of Natural History.
