                     The Nine Realms in Norse Mythology

Yggdrasill, is an immense mythical tree that connects the nine worlds in Norse Mythology.
These nine worlds are divided into three levels.

In the first level is Asgard, the home of
the Aesir.
Vanaheim, the home of the Vanir.
Alfheim, the home of the Light Elves.
In the middle is Midgard "Middle Earth",
the home of the Humans. Midgard is
connected to Asgard by Bifrost "The
Rainbow Bridge".
Jotunheim, the home of the Giants.
Svartalfheim, the home of the Dark
Elves.
Nidavellir, the home of the Dwarfs.
Niflheim is to the north, somewhere in
Niflheim under the ground is Helheim
home of the dead.
Muspelheim is to the south, it is the
home of the fire Giants and Demon.






Asgard: Home of the Gods
In the middle of the world, high up in the sky is
Asgard. It is the home of the gods and goddesses.
The male gods in Asgard, are called Aesir, and the
female gods are called Asynjur. Odin is the ruler of
Asgard, and the chief of the Aesir. Odin is married to
Frigg; she is the Queen of the Aesir. Inside the gates
of Asgard is Valhalla; it is the place where the Vikings
"Einherjer" that died in battle will go for the afterlife.



Valhalla was in Asgard: Home of the fallen Vikings
Valhalla (In Old Norse Valhöll) is located in Asgard,
the front of the big city of Asgard there are 540 doors.
The doors are so wide that through each huge door,
800 warriors can walk side by side. The roof is
covered with golden shields, and the walls around
Valhalla are made from wooden spear shafts. This is
the place where half of the Vikings who had died in a
battle would come for their afterlife. The other half of the Vikings are given to the goddess
Freya; she always has the first choice from every dead warrior. Each and every morning the
Vikings in Valhalla will take their weapons and put on their armor and then walk out to the big
plains in Asgard and fight. It did not matter if they got their arms, legs or head cut off. Because
when the great dinner in the evening came they would all be restored to normal.


Vanaheim: Home of the Vanir
Vanaheim (In Old Norse Vanaheimr) is the home of the
Vanir gods. The Vanir gods is an old branch of gods. The
Vanir are masters of sorcery and magic. They are also
widely acknowledged for their talent to predict the future.
Nobody knows where exactly the land, Vanaheim i
located, or even how it looks like. When the war between
the Aesir and the Vanir ended, three of the Vanir came to
live in Asgard, Njord and his children Freya and Freyr


Alfheim: Home of the Light Elves
Alfheim (In Old Norse Ālfheimr) is right next to Asgard in the
heaven. The light elves are beautiful creatures. They are
considered the "guardian angels" The god Freyr, is the ruler
of Alfheim. The Light elves are minor gods of nature and
fertility; they can help or hinder humans with their
knowledge of magical powers. They also often delivered an
inspiration to art or music.


Midgard: Home of the Humans
Midgard (In Old Norse Miðgarðr) “middle earth” is located in
the middle of the world, below Asgard. Midgard and Asgard
is connected by Bifrost the Rainbow Bridge. Midgard is
surrounded by a huge ocean that is impassable. The Ocean
is occupied by a huge sea serpent, the Midgard Serpent. The
Midgard serpent is so huge that it encircles the world entirely,
and biting its own tail. Odin and his two brothers Vili and Ve,
created the humans from an Ash log, the man and from an
elm log, the woman.


Jotunheim: Home of the Giants
Jotunheim (Jǫtunheimr) is the home of the jotuns (giants).
They are the sworn enemies of the Aesir. Jotunheim consist
mostly of rocks, wilderness and dense forests, so the giants
live from the fish in the rivers, and the animals in the forest,
because there is no fertile land in Jotunheim. The whole
world was created from the corpse of the first Jotun, named
Ymir. It was Odin and his brothers Vili and Ve, who killed
Ymir.
Svartalfheim: Home of the Dark Elves
Svartalfheim (In Old Norse Svartálfr) is the home of the
dark elves. The dark elves hates the sun so they live in the
murky underground. They are hideous and can be of a
great pain in the neck to the humans many describe them
as being extreme annoying. The dark elves are nothing but
trouble.




Nidavellir: Home of the Dwarves
Nildavellir (In Old Norse Niðavellir) is the home of the
dwarves, they live under the rocks, in caves and
underground. Hreidmar was the king of Nidavellir, Nidavellir
means Dark fields. The dwarves are masters of
craftsmanship. The gods of Asgard, the Aesir have received
many powerful gifts. Like Thor's hammer, the magical ring
Draupnir and also Gungnir, Odin's spear.


Niflheim: The World of Fog and Mist
Niflheim(Niflheimr) "Mist home" is the darkest and coldest
region in the world. Niflheim was the first of the nine
worlds; Niflheim is placed in the northern region of
Ginnungagap. In the lands of Niflheim there is located the
eldest of the three wells, which is called Hvergelmir
"bubbling boiling spring" protected by the huge dragon
called Nidhug (Níðhöggr).
It is said that all cold rivers come from Hvergelmir, and it is
said to be the source of the eleven rivers. Hvergelmir is the
origin of all living and the place where every living will go
back.
Elivagar "ice waves" are the rivers which existed in Niflheim at the beginning of the world. They
were the streams floating out of Hvergelmir. The water from Elivagar flowed down the
mountains to the plains of Ginnungagap, where it solidified to frost and ice, which gradually
formed a very dense layer. That is the reason that there is very cold in the northern plains. As
the world tree Yggdrasil grew up into the sky, it stretched one of its three large roots far into
Niflheim, and drew water from the spring Hvergelmir.


Muspelheim: The Land of Fire
Muspelheim was created far to the south of the world. Muspelheim is a
burning hot place, filled with lava, flames, sparks and soot. Muspelheim
is the home the of fire giants, fire demons and ruled by the giant Surt.
He is a sworn enemy of the Aesir. Surt will ride out with his flaming
sword in his hand at Ragnarök "the end of the world" Surt will then
attack Asgard, "the home of the gods" and turn it into a flaming inferno.
             Gods and Goddesses of the Norse Mythology



                                     Odin (or, depending upon the dialect Woden or Wotan) was
                                     the Father of all the Gods and men. Odhinn is pictured either
                                     wearing a winged helm or a floppy hat, and a blue-grey cloak.
                                     He can travel to any realm within the 9 Nordic worlds. His two
                                     ravens, Huginn and Munin (Thought and Memory) fly over the
                                     world daily and return to tell him everything that has happened
                                     in Midgard. He is a God of magick, wisdom, wit, and learning.
                                     He too is a psychopomp; a chooser of those slain in battle. In
                                     later times, he was associated with war and bloodshed from
                                     the Viking perspective, although in earlier times, no such
                                     association was present. If anything, the wars fought by
                                     Odhinn exist strictly upon the Mental plane of awareness;
                                     appropriate for that of such a mentally polarized God. He is
                                     both the shaper of Wyrd and the bender of Orlog; again, a
                                     task only possible through the power of Mental thought and
                                     impress. It is he who sacrifices an eye at the well of Mimir to
                                     gain inner wisdom, and later hangs himself upon the World
Tree Yggdrasil to gain the knowledge and power of the Runes. All of his actions are related to
knowledge, wisdom, and the dissemination of ideas and concepts to help Mankind. Because
there is duality in all logic and wisdom, he is seen as being duplicitous; this is illusory and it is
through his actions that the best outcomes are conceived and derived. Just as a point of
curiosity: in no other pantheon is the head Deity also the God of Thought and Logic. It's
interesting to note that the Norse/Teutonic peoples also set such a great importance upon
brainwork and logic. The day Wednesday (Wodensdaeg) is named for him.


                                    Thor, or Donnar, also known as the Thunderer, was
                                    considered to be a son of Odin by some, but among many
                                    tribes Thor actually supplanted Odin as the favorite god. He
                                    is considered to be the protector of all Midgard, and he
                                    wields the mighty hammer Mjollnir. Thor is strength
                                    personified. His battle chariot is drawn by two goats, and his
                                    hammer Mjollnir causes the lightning that flashes across the
                                    sky. Of all the deities, Thor is the most "barbarian" of the lot;
                                    rugged, powerful, and lives by his own rules, although he is
                                    faithful to the rest of the Aesir. The day Thursday
                                    (Thorsdaeg) is sacred to him.
                              Freya is considered to be the goddess of Love and Beauty, but is
                              also a warrior goddess and one of great wisdom and magick. She
                              and her twin brother Freyr are of a different "race" of gods known
                              as the Vanir. Many of the tribes venerated her higher than the
                              Aesir, calling her "the Frowe" or "The Lady." She is known as
                              Queen of the Valkyries, choosers of those slain in battle to bear
                              them to Valhalla (the Norse heaven). She, therefore, is a
                              psychopomp like Odhinn and it is said that she gets the "first pick"
                              of the battle slain. She wears the sacred necklace Brisingamen,
                              which she paid for by spending the night with the dwarves who
                              wrought it from the bowels of the earth. The cat is her sacred
                              symbol. There seems to be some confusion between herself and
                              Fricka, Odin's wife, as they share similar functions; but Fricka
seems to be strictly of the Aesir, while Freya is of the Vanic race. The day Friday (Frejyasdaeg)
was named for her (some claim it was for Fricka).


Freyr (Fro Ingwe) is Freya's twin brother. He is the horned God
of fertility, and has some similarities to the Celtic Cernunnos or
Herne, although he is NOT the same being. He is known as King
of the Alfs (elves). Both the Swedish and the English are said to
be descendents of his. The Boar is his sacred symbol, which is
both associated with war and with fertility. His golden boar,
"Gullenbursti", is supposed to represent the daybreak. He is also
considered to be the God of Success, and is wedded to Gerda,
the Jotun, for whom he had to yield up his mighty sword. At
Ragnarok, he is said to fight with the horn of an elk (much more
suited to his nature rather than a sword.)




                                  Tyr (or Tiw, Ziw) is the ancient god of War and the Lawgiver of
                                  the gods. He sacrifices his hand so that the evil Fenris wolf
                                  may be bound. At one time he was the leader of the Norse
                                  Pantheon, but was supplanted by Odin much later. There is
                                  nothing to indicate how this occurred; one assumes that he
                                  simply "stepped back" and let Odin assume the position of
                                  leadership. Tyr is excellent in all manners of Justice, fair play,
                                  and Right Action.
Loki, the Trickster, challenges the structure and order of the Gods, but
is necessary in bringing about needed change. He is also known as the
god of Fire. Neither an Aesir or a Vanir, he is of the race of Ettins
(Elementals) and thus possesses some daemonic qualities. He is both
a helper and a foe of the Aesir; he gets them out of predicaments, but
spawns the worst monsters ever seen on the face of the Earth: the
Fenris Wolf and Jormurgandr, the Midgard Wyrm. His other children
include the goddess Hel (Hella, Holle), and Sleipnir, Odin's 8-legged
horse; these beings are at least benign, if not somewhat terrifying to
behold.




                                  Heimdall is the handsome gold-toothed guardian of Bifrost,
                                  the rainbow bridge leading to Asgard, the home of the Gods.
                                  The rainbow bridge seems to be a common symbol in many
                                  religious traditions other than Norse Heathenism. In the Vedic
                                  tradition, it represents the Antakaranha of humanity
                                  (connection between the body and the soul). Other traditions
                                  see it as a message from the Gods, or a Bridge between the
                                  Gods and Mankind. This would tend to indicate that the
                                  Norse/Germanic people were aware of the presence of an
                                  overshadowing Soul for each individual, as well as a group or
                                  tribal intelligence. It is Heimdall who is to sound the signal
                                  horn to the Aesir that Ragnarok, the great destruction (or
                                  transformation?) is beginning.




Skadi is the Goddess of Winter and of the Hunt. She is
married to Njord, the gloomy Sea God, noted for his beautiful
bare feet (which is how Skadi came to choose him for her
mate.) Supposedly the bare foot is an ancient Norse symbol
of fertility. The marriage wasn't too happy, though, because
she really wanted Baldur for her husband. She is the
goddess of Justice, Vengeance, and Righteous Anger, and
is the deity who delivers the sentence upon Loki to be bound
underground with a serpent dripping poison upon his face in
payment for his crimes. Skadi's character is represented in
two of Hans Christian Anderson's tales: "The Snow Queen"
and "The Ice Princess."
Frigga (Frigg, Fricka), Odin's wife, was considered to be the Mother of all; and protectoress of
children. She spins the sacred Distaff of life, and is said to know the future, although she will not
speak of it. Some believe that Friday was named for her instead of Freya (see above), and there
is considerable confusion as to "who does what" among the two.

The Norns (Urd, Verdande, and Skuld), are the Norse equivalent of the greek Fates. It is they
who determine the orlogs (destinies) of the Gods and of Man, and who maintain the World Tree,
Yggdrasil.

The goddess of the dead and the afterlife was Hel (Holle, Hulda), and was portrayed by the
Vikings as being half-dead, half alive herself. The Vikings viewed her with considerable
trepidation. The Dutch, Gallic, and German barbarians viewed her with some beneficence, more
of a gentler form of death and transformation. She is seen by them as Mother Holle; a being of
pure Nature, being helpful in times of need, but vengeful upon those who cross her or
transgress natural law.

Odin's son, Baldur, the god of Love and Light, is sacrificed at Midsummer by the dart of the
mistletoe, and is reborn at Jul (Yule). Supposedly his return will not occur until after the
onslaught of the Ragnarok, which I see as a cleansing and enlightenment more than wanton,
purposeless destruction. Baldur's blind brother Hodur was his slayer, whose hand was guided
by the crafty Loki. He is married to the goddess of Joy, Nanna.

Other Gods and Goddesses include Sif (Sifa), the Harvest Goddess; Forseti, the god of Law
and Justice; Bragi, the bard of the Gods and muse of Poetry; Weiland (Weyland), the Smith of
the Gods, Idunna, the goddess of Youth and Beauty; Vidar and Vali, the sons of Odin who will
survive Ragnarok; Magni and Modi, the sons of Thor; Eostre, the goddess of Spring and of
fertility, Hoenir, the messenger of the Aesir; Sunna and Mani, the Sun and Moon; Ullr, the God
of the Hunt; and Nerthus, Goddess of the Sea and of Rivers.




  




Prepared By: Eden Grace B. Pastor
AB42FA1
