                        Developing
                           the
                       Whole Person
                          Chapter 3
Personal Development
 Holistic Development
• Is the process of self actualization and
  learning that combines an individual’s mental,
  physical, social, emotional and spiritual
  growth.
• The term can be used to describe forms of
  alternative education that are based on the
  more humanistic and democratic outlook.
 Rene Descartes
• A French Philosopher,
  Mathematician, and Scientist, dubbed
  as the “Father of Modern Western
  Philosophy” much of subsequent
  Western philosophy is a response to
  his writings, which are studied
  closely to this day.
• He spent about 20 years of his life in
  Dutch Republic
Mind and Body Dualism of
       Descartes
• One of the modern philosophers of our
  time, influenced much of mankind’s
  thinking with his theory of duality or
  understanding the nature of things in a
  simple, dual mode.
  Hence, you are
 familiar with the
separation of the
body and spirit in
western religion,
 and of the mind
  and the body in
    the study of
human sciences.
More examples of these are
  the distinct male-female
 gender categorization or
the Yin and Yang of Eastern
thought, although Western
Culture overemphasizes its
    either-or black-white
  This is contrary to what
   Eastern Philosophers
  understand it to be-that
there is dynamism between
 two forces in nature, and
that each force is present in
 each other and will never
More examples can be thought
 of to illustrate this, such as:
• GOOD-BAD
• RADICAL PURITY
• LIFE-DEATH
• And other points of view where things are taken
  in their absolute and extremes
Yang
               The yin Yang   Yin
• Positive
• Male
• The Sun
                 Symbol       • Negative
                              • Female
                              • The Moon
• Light                       • Dark
• Spirit                      • Netherworld
• South                       • North
• Fire                        • Water
• Summer                      • Cold
• Life                        • Winter
• Heat                        • Death
• Heaven                      • Below
• Active                      • Growth
• Above                       • Earth
• Generation                  • Passive
Holism and
  Gestalt
          Holism
•    In 1926, General Jan C. Smuts, a
    South African statesman, military
      leader, and philosopher, wrote
     about holism in his book, Holism
     and Evolution. He introduced the
    Academic Terminology for Holism
      as “the tendency in nature to
     form wholes which are greater
        than the sum of the parts
      through creative evolution”.
                          Gestalt
•    Earlier in 1890 a German Philosopher Christian Von Ehrenfels,
      and later on supported by psychologist Max Wertheimer, Kurt
    Koffka, and Wolfgang Kohler of the Berlin School, introduced the
                            concept of Gestalt.
       • This is defined by the Merriam-Webster Dictionary as
    “something that is made of many parts and yet is somehow or
        different from the combination of its parts; broadly, the
        general quality or character of something”. This theory
                continues to influence much of psychology
                Max Wertheimer   Kurt Koffka   Wolfgang Kohler
Christian Von
 Ehrenfels
  the clusters or sums of these different
     notes do not make up the whole
  symphony nor characterize the whole
symphony. The Interaction and Fusion of
    the different notes in a symphony
 produce something bigger and greater
   than the notes themselves. Another
   example is a car, A car is made up of
 hundreds of different parts. Separately,
these parts do not represent the car, but
symphony, a car, and humans
  in terms of being unified
entity follows the principle of
  Holism. In understanding
humans, it is important to see
the person in his entirety and
  We have all heard that no two snowflakes are alike. Each snowflake
  takes the perfect form for the maximum efficiency and effectiveness
for its journey. And while the universal force of gravity gives them a
      shared destination, the expansive space in the air gives each
   snowflake the opportunity to take their own path. They are on the
              same journey, but each takes a different path.
    Along this gravity-driven journey, some snowflakes collide and
      damage each other, some collide and join together, some are
 influenced by wind... there are so many transitions and changes that
  take place along the journey of the snowflake. But, no matter what
 the transition, the snowflake always finds itself perfectly shaped for
                                its journey.
     I find parallels in nature to be a beautiful reflection of grand
                              orchestration.
 One of these parallels is of snowflakes and us. We, too, are all headed
 in the same direction. We are being driven by a universal force to the
 same destination. We are all individuals taking different journeys and
along our journey, we sometimes bump into each other, we cross paths,
 we become altered... we take different physical forms. But at all times
  we too are 100% perfectly imperfect. At every given moment we are
 absolutely perfect for what is required for our journey. I’m not perfect
for your journey and you’re not perfect for my journey, but I’m perfect
 for my journey and you’re perfect for your journey. We’re heading to
  the same place, we’re taking different routes, but we’re both exactly
                         perfect the way we are.
 Think of what understanding this great orchestration could mean for
 relationships. Imagine interacting with others knowing that they too
 each share this parallel with the snowflake. Like you, they are headed
to the same place and no matter what they may appear like to you, they
     have taken the perfect form for their journey. How strong our
   relationships would be if we could see and respect that we are all
                  perfectly imperfect for our journey.”
         ― Steve Maraboli, Life, the Truth, and Being Free
 When we consider a human person and what
various aspects make up this complex organism,
          five aspects come to mind :
   Physiological –the physical attributes including the five physical senses


       Cognitive –or the intellectual functions of the mind: thinking, recognizing, reasoning
       analyzing, projecting synthesizing, recalling, and assessing.


         Psychological –or how thinking, feeling, and behaving interact and happen in a person.


       Social –or the manner by which an individual interacts with other individuals or groups of
       individuals

   Spiritual –or the attribute of a person’s consciousness and beliefs including the values and
   virtues that guide and put meaning into a person’s life.
Feelings and
  Emotions
 Feelings, Moods, and
Emotions do not exactly
mean one and the same.
   Paul Ekman of the University of California
identified six basic emotions that human beings
  Happin               Sadnes :
                    experience            Fear
    ess                 s


                     Surpris
  Anger                                 Disgust
                        e
                               Emotion
    •      Emotion is taken from the Latin verb, “movare”, which means to
           move or be upset or agitated. It is defined as a descriptive term
          referring to variations in level of arousal, affective state or mood,
                         expressive movements, and attitudes.
•       In a state of strong emotion, the person’s physical responses include
        faster heartbeat, profuse sweating, and dilation of eye pupils, higher
         blood pressure, and muscular tremors, affecting the nervous system
                                       in general.
                    Feelings
• According to Dr. Antonio R. Damasio, from a neuro-
   scientific approach, feeling arises from the brain as it
     interprets an emotion, which is usually caused by
      physical sensations experienced by the body as a
          reaction to a certain external stimulus.
 • An example of this would be the emotion of being
           afraid which produces a feeling of fear.
Attitud
  es
• are a person’s thoughts, feelings, and emotion
  about another person, object, idea, behavior,
  or situation based on his or her values and
  belief systems. Belief and certain values
  therefore, affect the attitude of a person.
Behavi
  or
• is a manifestation or acting out of attitudes
  an individual has.
Values
• At the core of every person lies a system of
  beliefs that adheres to the highest ideals of
  human existence. These ideals create
  meaning and purpose in a person’s life. These
  ideals are called “values”.
        Shalom H
        Schwartz
• A Psychologist and a cross-cultural
  researcher from Hebrew University
  of Jerusalem conducted a research
  which covered many different peoples
  and cultures to identify the ten
  common values people have
  regardless of their racial and cultural
  backgrounds.
Schwartz wrote in his report, Basic Human
      Values : Theories, Methods, and
 Applications, the finding of his research ,
which identified the ten basic values that can
 characterized by describing their central
             motivational goals.
       The Ten Basic Values
• Self Direction –independent thought and action;
  choosing, creating, and exploring.
• Stimulation –excitement, novelty, and challenge in life.
• Hedonism –pleasure and sensuous gratification for
  oneself.
• Achievement –personal success through demonstrating
  competence according to social standards.
• Power –social status and prestige, and control or
  dominance over people and resources.
         The Ten Basic Values
•   Security –safety, harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and
    of self.
•   Conformity –restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses that are
    likely to upset or harm others and violate social expectations or norms.
•   Tradition –respect, commitment, and acceptance of the customs and
    ideas that traditional culture or religion provide the self.
•   Benevolence –preserving and enhancing the welfare of those with whom
    one is frequent personal contact (the “in-group”)
•   Universalism –understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection for
    the welfare of all people and of nature.
 The Motivational Goals that
characterize the ten values he
       identified were
      • Openness to change
      • Self–Transcendence
       • Self–Enhancement
         • Conservation
Virtue
  s
• adjectives that describe positive and desirable qualities
  which usually mirror a value it represents.
• while on the other hand , values are usually nouns.
  There has been confusion over definition pf values and
  virtues. Oftentimes, people interchange these two and
 when they write down a list of values, they also includes
                     virtues in the list.
      Values                                         Virtues

       Peace      Peaceful, Calm

      Integrity   Reputable, Responsible, Believable, Honest, Trustworthy

        Love      Loving, Caring, Compassionate, Gentle, Affectionate

      Respect     Respectful, Civil

      Balance     Objective, Fair, Harmonious




Values are usually reflected through these virtues which in turn
   become eminent in the attitude and behavior of a person.
