To order books from Open Court,
call toll free 1-800-815-2280.
Open Court Publishing Company is a division of
Carus Publishing Company.
This book has been reproduced in a print-on-
demand format from the 1994 Open Court printing.

Fourth printing 1991
Fifth printing 1993
Sixth printing 1994

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of the publisher. Open Court Publishing Company, 315 Fifth
Street, P.O. Box 300, Peru, Illinois 61354-0300.

Printed and bound in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Edinger, Edward F.
        Anatomy of the psyche.
          (The Reality of the psyche series)
          Bibliography: p.
          1. Psychoanalysis. 2. Alchemy. 3. Individuation.
1. Title. II. Series.
BF175.E297              1985 150.19'54 85-11546
ISBN: 0-8126-9009-5

THE REALITY OF THE PSYCHE SERIES
Originally published in the following issues of Quadrant: The Journal of the C. G. Jung
Foundation for Analytical Psychology.

Chapters 1 and 2—Volume 11, Number 1 (Summer 1978)
Chapter 3—Volume 11, Number 2 (Winter 1978)
Chapter 4—Volume 12, Number 1 (Summer 1979)
Chapter 5—Volume 13, Number 1 (Spring 1980)
Chapter 6—Volume 14, Number 1 (Spring 1981)
Chapter 7—Volume 14, Number 2 (Fall 1981)
Chapter 8—Volume 15, Number 1 (Spring 1982)

Note on Abbreviations
The Collected Works of Jung are cited as CW.
Various versions of the Bible are abbreviated as follows:
         AV Authorized (King James) Version
         DV Douay Version
         RSV Revised Standard Version
         NEB New English Bible
         JB Jerusalem Bible
         NAB New American Bible
[Let   u s ] . . . study   that true
Bible, as we count it, of the
human body and of the
nature of man.
             Andreas Vesalius
-•S-Contents-S*-




    List of Illustrations/x
    Preface/xix Chapter 1 /
    Introduction/1 Chapter 2/
    Calcinatio/17 Chapter 3 /
    Solutio / 47 Chapter 4/
    Coagulatio/83 Chapter 5/
    Sublimatioj 117 Chapter
    6/Mortificatio /147 Chapter 71
    Separatio 1183 Chapter 8/
    Coniunctio / 211
    Bibliography/233
List of Ilustrations


Rcfcrcnccs to primary sources appear under illustration titles. For
secondary sources, see captions for individual illustrations and Bibli -
ography.
                               Frontispiece
    The Mountain-Cave of the Adepts. Symbolic Résumé of the Alchemical
                   Opus. Michelspacher, Cabala (1654).
                         I- I (page 4)
      Macrocosm and Microcosm Interconnected. Waite, A. E., trans., The
                            Hermetic Museum.
                          1- 2 (page 7)
      The Alchemist Guided by God. Barchusen, Elementa Chemiae (1718),
                       Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale.
                            1- 3 (page 13)
        The Prima Materia as Chaos. Marolles, Tableaux du temple des muses
                       (1655), London, British Museum.
                             1- 4         (page 14)
     Cerberus as the Devouring and Entangling Aspect of the Prima Materia.
     (15th century), Biblioteca Apostólica Vaticana, Cod. Pal. lat. 1066, fol.
                                      239.
                             2- 1         (page 18)
     Calcinatio of the King. The Wolf as Prima Materia. Devouring the Dead
                       King. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                             2- 2 (page 21)
       Calcinatio of an Earth-Animal. MS. Sloane 1. 1316 (17th century),
                            London, British Museum.
                                 2- 3 (page 22)
             Calcinatio of the Devouring Parent. Mutus Liber (1702).
                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                             2 4 (page 23)
The Fire of the Dragon Being Both Fanned and Extinguished. Trismosin,
                        Splendor Solis ( 1582),
                           2- 5 (page 25)
    The Fiery Furnace of Daniel. Bible of St. Stephen Harding (12th
          Century), Dijon, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS. 14.
                            2- 6 (page 26)
 The Starry Salamander That Lives in the Fire. The Mercurial Spirit of
the Prima Materia, as Salamander, Frolicking in the Fire. Maier, Atalanta
                            Fugiens (1618).
                           2- 7 (page 28)
  The Violent Tortured in a Rain of Fire. Doré, Illustrations for Dante‟s
                            Divine Comedy.
                            2- 8 (page 33)
     Calcinatio of the Hermaphrodite. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                            2- 9 (page 34)
                       The Fire Sower. E. Jacoby.
                           2-    10 (page 36)
                    Pentecost. Doré, Bible Illustrations.
                          2-     11 (page 39)
    Shiva Dancing in a Circle of Fire. Bronze (12th or 13th century),
             Amsterdam, Museum van Aziatische Kunst.
                           2-    12 (page 41)
                  St. John Boiled in Oil. Dürer, 1498.
                           2-  13 (page 44)
          Expulsion of the Demons. Engraving (17th Century).
                         2-    14 (page 45)
       The King in the Sweatbox. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                          3- 1     (page 50)
Siegfried and the Rhine Maidens. Rackham, Color Illustrations for Wagner's
                                “Ring."
                           3-2 (page 51)
 The King and Queen in the Bath. Mylius, Philosophia reformata (1622).
                             3- 3 (page 53
   Solutio of the King. Background: Drowning King Calling for Help.
    Foreground: The King Reborn. Trismosin. Splendor Solis (1582).
                    ANATOMY OF THE PSYCHE



                     3-      4 (page 54)
 The Birth of Aphrodite,    (c. 460 b.c.), Rome,   Terme Museum.
                     3- 5 (page 55)
     Hylas and the Nymphs. John William Waterhouse,
          Manchester, England, City Art Gallery.
                     3- 6 (page 56)
         Bathsheba. Rembrandt, Paris, the Louvre.
                       3-    7 (page 57)
Susanna and the Elders. Tintoretto, Vienna, Gemäldegalerie.

                     3- 8 (page 59)
 Diana and Actaeon. Titian, Edinburgh, National Gallery of
                         Scotland.
                    3- 9 (page 61)
Baptism with Lunar Water While Being Bitten by Dragons.
   Ashmole, ed., Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum (1652).
                    3-   10 (page 62)
     Bacchanal of the Andrians. Titian, Madrid, Prado.
                     3-    11 (page 65)
 Bathers. Renoir, Philadelphia, Collection of Carroll Tyson.
                    3-   12 (page 67)
             The Flood. Doré, Bible Illustrations.
                      3-    13 (page 69)
  “Save Me, O God; for the Waters Are Come in Unto My
Soul." Illustration for Psalm 69, The Visconti Hours, Florence,
                       National Library.
                   3-    14 (page 73)
Pharaoh's Army Drowning in the Red Sea. The Visconti Hours,
               Florence, National Library.
                 3-    15 (page 74)
The Woman Washing Clothes. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                    3-   16 (page 76)
 The Corpse of the Merged King and Queen Being Purified
 and Reanimated by Heavenly Dew. Rosarium Philosophorum.
                    Frankfurt (1550).




                       4- 1 (page 84)
Earth Nurses the Filius Philosophorum. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens
                            (1618).
                     LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                         4 2 (page 87)
Eagle Chained to a Ground Animal. Stolciu«, Viridanum Chymicum
                              (1624).
                        4- 3 (page 89)
The Fall of the Rebel Angels. Les Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry,
                     Chantilly, Musée Condé.
                        4- 4 (page 92)
       The Stone of Saturn. Maier, Atalania Fugiens (1618).
                        4- 5 (page 94)
               The Torture of Prometheus. Moreau.
                        4- 6 (page 96)
            Virgin and Child on Crescent Moon. Dürer.
                        4- 7 (page 97)
    Liberty Leading the People. Delacroix, Paris, the Louvre.
                         4- 8 (page 102)
  Fortune or Nemesis Carrying the Cup and Harness of Destiny.
                                Dürer.
                         4- 9 (page 105)
   The Annunciation. Drawing by Rembrandt, Besançon. Musée
                            Communal.
                        4-     10 (page 106)
 “Sow Your Gold in White Earth.” Maier, Atalania Fugiens (1618).
                        4-     11 (page 107)
   Crucifixion. Drawing from Ramsey Psalter (c. 980), London,
                          British Museum.
                        4-     12 (page 108)
    The Mercurial Serpent Crucified. Alchimie de Flamel. MS.
           Français 14765, Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale.
                        4-     13 (page 109)
  Transfixion of the Mercurial Serpent and the King. “Speculum
veritatis,” Cod. Vaticanus Latinus 7286 (17th Century), Biblioteca
                              Vaticana.
                        4-     14 (page 110)
                       Adam and Eve. Dürer.
                       4-     15 (page 112)
  The Last Supper. Note the Tiny Black Devil Entering Judas'
Mouth. The Hours of Catherine of Cleves. The Guennol Collection and
                  the Pierpont Morgan Library.
                      5- 1 (page 119)
Satellite Photograph of Cape Cod and Vicinity. Photo Atlas
                      of the United States.
                      5- 2 (page 120)
   Sublimatio. Sapentia veterum philosophorum sive doctrina
  eorundum de summa et universali medicina (18th century),
         Paris, Bibliothèque de rArsenal, MS. 974.
                      5- 3 (page 121)
 Extraction of the White Dove. Trismosin, Splendor Solis
                             (1582).
                      5- 4 (page 122)
    The Cry. Munch (1895), Oslo, National Museum.
                     5- 5 (page 124)
Extraction of Mercurius and Coronation of the Virgin.
Lower Level: Mercurius (Represented as a Monstrosity)
Being Extracted from the Prima Materia. Upper Level:
Assumption and Coronation of the Virgin, Transforming
the Trinity into a Quatemity. Speculum trinitatis from
Reusner, Pandora (1588).
                     5- 6 (page 132)
        Ascension of Elijah. Doré, Bible Illustrations.
                   5- 7 (page 133)
Assumption of the Virgin. The Hours of Catherine of Cleves,
The Guennol Collection and the Pierpont Morgan Library.
                   5- 8 (page 135)
  Osiris as a Ladder. From the papyrus of Ani, British
                        Museum.
                   5- 9 (page 138)
The Mystics‟ Ladder to Heaven. Icon from St. Catherine‟s
     Monastery, Mount Sinai ( I lth-12th century).
                  5-     10 (page 140)
 Simeon Stylites on His Column Besieged by a Serpent.
       Reliquary (6th century), Paris, the Louvre.
                  5-     11 (page 141)
 Dante‟s Ladder of Saturn. Doré, Illustrations for Dante‟s
                      Divine Comedy.
                  5-     12 (page 143)
     The Tower of Babel. Bruegel (1563), Vienna,
               Kunsthistorisches Museum.
                   LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                          6-1 (page 148)
Skeleton as Mortificatio Image. Waite, A. E., tram.. The Hermetic
                             Museum.
                     6-2 (page 149)
    The Triumph of Death. Fresco by Francesco Traini (c.
                1350), Pisa, Camposanto.
                       6- 3 (page 151)
 Sol and Luna Kill the Dragon. Maier, Atalania Fugiens (1618).
                     6- 4 (page 152)
Death Pours a Drink for the King. Holbein, The Dance of Death
                           (1538).
                      6- 5 (page 153)
   Death of the King. Stolcius, Viridarium Chymicum (1624).
                      6- 6 (page 156)
       Massacre of the Innocents. Alchemical drawing.
                      6- 7 (page 157)
Death Blowing the Worm Trumpet. J. Meydenbach, Doten Dantz
                      (c. 1492), Mainz.
                        6- 8 (page 159)
Coniunctio in the Black Vas. The Nigredo. Paris, Bibliothèque de
                   l‟Arsenal, MS. 975, fol. 14.
                     6- 9 (page 161)
Grain Growing from the Corpse of Osiris. From a bas -relief at
                         Philae.
                    6-     10 (page 162)
  Grain Growing from the Grave, Symbolizing Resurrection.
          Waite, A. E., trans.. The Hermetic Museum.
                    6-    11 (page 164)
             Death and the Landsknecht. Dürer.
                    6-    12 (page 165)
     The Nigredo. Mylius, Philosophia reformata (1622).
                    6-    13 (page 166)
Salome with the Head of John the Baptist. Les Belles Heures du
 Duc de Berry, New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
                   6-     14 (page 169)
 The Death Head Points to the Cosmic Sphere. Holbein, The Dance of
                          Death (1538).
                   6-    15 (page 176)
   The Scourging of Christ. Mair of Landshut (15th century),
                  London, British Museum.
                     6-      16 (page 179)
                          Patient‟s Drawing.
                   7- 1 (page 184)
God Creating the World. Manuscript illustration (13th century),
              Vienna, Austrian National Library.
                    7- 2 (page 185)
 Cutting the Philosophical Egg. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                     7- 3 (page 186)
 The Separation of Heaven and Earth: Nut Lifted Above Geb by
   Shu. Drawing after an illustration in A. Jeremias, Das Alte
   Testament im Lichte des Alten Orients. Leipzig (1904). Turin,
                        Egyptian Museum.
                   7- 4 (page 190)
 The Aces of the Four Tarot Suits: Swords, Staves, Coins, and
                   Cups. Marseilles Tarot.
                    7- 5 (page 192)
                Christ of the Apocalypse. Dürer.
                     7- 6 (page 194)
 Joust Between Sol and Luna. Aurora Consurgens (14th century),
   Zurich, Zentralbibliothek, Cod. rhenovacensis 172, fol. 10.
                    7- 7 (page 195)
 The Awakening of the Sleeping King as a Judgment of Paris.
   Thomas Aquinas [pseud.], “De Alchemia,” (16th century),
Leiden, Bibliothek der Rijksuniversiteit, Cod. Vossianus 29, fol.
                              78.
                       7- 8 (page 196)
    Schismatics. Doré, Illustrations for Dante‟s Divine Comedy-




                    7- 9 (page 198) ne Alchemist as
Geometer. Maier, Atalanta Fugiens (1618).
                    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                      7-     10 (page 199)
                    Justice. Marseilles Tarot.
                      7-     11 (page 201)
  Moses Striking Water from the Rock. Biblia Pauperum Bavaria
(1414), Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek. Clm. 8201, fol. 86v.
                     7-    12 (page 205)
  Crucifixion and Last Judgment. H. Van Eyck, New York, The
                 Metropolitan Museum of Art.
                      7-    13 (page 207)
  The Soul of the Deceased Is Weighed in the Balance. From the
              papyrus of Ani, The British Museum.
                      7-     14          (page 208)
 The Archangel Michael Weighing Souls. Van der Weyden (15th
          century), Bourgogne, Hospice de Beaume.
                     8- 1 (page 213)
  The Dragon Kills the Woman and She Kills It. Maier, Atalanta
                        Fugiens (1618).
                         8- 2 (page 217)
    Coniunctio in the Alchemical Vessel. (17th century), Paris,
          Bibliothèque de 1‟Arsenal, MS. 975, fol. 13.
                          8- 3 (page 219)
 The Crucifixion as a Coniunctio Between Sol and Luna. (Late 9th
  century), Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, MS. lat. 257, fol. 12v.
                         8- 4 (page 221)
 The Circle of the Year as a Coniunctio of Sol and Luna. Medieval
Drawing, Stuttgart, Wurttembergische Landesbibliothek, Cod. hist.
                        fol. 415, fol. 17v.
                          8- 5 (page 222)
 The New Jerusalem as a Coniunctio of Sol and Luna. The Cloisters
  Apocalypse, fot. 36, New York, the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
                     8- 6 (page 225)
 The Heavenly Rose. Doré, Illustrations for Dante's Divine Comedy.
                        8- 7 (page 226)
     Star Trails Around the Pole. Photo Yerkes Observatory.
                     8- 8 (page 229)
Autobiography as a Mandate. Events in the Life of Opicinus
de Canistris Arranged Concentrically from His Conception on
March 24, 1296, to Completion of Drawing on June 3, 1336.
Biblioteca Apostólica Vaticana, MS. Pal. lat. 1993 fol. I In
                      Preface

Jung‟s discovery of the reality of the psyche opens the way for a new
approach to traditional material. Religious and literary scriptures, as
well as the gropings of the protosciences such as alchemy, ast rology,
and pre-Socratic philosophy, can now be understood as the phenome -
nology of the objective psyche.
   Continuing Jung‟s study of alchemy, this book attempts to bring into
visibility certain experiential modes or categories of the individuation
process that appear in alchemical symbolism. Although the data used
for amplification derive from the most varied sources, they all serve to
illustrate patterns and regularities of the objective psyche —that is,
archetypal images of transformation. What I present i s neither a theo-
retical construct nor a philosophical speculation, but rather an ordering
of psychic facts based on the method of Jung.
   These facts go to make up an anatomy of the psyche, which is at the
same time an embryology, since we are dealing with a process of
development and transformation. The great value of alchemical images
is that they give us an objective basis from which to approach dreams
and other unconscious material. With the psyche more than with any
other subject it is very difficult to distinguish between objective fact
and personal bias. A working knowledge of alchemical images can be
very helpful in promoting this much needed objectivity. Our goal, given
sufficient familiarity with archetypal symbolism and sufficient self -
knowledge from personal analysis, is an anatomy of the psyche that is
as objective as the anatomy of the body.
Anatomy of the Psyche
       Introduction


      HE PROCESS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY , when it goes at all deep, sets into
T     motion profound and mysterious happenings. It is very easy for
both patient and therapist to lose their way. This is why narrow and
inadequate theories of the psyche are clung to so desperately—at least
they provide some sense of orientation. If we are not to submit psychic
phenomena to the Procrustean bed of a preconceived theory, we must
seek the categories for understanding the psyche within the psyche itself.
An old alchemical dictum says, “Dissolve the matter in its own water.”
This is what we do when we try to understand the process of psycho-
therapy in terms of alchemy.
    As Jung has demonstrated, alchemical symbolism is largely a product of the
unconscious psyche. “The real nature of matter was unknown to the alchemist; he
knew it only in hints. Inasmuch as he tried to explore it he projected the unconscious
into the darkness of matter in order to
illuminate it ____ While working on his chemical experiments the operator
had certain psychic experiences which appeared to him as the particular behavior of
the chemical process. Since it was a question of projection, he was naturally
unconscious of the fact that the experience had nothing to do with matter itself. He
experienced his projection as a property of matter; but what he was in reality
experiencing was his own unconscious."1
    As Jung studied alchemy he found that this luxuriant network of images was,
indeed, the psyche‟s “own water” which could be used to understand the complex
contents of the psyche. He wrote:
    I had very soon seen that analytical psychology coi ncided in a most curious way
    with alchemy. The experiences of the alchemists, were, in a sense, my
    experiences, and their world was my world. This was, of course, a momen tous
    discovery: 1 had stumbled upon the historical counterpart of my psychology of the
    unconscious. The possibility of a comparison with alchemy, and the uninterrupted
    intellectual chain back to Gnosticism, gave substance



‟Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, CW 12, pars. 345 ff.
to my psychology. When 1 pored over those old texts everything fell into place:
the fantasy-images, the empirical material I had gathered in my practice, and the
conclusions 1 had drawn from it. 1 now began to understand what these psychic
contents meant when seen in historical perspective. 2
At the end of Mysterium Coniunctionis he sums up the meaning of alchemy:
... the entire alchemical procedure... could just as well represent the individ -
uation process of a single individual, though with the not unimportant difference
that no single individual ever attains to the richness and scope of the alchemical
symbolism. This has the advantage of having been built up through the
centuries... It is... a difficult and thankless task to try to describe the nature of
the individuation process from case material... No case in my experience is
comprehensive enough to show all the aspects in such detail that it could be
regarded as paradigmatic __________________ Alchemy, therefore, has per-
formed for me the great and invaluable service of providing material in which
my experience could find sufficient room, and has thereby made it possible for
me to describe the individuation process at least in its essential aspects. 1
 We can therefore say that alchemical images describe the process of depth
psychotherapy which is identical with wh at Jung calls individuation. What I thus
propose to do is to examine some of the basic images of alchemy to see how they
correspond to the experiences of psychotherapy.
 The term “psychotherapy” is used here in its broadest, etymological sense. The
Greek word iherapeuein, “to heal,” originally meant “service to the gods.”
Healing thus took place at first in a sacred context. Philo tells us of a group of
pre-Christian, Jewish contemplatives who called themselves Therapeuts “either
because they profess an art of medicine more excellent than that in general use in
cities (for that only heals bodies, but the other heals souls which are under the
mastery of terrible and almost incurable diseases, which pleasures and appetites,
fears and griefs, and covetousness, and follies, and injustice, and all the rest of
the innumerable multitude of other passions and vices, have inflicted upon
them), or else because they have been instructed by nature and the sacred laws to
serve the living God.” 4 Psychotherapy thus means, basically, service to the
psyche.
    What makes alchemy so valuable for psychotherapy is that its images
 concretize        the    experiences      of   transformation      that   one       undergoes   in
 psychotherapy. Taken as a whole, alchemy provides a kind of anatomy of
 individuation. Its images will be most meaningful, of course, to those who have
 had a personal experience of the unconscious.




          J
              Jung, Memories. Dreams. Reflections, p. 205.

          KW 14, par. 791
              „Philo, “On the Contemplative Life," in The Essential Philo, p. 311.
                                      T HE A LCHEMICAL W ORLD V IEW

    For the alchemist, upper and lower and inner and outer were linked by hidden
connections and identities. What happens in heaven is duplicated by what happens on
earth, as indicated in this alchemical verse:
                                          Heaven above
                                          Heaven below Stars
                                          above Stars below
                                          All that is above
                                          Also is below Grasp
                                          this And rejoice. 5
     Likewise, a passage from the Emerald Tablet says, “What is below is like that
which is above, and what is above is like that which is below, t o accomplish the
miracles of one thing.” 6 The planets in heaven correspond to the metals in the earth:
Sun = gold, Moon = silver, Mercury = quicksilver, Venus = copper, Mars = iron,
Jupiter = tin, and Saturn = lead. As the planets revolve around the earth , they
gradually spin their corresponding metals into the earth, which people can extract by
their chemical operations (see figure 1-1).
     Psychologically we can understand this image as referring to the archetypal
constituents of the ego. The building blocks of the ego are divine qualities stolen
from the gods or products of the dismemberment of a deity—earthly representatives
of transpersonal principles. Such imagery is still alive in the modern psyche as
indicated by the following dream of a middle-aged businessman and commercial
artist who had no knowledge of alchemy:
      Four metal-clad figures descend toward me from the sky. They Jloat down over an
      ancient Roman wall. Each suit is made of a different metal. One is bronze, another
      lead, another iron, and the fourth is made of platinum. The platinum-suited figure
      separates himself from the others and approaches. “We are seeking metal," he says.
      “The metal we seek matches the material of our suits." The figures remain suspended in
      the air by some unique method.
       The metal-suited men correspond to the planetary deities of the alchemists. Since
they have no weight, they are spirit beings and inhabitants of the sky. Thus they
would represent archetypal images of the




5
    Cited in Jung, The Practice of Psychotherapy. C W 16, par. 384.

„Read, Prelude to Chemistry: An Outline of Alchemy, p. 54.
                               FIGURE I - 1.
    Macrocosm and Microcosm Interconnected (The Hermetic Museum, trans. by
                                A. E. Waite.)


objective psyche. Their descent in search of their corresponding metals
indicates that each metal-spirit is seeking his own earthly embodiment. They
want to be concretely actualized in the conscious experience of an individual
ego. This is an archetypal dream and clearly has a collective as well as
personal meaning. The gods we have lost are descending on us, demanding
reconnection. Like Baucis and Philemon, modern individuals are being visited
by and asked to provide hospitality for transpersonal factors with which they
have lost connection. The dream is also relevant to our efforts to understand
alchemy. The spirits of alchemy—the symbolic images that have come down
to us—are asking for their earthly counterparts—that is, their meaningful
realization in modern experience. Many gifted and devoted people offered up
their whole lives to the quest for the Philosophers‟ Stone. By understanding
the images they served we can redeem their lives from futility and recognize
them to be witnesses to and carriers of the mystery of individuation.




                                      T HE O PUS

   The central image of alchemy is the idea of the opus. The alchemist thought
                   of himself as committed to a sacred work—a search for the
supreme and ultimate value. Alchemical texts have a great deal to say about the
nature of the opus and the attitude that should be taken towards it. Certain virtues are
indispensable prerequisites. One text says, “O all ye seekers after this Art, ye can
reach no useful result without a patient, laborious, and solicitous soul, persevering
courage, and continuous regimen.” 7 These are requirements of ego function. Patience
is basic. Courage means a willingness to face anxiety. Contin uous regimen means
that through all shifts of mood and mental state one is willing to persevere in the
effort to scrutinize and understand what is happening.
   Another relevant text comes from Thomas Norton‟s Ordinal of Alchemy. For anyone
who has had the experience of psychotherapy, the parallels will be immediately
evident.
   Anyone who gives himself up to this search must therefore expect to meet with
   much vexation of spirit. He will frequently have to change his course in
   consequence of new discoveries which he makes ______ The devil will do his
   utmost to frustrate your search by one or the other of the three stumbling blocks,
   namely, haste, despair, or deception... he who is in a hurry will complete his work
   neither in a month, nor yet in a year; and in this Art it will always be true that the
   man who is in a hurry will never be without matter of
   complaint __ If the enemy does not prevail against you by hurry, he will
   assault you with despondency, and will be constantly putting into your minds
   discouraging thoughts, how those who seek this Art are many, while they are few
   that find it, and how those who fail are often wiser men than yourself. He will
   then ask you what hope there can be of your attaining the grand arcanum;
   moreover, he will vex you with doubts whether your master is himself possessed
   of the secret which he professes to impart to you; or whether he is not concealing
   from you the best part of that which he knows. ...The third enemy against whom
   you must guard is deceit, and this is perhaps more dangerous than the other two.
   The servants whom you must employ to feed your furn aces are frequently most
   untrustworthy. Some are careless and go to sleep when they should be attending
   the fire; others are depraved, and do you all the harm they can; others again are
   either stupid or conceited and over-confident, and disobey instructions... or they
   are drunken, negligent, and absent-minded. Be on your guard against all these, if
   you wish to be spared some great loss."

    A prominent feature of the opus is that it is considered a sacred work requiring a
religious attitude.
   ...this arcanum should be regarded, not only as a truly great, but as a most
   holy Art __ Therefore, if any man desire to reach this great and unspeakable
   mystery, he must remember that it is obtained not only by the might of man, but
   by the grace of God, and that not our will or desire, but only the mercy of the
   Most High, can bestow it upon us. For this reason you must first of all




7
Waite, trans., Turba Philusophorum, p. 127, dictum 39.
•Waite, trans.. The Hermetic Museum, 2:22 25.
        cleanse your heart, lift it to Him alone, and ask of Him this gift in true earnest,
        and undoubting prayer. He alone can give and bestow it. 9
        Now, the regimen is greater than is perceived by reason, except through divine
        inspiration. 10
        Woe unto you who fear not God, for He may deprive you of this art! 11
        Our art, its theory as well as its practice, is altogether a gift of God, Who gives
        it when and to whom He elects: it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs,
        but simply through the mercy of God. 12
    Such passages as these make clear that a careful awareness of the transpersonal
 level of the psyche is required. This means one must be Self -oriented rather than
 ego-oriented. There is a paradox here—as so often in alchemy and psychotherapy.
 An awareness of the Self and the religious attitude that such an awareness brings
 are the goals of psychotherapy rather than requirements at the beginning.
 However, the potential at least must exist from the start. As one alchemist says,
 one must start with a bit of the Philosophers‟ Stone if one is to find it. As the
 process deepens, one realizes more and more that insights come by grace and that
 development occurs not by the will of the ego but by the urge to individuation
 from the Self (see figure 1-2).
    Another aspect of the opus is that it is a highly individual work. Alchemists
 were decidedly solitaries. They might have had one helper but no more. This
 refers to the uniquely individual nature of individuation. In its deepest aspects it
 is experienced alone. The opus cannot be performed by a committee. It thus
 generates a certain unavoidable alienation from the world, at least for a time. “But
 when God grants his grace, to someone who understands (the Art)             this will
 appear incomprehensible in the eyes of the world and those who have this mystery
 will be scorned of men and looked down upon.” 13 This corresponds to the work of
 psychotherapy, which is impossible for anyone to understand from the outside. It
 will be scorned and ridiculed by the collective, conventional standpoint either
 from another person or one‟s own shadow. Parallel to this text are these words of
 Jesus: “If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own; but because
 you do not belong to the world, because I have chosen you out of the world, for
 that reason the world hates you” (John 15:19, NEB). Another feature of the opus
 concerns its secret nature. The alche-




9
 Ibid., 1:127.
,0
     Turba Philosophorum. p. 138, dictum 39.
"Ibid., p. 97, dictum 29.
l2
     Waite, trans.. The Hermetic Museum, 1:9.
“Ibid., 173.
                                 FIGURE 1 - 2
     The Alchemist Guided by God (Barchusen, Elemenia Chemiae. 1718. Paris.
        Bibliothèque Nationale. Reprinted in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy.)


mists considered themselves to be the guardians of a mystery that was not to be
divulged to the unworthy.
   Therefore you should carefully test and examine the life, character, and mental
   aptitude of any person who would be intitiated in this Art, and then you should
   bind him, by a sacred oath, not to let our Magister y be commonly or vulgarly
   known. Only when he begins to grow old and feeble, he may reveal it to one
   person, but not to more—and that one man must be virtuous, and generally
   approved by his fellows. For this Magistery must always remain a secret science,
   and the reason that compels us to be careful is obvious. If any wicked man should
   learn to practice this Art, the event would be fraught with great danger to
   Christendom. For such a man would overstep all bounds of moderation, and
   would remove from their hereditary thrones those legitimate princes who rule
   over the peoples of Christendom. And the punishment of this wickedness would
   fall upon him who had instructed that unworthy person in our Art. In order, then,
   to avoid such an outbreak of overweening prid e, he who possesses the knowledge
   of this Art. should be scrupulously careful how he delivers it to another, and
   should regard it as the peculiar privilege of those who excel in virtue. 14

Like the Eleusinian Mysteries, the alchemical secret was forbidden t o be published.
             Understood psychologically, the matter is more subtle. A
secret that can be told is no secret. In a sense, the secret of the psyche is
safe because it is not communicable to those who have not yet experi enced
it for themselves. The misuse of the secret referred to in the text suggests
an inflation following the ego's identification with an archetypal image. If
the transpersonal energies are not perceived as secret and sacred they will
be channeled into personal ends and have destructive effects. Misuse of the
alchemical mystery corresponds to the misuse of the Eucharistic mystery
concerning which the Apostle Paul says, “Anyone who eats the bread or
drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty of desecrating t he
body and the blood of the Lord. A man must test (dokimazo—*to prove, to
assay metals”) himself before eating his share of the bread and drinking
from the cup. For he who eats and drinks eats and drinks judgement on
himself if he does not discern the Body” (I Cor. 11:27-29, NEB).
   The alchemical opus was considered a process begun by nature but
requiring the conscious art and effort of a human being to complete.
   This state cannot be perfected by the mere progress of nature; for gold has no
   propensity to move itself so far, but rather chooses to remain in its constantly
   abiding body .15
   Nature serves Art with matter, and Art serves nature with suitable Instru ments and
   method convenient for nature to produce such new forms; and although the before -
   mentioned Stone can only be brought to its proper form by Art. yet the form is from
   nature .16
   This is a profound idea. In one sense the opus is against Nature, but in
another sense the alchemist is helping her to do what she cannot do for
herself. This surely refers to the evolution of consciousness. Although the
urge to consciousness exists with nature—within the unconscious psyche—
an ego is needed to realize fully that natural urge. It is required that the
individual cooperate deliberately in the task of creating c onsciousness.
   The ultimate statements about the alchemical opus occur in certain texts
that equate it with the creation of the world. Zosimos says, “The symbol of
chemistry is founded on the creation of the world.” 17 The Emerald Tablet
says at the conclusion of its alchemical recipe, “Thus the world has been
created.” Another text, after describing the preparation of a special water,
continues as follows:
   When this has been done, take a drop of the consecrated red wine and let it fall into
   the water, and you will instantly perceive a fog and thick darkness on top of the
   water, such as also was at the first creation. Then put in two drops.




"The Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers, p. 175.
   **Tri»fno»in, Splendor Solis: Alchemical Treatises of Solomon Trismosin, p. 18.
   •‟Cited by Jung, E.T.H. Seminars: Alchemy, p. 146.
   and you will see the light coming forth from the darkness; whereupon little by little put
   in every half of each quarter hour first three, then fou r, then five, then six drops, and
   then no more, and you will see with your own eyes one thing after another appearing
   by and by on top of the water, how God created all things in six days, and how it all
   came to pass, and such secrets as are not to be spoken aloud and 1 also have not power
   to reveal. Fall on your knees before you undertake this operation. Let your eyes judge
   of it: for thus was the world created. 1 "

   Understood psychologically, these texts are equating the individual with
the world; that is, they state that individuation is a world creating process.
Schopenhauer begins his great work. The World as Will and Idea, with the
outrageous statement, “The world is my idea." Likewise, Jung speaks of the
“world-creating quality” of consciousness. 19 Such an idea is dangerously
close to solipsistic inflation, and, indeed, it is a common content of
psychosis—the idea that one is the whole world or the center of the universe.
Nevertheless, it is an archetypal idea that the individual needs in order not to
be swallowed up by collective, statistical standards. Collective thinking is
revealed by preoccupation with whether or not one is normal. To the extent
that one is a separate, unique world of being there can be no norms, since a
norm is an average of many. The individual psyche is and must be a whole
world within itself in order to stand over and against the outer world and
fulfill its task of being a carrier of consciousness. For the scales to be
balanced, the individual must be of equal weight to the world.
   This realization of the individual as a whole world often comes over me
with considerable force as 1 am working with patients. It is a valuable
counterbalance to doubts about the significance of one's efforts with only a
handful of individuals as compared to the world population of several billion.
   Although alchemical writings are complex, confused, and even cha otic, the
basic scheme of the opus is quite simple. It is as follows: The purpose is to
create a transcendent, miraculous substance, which is variously symbolized as
the Philosophers‟ Stone, The Elixir of Life, or the universal medicine. The
procedure is, first, to find the suitable material, the so - called prima materia,
and then to subject it to a series of operations that will turn it into the
Philosophers‟ Stone.


                                     The PRIMA MATERIA
  The term “prima materia" has a long history that goes back to the pre
Socratic philosophers. These early thinkers were gripped by an a


“Cited hr Jung. Psychology and Alchemy. CW 12. par. 347.
•*Mysierium Coniundioni.%. CW 14. par. 132.
priori idea—that is, an archetypal image that told them that the world derives
from a single, original stuff, the so-called first matter. They differed as to the
identification of this prime matter, but they agreed on its existence. Thales called
the prime matter “water,” Anaximander called it “the boundless” (apeiron),
Anaximenes called it “air,” and Heraclitus called it “fire.”
   This idea of a single, original substance has no empirical source in the outer
world. Externally the world is obviously a multiplicity. Thus, the idea must be a
projection of a psychic fact. According to philosophical fantasy it was then
imagined that the prime matter underwent a process of differentiation whereby it
was separated into the four elements, earth, air, fire, and water. It was thought
that these four elements then combined in various proportions to form all the
physical objects of the world. Upon the prima materia was imposed, as it were, a
fourfold structure, a cross, representing the four elements —two sets of contraries,
earth and air, fire and water. Psychologically, this image corresponds to the
creation of the ego out of the undifferentiated unconscious by the process of
discriminating the four functions: thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuition.
   Aristotle elaborated the idea of the prima materia in connection with his
distinction between matter and form. According to Aris totle, primary matter
before it has been wedded to form or had form imposed upon it is pure
potentiality—not yet actualized because the actual does not exist until it has
taken on a particular form. As one commentator of Aristotle puts it, "First matter
is the name of that entirely indeterminate power of change.” 20
   The alchemists inherited the idea of the prima materia from ancient philosophy
and applied it to their attempts at the transformation of matter. They thought that
in order for a given substance to be transformed, it must first be reduced or
returned to its original, undifferentiated state. “Bodies cannot be changed except
by reduction into their first matter.” 21 Again, “the species or forms of metals
cannot be changed into gold and silver before being first reduced to their primary
matter.” 22
   This procedure corresponds closely to what takes place in psycho therapy. The
fixed, settled aspects of the personality that are rigid and static are reduced or led
back to their original, undifferentiated condition as part of the process of psychic
transformation. Return to the prima materia is illustrated by the following dream:




    20
     Brehier, The History of Philosophy: The Hellenic Age, p. 208.
    21
         Kelly, The Alchemical Writings of Edward Kelly, p. 34.
    JJ
         Figulus, A Golden and Blessed Casket of Nature's Marvels, p. 298.
    / am hack in a hospital ward. / have become a child again and / am in the ward to
    start my life from the beginning.
    The dreamer had recently made a suicide attempt, and this dream indicates the
symbolic meaning of that act. The child is the prima materia of the adult. This
patient's urge for transformation is causing his return to the original condition. In
Aristotle‟s terms, the form that actualizes the present person ality is being dissolved
and returned to the first matter, the formless state of pure potentiality, in order for a
new form or actuality to emerge. This idea is represented by the following dream:
    I am having to deal with an infant. Whenever there is something one can‟t
    understand—is blocked to—one must approach this infant. At the moment of lack of
    understanding, the infant glows a faint crimson. This faint crimson glow conveys
    innocence—which is the material of the infant—and this innocence frees one to
    approach the problem in terms of one‟s individual reality.
    Innocence corresponds to the undifferentiated state of the prima materia. The
dream reminds one of the saying of Jesus, “Truly, I say unto you, unless you turn
and become like children you will never enter the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 18:3
RSV). To become like children is to revert to the innocent, undifferentiated state of
the prima materia. which is a prerequisite of transformation.
    Fixed, developed aspects of the personality allow no change. They are solid,
established, and sure of their rightness. Only the indefinite, fresh, and vital, but
vulnerable and insecure, original condition symbolized by the child is open to
development and hence is alive. We consider the image of a child in dreams as o ne
of the symbols of the Self, but it also can symbolize the prima materia.
    Often the texts speak of finding the prima materia rather than making it. Its
descriptions are innumerable. Here are a few typical examples:
    This Matter lies before the eyes of all; everybody sees it, touches it, loves it, but
    knows it not. It is glorious and vile, precious and of small account, and is
    found everywhere __ To be brief, our Matter has as many names as there are
    things in the world; that is why the foolish know it not. 23
    As concerns the Matter, it is one, and contains within itself all that is needed.
    ...In the same way Arnold of Villa Nova writes in his “Flower of Flowers”: “Our
    stone is made out of one thing, and with one thing.” To the same effect he says to
    the King of Naples: “All that is in our stone is essential to it, nor does it need
    any foreign ingredient. Its nature is one, and it is one thing.”




-‟‟Waite, Irans., The Her met it Museum] 1:13.
          And Rosinus says: “Know that the object of your desire is one thing, out of which
          all things are made .”24
          The substance that we first take in hand is mineral —It is of great inward virtue,
          though it is vile to the sight. It is Saturn‟s child, do you need more; conceive it
          aright, for it is our first entrance. It is sable colored, with argent veins appearing
          intermixed in the body—It is of a venomous nature .25
          There is in our chemistry a certain noble substance over whose beginning affliction
          rules with vinegar, but over whose end joy rules with mirth . 2 *

      The problem of finding the prima materia corresponds to the problem of
finding what to work on in psychotherapy. These texts give us some hints.
      I. It is ubiquitous, to be found everywhere, before the eyes of all. This
means that psychotherapeutic material likewise is everywhere, in all the
ordinary, everyday occurrences of life. Moods and petty personal reac tions
of all kinds are suitable matter to be worked on by the therapeutic process.
      2.     Although of great inward value, the prima materia is vile in outer
appearance and therefore despised, rejected, and thrown on the dung heap.
The prima materia is treated like the suffering servant in Isaiah.
Psychologically, this means that the prima materia is found in the shadow, that
part of the personality that is considered most despicable. Those aspects of
ourselves most painful and most humiliating are the very ones to be brought
forward and worked on.
   3. It appears as a multiplicity—“has as many names as there are
things”—but at the same time is one. This feature corresponds to the fact
that initially psychotherapy makes one aware of one‟s fragmented,
disjointed condition. Very gradually these warring fragments are discov ered
to be differing aspects of one underlying unity. It is as though one sees th e
fingers of a hand touching a table at first only in two dimensions, as
separate unconnected fingers. With three-dimensional vision, the fingers are
seen as part of a larger unity, the hand.
   4. The prima materia is undifferentiated, without definite boundaries,
limits, or form. This corresponds to a certain experience of the unconscious
that exposes the ego to the infinite, the apeiron. It may evoke the terror of
dissolution or the awe of eternity. It provides a glimpse of the pleroma, the
increatum, the chaos prior to the operation of the world-creating Logos. It is
the fear of the boundless that often leads one to be content with the ego
limits one has rather than risk falling




24
     lbid. t 12.
»The Lives of the Alchemysiical Philosophers, p. 176.
26
     Cited in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy. CW 12, par. 387.
into the infinite by attempting to enlarge them (see figures 13 and 1 -4).




                                     FIGURE 1 - 3
 The Prima Materia as Chaos (Marolles, Tableaux du temple des muses. 1655. London,
 British Museum. Reprinted in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy.)
                       ANATOMY OK THE PSYCHE
14




                                       FIGURE I - 4
 Cerberus as the Devouring and Entangling Aspect of the Prima Materia (15th century.
 Biblioteca Apostólica Vaticana, Cod. Pal. lat. 1066, fol. 239. Reprinted in Derola, The
                                 Secret Art of Alchemy.)



                                    T HE O PERATIONS
   It is very difficult to understand alchemy as we find it in the original writings.
We encounter a wild, luxuriant, tangled mass of overlapping images that is
maddening to the order-seeking conscious mind. My method of ordering the chaos
of alchemy is to focus on the major alchemical operations. After the prima materia
has been found, it has to submit to a series of chemical procedures in order to be
transformed into the Philosophers‟ Stone. Practically all of alchemical imagery can
be ordered around these operations, and not only alchemical imagery. Many images
from myth, religion, and folklore also gather around these symbolic operations,
since they all come from the same source—the archetypal psyche.
   There is no exact number of alchemical operations, and many images overlap.
For my purposes 1 have chosen seven operations as the major ones making up the
alchemical transformation. They are calcinatio, solutio, coagulatio, sublimatio,
mortificatio, separatio, and coniunctio. (1 use the Latin terms instead of calcination,
solution, and so on, in order
 to distinguish the psychological processes from the chemical procedures.) Each of
 these operations is found to be the center of an elaborate symbol system. These
 central symbols of transformation make up the major content of all culture -
 products. They provide basic categories by which to understand the life of the
 psyche, and they illustrate almost the full range of experiences that constitute
 individuation.
    In subsequent chapters, I shall take up each of these operations in turn. Each will
 be accompanied by a chart indicating the major symbolic connections that cluster
 around the core image. The charts are an important part of my method because I
 want to emphasize the structural nature of each symbol system. Although 1 shall try
 to be clear and explicit, the nature of the subject requires that much be left on the
 level of image and symbol. In justification, I offer these remarks by Jung:
     We should not begrudge the alchemists their secret language: deeper insight into the problems
     of psychic development soon teaches us how much better it is to reserve judgement instead of
     prematurely announcing to all and sundry what's what. Of course we all have an
     understandable desire for crystal clarity, but we are apt to forget that in psychic matters we
     are dealing with processes of experience, that is, with transformations which should never be
     given hard and fast names if their living movement is not to petrify into something static. The
     protean mythologem and the shimmering symbol express the processes of the psyche fa r more
     trenchantly and. in the end. far more clearly than the clearest concept; for the symbol not only
     conveys a visualization of the process but—and this is perhaps just as important—it also
     brings a re-experiencing of it, of that twilight which we can l earn to understand only through
     inoffensive empathy, but which too much clarity only dispels .27




37
 Jung, Alchemical Studies, CW 13, par. 199.
                                        Calcination


                                  begin with calcinatio. A few
         ost lists of alchemical operations

M       authors say solulio comes first. However, the sequence of opera -
tions (with one or two exceptions) does not seem to be psychologically
significant. Any operation may be the initiating one, and the others may
follow in any order.
    As with most alchemical images, calcinatio derives in part from a chemical
procedure. The chemical process of calcination entails the intense heating of a solid
in order to drive off water and all other constituents that will volatilize. What
remains is a fine, dry powder. The classic example of calcination, from which it
derives its name (calx = lime), is the heating of limestone (CaCOj) or slaked lime
(Ca(OH) 2 ) to produce quicklime (CaO, calx viva). When water is added, quicklime
has the interesting characteristic of generating heat. It was thought by the
alchemists to contain fire and was sometimes equated with fire itself. 1
    The wonder of quicklime to the mind ignorant of chemistry is vividly described
by Augustine:
     Let us consider the wonders of lime; for besides growing white in fire, which makes other
     things black, ...it has also a mysterious property of conceiving fire within it. Itself cold to
     the touch, it yet has a hidden store of fire, which is not at once apparent to our senses, but
     which experience teaches us. lies as it were slumbering within it even while unseen. And it
     is for this reason called “quicklime,” as if the fire were the invisible soul quickening the
     visible substance or body. But the marvelous thing is, that this fire is kindled when it is
     extinguished. For to disengage the hidden fire the lime is moistened or drenched with
     water, and then, though it be cold before, it becomes hot by that very application which
     cools what is hot. As if the fire were departing from the lime and breathing its l ast, it no
     longer lies hid, but appears; and then the lime lying in the coolness of death cannot be
     requickened, and what we before called “quick,” we now call “slaked.” 2




1
  The Glory oj the World says, “Take fire, or the quicklime of the sages, which is th e vital fire of
all trees, and therein doth God Himself burn by divine love” (Waite, trans.. The Hermetic
Museum 1:198).
1
    Augustine. City of God 21:4.
    Each of the four elements has its own particular operation. Calcina- tio is the
fire operation (the others: solutio, water; coagulatio. earth; sublimaiio, air). Hence
any image that contains open fire burning or affecting substances will be
related to the calcinatio. This opens up the whole rich and complicated subject
of fire symbolism. Jung has demonstrated that fire symbolizes libido.‟ This
puts it very generally. In order to specify the implications of fire and its
effects, we must examine the phenomenology of the image in its various
ramifications.
    In The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine we find the following recipe for
calcinatio: “Take a fierce gray wolf, which... is found in the valleys and
mountains of the world, where he roams almost savage with hunger. Cast to
him the body of the King, and when he has devoured it, burn him entirely to
ashes in a great fire. By this process the King will be liberated; and when it has
been performed thrice the lion has overcome the wolf, and will find nothing
more to devour in him. Thus our body has been rendered fit for the first stage
of our work” 4 (see Figure 2-1).




                                  FIGURE 2 - I
   Calcinatio of the King. The Wolf as Prima Materia. Devouring the Dead King
                       (From Maier. Atalanta Fugiens. 1618.)


‟Jung, Symbols of Transformation. CW 5, par. 208.
■•Waite, trans.. The Hermetic Museum 1:325.
        Read has interpreted this passage chemically. He identifies the wolf with
    antimony, which was called the “„wolf of metals,‟ because it „de voured,‟ or united
    with, all the known metals except gold. On account of its use in purifying molten
    gold—the impurities being removed in the form of a scum—antimony was also
    called balneum regis, the „bath of the King.‟” 5 Thus the passage would refer to the
    purification of gold by melting it three times with antimony. This interpretation may
    be right from the strictly chemical standpoint. However, it fails to take into account
    the meaning of the fantasy images that are projected into the chemical process.
    These represent the psychic component of alchemy that is the chief interest of the
    psychotherapist.
        The text speaks of “the body of the King.” Presumably the king is already dead,
    having been killed in the process of moriificaiio. The death of a king is a time of
    crisis and transition. Regicide is the gravest of crimes. Psychologically it would
    signify the death of the ruling principle of consciousness, the highest authority in
    the hierarchical structure of the ego. Death of the king would thus be accompani ed
    by a regressive dissolution of the conscious personality. This course of events is
    indicated by the fact that the body of the king is fed to a ravening wolf; that is, the
    ego has been devoured by hungry desirousness. The wolf in turn is fed to the fire.
    But wolf = desire and desire = fire. Thus desirousness consumes itself. After a
    descent into hell, the ego (king) is reborn, phoenixlike, in a purified state.
        As in fairy tales, the threefold repetition signifies the consummation of a
    temporal process. 6 The statement that “the lion has overcome the wolf‟ would equate
    the lion with the fire that consumes the wolf. The lion is the “lower sun,” 7 a
    theriomorphic representation of the masculine principle. There are alchemical
    pictures showing a lion devouring the sun. Since sun, king, and gold are equivalents,
    this would signify the descent of consciousness into the animal realm where it must
    endure the fiery energies of instinct. In chemical imagery it is the purification or
    refining of gold.
        Our text seems to set up three levels of being. From below upward there are the
    level of the wolf, the level of the fire or lion, and the level of the king. If we equate
    the wolf with elemental desirousness, the lion with the egocentric power drive, and
    the king with discriminating, objective consciousness, we have a very close parallel
    to the stages in the transformation of instinct as formulated by Esther Harding—that
    is, the autos.




'Read, Prelude to Chemistry, p. 201.

'„Edingcr. Ego and Archetype, pp. 179ff.
7
 Jung. Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14. par. 21.
the ego, and the Self." Although Harding uses these terms to denote successive
centers of consciousness in the course of psychological development, they can
also be understood as residual structural layers of the adult psyche that are
subject to reactivation. The feeding of the king to the wolf, the consuming of
the wolf by fire (lion), and the rebirth of the king out of the fire would then
signify the regression of the ego to the original “autos” stage of autoerotic
desirousness. This is followed by the “ego” or personal power stage, and finally
by the return of a refined or augmented objective consciousness.
   A dream that closely parallels our text was dreamed by a man of middle age
facing a challenging illness:
    The Rev. X had died (a well-known minister beloved by the patient). His body
    was to be cremated and there was some question as to who would get the gold
    that would be left over after his body was burned. I saw the liquid gold, very dark
    in
    color, held in some dark stuff, perhaps ashes that were black ---------------------
    My first thought about the gold was negative, a feeling of repugnance, then it
    occurred to me th'at he must have been something very special, and that the gold
    was sort of his essence, or what he left behind of value.
This dream combines several alchemical themes: calcinatio as cremation; the
death and blackness of mortiftcatio; extraction of essence, separatio; and the
making of gold, the goal of the opus. In both the text and the dream, the dead
king or father figure is the object of calcinatio. 9 The dream suggests that a
dominant life value around which the personality has been structured is
undergoing réévaluation.
   The calcining fire may derive from sexuality. For instance, a man who was
dealing with compulsive sexuality had this dream:
    He sees his mother in a wire basket covered with fragments of hot slate. The
    procedure is supposed to be therapeutic but there




"Harding writes: “In the first stage... the focal center, the I, is complet ely dominated by
auto-erotic desires. I have called this center the autos. In the second stage the ego becomes
the center of consciousness, and the instinctive drives are modified through their relation to
the new-found ego consciousness, which in turn says“h" In the third stage the ego is
displaced from its central position, becoming relative in importance to the new center of
consciousness, the Self, whose categorical imperative takes over ultimate con trol" (Psychic
Energy, Its Source and Goal. pp. 23 24).
‟Frances Wickes has reported a dream on the same theme, dreamed by a man with a mother
problem. The old King, whose cruelly is completely irrational, must be killed with his own sword, a
bent and rusty blade. When this is done, a flame springs up from the lifeless body. As the old King is
consumed to ashes, a gleaming sword appears in the center of the flame (The Inner World of Choice,
p. 114).
   is some question that it may become diabolical if the state fragments are heated so
   hot as to make it torture.
The dreamer was reminded of having seen rats escaping from a basket of burning
trash. In this dream the mother represents the prima materia that must undergo
calcinatio. In other words it is the Eros realm of the feminine principle that requires
purification (see figures 2-2 and 2 3).
    In another text the calcinatio is described as follows: “Then take out all the faeces
which remain in the retort, and are blackish like unt o soot, which faeces are called
our Dragon, of which faeces calcine...in a fervent hot fire...until it becomes a white
calx, as white as snow” 10 (see figure 2-4). Here the matter to be calcined is called
dragon or “black faeces"—that is, shadow stuff. In another text it is called the
Ethiopian: “Then will appear in the bottom of the vessel the mighty Ethiopian,
burned, calcined, bleached, altogether dead and lifeless. He asks to be buried, to be
sprinkled with his own moisture and slowly calcined till he sha ll arise in glowing
form from the fierce fire. ...Behold a wondrous restoration or renewal of the
Ethiopian!”"
    The three texts quoted will suffice to demonstrate the nature of the substance to
be calcined. It is called variously a “ravening wolf," “black faeces," a “dragon,” and
a “mighty Ethiopian.” These terms tell us that the calcinatio is performed on the
primitive shadow side, which harbors




                                   FIGURE 2-2
  Calcinatio of an Earth-Animal (MS. Sloane I. 1316, 17th century. London. British
               Museum. Reprinted in Burland, The Arts of the Alchemists.)



'"“The Bosom Book of Sir George Ripley," in Collectanea Chemica. p. 126. "Melchior,
cited by Jung in Psychology anil Alchemy, CW 12. pars. 484 85.
                  ANATOMY of the psyche




                               FIGURE 2-3
 Calcinalio of the Devouring Parent (Mutus Liber, 1702. Reprinted in Jung,
                          Psychology and Alchemy.)




hungry, instinctual desirousness and is contaminated with the uncon scious.
The fire for the process comes from the frustration of these instinctual desires
themselves. Such an ordeal of frustrated desire is a characteristic feature of
the developmental process.
    A man who endured a prolonged frustration had this dream:
   The dreamer found himself in a cavernous place, perhaps underground.
   Through a door come huge, white-hot masses of limestone that slide or roll past
   him. Smoke and fire are all about. He
                                 FIGURE 2 - 4
 The Fire of the Dragon Being Both Fanned and Extinguished (Trismosin, Splendor
                                  Solis, 1582.)




    seeks Jor a way out but whenever he opens a door he is met by billowing smoke which
    drives him back.

On awakening his first associations were that this must be hell or the fiery furnace
of Nebuchadnezzar. In this dream the inert limestone is in the process of being
transformed into living quicklime by the calcinatio. The associations bring up a
biblical image of the calcinatio. Nebuchadnezzar‟s fiery furnace, which makes an
interesting psychological point. Nebuchadnezzar commanded everyone to fall down
and worship his golden image. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused.
Nebuchadnezzar in furious rage had them thrown into the fiery furnace. But they
were unharmed, and in the midst of the fire four men were seen; the appearance of
the fourth was “like a son of the gods” (Daniel 3:25 JB).
        The account emphasizes Nebuchadnezzar‟s furious rage. His rage can be
 equated with the fiery furnace. He personifies the power motive, the arbitrary
 authority of the inflated ego that undergoes calcinatio when its overwhelming
 pretensions are frustrated by the presence of the transpersonal authority (the God
 of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego). Nebuchadnezzar corresponds to the king
 in our alchemical quotation who is fed to the wolf and then calcined. Another
 interesting feature is that in the furnace the three men become four. This is a
 clear allusion to the totality of the Self that emerges in the midst of the
 frustration of the ego power demands. Nebuchadnezzar‟s fiery furnace expresses
 an archetypal situation. It is what one encounters whenever one challenges an
 arbitrary authority, either internal or external. Whether one gets through such a
 calcinatio depends on whether one is acting on ego motives or Self motives (see
 figure 2-5).
        Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were immune t o fire. This brings up a
 typical motif. Eliade has discussed the “mastery of fire” as a feature of
 shamanism and the mythology of early metallurgy. 12 The shamans were supposed
 to be immune to fire. They could swallow it or pick up burning coals with
 impunity. In this connection a woman had an interesting dream:
        The dreamer saw a woman bending over a cauldron-like vat holding a ball of fire
        in her hands. With complete nonchalance and no evidence of pain or harm she
        held, shaped, and squeezed the ball of fire as though it were a piece of laundry
        being washed.
        The dreamer watched with amazement.
 The dream associated to an ancient Navajo Indian woman that the dreamer once
 saw making bread on a heated stone with her bare hands. The dream came at a
 time when the patient was starting to embark on a major creative project and
 indicates that the creative energies of the Self were activated 13 (see figure 2-6).
        The image of invulnerability to fire indicates an immunity to identifi cation
 with affect. Experience of the archetypal psyche has this effect to the extent that
 it enlarges and deepens ego consciousness. There is then less likelihood of
 identification with the emotional reactions of oneself




,2
     Eliade. The Forge and ihe Crucible, pp. 79ff; also Shamanism.
,3
 The interpretation of the fire-kneading woman as the Self is supported by the following
amplification. “In Ephreum, the Syrian writer of hymns. John the Baptist says to Christ: „A
spark of fire in the air waits for thee over the Jordan. If thou followest it an d willst be
baptised, then take possession of thyself, wash thyself, for who has the power to take hold
of burning fire with his hands? Thou who are wholly fire, have mercy on me‟ ” (cited in
Jung. Psychology of the Unconscious, p. 547 n. 61).
                                   FIGURE 2-5
The Fiery Furnace of Daniel (Bible of St. Stephen Harding, 12th century. Dijon,
Bibliothfeque Municipale, MS. 14. Reprinted in Medieval Manuscript Painting.)



or others. By contrast a weak ego is very vulnerable to bein g consumed by encounter
with intense affect. This phenomenon is described in a poem by Dorsha Hayes:

               Filled with a clutter of unsorted stuff a spark can
               set a man ablaze. What‟s there heaped high
               among stored rubbish at a puff will burst in
               flame. No man can be aware of how inflammable
               he is, how prone
26                             ANATOMY OF THE PSYCHE




                                          FIGURE 2 - 6
     The Starry Salamander That Lives in the Fire. The Mercurial Spirit of the Prima
     Materia, as Salamander. Frolicking in the Fire (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens.
                                              1618.)




                       to what can rage beyond control, unless the
                       piled up litter of his life is known to him,
                       and he is able to assess what hazard he is in,
                       what could ignite.
                       A man, disordered and undisciplined, lives
                       in the peril of a panic flight before the
                       onrush of a flaming wind.
                           Does it now seem I seek to be profound?
                           1 stand on smoking ash and blackened ground! 14
     The fire of the calcinatio is a purging, whitening fire. It acts on the black
     stuff, the nigredo, and turns it white. Basil Valentine says, “Know that this
     (calcinatio) is the only right and legitimate way of purifying our
     substance." 15 This connects it with the symbolism of purgatory. The
     doctrine of purgatory is the theological verson of calcinatio projected



      l4
       Hayes, “Fire Hazard,” in The Bell Branch Rings, p. 26.
      l5
           Waite, trans., The Hermetic Museum 1:325.
onto the afterlife. The chief scriptural source for the doctrine is Paul's statement in I
Corinthians 3:11-15 (RSV):
   For no other foundation can anyone lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
   Now if anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay,
   stubble—each man's work will become manifest; for the Day will disclose it. because
   it will be revealed with fire, and the fire will test what sort of work each has done. If
   the work which any man has built on the foundation survives, he will receive a
   reward. If any man's work is burned up. he will suffer loss, though he himself will be
   saved, but only as through fire.

Augustine comments on this passage: The man who builds with wood, hay, and stubble is
the man involved in lust and carnal desire, but “For so long as he does not prefer such
affection or pleasure to Christ. Christ is his found ation, though on it he builds wood,
hay, stubble; and therefore he shall be saved as by fire. For the fire of affliction shall
burn such luxurious pleasures and earthly loves...and of this fire the fuel is bereavement,
and all those calamities which consume these joys.” 16 Again, “things are not lost without
anguish when they have been loved with a possessive love. But because...he prefers to
suffer the loss of these things rather than losing Christ, and does not desert Christ from
fear of losing such things—even though he may grieve over his loss—„he is saved‟
indeed, „yet so as by fire.‟ He „burns‟ with grief, for the things he has loved and lost, but
this does not subvert or consume him, secured as he is by the stability and the
indestructability of his foundation.” 17 The doctrine of purgatory had not yet become
established at the time Augustine wrote. However these remarks were later applied to
purgatorial fire. Augustine makes two important psychological points. First, the fire of
purgatory is caused by the frustrations of lust, desire, possessive love —in a word,
concupiscence. Secondly, one can survive this fire, indeed be saved by it. if one has a
solid foundation in Christ. Psychologically this would mean that psychological
development will be promoted by the frustration of pleasure and power desires providing
one has a basically viable relation to the Self symbolized by Christ.
    Next to the doctrine of purgatory with its purging but redeeming fire is an image of
perpetual calcinaiio, the idea of eternal punitive fire. Ixion was punished for his crime of
trying .to seduce Hera by being bound to a perpetual wheel of fire. The notion that the
wicked were punished in the afterlife was widespread in antiquity. Cumont writes:
“Among all the forms of punishment that by fire predominates. The idea that the Erinyes
burnt the damned with their torches is ancient, and




1
'•Augustine, City of Cod 21:26.
■‟Augustine. Confessions and Enchiridion 18:68.
        the Pyriphlegethon is an igneous river surrounding Tartarus. Certain authors
  went beyond this. Lucian in his „True Histories‟ describes the island of the impious
  as an immense brazier whence rise sulphurous and pitchy flames” 11 * (see figure 2-
  7).
        Similarly, in Buddhism, Avichi. the lowest of the eight Buddhist “hot hells,” is a
  place of torture by fire as a punishment for sin. 19 However, this image is most fully
  developed in the Christian doctrine of hell. One of its sources is Matthew 25:41 -43
  (RSV): “When he will say to those at his left hand, „Depart from me, you cursed,
  into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels; for 1 was hungry and you
  gave me no food, 1 was thirsty and you gave me no drink, I was a stranger and you
  did not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you
  did not visit me.‟ ”
        As did Augustine, Origen in commentary on this passage equates fire with the
  passions of man. Origen comments on this passage as follows:




                                       FIGURE 2-7
The Violent Tortured in a Rain of Fire (Doré, Illustrations for Dante‟s Divine
                                         Comedy.)



'•Cumont, Afterlife in Roman Paganism, p. 175.
'‟Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 11:830.
     Let us now see what is the meaning of threatened “eternal fire.“ Now we find in the
     prophet Isaiah that the fire by which each man is punished is described as belonging to
     himself. For it says, “Walk in the light of your fire and in the flame which you have
     kindled for yourselves“ (Isaiah 50:11). These words seem to indicate that every sinner
     kindles for himself the flame of his own fire, and is not plunged into a fire which has
     been previously kindled by someone else or which existed before him. Of this fire the
     food and material are our sins, which are called by the apostle Paul wood and hay and
     stubble... in the very essence of the soul certain torments are produced from the harmful
     desires themselves that lead us to sin.
         Consider the effect of those faults of passion which often occur in men, as when the
     soul is burnt up with the flames of love, or tormen ted by the fires of jealousy or envy, or
     tossed about with furious anger, or consumed with intense sadness; remembering how
     some men, finding the excess of these ills too heavy to bear, have deemed it more
     tolerable to submit to death than endure such tort ures. 20

     This is a remarkably psychological interpretation of the fire of hell to have been written
in the third century. It demonstrates that for the early church fathers, psychic reality and
theological reality were one. Hell fire is the punishment meted out to those who are
condemned in the “Last Judgement,” who are “weighed in the balance and found wanting.”
It is the fate of that aspect of the ego that is identified with the transpersonal energies of the
psyche and uses them for personal pleasure or power. This aspect of the ego, which is
identified with the Self-energy, must undergo calcinatio. The process will be considered
“eternal” only when we are dealing with a psychic split that irrevocably divides good from
evil and heaven from hell.
     There are many vivid expressions of the fire of the Last Judgement. For example, in
Revelation 20:13-15 (RSV) we read: “And the sea gave up the dead in it. Death and Hades
gave up the dead in them, and all were judged by what they had done...and if anyone‟s name
was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.”




J0
  Origen, On First Principles 2:4 5. A thousand years later Thomas a Kempis expressed it this way (The
Imitation of Christ 1:24):
    What is there that the fire of hell shall feed upon, but thy sins?
    The more thou sparest thyself now and followest the flesh, the more severe hereafter shall be thy
punishment, and thou storest up greater fuel for that flame.
    In what things a man hath sinned, in the same shall he be the more grievously punished.
    There shall the slothful be pricked forward with burning goads, and the gluttons be tormented with
extreme hunger and thirst.
    There shall the luxurious and lovers of pleasure be bathed in burning pilch and stinking brimstone, and
the envious, like mad dogs, shall howl for very grief.
    There is no sin but shall have its own proper torment.
    There the proud shall be filled with all confusion; the covetous shall be pinched with miserable
penury.
   In another place it is put this way:
   If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his fore head, or in
   his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
   without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented
   [fiaoainodiiotTai] with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the
   presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment [(jaoaviopov] ascendeth up for ever
   and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image; and
   whosoever receiveth the mark of his name 21 (Rev. 14:9— 11. AV).
   Here the punitive fire of the Last Judgement is identified with God‟s wrath.
The same occurs in the Sequence hymn, Dies Irae, in the Burial Mass. It presents
the Last Judgement quite explicitly as a calcinatio:
                              Dies irae. dies ilia Solvet
                              saeclum in favilla Teste
                              David cum Sibylla
(“Oh day of wrath, Oh that day, when the world dissolves in glowing ashes, as
witness David with the Sibyl.”) The reference to the Sibyl leads to a passage in
Book II of the Sibylline Oracles:
   And then shall a great river of flaming fire flow from heaven and consume all places,
   the earth and the great ocean and the grey sea, lakes and rivers and fountains, and
   merciless Hades and the Pole of heaven: but the lights of heaven shall melt together in
   one and into a void (desolate) shape (?). For the stars shall all fall from heaven into the
   sea (?), and all the souls of men shall gnash their teeth as they burn in the river of
   brimstone and the rush of the fire in the blazing plain, and ashes shall cover all things,
   and then shall all the elements of the world be laid waste, air, earth, sea, light, poles,
   days and nights, and no more shall the multitudes of birds fly in the air nor swimming
   creatures any more swim in the sea; no ship shall sail with its cargo over the waves; no
   straight-going oxen shall plow the tilled land; there shall be no more sound of swift
   winds, but he shall fuse all things together into one, and purge them clean. JJ
   In this passage the calcinatio overlaps with the image of the coni- unctio. The
four elements are being fused into a quintessential one. Multiplicity is being
melted into unity. Hence it alludes to the integration of the personality through
the process of calcinatio. It is an example of the widespread notion that the world
will end in fire. The Stoics had the




''The Greek word for torment is PaoavLtfeiv or Paaauifios. Jung says about this word: “For
alchemists it had a double meaning: /3ao<m£etv also meant „testing on the touchstone'
(Paoctvos). The lapis l.ydius (touchstone) was used as a synonym for the lapis philusophvrum.
The genuineness or incorruptibility of the stone is proved by the torment of fire and cannot
be attained without it.. This leitmotiv runs all through alchemy” (Alchemical Studies, par. 94).
“James. The Apocryphal New Testament, p. 522.
       idea, which they claimed to derive from Heraclitus, that each cosmic cycle or magrtus
       annus ends in a conflagration, an eKirvp(oais.2i
           According to Josephus, Adam predicted that the earth would be destroyed twice,
       once by water and once by fire 24 —first a solutio and then a calcinatio. The same idea
       is expressed in 2 Peter 3:6,7 (RSV): “The world that then existed was deluged with
       water and perished. But by the same word the heavens and earth that now exist have
       been stored up for fire, being kept until the day of judgement and destruction of
       ungodly men.”
           In a poem by Robert Frost the images of fire and ice are associated with the end
       of the world:
                                     Some say the World will end in fire.
                                     Some say in ice.
                                     From what I‟ve tasted of desire I hold
                                     with those who favor fire.
                                     But if it had to perish twice,
                                     I think I know enough of hate To say
                                     that for destruction ice Is also great And
                                     would suffice. 25
           Another modern poet uses the same image:
       Fire will surely come one day to purify the earth. Fire will surely come one day to
       obliterate the earth. This is the Second Coming.
       The Soul is a flaming tongue that licks and struggles to set the black bull of the
       world on fire. One day the entire universe will become a single conflagration.
       Fire is the first and final mask of my God. We dance and weep between two
       enormous pyres. 26
           Last judgement by fire corresponds to the ordeal by fire that tests the purity of
       metals and refines away all impurities. There are numerous passages in the Old
       Testament that make use of metallurgical metaphors to describe Yahweh‟s testing of
       his chosen people. For example, Yahweh speaks:
       I will turn my hand against you, I will smelt away your dro ss in the furnace. I will
       remove all your base metal from you. (Isa. I:24<25, JB)
       And now I have put you in the fire like silver, I have tested you in the furnace of
       distress. For my sake and my sake only have I acted—is my name to be profaned?
       Never will I yield my glory to another. (Isa. 48:10,11, JB)




2J
     Haslings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 1:198.
,4
     Josephus. Antiquities of the Jews 1 :ii, 3.
25
     Frost, “Fire and Icc,” in Complete Poems of Robert Frost, p. 268.
26
     Kazantzakis, The Saviors of God. p. 128.
      I will lead ...[themJ into the fire, and refine them as silver is refined, test
      them as gold is tested. They will call my name and I shall listen; and I shall
      say; These are my people; and each will say, “Yahweh is my God!” (Zech.
      13:9, JB)

      You tested us, God, you refined us like silver, you let us fall into the net,
      you laid heavy burdens on our backs, you let people drive over our heads;
      but now the ordeal by fire and water is over, and you allow us once more to
      draw breath. (Ps. 66:10-12, JB)

    Then Yahweh speaks to the refined or redeemed ones, those who have gone
through the calcinatio: “Do not be afraid, for I have redeemed you; I have called
you by your name, you are mine. Should you pass through the sea, I will be
with you; or through the rivers, they will not swallow you up. Should you walk
through fire, you will not be scorched and the flames will not burn you. For I
am Yahweh, your God, the Holy One of Israel, your savior” (Isa. 43:1 -3, JB).
    This passage is paralleled by the idea found elsewhere that at death souls
pass through a river or a sea of fire. It does not harm the righteous but causes
suffering or destruction to the wicked. For instance, a Parsi doctrine states that
all must pass through a river of fire. To the righteous it is like warm milk, but
to the wicked like molten metal. 27
    Again, in the Sibylline Oracles we read: “And then shall all men pass through
a blazing river and unquenchable flame, and the righteous shall be saved whole,
all of them, but the ungodly shall perish therein unto all ages, even as many as
wrought evil aforetime.” 28 Yahweh‟s remarks about his use of fire can be
compared with Paracelsus‟ statements about the alchemical effects of fire:

      By the element of fire all that is unpurified is destroyed and taken away.
      In the absence of all ordeal by fire, there is no proving of a substance
      possible.

      Fire separates that which is constant or fixed from that which is fugitive or
      volatile.”

   Another alchemist specifically compares the fire of the alchemical calcinatio
with the fire of divine wrath as endured by Christ. “It is not unfitly compared
with Christ when the putrefied body of the Sun lies
dead, inactive, like ashes in the bottom of a phial _________ So also did it
happen to Christ himself, when at the Mount of Olives, and on the




 ‟‟Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 5:376.
 “James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 532.
 29
  Paracelsus, The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelsus 1:4.
cross, he was roasted by the fire of the divine wrath (Matt. 26,27), and complained that
he was utterly deserted by his heavenly Father.”* 0
      As early as Homeric Greece we find the image of fire as a purifier and separator of
the soul. According to Rohde the body of a dead man must be burnt before his soul is
released to go to Hades. “Only through fire are the souls of the dead 'appeased' (Iliad
VII, 410). So long, then, as the psyche retains any vestige of 'earthliness' it possesses
some feeling still, some awareness of what is going on among the living ,,,, (see figure 2-
8).
      Everywhere fire is associated with God and therefore represents archetypal energies
that transcend the ego and are experienced as numinous. The Psalmist speaks of God as
he “who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire” (Ps. 104:4, AV). An
ancient prayer to Mithra says: “Give ear to me, hear me. Lord, who has fastened the
fiery bolts of heaven with thy spirit, double-bodied, fire-ruler, creator of




                                       FIGURE 2 8
              Calcinaliu of the Hermaphrodite (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens. 1618.)



"‟Cited by Jung. Mvsterium Coniunctionis. ('W 14. par. 485. 1 he same passage in The Hermetic
Museum (1:102) translated by Waite omits the crucial passage—that Christ “ W as roasted by the fire
of divine wrath.”
"Rohde. Psyche I:l 8ff.
light, fire-breathing, fiery-hearted, shining spirit, rejoicing in fire, beautiful light.
Lord of light, fiery-bodied, giver of light, sower of fire, confounding with fire,
living light, whirling fire, mover of light, hurler of thunderbolts, glorious lig ht,
multiplier of light, holder of fiery light, conqueror of the stars, etc.” 32
   In several texts Christ is associated with fire. In Luke 12:49 (RSV) Christ
said, “I came to cast fire upon the earth; and would that it were already kindled.”
In the Gnostic Gospel of Thomas we read, “Jesus said: He who is near me is near
the fire and he who is far from me is far from the kingdom” 33 (see figure 2-9).
   Characteristically, mythical thinking distinguishes two types of fire. The
Stoics spoke of a terrestrial fire and an etherial fire. The latter corresponded to
Nous, the divine Logos, and is analogous to the later




                                   FIGURE 2 9
       The Fire Sower (E. Jacoby. Reprinted in Jung, Civilization in Transition.)



  '•‟Dieterich, Eine Mithrasliiurgie. cited by Jung. Symbols of Transformation. CW5. par. 135.

  ‟‟Grant, The Secret Sayings oj Jesus, p. 180.
Christian conception of the Holy Spirit. Bevan describes the concept of etherial fire as
follows: “All round the world was an envelope of the fiery ether, pure and unmixed,
but it also penetrated the whole mass, as its soul. The orderly working of nature was its
operation: organic beings grew according to regular types, because the Divine Reason
was in them as a logos spermatikos, a formula of life developing from a germ. Even upon
earth some of the divine fire retained its pure essence —the reasonable souls, each one
a particle of fiery ether, which dwelt in the hearts of men.” 34
   In Jacob Boehme we find the image of two trees of fire —one is the fire of the Holy
Ghost, the other the fire of God‟s wrath. “The tree of life was kindled in its own
quality by the fire of the Holy Ghost, and its quality burnt in the fire of heavenly
joyfulness, in an unsearchable light
and glory ____ The tree of the fierce quality, which is the other part in
nature, was kindled also, and burnt in the fire of God's Wrath in a hellish flame; and the
fierce source rose up into eternity, and the prince of darkness with his legions abode in
the fierce wrathful quality, as in his own kingdom.” 35
   The tree of life as a tree of fire alludes to the passage in Genesis (3:24, RSV): “He
drove out the man; and at the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim, and a
flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life.” The sword
belongs to the symbolism of separatio and mortiftcaiio. In this passage there is thus an
overlap of the latter images with the calcinatid: The Zohar says the flaming sword
symbolizes the trials with which God overwhelms man, that he may be restored t o the
way of goodness. 36
    For the purged ego the divine fire is more apt to be experienced as a theophany or
divine inspiration. For instance, when Yahweh descended onto Mount Sinai he turned it
into a lime kiln: “And Mount Sinai was wrapped in smoke, becau se the Lord descended
upon it in fire; and the smoke of it went up like the smoke of a kiln” (Exod. 19:18,
RSV).
   The word of God is described as a fire. Yahweh says: “Behold, I am making my
words in your mouth a fire, and this people wood, and the fire sha ll devour them” (Jer.
5:14, RSV). Again, “Is not my word like fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer which
breaks the rocks in pieces?” (Jer. 23:29, RSV). Elsewhere, the tongue of man is said to
be set on fire by hell. “And the tongue is a fire. The tongue is an unrighteous world
among our members, staining the whole body, setting on fire the cycle




u
    Bevan. Stoics anil Sceptics, p. 43.
"Boehme, Aurora, pp. 24ff.
■'•Waite. The Holy Kabbalah, p. 290n.
of nature, and set on fire by hell” (James 3:6 RSV). In the Bruce Codex, a Coptic
Gnostic papyrus in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, a ritual is described called “the
Baptism by Fire.” The “Virgin of Life” gives the “Water of the Baptism of Fire”
and the baptized ones receive on their foreheads "the seal of the Virgin of
Light.” 17
    In the miracle of Pentecost, as described in Acts 2:3, the Holy Spirit comes as
tongues of fire (see figure 2-10). The following case is an example of the image of
fire as the Holy Spirit. A young research scientist made a brilliant formulation in a
scientific paper based on an important discovery. The professor who held
authority over him had belittled his conclusions without reading the paper. At this
point the




                          FIGURE 2 - 1 0 Pentecost (Doré,
                                Bible Illustrations.)


  Mead, Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, p. 526.
 young scientist, who was usually very mild-mannered, replied with great
 intensity: “Professor ------------- , if you are going to criticize my paper you
 must first read it and give it careful thought.” He was alarmed by the intensity of
 his reaction, but after an initial flare of anger the professor acknowledged his
 mistake, read the paper, and recognized its value.
 The night before this crucial encounter, which had important consequences for the
 young scientist‟s career, he had this dream:
 I am sitting at a dinner table with guests. Suddenly something spills and catches fire. Then the
 whole table is covered with little flames shifting around from one side to the other. It is a
 beautiful sight. On awakening / think of the miracle at Pentecost.
 This dream refers not only to the dreamer‟s fiery encounter with the professor,
 but, more importantly, to the creative fire of the Holy Ghost that poured itself out
 on him and enabled him to make his brilliant formulations. The divine fire that
 touches the creative artist is described in the fifty-ninth sonnet of Michelangelo:
                Only through fire can the smith pull and stretch Metal
                into the shape of his design.
                Only through fire can the artist reach Pure gold which
                only furnaces refine.
                  Nor can the phoenix rare itself remake
                  Unless it first be burnt. For my part, I
                  Hope to ascend triumphantly on high
                  Where death fulfills, where time itself must break.
                  The fire of which I speak has brought salvation,
                  I find in it new powers and restoration Although I
                  seemed already with the dead.
               Since by fire nature reaches up to heaven I may, through
               it, be reconciled, forgiven,
               For it must surely bear me overhead. 38
 The ambiguous contrast between the fire of the Holy Spirit (or the dove of
 Aphrodite) and the fire of concupiscence is beautifully described by T. S. Eliot:
                          The dove descending breaks the air With
                          flame of incandescent terror Of which
                          the tongues declare The one discharge
                          from sin and error.
                          The only hope, or else despair




"Michelangelo. The Sonnets of Michelangelo, p. 95.
                             Lies in the choice of pyre or pyre—
                              To be redeemed from fire by fire.
                        Who then devised the torment? Love.
                       Love is the unfamiliar name
                       Behind the hands that wove
                       The intolerable shirt of flame
                       Which human power cannot
                       remove.
                         We only live, only suspire
                         Consumed by either fire or fire.- 19
      The “intolerable shirt of flame” refers to an important cakinatio image, the
shirt of Nessus in the Heracles myth. Heracles rescued Deianeira from rape by
the centaur Nessus, using an arrow tipped with the poisonous blood of the hydra.
Before his death, Nessus gave Deianeira a love charm composed of his own
blood tainted with hydra blood. When Heracles became in terested in another
woman, Deianeira soaked a shirt in this potion and gave it to Heracles. When he
put it on it became a “shirt of flame” which could not be removed. Heracles
escaped the torment only by voluntarily consuming himself on a funeral pyre.
The same image appears when Medea sends Jason's fiancee, Glauce, a robe that
bursts into flame when she puts it on.
      The shirt of Nessus illustrates the fact that blood is often symbolically
equated with fire. Thus baptism in blood is equivalent to baptism in fire. In the
taurobolium rite of Mithraism, the initiate in a pit was soaked with the blood of
a bull that was sacrificed on a latticed platform above him. 40 A somewhat more
refined example of the same image is found in Revelation: “Who are these,
clothed in white robes, and whence have they come?...These are they who have
come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb” (Rev. 7:13-14, RSV).
      Baptism in blood, like the encounter with fire, refers p sychologically to the
ordeal of enduring intense affect. If the ego holds, the ordeal has a refining and
consolidating effect. This will be one of the reasons for primitive initiation
ordeals that often generated intense anxiety.
      In early times fire was the chief method of sacrifice to the gods. Fire was
thought of as a connecting link between the human and divine realms. That
which was sacrificed by burning quite literally was “made sacred.” That which is
burned turns largely to smoke and ascends to the up per regions. It is transferred
to the gods by a process of sublimation. This is how the Greek burnt sacrifice,
the thvsia, was conceived, and also the burnt offerings of the Jews. 41 In India,
Agni is the Hindu fire




 w
  Eliol, “Little Gidding,” in Four Quartets.
 "Cumont. The Mysteries of Mithra, p. 180.
 4l
      Yerkes, Sacrifice in Creek and Roman Religion and Early Judaism, passim.
god, the one to whom sacrifice is offered. In Hindu thought, “it is through fire that
man could communicate with higher states of being, with the gods and the heavenly
spheres. Through fire he could take part in the cosmic life, cooperate with the gods.
He could feed them through the mouth of fire. „Agni is the mouth of the gods;
through this mouth they take their breath.‟” (Kapisthala-katha Samhita 31.20 and
Sata- pabha Brahmana 3.7.) 42 (see figure 2-11).
  Speaking of the sacrificial fire of the Greek thvsia, lamblichus says: “thus also the
                               fire that is with us, imitating the energy of divine fire,




Shiva Dancing in a Circle of Fire (Bronze, 12th or 13th century. Amsterdam.
Museum van Aziatische Kunst. Reprinted in Zimmer, The Art oj Indian Asia.)


«Daniclou, Hindu Polytheism, p. 64.
         destroys everything which is material in sacrifices, purifies the things which are
         offered, liberates them from the bonds of matter, and renders them, through purity of
         nature, adapted to the communion of the gods. It likewise liberates us, after the same
         manner from the bonds of generation, assimilates us to the Gods, causes us to be
         adapted to their friendship, and conducts our material         nature to an immaterial
         essence.”« Similarly, certain myths speak of the fire -bath   that conveys immortality.
         For example, Demeter, in her sorrowful wanderings              after the abduction of
         Persephone, accepts the hospitality of Celeus and Meta -      neira, king and queen of
         Eleusis. In gratitude she plans to make their young son       Demophoon immortal by
         holding him in the fire. Metaneira sees this procedure         and interrupts it by her
         screams. 44 Immortality is a quality of the archetypes. Thus the psychological
         meaning of the fire- bath of immortality will be that a connection is made between
         the ego and the archetypal psyche, making the for mer aware of its transpersonal,
         eternal, or immortal aspect.
            The end product of calcinado is a white ash. 45 This corresponds to the so-called
         “white foliated earth” of many alchemical texts. It signifies the albedo or whitening
         phase and has paradoxical associations. On the one hand ashes signify despair,
         mourning, or repentance. 46 On the other hand they contain the supreme value, the
         goal of the work. One text says, “Despise not the ashes for they are the diadem of
         thy heart, and the ash of things that endure.” 47 Another says, “The white foliated
         earth is the crown of victory which is ash extracted from ash, and their second
         body.” 48 The ash is the incorruptible “glorified body,” which has survived the
         purifying ordeal. It is equated with the biblical image of the crown of glory. Isaiah
         promises to give the mourners of Zion “a crown for ashes, the oil of joy for
         mourning, a garment of praise for the spirit of




    41
         lamblichus, On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, p. 247.

    “Hesiod, “Homeric Hymns to Demeter," in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica. p. 307.
    4,
     Sometimes the result is a vitreous mass; hence there is an overlap between the symbolism
    of ash and glass. “In Senior the ash is synonymous with vitrum (glass), which, on account of its
    incorruptibility and transparency, seemed to resemble the glorified body” (Jung.
    Mystcriuni Coniunctionis. C W 14. par. 391).
4,
         ‟This is a common biblical image. The book of Job provides a good example. After “the fire
of God fell from heaven" (Job 1:16), Satan “afflicted Job with loathsome sores from the soles of his
feet to the crown of his head. And he took a potsherd with which to scrape himself, and sat among
the ashes" (Job 2:7 8). At the end of the drama, after Job has encountered Yahweh, he says, “1 had
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear. but now my eye secs thee; therefore I despise myself and
repent in dust and ashes” (Job 42:5). The entire book of Job can be considered a symbolic description
of the calcinaiio. See Edinger. Ego and Archetype, p. 76ff.

47
     Jung. Mystcriuni Coniunctionis, CW 14, par. 247.
4
*lbid., par. 318 n. 619.
grief‟ (Isa. 61:3, DV). St. Paul, using the analogy of athletic games, says, “Now they do
it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible" (I Cor. 9:25, AV). And later: "I
have fought the good fight (aywv), 1 have finished the race, 1 have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness” (2 Tim. 4:7 -8, RSV). An
example of calcinatio followed by glory is found in a legend of St. John the Evangelist
(see figure 2-12):
   When, after Pentecost, the apostles separated, John the Apostle and Evan gelist went
   to Asia, and there founded many churches. The Emperor Domitian, hearing of his
   fame, summoned him to Rome, and had him plunged into a cauldron of boiling oil
   which was set up before the gate called the Porta Latina; but the saint came forth
   untouched, just as he had escaped the corruption of the senses. Seeing which, the
   emperor exiled him to the




                                       FIGURE 2 12
         St. John Boiled in Oil (Dürer, 1498. Reprinted in The Complete Woodcuts of
                                       Albrecht Dürer.)
        island of Patmos where, living alone, he wrote the Apocalypse. But the cruel
        emperor was slain that same year, and the Senate revoked all his dccrces.
        Thus it came about that Saint John, who had been deported as a criminal,
        returned to Ephesus covered with glory: the multitude ran out to meet him.
        crying: “Blessed is he that comcth in the name of the Lord .”49

     What turns the ashes of failure into the crown of victory is indicated by the
fact that ash is alchemically equivalent to salt. The symbolism of salt has been
discussed comprehensively by Jung. 50 Basically salt symbolizes Eros and appears
in one of two aspects, either as bitterness or as wisdom. Jung writes: “Tears,
sorrow, and disappointment are bitter, but wisdom is the comforter in all psychic
suffering. Indeed, bitterness and wisdom form a pair of alternatives: where there is
bitterness wisdom is lacking, and where wisdom is there can be no bitterness. Salt,
as the carrier of this fateful alternative, is coordinated with the nature of
woman.” 51 This piece of modern wisdom has an ancient parallel in Aeschylus:
                 In visions of the night, like dropping rain.
                 Descend the many memories of pain
                 Before the spirit‟s sight; through tears and dole
                 Comes wisdom o'er the unwilling soul. 52
   From the simplest standpoint, calcinatio is a drying-out process. An important
part of psychotherapy involves the drying out of waterlogged unconscious
complexes. 51 The fire or emotional intensity necessary for this operation seems to
reside in the complex itself and becomes operative as soon as the patient attempts
to make the complex conscious by sharing it with another person. All thoughts,
deeds, and memories that carry shame, guilt, or anxiety need to be given full
expression. The affect liberated becomes the fire that can dry out the comp lex and
purify it of its unconscious contamination.
   The necessary frustration of desirousness or concupiscence is the chief feature
of the calcinatio stage. First the substance must be located; that is, the unconscious,
unacknowledged desire, demand, expectation must be recognized and affirmed.
The instinctual urge that says “I want" and “1 am entitled to this” must be fully
accepted by the ego. There can be no proper calcinatio. as distinguished from
masochistic self-flagella-




■ w Voraginc. The Golden Legend, p. 58.

‟"Jung. Mysierium Coniimctionis. C.W 14. pars. 234-348.
51
     Ibid., par. 330.
52
  Agamemnon, in The Complete Greek Drama, ed. Oates and O‟Neill 1:173.
‟‟Heraclitus says. “A dry soul is the wisest and best" (Freeman. Am ilia to the Pre Sucraiit
Philosophers, p. 32).
     tion, until the proper material is at hand. I think this fact is what under lies the
     following warning of an alchemist: “A great many students make a mistake at the
     very outset, by performing this calcinatio on a wrong substance;...or they choose a
     false method, and corrode instead of calcining the metallic bodies on which they
     operate. Calcination can take place only by the means of the inward heat of the
     body, assisted by friendly outward warmth; but calcinati on by means of a
     heterogeneous agent can only destroy the metallic nature, in so far as it has any
     effect at all.” 54
        The fire of the calcinatio, to the extent that it can be brought about by the
     psychotherapist, is achieved largely by expressing attitudes and reactions that
     frustrate the patient. This is a dangerous procedure and must be used with great
     care. As the text warns, the calcinatio may be performed on the wrong substance or
     by a false method, which corrodes instead of calcining. A sufficiently solid psychic
     foundation must be present to endure the calcinatio. and also an adequate rapport
     between the patient and therapist must exist to be able to carry frustration without
     generating destructive negativity. The text says, "calcinatio can take place only by
     means of the inward heat of the body”—in other words, by its own heat, by its own
     tendency to se\f-calcinatio. This means that the therapist must take his lead from the
     patient's material itself and promote frustration of a given desire only to the extent
     that the inner developmental tendency also contains the denial of the desire. The
     therapist can assist “by friendly outward warmth. ” But “calcination by means of a
     heterogeneous agent can only destroy the metallic nature.” A heterogeneous agent
     would refer to an arbitrary attitude that is not guided by the patient's own material
     and condition and hence is alien and damaging to his ess ential nature.
        As a rule, life reality, if faced, provides plenty of occasions for the calcinatio of
     frustrated desirousness. The primitive, undifferentiated desire that says “I want”
     operates on the implicit assumption that it is entitled to have what it wants. When
     denied, it becomes enraged. This is the psychological homologue of the “Divine
     Wrath” that roasted Christ. Reality often generates fire by challenging or denying
     the demanding expectations of such desires. Denied justification, the frustrated
     desire becomes the fire of calcinatio. Ripley says:
                              Calcination is the purgation of our stone.
                              Restoring also of his natural heat;
                              Of radical moisture it leaveth none. 5 5




w
    Waitc, trans.. The Hermetic Museum 2:256.
,5
    77jf Lives of the Alchemystiial Philosophers, p. 218.
44                        ANATOMY OF I HR PSYCHE


   Caldnatio has a purging or purifying effect. The substance is purged of
radical moisture. This would correspond to the drippings of uncon sciousness
that accompany emerging energies. Or, in other words, the energies of the
archetypal psyche first appear in identification with the ego and express
themselves as desires for ego-pleasure and ego-power. The fire of caldnatio
purges these identifications and drives off the root, or primordial moisture,
leaving the content in its eternal or transpersonal state, restored of its natural
heat—that is, of its own proper energy and functioning (see figures 2 -13 and 2-
14).
   Finally, the caldnatio brings about a certain immunity to affect and an
ability to see the archetypal aspect of existence. To the extent that one is
related to the transpersonal center of one‟s being, affect is experi enced as
etherial fire (Holy Spirit) rather than terrestrial fire—the pain of frustrated
desirousness. Jung describes the transformation of desirousness this way:
     In this transformation it is essential to take objects away from those animus or anima
     devils. They only become concerned with objects when you allow yourself to be self-
     indulgent. Concupiscentia is the term for that in the
     church __ On this subject the great religions come together. The fire of
     desirousness is the element that must be fought against in Brahmanism, in Buddhism,
     in Tantrism, in Manicheanism, in Christianity. It is also impor tant in psychology.
     When you indulge in desirousness, whether your desire




                                   FIGURE 2 - 1 3                                         .
       Expulsion of the demons (Engraving, 17th century. Reprinted in Jung, Syrrtbo '■ of
                                      Transformation.)
           FIGURE 2 - 1 4       The King in the Sweat box (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens,
                                             1618.)



    turns toward heaven or hell, you give the animus or anima an object; then it
    comes out into the world instead of staying inside in its place__________ But if you
    can say: Yes, I desire it and I shall try to get it but I do not have to have i t, if I
    decide to renounce, I can renounce it; then there is no chance for the animus
    or anima. Otherwise you are governed by your desires, you are possessed _________
    But if you have put your animus or anima into a bottle you are free of possession,
    even though you may be having a bad time inside, because when
    your devil has a bad time you have a bad time ________ Of course he will rumble
    around in your entrails. But after a while you will see that it was right (to bottle him
    up). You will slowly become quiet and change. Then you will discern that there is a
    stone growing in the bottle... insofar as self-control, or non-indulgence, has become a
    habit, it is a stone...when that attitude becomes a fail accompli, the stone will be a
    diamond. 56


‟Mung, The Visions Seminars 1:239.
                    ^3 Solutia-S*

                         is one of the major procedures in alchemy.
       he operation of solutio

T     One text says, "Solutio is the root of alchemy.” 1 Another says,
“Until all be made water, perform no operation.” 2 In many places the
whole opus is summarized by the phrase “Dissolve and coagulate.” Just
as calcinatio pertains to the element fire, coagulatio to the element
earth, and sublimatio to the element air, so solutio pertains to water.
Basically, solutio turns a solid into a liquid. The solid seems to disappear
into the solvent as if it had been swallowed up. For the alchemist,
solutio often meant the return of differentiated matter to its original
undifferentiated state—that is, to prima materia. Water was thought of
as the womb and solutio as a return to the womb for rebirth. In one text
the old king submits to the solutio of drowning, saying,
                    Else I God's Kingdom cannot enter in:
                    And therefore, that I may be Borne agen,
                    I'll Humbled be into my Mother‟s Breast,
                    Dissolve to my First Matter, and there rest. 3
   First matter, or prima materia, is an idea that the alchemists inherited from
the pre-Socratic philosophers. In Thales, and also in many creation myths,
water is the original material out of which the world i s created. The
alchemists thought that a substance could not be transformed unless it were
first reduced to prima materia. One text says, “Bodies cannot be changed
except by reduction into their first matter.” 4 This procedure corresponds to
what takes place in psychotherapy. The fixed, static aspects of the personality
allow for no change. They are established and sure of their rightness. For
transformation to proceed, these fixed


'Bonus of Ferrara. The New Peart of Great Price, p. 365. -Read, Prelude
to Chemistry, p. 262.
'Jung. Mysterium Coniundionis. CW 14. par. 380.
'Kelly, The Alchemical Writings of Edward Kelly, p. 34.
aspects must first be dissolved or reduced toprima materia. This is done by
the analytic process, which examines the products of the unconscious and
puts the established ego attitudes into question.
   One alchemical recipe for solutio is the following:
     Dissolve then sol and luna in our dissolving water, which is familiar and
     friendly, and the next in nature unto them, and as it were a womb, a mother, an
     original, the beginning and the end of their life. And that is the very reason why
     they are meliorated or amended in this water, because like nature rejoiceth in
     like nature....Thus it behooves you to join consanguinity, or sameness of kind....
     And because sol and luna have their origin from this water their mother; it is
     necessary therefore that they enter into it again, to wit. into their mother‟s
     womb, that they may be regenerate or born again, and made more health y, more
     noble, and more strong. 5

   The chemical fact that lies behind this text is the capacity of mercury
to dissolve or amalgamate with gold and silver, here referred to as Sol and
Luna. In fact, this process is the basis of a very old method for extracting
gold from crude ore. The ore is pulverized and treated with mercury,
which dissolves the gold. The mercury is then separated from the gold by
distilling with heat. However, our text has turned this chemical process
into a symbolic image by superimposing a projected psychological
process onto the chemical one. Sol and Luna will stand for the masculine
and the feminine principles as they concretely manifest themselves in the
personality at the beginning of the process. In other words the dominant
conscious attitude of the ego is represented by Sol and the anima at its
current state of development by Luna. 6 These two are dissolved in
“friendly water”—that is, mercury—which is equated with the maternal
womb and corresponds to the prima materia. Incest symbolism is
emphasized in the phrase, “it behooves you to join con sanguinity, or
sameness of kind.”
   We have here a picture of a descent into the unconscious, which is the
maternal womb from which the ego is born. It is the prima materia prior to
the differentiation of the elements by consciousness. This text de scribes
the procedure as a very pleasant process. There are others which express
it much more negatively. For instance, consider this solutio-
dismemberment recipe: “The body of that woman [who slays her hus-
bands] is full of weapons and poison. Let a grave be dug for that dragon,
and let that woman be buried with him, he being chained fast to that
woman; and the more he winds and coils himself around her, the more
will he be cut to pieces by the female weapons which are fashioned



5
    Secret Book of Artephius,” in The Lives of the Alchemvsiical Philosophers, pp. 145-46.

“This applies to a man's psychology. For a woman, Luna would represent the ego attitude
and Sol the animus.
 in the body of the woman. And when he sees that he is mingled with the limbs of the
 woman, he will be certain of death, and will be changed wholly into blood.” 7
     This grisly image expresses how a fairly well-developed ego might experience solutio.
 An immature ego may find it pleasant to surrender to containment in a blissful
 regression; however, at a later stage of development the prospect of solutio will generate
 great anxiety because the hard-won state of ego autonomy is being threatened with
 dissolution. A blissful solutio is the most dangerous one. It corresponds to Neumann‟s
 concept of uroboric incest:
    Uroboric incest is a form of entry into the mother, of union with her, and it stands in
    sharp contrast to other and later forms of incest. In uroboric incest, the emphasis
    upon pleasure and love is in no sense active, it is more a desire to be dissolved and
    absorbed; passively one lets oneself be taken, sinks into the pleroma, melts away in
    the ocean of pleasure—a Liebestod. The Great Mother takes the little child back into
    herself, and always over uroboric incest there stand the insignia of death, signifying
    final dissolution in union
    with the Mother _____
        Many forms of nostaglia and longing signify no more than a return to uroboric
    incest and self-dissolution, from the unio mystica of the saint to the drunkard‟s craving
    for unconsciousness, and the death-romanticism of the Germanic races. The incest we
    term “uroboric” is self-surrender and regression. It is the form of incest taken by the
    infantile ego, which is still close to the mother and has not yet come to itself; but the
    sick ego of the neurotic can also take this form and so can a later, exhausted ego that
    creeps back to the mother after having found fulfillment. 8

 An example of the longing for blissful solutio is Siegfried‟s yearning for union with
 Brunnhilde in Wagner‟s The Ring of the Nibelung (cf. figure 3-1):
                        Before me
                        a wondrous river flows with all my senses
                        I only see
                        its joyous, billowing waters... still would I
                        plunge in the cooling water, myself, as I
                        am, ending my pains:
                        O that its billows
                        Might drown me in bliss
                        and quench my fire with its waves! 9




‟Jung. Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14, par. 15.
"Neumann. The Origins and History of Consciousness, p. 17.
‟‟Wagner. The Ring of the Nibelung, p. 254.
                             FIGURE 3 - 1
Siegfried and the Rhine Maidens (Rackham, Color Illustrations Jor Wagner's
                                 "Ring.")


Another example is the final death-song of Isolde in act 3, scene 4 of Wagner‟s
great solutio drama, Tristan and Isolde:
                 Resounding yet more clearly, wafting about me, are
                 they waves of refreshing breezes?
                 Are they clouds of heavenly fragrance?
                 As they swell and roar around me,
                 shall 1 breathe them, shall 1 listen to them?
                 Shall 1 sip them, plunge beneath them, to expire in
                 sweet perfume?
                 In the surging swell, in the ringing sound.
                  in the vast wave of the world‟s breath- to
                  drown, to sink unconscious—supreme bliss!
Our alchemical text is a mixture of images, as often happens in alch emy. It is a
combination of solutio and coniunctio. Sol and Luna are being dissolved and united at
the same time. This corresponds to a common type of alchemical picture in which
the king and queen are bathing together in the mercurial fountain. An outstan ding
sequence of pictures of this type is found in the Rosarium Philosophorum10 (cf. figure
3-2).
   As our text indicates, the solutio has a twofold effect: it causes one form to
disappear and a new regenerated form to emerge. The dissolu tion of the old one is
often described in negative imagery and is associated with the nigredo. For instance,
Philalethes says: “The blackness becomes more pronounced day by day until the
substance assumes




                                FIGURE 3 - 2
 The King and Queen in the Bath (Mylius, Philosophia refórmala. 1622. Reprinted in
                          Jung, Psychology and Alchemy.)


"'Rcproduccd in Jung. “The Psychology of the Transference.‟‟ in The Practice of Psychotherapy (,'W
16.
a brilliant black color. This black is a sign that the dissolution is accomplished.'* 11
    Solutio thus may become a mortificatio. This is understandable because that which
is being dissolved will experience the solutio as an annihilation of itself. It is here
that the saying of Heraclitus applies: “To souls it is death to become water.” 12
However, solutio leads on to the emergence of a rejuvenated new form, and when
this aspect is emphasized the tone is positive. For instance, The Golden Treatise of
Hermes says: “O, blessed watery pontic form, that dissolvest the elements!... For
when, by the power of the water, the composition is dissolved, it is the day of the
restoration; then darkness and Death fly away from them, a nd Wisdom proceeds.” 13
    Often solutio is performed on the king. There is, for instance, the image of the
drowning king, since “drowning” is a synonym for solutio (see figure 3-3). One text
has the drowning king (or king‟s son) say, “Whosoever will free me from the waters
and lead me to dry land, him will I prosper with everlasting riches.” 14
Psychologically, the meaning is that the old ruling principle, which has undergone
solutio, is calling out to be coagulated again in a new, regenerated form, saying that
it has quantities of libido (riches) at its disposal.
    Another text speaks of a dropsy, an inner drowning. The king asked for a drink
of water saying: „“I demand the water which is closest to my heart, and which likes
me above all things.‟ When the servant brought it, the king drank so much that „all
his limbs were filled and all his veins inflated, and he himself became
discoloured‟...„I am heavy and my head hurts me, and it seems to me as though all
my limbs were falling apart.‟ He demanded to be placed i n a heated chamber where
he could sweat the water out. But when, after a while, they opened the chamber he
lay there as if dead.” 15
    Jung comments on this text: “The king personifies a hypertrophy of the ego
which calls for compensation _____________ His thirst is due to his boundless
concupiscence and egotism. But when he drinks he is overwhelmed by the water —
that is, by the unconscious.” 16




"Waite, trans.. The Hermetic Museum. 2:258.
l2
     Freeman, Andlla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers, p. 27.
'•‟Atwood, Hermetic Philosophy and Alchemy, p. 122.
l4
     Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, CW 12, par. 434.
,5
 Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis, CW 14, par. 357.
I6
     lbid., par. 365.
                                     SO    LUT to                                    53




Sulutio of the King. Background: Drowning King Calling for Help. Foreground: The
                   King Reborn. (Trismosin, Splendor Solis, 1582.)




    As Jung suggests, the king refers to the ego—at least the dominant or ruling
principle according to which the ego is structured. The king is dissolving in his own
surfeit; that is, inflation is the cause and agent of soluiio. A swollen ego is dissolved
by its own excess. Its dissolution leads the way to a possible rejuvenation on a
sounder basis.
    In another text the king is described as drowning in the fountains of Venus. In
this poem Venus is identified with the fountain, the mother and bride of the king, in
which her “fixed” father is drowned:
                    A stone there is, and yet no stone.
                    In it doth nature work alone.
                       From ¡1 there wclleth forth a fount [Venus]
                       In which her Sire, the Fixed, is drown‟d:
                       His body and life absorbed therein Until the
                       soul's restored agcn. 1 7

In this case the agent of dissolution is the Eros principle, Venus or
Aphrodite. Her mythology has important relations to water by virtue of the
fact that she was born out of the sea (see figure 3-4). Her dangerous powers
of soluiio are represented by seductive mermaids or water nymphs who lure
men to death by drowning. An impressive example of this theme occurred in
the dream of a young man who was thinking of leaving his wife and young
children to marry a seductive woman. He dreamed:

    I am in an underpass where people pass to and fro from the beach. Here are
    sold the usual recreation goodies: enormous lollypops, popcorn, pretzels a
    foot or more in length, and crack- erjacks. Two of my children are with me
    (the two youngest). A beautiful woman beckons me to the sea and I leave the
    children in




                                                        4
                                           FIGURE 3 -                       . . - R ich-
  The Birth of Aphrodite (c. 460 B.C. Rome. Terme Museum.
                       Reprinted ter, A Handbook of Greek Art.)


   I7
    lbid., par. 415.
   a hawker's stand munching pretzels. The dream ends as I stand
   midway between the sea and the stand.
    A classical example of a fatal solutio occurs in the story of Hylas. During
the expedition of the Argonauts, Hylas, the beautiful favorite of Heracles,
was sent to fetch water. He was pulled into a pool by water nymphs and was
never seen again. Here the solutio image accompanies a homoerotic
entanglement, the attachment between Heracles and Hylas (see figure 3 -5).
    The Old Testament provides examples of the erotic solutio that combine
the themes of woman, bath, and the dissolution of the mascu line. David spied
Bathsheba bathing (2 Sam. 11:2), and thus began the dissolution of that man
of integrity (see figure 3-6). In the apocryphal text of Daniel and Susanna,
the two elders lustfully approach Susanna in her bath and meet their downfall
after giving perjured testimony (see figure 3 -7).
    These images tell us that love and/or lust are agents of solutio. This
corresponds to the fact that a particular psychic problem or stage of
development often remains arrested or stuck until the patient falls in love.
Then abruptly the problem is dissolved. Although new complications appear,
life has begun to flow again. It has been liquified.
    One alchemist defined solutio this way: “Solution is the action of any




                                      FIGURE 3 5
Hylas and the Nymphs (John William Waterhouse. Manchester, England. City Art
Gallery. Reprinted in Grant and Hazel, Gods ami Mortals in Classical
                                       Mythology.)
                                       FIGURE 3-6
  Bathsheba (Rembrandt. Paris, the Louvre. Reprinted in Rembrandt, text by Ludwig Munz.)


 body, which, by certain laws of innate sympathy, assimilates anything of a
 lower class to its own essence.” 18 Understood psychologically, this
 definition states that the dissolving agent will be a superior, more
 comprehensive viewpoint—one that can act as a containing vessel for the
 smaller thing. Jung's concept of “the contained and the container” applies
 here. In relating to a more complex personality, he says: “the simpler
 personality is surrounded, if not actually swamped, by it; he is swallowed up
 in his more complex partner and cannot see his way out. It is an almost
 regular occurrence for a woman to be wholly contained, spiritually, in her
 husband, and for a husband to be wholly contained, emotionally, in his wife.
 One could describe this as the problem of the „contained‟ and the
 „container.‟ ” 19
   Whatever is larger and more comprehensive than the ego threatens to
 dissolve it. Internally, the unconscious as the latent Self or totality of the
 psyche can dissolve the ego. Externally, an individual with a larger




'"Kelly, The Alchemical Writings, p. 87.

'‟Jung, The Development of Personality, CIV 17, par. 331.
                                     FIGURE 3 - 7
    Susanna and the Elders (Tintoretto. Vienna, Gemäldegalerie. Reprinted in Italian
                               Painting: The Renaissance.)



consciousness than one's own can bring about solutio. For instance, a man who
had recently come in contact with Jung's ideas and had fallen under their sway
had this dream: He dreamed that he felt into the Lake of Zurich. A group, a school,
or a party may also be the dissolving agent. A group collective can easily
attract the projection of the Self and swallow up the individual who succumbs
to it. Identification with political parties or religious creeds would be
examples of solutio within a group.
    In the process of psychotherapy it usually happens that the e go of the
patient encounters in the therapist a more comprehensive standpoint, which
has a dissolving effect. This happening often leads to a partial state of
containment of the patient by the therapist and is a common cause of the
transference. Whenever a one-sided attitude encounters a larger attitude that
includes the opposites, the former, if it is open to influence, is dissolved by
the latter and goes into a state of solutio. This explains why a more
comprehensive standpoint is often experienced as a threat. It feels as though
one were drowning, and hence it will be resisted. Such resistance is valid and
necessary and should be respected. The psychotherapist must always be aware
of the possibility that the
patient may need to be shielded from the former‟s more comprehensive
attitude.20 Basically it is the Self, either experienced from within or as a
projection on an individual or a group from without, that is the agency
of soluiio. As Jung says: “The ego is contained in the self as it is
contained in the universe of which we know only the tiniest section. [A
person can serve that same containing function because] a man of
greater insight and intelligence than mine can know myself, but I
could not know him as long as my consciousness is inferior to his.” 21
    Bath, shower, sprinkling, swimming, immersion in water, and so
forth, are all symbolic equivalents for solutio that appear commonly in
dreams. All of these images relate to the symbolism of baptism, which
signifies a cleansing, rejuvenating immersion in an energy and
viewpoint transcending the ego, a veritable death and rebirth. Baptism
was once done by total immersion and was meant to signify
drowning—an echo of the ancient primitive procedure of ordeal by
water. It signified a total conversion, the death of the old life and
rebirth of a new person into the community of religious believers. The
ritual was considered quite literally to bring about the creation of a
new personality. Eliade describes the symbolism of baptism in these
words: “Immersion in water symbolizes a return to the preformal, a total
regeneration, a new birth, for immersion means a dissolution of forms,
a reintegration into the formlessness of pre-existence; and emerging
from the water is a repetition of the act of creation in which form was
first expressed.'* 22
    In Christian baptism the individual is united with Christ; that is, the
ego is linked to the Self. The Apostle Paul says: “Do you not know that all
of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
We were buried therefore with him by baptism into death, so that as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness
of life” (Rom. 6:3-4, RSV).
    Another feature of baptism is that it dissolves all separateness and individual
distinctions. According to Paul: “For as many of you as were baptized into
Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave
nor free, there is neither male or female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus”
(Gal. 3:27-28, RSV).
       From the inner standpoint this amounts to an integration or unification of
separated fragments. However, from the external standpoint — as with an outer
religious ritual—it represents the collectivization of the

a,
  An example of the cffccis of encountering a larger personality is found in the Moslem
legend of Moses and Khidr. See Jung, The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, CW
91. pars. 244ff.

¡'Jung, Letters 2:194.
22
     Eliade, Patterns In Comparative Religion, p. 88.
individual who has hit unique features dissolved by an identification with
the new viewpoint. It is also an example of a lesser standpoint being
dissolved by the greater, more comprehensive standpoint —indicated by
the phrase “in Christ Jesus.” To be “in” anything, such as in love, or in
pain, means one is surrounded, contained, and dissolved by the
containing matrix. Thus the religious faithful were described as fish
swimming in the pond containing the water of doctrine.
   The ambiguous interplay of the opposites is revealed by the fact that
often solutio is experienced not as containment, but rather as fragmentation
and dismemberment. A classic example is the myth of Actaeon (see
figure 3-8). The young hunter Actaeon unexpectedly came upon Artemis
naked in her bath. In retaliation, Artemis turned Actaeon into a stag, and
he was then dismembered by his own hounds. The dog is a theriomorphic
aspect of Artemis, therefore Artemis herself can be con sidered as the
dismembering agency. This myth depicts the dangerous aspect of
encounter with the archetypal feminine by an immature ego. It is thrown
into a regressive solutio by the activation of instinctual factors (the
hounds). One way of putting it would be that Act aeon is dissolved




                              FIGURE 3-8
   Diana and Actaeon (Titian. Edinburgh, National Gallery of Scotland.
               Reprinted in Titian: The Colour Library of Art.)
 by his lust. He is bitten and consumed by his animal nature. A similar idea
 is expressed in Plutarch's account of Isis and Osiris. According to this
 story, the child Maneros witnessed Isis' terrible love and grief upon seeing
 the dead Osiris. This awesome sight was so intolerable to Maneros that he
 fell out of the boat and drowned. 2J Most men, if they are honest, will
 acknowledge having had the experience of Maneros when confront ed with
 a woman‟s intense grief, desire, or anger.
    Artemis is the moon. Her dismemberment of Actaeon thus corresponds
 to the alchemical statement that “the solutio takes place in the moon” 24 (see
 figure 3-9). A young man who had gone as far in analysis as he was ready
 to once dreamed the simple statement, Psychoanalysis is of the moon. He
 awoke from this dream in panic and discontinued analysis not long
 thereafter. Analysis can indeed be a dissolving immersion into the dark,
 irrational lunar side, and the dreamer‟s anxiety is quite understandable.
    The theme of dismemberment leads directly into the myth of Dionysus.
 As an infant, Dionysus was dismembered by the Titans. Also, the Maenads
 who worshipped him were dismemberers who tore apart whatever crossed
 their frenzied path. Such was the fate of Pentheus in The Bacchae of
 Euripides. Many aspects of the Dionysian principle belong to solutio
 symbolism. Walter Otto tells us: “Water is... the element
 in which Dionysus is at home ___ The cults and myths are as explicit as
 they can be about the fact that Dionysus comes out of the water and returns
 to it, and that he has his place of refuge and home in the watery depths.” 25
    Dionysus is even described as the moisture principle itself and there fore
 the source of all fertility. Psychologically he is the principle of life,
 spontaneity, and energy as contrasted with form, measure, and restraint.
    One aspect of the Dionysian solutio is the orgiastic instinct bath.
 Sometimes the yearning of the lonely, alienated ego for containment in a
 larger whole expresses itself as lust for orgiastic, collective sexuality (see
 figure 3-10). If acted out concretely, such experiences aggravate the state
 of psychic fragmentation. Symbolically, however, the image of a collective
 orgy suggests the possibility of reestablishing one‟s lost con nection with
 common humanity. Group experiences of collective identi fication may
 activate this image of an orgy. For instance, a group process that I had an
 opportunity to observe generated in some participants definite solutio
 dreams. A beginner in the group had this dream




»Plutarch, Moratia. vol. 5.
24
     Bonus of Ferrara, The New Pearl of Great Price, p. 426.
25
     Otto, Dionysus Myth and Cull, p. 162.
                               Anonymi.




                           FIGURE 3 - 9
Baptism with Lunar Water While Being Bitten by Dragons (Ashmole, ed.,
                Theairum Chemicum Briiannicum. 1652.)


after being shocked by the psychological intimacies shared by group
members.
 / am looking for the group. / open a door to the room and on the floor / see all
 the group members making love with each other. One couple falls out of the door
 in front of me.
Another group member had this dream:
 / am in a classroom like a chemistry classroom. With seats in high tiers leading
 down to a stage-like platform. It is our group.
                                 FIGURE 3 10
    Bacchanal of the Andrians (Titian. Madrid. Prado. Reprinted in Titian: The
                              Colour Library of Art.)


    and the exhibit is of a beach with enormous, crashing waves, which become
    abruptly real. I can see that under the waves, along the sand, there is a strong
    sturdy fishing net which has been firmly anchored into the sand in several places,
    obviously to catch and hold a good haul in even rough weather, but the waves
    become so real and turbulent that they splash out of the exhibit stage and onto the
    audience. Several of us scramble down from the seats to avoid getting wet. I
    notice that / have left my purse behind in my hurry, and I think I will have to go
    back and get it.




   Water as the Dionysian fertility principle is described beautifully Goethe‟s
hymn to water
             Hail anew! Spring‟s burgeoning
             Leaps up within my heart, a spring
             With truth and beauty permeated—
             From the wave was all created.
             Water will all life sustain:
             Ocean, grant your endless reign!
                    But for clouds of your rich lending.
                    And the brooklets of your sending.
                    Rivers‟ courses wide extending.
                    Streams that reach majestic ending,
                    What were our world, our mountains, and our plains?
                    Your power the freshness of our life maintains.
                                                                  2
                    Tis you from whom the life flows in our veins. *

     Fertility and creativity were emphasized in the phallic aspects of Dionysian
 rituals. Otto writes:
        Inherent in the Dionysiac element of moisture is not only the power which
        maintains life but also the power which creates it. Thus it flows through the
        entire human and animal world as a fertilizing, generative substance. The
        learned Varro was very well informed when he declared that the sovereignty of
        Dionysus was not only to be recognized in the juice of fruits whose crowning
        glory was wine but also in the sperms of living creatures. From this sphere of
        the god‟s activity he traced the origin of the custom in which a phallus was
        crowned with wreaths and carried around in the god's cult. We certainly know
        how great a role this symbol of procreative power played in his festivals. "A
        wine jar, a vine, a goat, a basket of figs, and then the phallus” —this is the
        description Plutarch gives us of the original simplicity of the Dionysiac
        celebration. A song was sung to the phallus. We have inscriptional evidence for
        the use of a large wooden phallus in the processions of the Dionysia in Delos.
        Each colony sent a phallus regularly to the Athenian Dionysia. 27
    An example of Dionysian phallic symbolism linked with baptismal imagery is
 provided by the following dream. The dreamer was a middle - aged woman with
 emerging creative powers as a poet and a scholar. She dreamed :
        There is a party at my mother‟s apartment. A strange and disturbing man, Mr. X, a
        poet, is the guest of honor. (After several episodes the mother leaves the party.) When
        she does, there‟s a kind of universal, spontaneous rejoicing which / also feel, though I
        don‟t know what‟s up. / find out soon enough, though. For almost at once X gathers all
        the women around him in a semi-circle, whereupon he undresses and ejaculates a huge
        stream of sperm which falls like a fountain on each of us. I'd thought the idea was for
        us to serve him in this way, but as it turns out that‟s only part of it. Because as the
        sperm shower hits us severally, we each experience our own separate and individual
        orgasms.




J6
     Goethe, Faust, pt. 2. lines 8432 44.
27
 Olto, Dionysus Myth and Cult, p. 164.
            This dream foreshadowed an emerging positive realization of the
        dreamer‟s creative capacities. However, sometimes one‟s relation to the
        creative power is dangerous. Nietzsche, the great exponent of the Dionysian
        principle, is an awesome example of the dangers of a destructive solutio brought
        about by a personal identification with Dionysian creativity. In his psychosis,
        Nietzsche called himself “Dionysus” and signed his letters, “Zagreus”—that is,
        “the dismembered one.” Jung has some profound observations to make on the
        danger of dissolution in identification with creative powers. He says:
        [The creative forces] have you on the string and you dance to their whistling,
        to their melody. But in as much as you say these creative forces are in
        Nietzsche or in me or anywhere else, you cause an inflation, because man
        does not possess creative powers, he is possessed by them. That is the truth.
        If he allows himself to be thoroughly possessed by them without questioning,
        without looking at them, there is no inflation, but the moment he splits off,
        when he thinks, I am the fellow, an inflation follows ____
            It happens automatically that you become conscious of yourself and then
        you are gone, it is as if you had touched a high tension wire. Nietzsche, of
        course, could not help looking at the thing and then he was overwhelmed
        with resentments, because the creative powers steal your time, sap your
        strength, and what is the result? A book perhaps. But where is your personal
        life? All gone. Therefore, such people feel so terribly cheated, they mind it,
        and everybody ought to kneel down before them in order to make up for that
        which has been stolen by God. The creative forces have taken it out of them,
        and therefore they would like to personi fy them, imagine that they are Shiva,
        in order to have the delight of being creative. But if you know you are
        creative and enjoy being creative, you will be crucified afterwards because
        anybody identified with God will be dismembered. An old father of the
        church, the Bishop Synesius, said that the spiritus phantasticus, our creative
        spirit, can penetrate the depths or the heights of the universe like God, or like
        a great demon, but on account of that he will also have to undergo the divine
        punishment, and that would be the dismemberment of Dionysus or the
        crucifixion of Christ. 21 *
     In general, the Dionysian is daimonic and ecstatic, promoting inten sity of
experience rather than clear, structured meaning. It is a dissolver of limits and
boundaries, bringing life without measure. In its extreme form it is wild,
irrational, mad, ecstatic, boundless. It is the enemy of all conventional laws,
rules, and established forms. It is in the service, not of safety, but of life and
rejuvenation. The weak and immature may be destroyed by its onslaughts; the
healthy will be fertilized and enlivened like the land by the flooding of the Nile
(see figure 3-11).
     Many clinical syndromes are due to a concretistic identification with the
Dionysian principle. Alcoholism and drug addiction are obvious. Don Juanism
can also be considered an identification with Dionysus, in




:
    »Jung. Zarathustra Seminar 1:67.
                                 FIGURE 3 - 1 1
 Bathers (Renoir. Philadelphia, Collection of Carroll Tyson. Reprinted in Craven,
                          A Treasury of Art Masterpieces.)




which the individual surrounds himself with an entourage of women in various
stages of love or frenzy (Maenads). This situation threatens to bring about his own
psychological dismemberment by conflicts, obligations, and entanglements. The
Dionysian takes on a compulsive quality when it exists in a dissociated personality.
Put another way, the Dionysian destroys the Pentheus -like ego that is not related to
wholeness. In favorable circumstances it promotes harmony and dissolves
differences. For instance, consider this paean to the Dionysian by N ietzsche:
   Under the charm of the Dionysian not only is the union between man and man
   reaffirmed, but nature which has become alienated, hostile, or subju gated.
   celebrates once more her reconciliation with her lost son, man. Freely, earth
   proffers her gifts, and peacefully the beasts of prey of the rocks and desert
   approach. The chariot of Dionysus is covered with flowers and garlands; panthers
   and tigers walk under its yoke. Transform Beethoven's “Hymn to Joy" into a
   painting; let your imagination conceive the multitudes bowing to the dust,
   awestruck—then you will approach the Dionysian. Now the slave is a free man;
   now all the rigid, hostile barriers that necessity, capri ce, or “impudent
   convention” have fixed between man and man are broken. Now, with the gospel
   of universal harmony, each one feels himself not only united, reconciled, and
   fused with his neighbor, but as one with
        him, as if the veil of mAyi had been torn aside, and were now merely fluttering in tatters
        before the mysterious primordial unity. 29
         The Apostle Paul expresses approximately the same idea concerning the
      efficacy of the blood of Christ. In Ephesians, we read: “But now in Chris t
      Jesus you who once were far off have been brought near in the blood of
      Christ. For he is our peace, who has made us both one, and has broken
      down the dividing wall of hostility, by abolishing in his flesh the law of
      commandments and ordinances, that he might create in himself one new
      man in place of the two, so making peace, and might reconcile us both to
      God in one body through the cross, thereby bringing the hostility to an end”
      (Eph. 2:13-16, RSV).
         The wine of Dionysus and the blood of Christ are symbolically
      equivalent. This fact is illustrated in the dream of a young clergyman,
                                                             30
      which I have previously published in Ego and Archetype. It is as follows:
         Dream (abbreviated):
         / am to celebrate communion. In the sacristy, which looks like a kitchen, the
         communion wine is to be prepared by mixing two separate wines-a blue wine
         and a red wine. The latter is in a bottle with a yellow label that looks tike a
         Scotch label and is marked "Paul." At a round table, two men are sitting. One
         is a political leftist, the other a rightist. Up to now they have maintained a
         facade of social amenity but now they are becoming hostile to one another. /
         suggest that they ventilate at the gut level and resolve their feeling
         relationship. At this point the scene darkens as in a theatre play and a red-
         yellow spotlight focuses on a small table between and behind the two men. On
         the table is a bottle of the warm red wine with the Scotch label clearly marked
         "Paul.” Then there is total darkness and the tinkle of glasses, sounding as
         though they‟ve been clinked and perhaps broken.
         The sense is obvious in the dream. I think: they‟ve drunk the red wine in their
         discussion, attained comradeship, become drunk in the process, fallen asleep,
         and dropped their glasses. My response is delight in the aesthetic way this has
         been portrayed and anxiety about the fact that the service needs to begin and
         we do not now have the ingredients for the communion wine mixture.
The dreamer‟s psychology is not known to me in depth; however, it is evident
                 that Dionysian and Christian symbolism are here combined.




M
    Nietzsche, “The Birth of Tragedy," in Basic Writings of Nietzsche, p. 37.

‟"Edinger, Ego and Archetype, pp. 248ff.
                                        soi.uno                                      67


Although the union of the two wines perhaps Logos and Eros - remains to be
achieved, a solutio has occurred that dissoves the opposition between leftist and
rightist, although at the price of consciousness since they fall asleep. In this case,
as is often true, there is a confusion between authentic reconciliation of opposites
through greater consciousness and a regressive dissolution which blurs awareness
of the opposites.
   A cosmological version of solutio is the widespread myth of a cosmic catastrophe
by flood (see figure 3-12). In Hebrew myth it is Noah‟s flood; in Greek myth, the
story of Deucalion and Pyrrha. According to an ancient idea each of the four
elements in turn was to be an agent of world destruction. As reported by Dio
Chrysostom, the story is as follows: “The Lord of the world rides in a chariot
drawn by four horses which are sacred to Zeus, Hera, Poseidon, and Hestia
respectively. In other words, the four horses are the four elements, fire, air, water,
and




                    The Flood (Doré, Bible Illustrations.)
     earth. As a rule they are tractable, now and then, however, the first steed
     becomes restive and sets fire to the other three. This is the origin of the story of
     Phaethon told by the Greeks. Again it is the steed of Poseidon that becomes
     restive, and the drops of his sweat are sprinkled upon the other three. This,
     again, is the source from which the Greeks derived their story of Deucalion‟s
     flood,” and likewise with the other two horses. 31
        This idea corresponds to the alchemical circulatio in which the material is to
     be repeatedly sublimated and coagulated, circling again and again through all
     the states of being until the Philosophers‟ Stone is created. The whole history of
     the world is thus seen as a vast alchemical process.
        The flood myths are quite instructive psychologically. God sends a
     destructive flood when the world has become wicked and degenerate. It is as
     though humanity must be reduced through solutio to its prima materia in order for
     it to be transformed to something better. An other aspect of solutio is also
     demonstrated by the flood stories, namely, the theme of ordeal by water.
     Through this ordeal the godly men, those with authentic existence, remain intact
     while the wicked or inauthentic are dissolved. Psychologically this wo uld mean
     that those aspects of the ego consciously related to the Self withstand solutio.
        In the myths, the threat of a world flood was used to encourage an awareness
     of God. Similarly, a threat of flooding from the unconscious may have a salutary
     effect on a presumptuous ego and bring about an awareness of a need for a
     relation to the transpersonal. This state of mind is expressed in the Sixty -ninth
     Psalm (see figure 3-13):
        Save me, 0 God; for the waters are come in unto my soul. I sink in deep mire,
        where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods
        overflow me. (1, 2, AV)
        Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them
        that hate me, and out of the deep waters. Let not the water flood overflow me,
        neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon
        me. (14, IS, AV)

  Flood dreams refer to solutio. They represent an activation of the unconscious
that threatens to dissolve the established ego structure and reduce it to prima
materia. Major life transitions are commonly solutio experiences. For instance, a
woman with three children who was going through a second divorce had several
flood dreams, one of which was reported by Rivkah Kluger:




31
     Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 1:199-200.
                             FIGURE 3 - 1 3
“Save Me, O God; For the Waters Are Come in unto My Soul” (Illustration for
         Psalm 69, The Visconti Hours. Florence, National Library.)




  From a beach house / look out and see a great wave. I call the girls in. Mary is slow
  but does come in time and / shut the doors. Then the wave is on us. It comes through
   every crack and is all around us. I am frightened about Bob. my son. who is on the
   beach and wonder if he has been able to escape. I know that all the swimmers will
 have died. There is no escape and / say to myself: "So this is how it is.” I feel no real
        panic. Since escape is impossible, it is simply the way it is. But then the water
                                                                                subsides.
        We run about trying to close up cracks. There is a hole in the floor,
 besides many cracks in the walls ______Another wave comes. It crashes over and
     around us but this lime the room is not flooded and the cabin does not lift
        and roll about. We begin to run before the next one comes. I open the back door and there
        stands an old friend whom Ihave not seen in years. I hug him in joy and relief.... The country
        is bleak and mud is washed high up in the land. I see how lucky we have been and am so
        gladfor the man who came to take us away.32

       Another example is the following dream. The dreamer was a mature,
    middle-aged man who was going through a major life reorientation and
    facing a serious operation. He also later was divorced. He dreamed:

        World life is seen as in a great bowl. Then there is a huge flood, something like a dam
        lets loose and everything is overwhelmed.
        It is cataclysmic, a catastrophe of huge proportions and all is
        washed away in the rising waters __________ We flee before the deluge
        and some of us escape.
             Then it seems as if we are in a new era. This is world life seen inside a great
        sphere. There are many levels connected by staircases, ramps, etc., all around an open
        center. Apartments and living spaces are part of the outer wall.... Before it was night,
        now it is day. In the middle all is earth. It is a thick layer covering over the water.

       Dreams of a great flood sometimes include the experience of being
    rescued by a divine or transpersonal agency. In the following dream it is
    evident that a fatal solutio was avoided by the discovery of Jungian
    psychology:

        [The dreamer] was caught in a monstrous sea. Though she was a strong and practiced
        swimmer, her strength was nearly exhausted, and she knew she could not hold out much
        longer. Just then she saw ahead a square houseboat resembling the Noah's arks of her
        childhood. With a tremendous last effort she made for it, and just in time she reached its
        side, to be hauled up half fainting by none other than Dr. Jung, whom she had never even
        seen at the time. 33

        A middle-aged man going through the dissolution of a dependent
    relationship had this dream:

        I am at the center of a great city watching a vast stream of humanity pass by—
        individuals of every type and description. It‟s like the flow of a great river. / am
        fascinated.




u
    Kluger, “Flood Dreams,” in The Reality of the Psyche, p. 51.
w
    Bertine, “The Great Flood,” in Jung's Contribution to Our Time. p. 204.
On awakening the dreamer thought of the doctrine of Heraclitus that “all things are
in flux” (panta rhei). The dream is thus picturing the solutio aspect of existence—life
as perpetual change and becoming. A painful personal experience is cast in an
archetypal or general context and thereby made meaningful and even fascinating.
   The connection of solutio with salvation is indicated by the Apostle Peter‟s
relation of Noah‟s flood to baptism. “Now it was long ago, when Noah was still
building that ark which saved only a small group of eight
people „by water‟ ____ That water is a type of the baptism which saves you
now” (1 Pet. 3:20, 21, JB).
   Because eight people were saved in the flood, the number eight became
associated with baptism, the ritual repetition of the original flood. The Christians of
antiquity and the Middle Ages nearly always built their baptistries in octagonal
form. An inscription composed by St. Ambrose for the baptistry of the church of St.
Thecla in Milan reads as follows:
         Eight are the temple‟s walls—O number worthy of holy Actions
         performed at the spot; eight are the walls of the font. Mystical shape of
         the house that covers the rites of the water —Rites for the saving of
         man—mystical number of eight.
 Rites that derive their pow‟r from the light of Christ resurrected Christ who set
                     all men free, breaking the shackles of Hell,
         Who from the blemish of sin releaseth him that repenteth.
               In the crystalline spring cleansing the bather from guilt.
         What greater proof can ye ask of the power of God who Acting at one
         small point loosens the guilt of the world? 34
   We now know that the number eight is an individuation number, an expression
of wholeness. The flood and baptism symbolism is therefore telling us that by
passing through the water of solulio we become whole—that is, related to the Self.
   The exodus and passage through the Red Sea was also connected with baptism
by Paul: “I want you to know, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in
the sea” (1 Cor. 10:1-2 RSV).
   Jung mentions the Peratics‟ (a Gnostic sect‟s) interpretation of the Red Sea:
“The Red Sea drowned the Egyptians, but the Egyptians were all „non -
knowers.‟...The Red Sea is a water of death for those that are „unconscious,‟ but for
those that are „conscious‟ it is a baptismal water of rebirth and transcendence.” - 15
Augustine says, “The Red Sea signifies




M
    Rahner, Greek Myths
and Christian Mystery, p.
78. ‟'Jung, Mysterium
Coniunvtionis, CW 14.
par. 257.
    baptism,” and according to Honorius of Autun, “the Red Sea is the baptism
    reddened by the blood of Christ, in which our enemies, namely our sins, are
    drowned.” ,ft
        The alchemists used the image of the Red Sea. The tincture is said to be
     extracted from the Red Sea. One text speaks of the “Tyrean dye, which is
     extracted from our most pure Red Sea.”‟ 7 Another says, “And know that our
     Red Sea is more tincturing than all seas, and that [it]... penetrates all
     bodies."3 * The term “our Red Sea” refers to the aqua permanens, the universal
     solvent—that is, the liquid form of the Philosophers‟ Stone. Thus, that which
     has passed through the solutio of the Red Sea is the goal of the opus, the Self.
     Or, put another way, the Red Sea is the totality of the psyche, the agency of
     solutio that the ego must encounter and pass through on the way to
     individuation (see figure 3-
     14).
        The Red Sea had several overlapping meanings to the alchemists. (1) It
     was the crucial transition of the exodus. The Israelites' escape from slavery
     was equated with the redemption of the lost value hidden in the darkness of
     matter and indeed with the whole alchemical process of transformation. (2) It
     had the general meaning of the sea—the original chaos, the creative source
     of all that comes to be, in psychological terms, the uncons cious. (3) Its
     redness associated it with the color of the Philosophers‟ Stone and the
     transforming tincture. Thus the Red Sea was not only the prima materia, but
     also the goal of the opus. It was also connected with the redeeming blood of
     Christ and the “blood of the lamb” as described in Revelation. “What are
     these which are arrayed in white robes?...These are they which came out of
     great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made then white in the
     blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve
     him day and night in his temple” (Rev. 7:14, 15, AV).
        Literal blood baptism was practiced in the taurobolium of Mithraism.
     Blood is associated with the element fire; hence, blood symbolism com bines
     fire and water—that is, both calcinatio and solutio imagery.
        Baptism is basically a purification ritual that washes one clean of dirt,
     both literal and spiritual. Washings were frequent preliminary procedures in
     religious ceremonies, in the Eleusinian Mysteries for instance.
     Psychologically, the dirt or sin that is washed away by baptism can be
     understood as unconsciousness, shadow qualities of which one is unaware.
     Psychological cleanliness means not literal purity, but aware -




3

6


I
b
i
d
.
,


p
a
r
.


2
5
6
.


,

7


l
b
i
                                   FIGURE 3 14
Pharaoh‟s Army Drowning in the Red Sea (The Visconti Hours. Florence. National Library.)


     ness of one‟s own dirt. If one is psychologically clean, one will not
   contaminate one‟s environment with shadow projections (see figure 3 -
 15).
 I cannot conclude this section on baptism symbolism without citing a
 beautiful quotation that equates Christ and the sun as partners in baptism.
 This from Melito of Sardis, a second-century theologian:
When drawn by his fiery steeds the sun has completed his daily course, then by reason of
            his whirling passage he takes on the color of fire and becomes as
 a burning torch ____ Then, almost lost from view, he descends into the ocean.
 ...Bathing himself in the mysterious depths he shouts mightily for joy, for water is his
             nourishment. He remains one and the same, yet he comes forth
                            ANATOMY OF THE PSYCH E




        FIGURE 3 - 1 5        The Woman Washing Clothes (Maier,   Atalania Fugiens,
                                         1618.)



    strengthened out of the depths, a new sun, and shines his light upon men,
    having been cleansed in the water ____
       There follow him in due course the dancing ranks of the stars and by reason of
    him the moon puts forth her power. They bathe in the baptistry of the sun like
    those who are obedient under instruction and it is only because moon and stars
    follow the course of the sun that they shine with a truly pure light. If then the sun
    and the stars and the moon all bathe together in the ocean, why should not Christ
    have been baptized in the River Jordan? King of Heaven, prince of creati on, sun
    of the eastern sky who appeared both to the dead in Hades and to mortals upon
    earth, he, the only true Helios, arose for us out of the highest summits of
    Heaven. 39

    Earlier, the moon was mentioned as an agent of negative or danger ous solutio. It
also has important connections with highly positive imagery. The moon was
considered to be the source of dew—an agent of healing grace and identical with the
aqua permanens. Isis was called “dew,” and it was the dew of her tears that brought
together the dismembered fragments of Osiris. 40 Jung describes moon and dew
symbolism in these words:




"'Rahner, Greek Myths anil Christian Mystery, p. 115.

"Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14, par. 14.
        Luna secretes the dew or sap of life. [According to an alchemical text,] "'f his
        Luna is the sap of the water of life, which is hidden in Mercurius!” Even the
        Greek alchemists supposed there was a principle in the moon which Chris' tianos
        calls the “ichor of the philosopher.” The relation of the moon to the soul, much
        stressed in antiquity, also occurs in alchemy though with a different nuance.
        Usually it is said that from the moon comes the dew. but the moon is also the
        aqua miriftca that extracts the souls from the bodies or gives the bodies life and
        soul. Together with Mercurius, Luna sprinkles the dismembered dragon with her
        moisture and brings him to life again, “makes him live, walk, and run about, and
        change his color to the nature of blood." As the water of ablution, the dew falls
        from heaven, purifies the body, and makes it ready to receive the soul; in other
        words, it brings about the albedo, the white state of innocence, which like the
        moon and a bride awaits the bridegroom. 41
    In ecclesiastical symbolism dew represents grace, and in alchemy it is the aqua
sapentiae. An excellent example is seen in one of the Rosarium pictures reproduced in
The Psychology of the Transference42 (see figure 3-16). This picture shows the king and
queen following coitus merged and dead lying on a slab. Drops of moisture are
falling on them from a cloud above. Jung interprets the descending dew as the water
of divine Wisdom or “Gideon‟s dew,” a synonym for the aquapermanens. It “is a sign
of divine intervention, it is the moisture that heralds the return of the soul.” 43 This
corresponds to the recovery of feeling after succumbing to the deadly, barren state
of intellectual abstraction like Faust‟s before his encounter with Mephistopheles. As
Jung tells us, “The alchemists thought that the opus demanded not only laboratory
work, the reading of books, meditation, and patience, but also love.” 44 The dew of
divine Wisdom emphasizes another aspect of solutio, namely, its power to answer
questions or provide a solution to problems. Gerhard Dorn says: “The chemical
putrefaction is compared to the study of the philosophers, because as the
philosophers are disposed to knowledge by study, so natural things are disposed by
putrefaction to solution. To this is compared philosophical kn owledge, for as by
solution bodies are dissolved, so by knowledge are the doubts of the philosophers
resolved.” 45
    The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam expresses the same idea in a style more
appropriate to solutio.
                         The Grape that can with Logic absolute The
                         Two-and-Seventy jarring Sects confute:




41
     1 bid., par. 155.

^Printed in Jung, The Practice of Psychotherapy CW 16.
'‟Ibid.. par. 487.
"Ibid.. par. 490.
45
 Jung, Mysterium Conjunct ioriis, Of 14. par. 363.
   PHILOSOPHORVM ABLVTIO

                               VEL
                               Muttdißcatio




                      Çw frit 6# Zdotv WH SfriPBtl

                                                             K ift

                                 FIGURE 3 - 1 6
    The Corpse of the Merged King and Queen Being Purified and Reanimated by
   Heavenly Dew (Rosarium Philosophorum, Frankfurt, 1550. Reprinted in Jung, The
                             Practice of Psychotherapy.)


                  The sovereign alchemist that in a trice Life‟s
                  leaden metal into Gold transmute. 46
 The solutio experience “solves” psychological problems by transferring the issue
 to the realm of feeling. In other words, it answers “unanswerable” questions by
 dissolving the libido obstruction of which the question was a symptom.
 A variant of solutio is liquefactio, the process of melting. Sometimes it is called
 “ceration.” About this procedure Ruland says, “Ceration is performed upon a
 body which is hard and of dry humour by continual




^Fitzgerald, trans.. The Rubaiyat of Omar Khavvam. st. 42.
     inhibition until melting takes place _________ the sign of perfect ceration is
      when the medicine, being most swiftly projected upon a burning plate, resolves
      itself, without smoke, into the consistency of molten wax.” 47 The ability to melt
      upon heating, a feature of most metals, was considered to be an indicator of
      quality or nobility. Thus, regarding a nonfusible metal, an alchemist exclaims in
      disgust, “Bismuth..-is not even fusible by fire—such is its earthly grossness and
      impurity.” 4 * This is an interesting psychological point. It tells us that psychic
      quality is indicated by its ability to soften, to melt into a liquid flowing state.
      Perhaps this is the root image of the idea of a gentle man. Lao Tse describes it
      beautifully:
                       The best of men is like water.
                       Water benefits all things
                       And does not compete with them.
                       It dwells in (the lowly) places that all disdain,—
                       Wherein it comes near to the Tao.

                       In his dwelling, (the Sage) loves the (lowly) earth;
                       In his heart, he loves what is profound;
                       In his relations with others, he loves kindness;
                       In his words, he loves sincerity;
                       In government, he loves peace;
                       In business affairs, he loves ability;
                       In his actions, he loves choosing the right time.
                       It is because he does not contend That he is without
                       reproach. 49
     The / Ching has a hexagram, number 59, which might have been named
     “solutioWilhelm calls it “Dispersion or Dissolution.” Part of the commentary reads
     as follows:
     Religious forces are needed to overcome the egotism that divides men. The
     common celebration of the great sacrificial feasts and sacred rites... was the means
     employed by the great rulers to unite men. The sacred music and the splendor of
     the ceremonies aroused a strong tide of emotion that was shared by all hearts in
     unison, and that awakened a consciousness of the common origin of all creatures.
     In this way disunity was overcome and rigidity
     dissolved __ Egotism and cupidity isolate men. Therefore the hearts of men
     must be seized by a devout emotion. They must be shaken by a religious awe in
     face of eternity. 50




47
 Ruland, A Lexicon of Alchemy, p. 95.

“Waite, trans., The Hermetic Museum 1:24.
     Tut> Teh Chinn or The Book of Tao, Chapter 8, Tr. Lin Yutang.
•'"Wilhelm, trans.. The t Ching or Book of Changes, pp. 227ff.
         To summarize, I have spoken of seven major aspects of solutio symbolism:
     (I) return to the womb or primal state; (2) dissolution, dispersal,
     dismemberment; (3) containment of a lesser thing by a greater; (4) rebirth,
     rejuvenation, immersion in the creative energy flow; (5) purification ordeal;
     (6) solution of problems; and (7) melting or softening process. These different
     aspects overlap. Several or all of them may make up different facets of a single
     experience. Basically it is the ego‟s confrontation with the unconscious that
     brings about solutio. Jung says:
       The analysis and interpretation of dreams confront the conscious standpoint
       with the statements of the unconscious, thus widening its narrow horizon.
       This loosening up of cramped and rigid attitudes corresponds to the solution
       and separation of the elements by the aqua permanens, which was already
       present in the “body" and is lured out by the art. The water is a soul or spirit,
       that is, a psychic “substance,” which now in its turn is applied to the initial
       material. This corresponds to using the dream‟s meaning to clarify existing
       problems. “ Solutio" is defined in this sense by Dorn. “As bodies are dissolved
       by solution, so the doubts of the philosophers are resolved by knowledge.” 51

    This quotation describes the analytic process as chiefly a solutio for the patient.
 However, the therapist must also submit to solutio. Certain texts state this
 explicitly: “It is necessary therefore to convert the bodies of metals into a fluid
 substance; for...every tincture will tinge a thousand times more in a soft and
 liquid substance, than when it is in a dry one....Therefore the transmutation of
 imperfect metals is impossible to be done by perfect bodies while they are dry and
 hard: for which cause sake, they must be brought back into their first matter,
 which is soft and fluid.” 52 Again, “that which is dry does not enter into, nor tinge
 anything besides itself...nor can it tinge except it be tinged.” 53 Thus, both patient
 and agent must be soft and fluid. This corresponds to what Jung tells us about the
 nature of psychotherapy:
    The relation between doctor and patient remains a personal one within the
    impersonal framework of professional treatment. By no device can the
    treatment be anything but the product of mutual influence, in which the whole
    being of the doctor as well as that of his patient plays its part — Hence the
    personalities of doctor and patient are often infinitely more imp ortant for the
    outcome of the treatment than what the doctor says and thinks.... For two
    personalities to meet is like mixing two different chemical substances: if there
    is any combination at all, both are transformed. In any effective psychological
    treatment the doctor is bound to influence the patient; but this influence can
    only take place if the patient has a reciprocal




•'•Jung. Mvsterium Con ¡unci ionis. C W 14, par. 306 and n. 587.

  The Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers, p. 135.
»‟Ibid.
       influence on the doctor. You can exert no influence if you are not susceptible to
       influence. 5 4

       Between doctor and patient, therefore, there are imponderable factors which bring
       about a mutual transformation. In the process, the str onger and more stable
       personality will decide the final issue. I have seen many cases where the patient
       assimilated the doctor in defiance of all theory and of the tatter's professional
       intentions—generally, though not always, to the disadvantage of the doctor. 55

       Each of the alchemical operations has a lesser and a greater aspect, just as it has
both a negative and a positive side. The fire of calcinatio can be experienced as hell
fire or the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. The same applies to solutio. One text says:
“You are to know that, although the solution is one, yet in it there may be
distinguished a first, and a second....The first solution is...the reduction of it to its
First Matter, the second is that perfect solution of body and spirit at the same time,
in which the solvent and the thing solved always abide together, and with this
solution of the body there takes place simultaneously a consolida tion of the
spirit.” 56
    The greater solutio thus involves a transposition of the opposites; the solution of
the body brings about a consolidation of the spirit. Many other texts say the same
thing. Kelly quotes Avicenna: “The true principle of our work is the dissolution of
the Stone, because solved bodies have assumed the nature of spirits, i.e., beca use
their quality is drier. For the solution of the body is attended with the coagulation of
the spirit.” 57 Another text says, “Our solucyon ys cause of our coagulacyon; For the
dissolucyon on the one syde corporall causyth congelacyon on the other syde
spyrytuall.” 58
    This is profound and paradoxical symbolism. The most obvious meaning is that a
release from concrete particulars promotes a realization of universals. However, the
paradoxical play of opposites means ultimately that the procedure leads to the
Self—the transpersonal center of the psyche that unites and reconciles the opposites.
We are thus brought, finally, to the ultimate in solutio symbolism, the idea of the
water that is the goal of the process. Several terms are used for this liquid version of
the Philosophers‟ Stone: "aqua permanens"elixer vitae," “tincture,” “philosophical
water,” “universal solvent,” “divine




u
    The Practice of Psychotherapy, C W 16, par. 163.
* 4Ibid., par. 164.
5,1
      Waite, trans.. The Hermetic Museum 1:40.
'‟Kelly, The Alchemical Writings of Edward Kelly, p. 49. **1he Lives
of the Alchemvstical Philosophers, p. 219.
water,” and so forth. Water as the goal of the opus is described in this text:
     [The philosophers] say that the whole work and the substance of the whole
     work are nothing but the water, and that the treatment of the same also takes
     place in nothing but the water ___ And by whatever names the philosophers
     have called their stone they always mean and refer to this one substance, i.e.,
     to the water from which everything [originates] and in which everything [is
     contained], which rules everything, in which errors are made and in which the
     error is itself corrected. I call it “philosophical” water, not ordinary water but
     aqua mercurialis.59
   Here the philosophical water in which everything takes place is both the
beginning and the end of the opus, the prima materia, and the Philosophers‟ Stone.
It is a liquid symbol of the Self containing the opposites and turning each one -
sided thing into its contrary. Thus it is said, “This (divine) water makes the dead
living and the living dead, it lights the darkness and darkens the light.” 60
   Just as the Philosophers‟ Stone was identified with Christ, the divine water of
the alchemists was also connected with the living water that Christ equated with
himself in the Gospel of John: “Whoever drinks the water that I shall give him
will never suffer thirst anymore. The water that I shall give him will be an inner
spring always welling up for eternal life” (John 4:14, NEB). “If anyone is thirsty
let him come to me; whoever believes in me, let him drink. As Scripture says,
„Streams of living water shall flow out from within him‟” (John 7:38, NEB).
   An interesting dream parallel to the “stream of living water” came to my
attention. During a particular session, the analyst was especially resourceful in
giving a rich amplification of the patient‟s dream. That night the patient dreamed
that a stream of crystal clear water was flowing from the analyst‟s mouth. This episode is
an excellent example of Jung‟s statement, “The analysis and interpretation of
dreams...corresponds to the solution and separation of the elements by the aqua
permanens.bi
   The Psalmist cries out to God, “My soul thirsteth for thee in a dry and thirsty
land where no water is” (Ps. 63:1, AV). Almost in answer to this cry, an
alchemical recipe for solutio begins with these words, “If thou knowest how to
moisten this dry earth with its own water, thou wilt loosen the pores of this
earth.” Jung offers the following interpretation:




 w
     Jung,
 Psychology and
 •'Ibid., par.
 Alchemy,  CW306.
 12, par. 336.
 “Jung,
 Mysterium
 Coniunctionis,
 CW 14. par.
 317.
       If you will contemplate your lack of fantasy, of inspiration and inner alive' ness,
       which you feel as sheer stagnation and a barren wilderness, and impreg nate it
       with the interest born of alarm at your inner death, then something can take
       shape in you, for your inner emptiness conceals just as great a fullness if only
       you will allow it to penetrate into you. If you prove receptive to this “call of the
       wild,” the longing for fulfillment will quicken the sterile wilderness of your soul
       as rain quickens the dry earth. 62

    The greater solutio is an encounter with the Numinosum. which both tests and
establishes the ego‟s relation to the Self. As the flood myths tell us explicitly, the
flood comes from God; that is, solutio comes from the Self. What is worth saving in
the ego is saved. What is not worth saving is dissolved and melted down in order to
be recast in new life-forms. Thus, the ongoing life process renews itself. The ego
that is committed to this transpersonal process will cooperate with it and will
experience its own diminishment as a prelude to the coming of the larger person -
ality, the wholeness of the Self.




H
    Ibid„ par. 190.
                                               Coagulation


     ust as calcina tio is the operation of the element fire, solutio the

J    water operation, and sublimatio the operation pertaining to air, so
coagulaiio belongs to the symbolism of the element earth. As with all
the alchemical operations, coagulaiio refers first of all to experience in
the laboratory. Cooling can turn a liquid into a solid. A solid that has
been dissolved in a solvent reappears when the solvent is evaporated. 1
Or a chemical reaction may produce a new compound that is solid —for
example, the coagulation of egg white when it is heated.
    In essence, coagulaiio is the process that turns something into earth. “Earth” is thus
one of the synonyms for the coagulaiio. It is heavy and permanent, of fixed position and
shape. It doesn‟t disappear into the air by volatilizing nor pliantly adapt itself to the
shape of any container as does water. Its form and location are fixed. Thus, for a psychic
content to become earth means that it has been concretized in a particular localized form;
that is, it has become attached to an ego (see figure 4-1).
    Coagulaiio is often equated with creation. The Turba Philosophorum says, “God hath
created all things by his word, having said unto them: Be, and they were made with the
four other elements, earth, water, air, and fire, which He coagulated.” 2 Certain creation
myths use explicit images of coagulatio. In the cosmogony of the North American Indians,
the world was often created by an “earth diver” who brought up bits of mud from the
depths of the sea. 3 For example, a Cherokee myth says: “Originally the animals were
crowded into the sky-world; everything was flood below. The Water-Beetle was sent on
an exploration, and




'Ruland calls this “Coagulation by Segregation" and says it is “when certain portions being
segregated, the rest are concreted. The operation may be termed Concretion. It ■ * performed
with heat, whereby the humour is evaporated, or exhaled, and thus the cause of fluidity is
removed" (Ruland. A Lexicon of Alchemy, p. 107).
J
  Waite, trans., Turha Philosophorum. p. 25.
    n
      example is found in Eliade, From Primitives to Zen. p. 88.
                                    FIGURE 4 - I
         Earth Nurses the FHius Philosophorum (Maier, Atalania Fugiens, 1618.)




after darting about on the surface of the waters and finding no rest, it dived
to the depths, whence it brought up a bit of mud, from which Earth
developed by accretion. When the earth was dry...the animals came
down.” 4
   There is an interesting coagulatio image in Hindu mythology. After the
flood (soluiio) that destroyed all people except Manu, the Hindu Noah, there
was need to recover valuable things lost in the deluge. “Gods and genii
churned the ocean of milk, using the great serpent (Sesa-naga) as a rope
and the Slow-Mountain (Mandara) as a churning rod.” 5 From this churning
process various objects coagulated out like butter from cream. This same
image is given a psychological application in the Upanishads. “Like the
butter hidden in milk, Pure Consciousness (vijnanam: the state of Atman as
Brahman, sheer bliss) resides in every being. It is to be constantly churned,
with the mind serving as the churning rod."6 The idea that the world was
coagulated into being by an


„Alexander. The Mythology of All Races 10:60.
 s
     Danielou, Hindu Polytheism, p. 167.
 •Zimmer, Philosophies of India, p. 369.
agitating or churning motion is also expressed by Anaximander: “There was
an eternal motion, in which was brought about the origin of the worlds.” 7
This “eternal motion” was thought of as a vortex taking place in the
“boundless” ( apeiron), the prima materia, and is very similar to the Hindu
myth.
   A middle-aged man who was going through a major reorientation with a
“sense of the old order passing away” had this dream:
    It is dawn, the light of the rising sun just emerging. I am up to my waist in
    a substance that is a mixture of black mud, slime, and shit. There is no one
    else around and this black expanse stretches to the horizon. It is like the
    beginning of the world, the first day of creation. I start to thrash my legs, to
    churn in the black mud with great and persistent effort. I continue doing
    this for hours and slowly the primeval ooze begins to harden and become
    firm.
    I notice the sun is rising into the sky and its heat is drying up the water and
    providing solid earth. I anticipate being able to stand on firm ground.
    These myths tell us that coagulatio is promoted by action (diving,
churning, whirling motion). They correspond to what Faust learned from the
Spirit of Mephistopheles: “In the beginning was the deed.” 8 Psychologically
this means that activity and psychic movement promote ego development.
Exposing oneself to the storm and stress of action, the churn of reality,
solidifies the personality.
    The Turba Philosophorum gives the following alchemical recipe for
coagulatio: “Take quicksilver, coagulate in the body of Magnesia, in Kuhul
(lead), or in Sulphur which does not burn; etc.” (dictum 11). This text has a
recognizable chemical reference. If mercury is amalgamated with a large
quantity of another metal such as lead, the amalgam solidifies. Similarly,
mercury combines with sulphur to form solid mercury sulphide. However, the
reference to sulphur that does not burn makes it clear that a psychic meaning
has been superimposed on the chemical facts.
    The substance to be coagulated is elusive quicksilver. This is the S pirit
Mercurius about whom Jung has written extensively. 9 Essentially it is the
autonomous spirit of the archetypal psyche, the paradoxical manifestation of
the transpersonal Self. To subject the Spirit Mercurius to coagulatio means
nothing less than the connecting of the ego with the Self, the fulfillment of
individuation. Lesser aspects of the elusive




‟Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, p. 52.
"Goethe, Faust, pt. I, line 1237.
‟•^ung. Alchemical Studies, CW 13, pars. 239ff.
        Mercurius appear in the effects of all autonomous complexes. The assimilation
        of a complex is thus a contribution to the coagulatio of the Self.
        The text mentions three agents of coagulatio: magnesia, lead, and sulphur.
     Magnesia had a different meaning to the alchemists than it does to us; it was a
     general term referring to various crude metallic ores or impure mixtures. 10
     Psychologically this could refer to the union of the transpersonal spi rit with
     ordinary human reality. Perhaps this is the meaning of Jung‟s remark as reported
     by Aniela Jaffe: “When Jung, in his eighties, was discussing at his house the
     process of becoming conscious with a group of young psychiatrists... he ended
     with the surprising words: „And then you have to learn to become decently
     unconscious.‟” 11 The next agent of coagulatio mentioned is lead. Lead is heavy,
     dull, and burdensome. It is associated with the planet Saturn, which carries the
     qualities of depression, melancholy, and galling limitation. Thus, free,
     autonomous spirit must be connected with heavy reality and the limitations of
     personal particularity. In analytic practice this linkage with lead is often
     accomplished when the individual takes personal responsibi lity for fleeting
     fantasies and ideas by expressing them to the analyst or to another significant
     person. It is astonishing to observe the difference between an idea thought and an
     idea spoken. It‟s the difference between mercury and lead (see figure 4 -2).
        The third coagulating agent mentioned is sulphur. Its yellow color and
     inflammability associate it with the sun. On the other hand, its vapors stink and
     blacken most metals so that brimstone is a characteristic feature of hell. Jung
     summarizes his masterful discussion of the symbolism of sulphur in Mysterium
     Cortiunctionis with these words:
        Sulphur represents the active substance of the sun or, in psychological
        language, the motive factor in consciousness: on the one hand the will, which can
        best be regarded as a dynamism subordinated to consciousness, and on the
        other hand compulsion, an involuntary motivation or impulse ranging from
        mere interest to possession proper. The unconscious dynamism would
        correspond to sulphur, for compulsion is the great myst ery of human life. It is
        the thwarting of our conscious will and of our reason by an inflammable
        element within us, appearing now as a consuming fire and now as life -giving
        warmth. 12

     It is paradoxical. “As the corrupter it has affinity with the devil, whil e on the
     other hand it appears as a parallel of Christ.” 13 Thus, if part of




l0
     See Ruland. A Lexicon of Alchemy, “magnesia" and “marcasite."

"Jaffe, The Myth of Meaning, p. 149.
l2
     Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis, CW 14, par. 151.
IJ
     Ibid., par. 153.
                                            FIGURE 4-2
           Eagle Chained to a Ground Animal (Stolcius, Viridarium Chymicum. 1624.
                            Reprinted in Read,    Prelude to Chemistry.)


the meaning of sulphur is desirousness—the striving for power and pleasure—we
reach the conclusion that desire coagulates.
     In the New Testament the flesh is explicitly equated with sinful desirousness.
“For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the
pride of life, is not of the Father but is of the world” (1 John 2:16, RSV). Likewise,
Paul said, “Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness ,
revellings. and such like” (Gal. 5:19-21, AV).
     Not only is desirousness a characteristic of flesh —the coagulated aspect of the
psyche—but also desire is said to initiate the incarnating process. For instance,
incarnation and desire are linked in The Tibetan Book of the Dead. When a soul is about
to be reincarnated and lodged in a womb, it has visions of mating couples and is
overcome by intense desire: if a male, desire for the mother and aversion for the
father, if a female, desire for the father and aversion for the mother. 14 Jacob




M
    Evans-Wentz, ed. The Tibetan Book of the Dead. pp. xlv ff.
        Boehme, speaking of the manifestation of the divine nature, says: “The will by
     desiring contracts and becomes substantial. Thus darkness is cr eated within the
     will, while without that desire there would be nothing but eternal stillness
     without substantiality.” 15 A Neoplatonic image of the incarnation of the soul also
     sees it as motivated by desire. “Looking down from that highest summit and
     perpetual light, and having with secret desire contemplated the appetence of the
     body and its „life,‟ so- called on earth, the soul by the very weight of this its
     earthly thought
     gradually sinks down into the nether world _______ In each sphere (which it
     passes) it is clothed with an etherial envelopment, so that by these it is in stages
     reconciled to the company of this earthen garment. And thus it comes through as
     many deaths as it passes spheres to what here on earth is called „life.‟” 16
        In this passage the incarnating process is linked with desire, with a descent or
     fall from heaven, and with a putting on of clothes. The motif of the fall from
     heaven because of pride or passion goes back to Genesis 6:2 (AV): “The sons of
     God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
     all which they chose.” Also relevant is Lucifer‟s rebellion and fall from heaven
     so beautifully described by Milton:
                      He trusted to have equal‟d the most High,
                      If he opposed; and with ambitious aim Against the
                      Throne and Monarchy of God Rais‟d impious War in
                      Heav‟n and Battel proud With vain attempt. Him the
                      almighty Power Hurl‟d headlong flaming from th‟
                      Ethereal Skie With hideous ruin and combustion down
                      To bottomless perdition, there to dwell In Adamantine
                      chains and penal Fire,
                      Who durst defie th‟ Omnipotent to Arms. 17
     This passage contains calcinatio symbolism, but its main reference is to
     coagulatio. It is a magnificent description of the initial preconscious act that lays
     the foundation of the ego. Angels or their equivalents still fall from heaven in
     modern dreams (see figure 4-3).
       A young woman who had a defective ego development —a gap in awareness of
     her feminine identity—had this dream early in her analysis:




ls
     Boehme, “Forty Questions,” quoted in Personal Christianity: The Doctrine of Jacob Boehme. p. 88.

l6
     Macrobius, In Somn. Scip., quoted in Jonas, The Gnostic Religion, p. 158.
l7
     Milton, “Paradise Lost," in Milton: Complete Poetry and Selected Prose, bk. 11, lines 40-49.
The
      Fall of the Rebel AngelsËSÏfB Riches Heures du Duc de Berry. Chantilly, Musée
                                      Condé.)
    (Abbreviated) I was called to the window to watch a phenomenon in the sky. As I
    watched the moon I saw another body emerge from behind it—like a second moon.
    Suddenly the second body began to explode in spectacular colors that looked ¡ike an
    H- bomb explosion. I thought we were watching the birth of a new sun. All at once,
    during another explosive event, a piece of the new body was thrown into space and
    landed in our apartment.
    We ran out as fast as we could, being afraid that it might be radioactive.
This dream encouraged me to persevere in a slow and difficult thera peutic process.
An important feature of it was the gradual development of the capacity to relate
fully to a man.
    Dreams of planes crashing or objects falling generally refer to coagu- latio. For
instance, a man who was in the process of developing a more authentic relation to
his religion had this dream:
    I am in midtown Manhattan. Tall buildings are being razed. A huge boulder from
    the lop of one of the buildings comes crashing to the ground, almost hitting me.
The dreamer‟s association to the boulder was Peter, the rock upon which Christ
built his church (Matt. 16:18).
    Psychotherapeutic experience verifies the idea that desire promotes
coagulatio. For those who are already driven by desirousness, coagulatio is not the
operation needed. However, many patients have an inadequate libido
investment, a weakness of desire sometimes bordering on anhe- donia. Such
people don‟t know what they want and are afraid of their own desires. They are
like unborn souls in heaven shrinking from the fall into concrete reality. These
people need to cultivate their desires— seek them, nourish them, and act on
them. Only thus will psychic energy be mobilized that will promote life
experience and ego development. In psychotherapy, the emergence of
transference desires will often indicate the beginning of a coagulatio process and
therefore should be treated with care.
    The lure of desire is the sweetness of fulfillment. Honey as the supreme
example of sweetness is therefore an agent of coagulatio. Paracelsus says that
“the prime matter of honey is the sweetness of the earth which resides in
naturally growing things.” And again, honey “is the prime materialized matter,
for honey and wax are one.” 18 According to the alchemist Dorn‟s recipe for
joining the spirit (unio mentalis) with




 '"Paracelsus. The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelsus 2:74
the body, one of the required agents is honey.» 9 Jung say* of Dorn‟s use of honey:
   Thereby the mixture acquired the property not only of eliminating impurities but
   of changing spirit into body, and in view of the proposed conjuncti on of the spirit
   and the body this seemed a particularly promising sign. To be sure, the “sweetness
   of the earth” was not without its dangers, for at we have seen... the honey could
   change into a deadly poison. According to Paracelsus it contains “Tartarum ,”
   which as its name implies has to do with Hades. Further, Tartarum is a “calcined
   Saturn” and consequently had affinities with this malefic planet. 20
   Honey, because of its preservative qualities, was considered by the ancients to be a
   medicine of immortality and had a Eucharistic use in some early Christian
   communities. 21
   In modern dreams, a reference to sweets (candy, cake, cookies, and so forth)
   usually indicates a regressive tendency toward childish pleasure - seeking that
   requires reductive interpretation (mortificatio). Occasionally, however, it points to
   an authentic need for coagulatio. Coagulatio is often resisted because it is felt to be
   morally ambiguous and apt to lead one into pain and conflict. The classic protest is
   that of Hamlet: “O. that this too too solid flesh would melt,/Thaw and resolve
   itself into a dew” (Act 1, sc. 2, line 129). In fact, coagulatio is explicitly associated
   with evil. This is demonstrated by the alchemical connection of coagulatio with
   Saturn, the malefic principle. One text says, “the coagulation (takes place) in
   Saturn.” 22 According to Jacob Boehme, “Saturn, that cold, sharp, austere and
   astringent regent, taketh its beginning and original not from the sun; for Saturn
   hath in its power the chamber of death, and is a drier up of all powers, from
   whence corporeity existeth. For as the sun is the heart of life, and an original of all
   spirits in the body of this world, so Saturn is a beginner of all corporeity and com -
   prehensibility or palpability” 23 (see figure 4-4). The utterly malign nature of
   Saturn is expressed by Chaucer who has Saturn say:
                        My course, which has so wide a way to turn.
                        Has power more than any man may know.
                        Mine is the drowning in the sea below;
                        Mine is the dungeon underneath the moat;
                        Mine is the hanging and strangling by the throat;




   '‟Jung, Mysterium Coniunct ion is. CW 14. par. 683.
   “Ibid.. par. 687.
        Eisler, Orpheus the Fisher, pp. 242ff.
   :j
        Bonus of Ferrara, The New Peart
   of Great Price, p. 426. u Boehme,
   Aurora, p. 687.
            FIGURE 4-4 The Stone of Saturn (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens,
                                   1618.)


               Rebellion, and the base crowd‟s murmuring,
               The groaning and the private poisoning.
               And vengeance and amercement—all are mine,
               While yet I dwell within the Lion‟s sign.
               Mine is the ruining of all high halls.
               And tumbling down of towers and of walls Upon
               the miner and the carpenter.
               1 struck down Samson, that pillar shaker;
               And mine are all the maladies so cold,
               The treasons dark, the machinations old;
               My glance is father of all pestilence. 24
Since antiquity there has been a tendency to equate matter with evil. This reached its
extreme in certain Gnostic sects. The fall of the soul from its immortal state into
bodily form is also often linked with a primal crime. For instance, Empedocles
describes immortal spirits condemned to incarnation because of violence and perjury;
“When one of the divine spirits whose portion is long life sinfully stains his own
limbs with bloodshed, and following Hate has sworn a false oath—these must




24
 Chaucer, “The Knight‟s Tale,” in   Canterbury Tales, pp. 68f.
                                         COAGULAT/O


wander for thrice ten thousand seasons far from the company of the blessed, being
born throughout the period into all kinds of mortal
shapes, which exchange one hard way of life for another ______________ Of this
number am I too now, a fugitive from heaven and a wanderer, because I trusted in
raging Hate.” 25
     According to ancient legend, behind the creation of human beings was a crime
of the Titans. While playing with the infant Dionysus, they dismembered, boiled,
and ate him—all except the heart, which was rescued by Zeus. In punishment, Zeus
consumed the Titans by lightning and used their ashes to create the human race.
Thus the “Titanic earth," containing scattered particles of the heavenly D ionysus,
became the clay for human coagulatio—a material derived from a primal crime.
     Prometheus, who taught humans how to trick the gods and take the best portion
of the sacrificial animal for themselves, brought fire to people by theft and was
punished by coagulatio—being chained to a rock (see figure 4-5). Similarly, Adam
and Eve were expelled from the paradisal, pre-ego condition after the crime of
eating the forbidden fruit. These examples demonstrate that ego development is
associated with the experience of evil, criminality, and guilt. Thus, consciousness
of one‟s own evil—that is, awareness of the shadow—coagulates. This can be seen
as the psychological meaning of Christ‟s statement, “Resist not evil” (Matt. 5:39,
AV). It is necessary to leave room for evil if one is to contribute to the real world.
Thus Jung wrote to Richard Wilhelm: “You are too important to our Western world, I
must keep on telling you this. You mustn‟t melt away or otherwise disappear, or get
ill, but wicked desires should pin you to the earth so your work can go on.” 26 We
all know the phrase, “He was too good for this world.” Saintly and spiritual people
often do have a short life. In the past they often died of tuberculosis. It is
dangerous to be one-sided, even one-sided in goodness.
     Dreams often allude to the criminal aspect of egohood. Presuming to take on
will and consciousness may be pictured as a theft. Daring to follow an inner
authority may be pictured as the murder of a projected authority, perhaps a
parricide. Being an ego is inextricably connected with guilt, which is punished by
coagulatio—confinement within the limits of one‟s personal reality (suggested by
the motif of chains and imprisonment). Although coagulatio is a guilt-laden process,
according to one text it contains its own capacity for redemption. “Lead signifies
the vexations and troubles wherewith God visits us and brings us back to
repentance. For as lead burns up and removes all the imperfections of




2S
 Empcdocles, Purifications, fr. 115, quoted in Freeman, Ancitia to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers, p.
65.
26
 Jung, Letters 1:63.
                           FIGURE 4-5                                  .. j
The Torture of Prometheus (Moreau. Reprinted in Larousse Encyclope i
                            Mythology.)
metals...so likewise tribulation in this life cleanses us from the many blemishes
which we have incurred: wherefore St. Ambrose call* it the key of heaven.” 27
   Coagulatio is generally followed by other processes, most often by mortificalio and
putrefaclio. What has become fully concretized is now subject to transformation. It
has become tribulation calling out for transcendence. This is how we can
understand the statements of the Apostle Paul linking body and flesh with death:
“Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” (Rom. 7:24, AV) . And, “For if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds
of the body, ye shall live” (Rom. 8:13, AV). And again, “For those who live
according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live
according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit. To set the mind on
the flesh is death, but to set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace. For the mind
that is set on the flesh is hostile to God; it does not submit to God‟s law, indeed it
cannot; and those who are in the flesh cannot please God” (Rom. 8:5 -8, RSV).
   The body and flesh are identified with death because anything that is born into
spatio-temporal existence must submit to the limitations of that existence, which
include an end, death. This is the price of being real. Once a content has fully
coagulated or incarnated it becomes lifeless with no further possibilities for growth.
Emerson expresses this idea: “Life only avails, not the having lived. Power ceases
in the instant of repose; it resides in the moment of transition from a past to a new
state, in the shooting of the gulf, in the darting to an aim. This one fact the world
hates; that the soul becomes; for that forever degrades the past, turns all riches to
poverty, all reputation to shame, confounds the saint with the rogue, shoves Jesus
and Judas equally aside.” 28 After full coagulatio the putrefactio follows. “For he who
sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption; but he who sows to the
Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life” (Gal. 6:8, RSV). An alchemical text
picks up the same theme: “The lion, the lower sun, grows corrupt
through the flesh ____ Thus is the lion corrupted in his nature through his
flesh, which follows the times of the moon, and is eclipsed. For the moon is the
shadow of the sun, and with corruptible bodies she is consumed, and through her
consumption is the lion eclipsed with the help of the moisture of Mercurius, yet his
eclipse is changed to usefulness and to a better natur e, and one more perfect than
the first.” 29 The lion or lower sun is the theriomorphic aspect of masculine con -
sciousness—the ego incarnated in pride and concupiscence. The text




•‟‟Quoted in Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14, par. 472n.

"Emerson, “Self Reliance,” in The Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, p. 158.
N
 Mysterium Coniunctionis, CW 14, par. 21.
tells us that it is to be corrupted “through his flesh, which follows the times of the
moon.” Corruption is inherent in flesh, and both are promoted by the moon. This
alludes to the fact that not only Saturn but also the moon govern coagulatio (see
figure 4-6). According to ancient thinking the moon, as the “planet” closest to earth,
was the gateway between the celestial and the earthly realms. All spiritual entities on
the way to embodiment were funneled through the moon where they were
materialized. Jacob Boehme says: “The seventh form is called Luna ...the property of
all the six forms lies therein, and it is as a corporeal being of all the rest;...for the
other forms do all cast their desire through Sol into Luna; for in Sol they are spiritual
and in Luna corporeal... whatever the sun is, and makes in the spirit -life in itself, the
same Luna is, and makes corporeal in itself.” 30 Luna‟s association to coagulatio
indicates that the latter is governed by the feminine principle. This is also indicated
by the feminine nature of earth, matter (mater), and the fact that we can be incarnated
only through a feminine womb. Any specific form, manifestation, or structure that
solidifies our life energies




                                     FIGURE 4-6                                     ne Lije
Virgin and Child on Crescent Moon (DOrer. Reprinted in Panofsky» and An of
                               Albrecht Diirer.)


‟“Boehme, The Signature of All Things, pp. 96ff.
into particular, concrete expression is of the nature of woman. Country, church,
community, institution, family, vocation, avocation, personal relationship —all
enlist our commitment via the feminine principle. Even apparent abstractions such
as science, wisdom, truth, beauty, liberty (see figure 4 -7, Liberty Leading the People),
and so forth, when they are served in a concrete and realistic way, are experienced
as personifications of the feminine. Jung has defined the feminine principle as the
principle of relatedness. Thus we can say, relationship coagulates. This is a very
important fact for psychotherapy and warrants some discussion.
   We know from clinical work the profound effect that childhood experience and
personal relationships with parents have on the emerging personality of the child.
We also know from such cases as the “wolf children” that if an infan t lacks an
environment of human relationship, no human personality develops. In such cases
no ego appears. The same thing happens in those occasional cases of a child locked
in a room for years and totally rejected by its parents. The child simply remains an
animal. Similarly, in cases where a parent figure has been lost at an early age and
not adequately replaced, a kind of hole is left in the




                                  FIGURE 4-7
 Liberty Leading the People (Delacroix. Paris, the Louvre. Reprinted in Craven. A
                             Treasury of Art Masterpieces.)
 psyche. An important archetypal image has not undergone personaliza tion
 or coagulatio through a personal relationship and hence retains a boundless
 and primordial power that threatens to inundate the ego if it is approached.
 On the other hand there are patients who, in spite of severe deprivation at
 the hands of the parents, were able to find an important relationship with
 some marginal figure in their childhood. It may have been a maid, an aunt,
 a teacher, or a grandparent who was able to relate genuinely to the child
 and hence mediate and personalize an archetypal image. In these cases th e
 parental inadequacies, although damaging, were not fatal to the child‟s
 development because an alternate source of human relatedness had been
 found. Such isolated positive relationships may have lasted only a short
 time, but their effects seem to be incorporated permanently into the
 growing personality.
    Clinical experience shows that the individual realizes and relates to only
 those aspects of the parental archetypes that have been encountered in
 personal relationships. That part of the archetype that the parent‟s
 personality is able to activate, mediate, and embody will be the part that
 the child can incorporate most easily and build into its own personality.
 That part of the archetype to which the parent has no relation will be left
 largely unrealized in the realm of eternal forms, not yet incarnated in the
 child's history.
    The whole early process of individual psychic development —the ego
 emerging from its original state of oneness with the objective psyche — can
 be considered a process of coagulatio. The experience and conscious
 realization of the innate archetypal images proceeds only by encounter ing
 them incarnated in concrete, personal forms. Neumann alludes to this fact
 when he speaks of the necessary phase of secondary personalization.
 Concerning this he writes:
    This principle [of secondary personalization] holds that there is a persistent
    tendency in man to take primary and transpersonal contents as secondary and
    personal, and to reduce them to personal factors. Personalization is directly
    connected with the growth of the ego, of consciousness and of indi viduality...
    through which...the ego emerges from the torrent of transpersonal and
    collective events....Secondary personalization brings a steady decrease in the
    effective power of the transpersonal and a steady increase in the importance of
    the ego and personality. 31

 This describes coagulatio. whereby archetypal contents fall out of heaven
 and are egoized.
   Childhood personal relationship coagulates the archetypes but also limits
 and distorts them. If the particular aspects that have been coagulated are
 too one-sidely negative or otherwise inimical to growth they



^Neumann, The Origins and History of Consciousness, p. 336.
 will have to be broken up and be recoagulated under more favorable
 circumstances. A woman who had such an experience had this dream:

     She sees four square concrete slabs with circles in them. They are cracked and
     broken. A voice says. “ These are your erroneous attitudes about femininity
     which are now destroyed."

    Coagulatio is promoted by an active, responsive, participating approach on
 the part of the psychotherapist. Certain patients require this approach and are
 threatened by anything that encourages solutio. The extreme case of failure of
 the archetypal images to become concretized is found in overt schizophrenia.
 The ego is literally inundated by boundless, primordial, archetypal images.
 Such an individual has had inadequate opportunity to experience the
 archetypes mediated and personalized through human relationships.
    The vital need for the personalization of the archetype accounts for the
 way in which many patients cling obstinately to their original expe rience of
 the parents. If, for instance, there has been a largely negative, destructive
 parental experience, the patient may find it very difficult to accept and
 endure a positive parent experience. I have gotten the distinct impression that
 a person will persist in, say, a negative orientation to the father archetype
 simply because that is the aspect of the image which has been coagulated in
 his or her own life and therefore has an element of safety and security, even
 though it is negative. For such a person to encounter the positive aspect of
 the archetype is threatening because, since this side has never been
 personalized, it carries a transpersonal magnitude that threatens to dissolve
 the established boundaries of the ego. Emily Dickinson describes that state of
 affairs:

                                 I can wade Grief—
                                 Whole pools of it—
                                 I‟m used to that—
                                 But the least push of Joy
                                 Breaks up my feet—
                                 And I tip-drunken—
                                 Let no Pebble-smile—
                                 Twas the New Liquor—
                                 That was all! 32

     Not only does external relationship coagulate, but also inner rela tionship
 does so. An example of this is found in an alchemical text: “The igneous
 spirit of the natural fire is corporified in the substances which are analogous
 to it. Our stone is an astral fire, which sympathizes




^Dickinson, The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson, p. 115.
with the natural fire, and which as a true salamander receives its nativity, is
nourished and grows in the elementary fire, which is geometrically proportional
to it.” 33 The text speaks of two fires, an astral fire and a natural fire; it seems
to say that natural fire is proportional to astral fire and, therefore, the former
corporifies or coagulates the latter. The term “geometrical proportion"
undoubtedly refers to the passage in Plato‟s Timaeus where the creation of the
body of the universe is described:
  Now that which comes to be must be bodily, and so visible and tangible; and
  nothing can be visible without fire, or tangible without something solid, and
  nothing is solid without earth. Hence the god, when he began to put together the
  body of the universe, set about making it of fire and earth. But two things alone
  cannot be satisfactorily united without a third; for there must be some bond
  between them drawing them together. And of all bonds the best is that which makes
  itself and the terms it connects a unity in the fullest sense; and it is of the nature of
  a continued geometrical proportion ( analogia) to effect this most perfectly. 34
   In essence this passage says that the body of the universe is created (that is,
coagulated) by means of proportion or analogy. Analogy is a process of
relationship, a making of connections by “as if.” These texts tell us that
analogy corporifies or coagulates spirit. This is what makes alchemy so
valuable for depth psychology. It is a treasury of analogies that corporify or
embody the objective psyche and the processes it undergoes in development.
The same applies to religion and mythology. The importance of analogy for
realization of the psyche can hardly be overestimated. It gives form and
visibility to that which was previously invisible, intangible, not yet
coagulated.
   Concepts and abstractions don‟t coagulate. They make air, not earth. They
are agents of sublimatio. The images of dreams and active imagination do
coagulate. They connect the outer world with the inner wor ld by means of
proportional or analogous images and thus coagulate soul- stuff. Moods and
affects toss us about wildly until they coagulate into something visible and
tangible; then we can relate to them objectively. Jung says in his memoirs: “To
the extent that I managed to translate the emotions into images —that is to say,
to find the images which were concealed in the emotions —1 was inwardly
calmed and reassured.” 35 The ancients considered human existence to be
controlled by a certain inexorable factor variously called fate, destiny, lot, or
portion. The image of spinning and weaving was used. The three Fates spin
one‟s




    "The I.¡vex of the Alchemystical Philosophers, p. 216.
    u
        Cornford. Plato's Cosmology, p. 43ff.
     ■'SJung. Memories. Dreams. Reflections, p. 177.
existence into being. Clotho spins the thread, Lachesis measures it, and Atropos cuts it.
One‟s destiny was considered a woven fabric or a garment, a rope, a chain, or a yoke
that confined one mercilessly to predetermined limits. 36 Pindar invokes this coagulatio
factor as the goddess of birth: “Goddess of birth, that art enthroned beside the brooding
Destinies! Listen thou daughter of mighty Hera, thou that createst offspring. Without
thine aid we see not the light, no nor the dark gloom, ere we attain unto thy sister,
Hebe with glowing limbs. Yet it is not for equal aims that all of us draw our breath, for
various indeed are the fates that fetter mortals in the chain of destiny.” 37
    When Agamemnon decides, despite her pitiful pleas, to obey the prophecy and
sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia in exchange for favorable winds to Troy, Aeschylus
says, “Thus on his neck he took/Fate‟s hard compelling yoke.” Or, by another
translation, “Then he put on/The harness of necessity.” 38 Coagulatio is experienced as a
bondage because it confines individuals to their actual reality, the portion they were
given by destiny. Perhaps this accounts for the phrase, “he was bound to do that.”
Language is stating that destiny is bondage (see figure 4 -8).
    Embodied existence is even described as a prison or tomb. Plato speaks of the soul
as being “enshrined in the living tomb which we carry about, now that we are
imprisoned in the body, like an oyster in his shell” (Phaedrus, 250). Less negatively, the
body is described as the house or temple of the soul. Oliver Wendell Holmes uses this
image in his poem The Chambered Nautilus.
                     Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul.
                     As the swift seasons roll!
                     Leave thy low-vaulted past!
                     Let each new temple, nobler than the last Shut thee from heaven
                     with a dome more vast.
                     Till thou at length are free.
                     Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea!
    Clothes are also images of the incarnated condition. The flesh is a vestiture
acquired during the descent of the soul through the planetary spheres. Although Jung
usually interpreted clothes in dreams as referring to the persona, they can also quite
properly be understood as modes of coagulatio. The idea of incarnated life as a woven
fabric or tapestry is found in a dream brought me by a woman who had just become
pregnant for the first time. She had this dream six days after




    J
        *Onians, The Origins of European Thought, passim.
    n
        Nemean Odes 7, 1-8, in The Odes of Pindar, p. 381.
             M
                 Oates and O‟Neill, eds. “Agamemnon” in The Complete Greek Drama, line 318.
FOr
      RepCrimed^'nr? C*rryinSthe Cu
                                    P an| Harness of Destiny (Dürer.
                        The Complete Engravings, Etchings anil Drypoints of Albrecht Düi „er.)
missing her first period and three days before learning that her pregnancy test
was positive.
   A tapestry is being brought down from the attic. It is in two separate parts
   which are to be joined—the burlap backing and the threaded design. First
   the burlap backing is brought downstairs. Next the threaded design was to
   be brought down. We were supposed to study the design of the tapestry in
   order to understand it. This would involve the counting of the threads.
   The design was very rich and complex.
    This dream is of considerable interest as an example of the reaction of the
unconscious to the biological fact of conception. It has several similarities
with the myths. First, the event is described as a fall, a descent from the attic.
Secondly, there is a distinction made between the material ground (the
burlap) and the image of meaning (threaded design) to be superimposed on it.
This would correspond to the distinction between the soul and the flesh,
which will house it, or the material, which will carry the stam p of its image.
In addition, the counting of the threads would correspond to the measuring
function of the second Fate, Lachesis.
    Coagulatio dreams sometimes occur at the approach of death, as though to
express the meaning of the incarnation now ending. An eighty-two-year-old
woman had this dream a few weeks before her sudden death:
   / was in the kitchen and looked into the oven. There was a beautiful roast
   completely cooked, perhaps a little dry. A voice said, “ You left it in too
   long, didn‟t you?" I acknowledged that / had.
   Another example is a woman‟s report of the death of her grandfa ther.
“Before my grandfather died, he was in a nursing home for eight or ten years,
so senile that he seemed to recognize no one. Everyone kept asking, “Why
doesn‟t he die?” Everyone kept saying how much better it would have been if
he could have died when his active life was over; always he had found
meaning only in work and activity. The night before his death, one of his
daughters (my aunt) dreamed
   that she saw hanging before her a very large and very beautiful intricately
   and colorfully woven Oriental carpet. At the top rim she saw the final
   thread being woven into place. She understood that this carpet was her
   father‟s soul-work, which he had been weaving silently for the past eight
   or ten years, and now that it was finished, he was free to go.
The next day my grandfather died.” 39
    It is particularly impressive how dreams concerning clothes come up at a
time of death. For instance, a few days before her death, a woman who knew
she was mortally ill dreamed that she was going to attend a fashion show.40 A few
days before the death of his father, a man dreamed that he saw his father dressed
very nattily in new clothes. These dreams seem to refer to an ultimate
coagulatio,the acquisition of an immortal body. In the Book of Enoch we read:
    And the righteous and elect shall have risen from t he earth.
    And ceased to be of downcast countenance.
    And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory.
    And these shall be the garments of Life from the Lord of Spirits:
    And your garments shall not grow old,
    Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits. (62:15—16) 4 1
Paul uses the same image. “For we know if the earthly tent we live in is
destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Here indeed we groan, and long to put on our
heavenly dwelling, so that by putting it on we may not be found naked. For
while we are still in this tent, we sigh with anxiety; not that we would be
unclothed, but that we would be further clothed, so that what is mortal may
be swallowed up by life” (2 Cor. 5:1-4, RSV).
    The idea of an immortal body, expressing an ultimate coagulatio of the
spirit, is a boundary image whose meaning can be only dimly sensed. It
corresponds to the paradoxical symbol of the Philosophers‟ Stone and seems
to refer to the final goal of individuation.
    The grandest symbol of coagulatio is the Christian myth of the Incarnation
of the Divine Logos. “And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us”
(John 1:14, RSVXsee figure 4-9). This subject requires a separate treatment
of its own. However, a few aspects of the life of Christ can be noted as
particularly relevant. Christ was born of a virgin; that is, he was incarnated
by means of pure earth. The Virgin Mary corresponds to the alchemical
notion of the “white foliated earth.” Alchemy says, “Sow your gol d in white
foliated earth” (see figure 4-10). White earth corresponds to the ash that has
survived calcinatio. It is a contradiction because earth is typically black. As
we have noted, the principle of materiality that promotes coagulatio has a bad
name. This is black earth. But in the symbolism of Christianity, and more
explicitly in alchemy, there arose the symbolic image of white earth, a
purified materiality principle. Psychologically this means the possibility of a
new




 • W 1 am indebted to Robin van Loben Sels for this report.

 "‟I am indebted to Edward Whitmont for this dream.
 ■"Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament 2:228.
                                FIGURE 4-9
The Annunciation (Drawing by Rembrandt. Besançon, Musée Communal. Reprinted
                       in Rembrandt‟s Life of Christ.)




and purified attitude toward materiality. It means the discovery of the
transpersonal value of the ego. What purifies is consciousness. The black
earth of ego desirousness becomes the white foliated earth that incarnates the
Self.
   The lowly circumstances of Christ‟s birth correspond to the ordinary and
commonplace aspects of being concretely real. The events of the Passion also
apply. Christ‟s condemnation and execution with criminals present him as a
willing carrier of evil. His carrying the cross represents the realization of the
burden of one‟s being. The outstanding image is the crucifixion itself —being
nailed to matter (see figure 4-11). In alchemical terms, the cross represents
the four elements from which all manifest being is made. Fixatio is one of the
synonyms for coagulatio, and the alchemists had pictures of the mercurial
serpent fixed to the cross or transfixed to a tree (see figures 4 -12 and 4-13).
The Manicheans universalized this image to the greatest exten t in their
doctrine of Jesus patibilis, the suffering Jesus “who „hangs from every tree,‟
„is served up bound in every dish,‟ „every day is born, suffers and dies,‟ and
is
                                   FIGURE 4 - 1 0
              “Sow Your Gold in White Earth” (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens. 1618.)



dispersed in all creation." 42 The uncoagulated spirit is free, it can entertain
any image without consequences. But to be a concretely realized ego means
one is nailed to the cross of the created world.
   Of particular interest concerning the Christian incarnation myth is the
stated purpose of the whole drama. The purpose is redemption or rescue of
the sinful human race. There is a parallel Gnostic incarnation tale that states
a similar purpose. In the apocryphal Acts of Thomas43 is found the so-called
“Hymn of the Pearl” or “Hymn of the Soul.” It describes how the royal son is
required to leave the heavenly palace of his parents, take off his robe of
glory, and descend to the land of Egypt in order to recover “the one pearl
which lies in the middle of the sea which is encircled by the snorting
serpent.” After helpful reminders from heaven, the royal son accomplishes
his rescue mission, returns to his heavenly home, and dons his heavenly
garment. In both the Christian and Gnostic myths, incarnation or descent into
flesh is for the purpose of rescue. In the one case the endangered value is
humanity lost in sin; in


42
     Jonas, The Gnostic Religion, p. 229.
43
     James, The Apocryphal New Testament, p. 411; also in Jonas, Gnostic Religion, p. 113.
                                 FIGURE 4 - 1 1
      Crucifixion (Drawing from Ramsey Psalter, c. 980. London, British Museum.
                          Reprinted in Clark, Civilization.)



 the other case it is a pearl in the possession of a serpent. These myths hint at
 the idea that egohood serves a redemptive function for a lost value. In
 alchemy it is made more explicit that the value to be redeemed is an aspect of
 deity.
    A curious variant of this image of the rescuing power of flesh has become
 part of the lore associated with the diamond. In India or Ceylon there is
 supposed to exist a deep valley of diamonds infested with deadly serpents. In
 order to acquire the diamonds, pieces of flesh are thrown into the valley. The
 diamonds adhere to the flesh, and vultures carry the flesh back to the top of
 the gorge where they are retrieved. 44 This legend is a quaint variation of the
 theme “incarnation for the purpose of


„„Kunz, The Curious Lore of Precious Stones, p. 75.
                     ANATOMY OF THE PSYCHE




                                     FIGURE 4 - 12
The Mercurial Serpent Crucified (Alchimie de Flamel. MS. Français 14765. Paris,
Bibliothèque Nationale. Reprinted in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy.)




redemption." The essential feature of the story is that diamonds adhere to
flesh. We have here, 1 think, a tantalizing glimpse into the meaning of
egohood. The diamond in its hardness is the supreme representative of the
“flesh" principle in its incorruptible state and is one of the symbols of the
Self. A parallel image occurred in the dream of a woman eight wee ks
pregnant.
    I am on the lower level of the subway system. A young black woman
    hands me a diamond. I put it deep within my pocket, not wanting people
    to know for fear they will steal it. When I reach the upper level I feel
    safer.
The association to the diamond was her pregnancy.
                                  FIGURE 4 -13
  Transfixion of the Mercurial Serpent and the King (“Speculum veritatis,” Cod.
  Vaticanus Latinus 7286, 17th century. Biblioteca Vaticana. Reprinted in Jung.
                             Psychology anil Alchemy.)




   Just as the terms “body” and “flesh” refer to coagulatio, so, that which
nourishes the body—food and meal imagery—belongs to the same
symbolism. Eating the forbidden fruit brought Adam and Eve into the painful
world of spatio-temporal reality. The Old Testament speaks of “the bread of
tears” (Ps. 80:5), “the bread of wickedness” (Prov. 4:17), “the bread of
deceit” (Prov. 20:17), “the bread of idleness” (Prov. 31:2), and “the bread of
adversity” (Isa. 30:20). These phrases refer to the realization of the conditions
mentioned. They become lived experiences, not abstract ideas.
   To eat something means to incorporate it—literally, to turn it into body.
Hence, dreams in which the dreamer is offered something to eat indicate that
an unconscious content is ready for coagulatio, assimilation by the ego. A
woman of fragile ego had an invasion of the unconscious that required daily
psychotherapy. After a month of intense encounter with the unconscious, she
had this dream: (Summarized)
   A woman is cooking a mysterious substance in a rectangular container. She
   opens it a bit and says, “It is ready." It was a
    strange material. The upper part had gelled into a green substance
    apparently made of fruits. Below' this layer was a dark ungelled liquid. /
    ate a small piece of the green stuff. It had no taste. A man in a black suit
    came into the room. He went directly to the container, filled eight jars
    with the gelled material and walked out with them. He was like a
    strange messenger. There was something uncanny about him.
    This dream represents a critical process of ego development. It has
similarities to the eating in the Garden of Eden, especially the reference to
the fruit and the black-suited man who associated to the Devil (see figure
4-14). The filling of eight jars (double quaternity) indicates that this is an
individuation dream concerning the core and totality of the psyche.




                                 FIGURE 4 - 1 4                               ihrpcht
 Adam and Eve (Dürer. Reprinted in The Complete Woodcuts of Alb

  Dürer.)
    A young man who had come to the end of his analysis and was in the
process of taking on more substantial life responsibilities had this dream:
    / go out for dinner at a very special place. It is not really a restaurant, but the
    basement of a monastery. The food is served by monks. For dessert they serve
    “cow-dung cookies"—supposedly a delicacy like filet mignon. However they
    warn me to be careful, for some may not have crystallized out of their prior
    form. The idea of eating them causes me great distress.
    Whenever food is offered one in a dream, the general rule is that it should
be eaten no matter how unpleasant it seems. Sometimes, as in this dream, it
will have strange or miraculous qualities, indicating that it is coming from
the archetypal level of the psyche. Biblical examples are the manna from
heaven sent to the Israelites in the wilderness (Exod. 16:12) and the feeding
of the four thousand (Matt. 15:32). In some cases the food to be eaten clearly
symbolizes the need to assimilate a relation to the Se lf. Isaiah speaks of the
word of God as bread to be eaten. He has Yahweh say, “For as the rain and
snow come down from heaven, and return not thither but water the earth,
making it bring forth and sprout, giving seed to the sower and bread to the
eater, so shall my word be that goes forth from my mouth (55:10 -11, RSV).
Christ says, “My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work” (John 4:34, AV).
    All food dreams have at least a distant reference to Eucharistic
symbolism, although at times it seems more like a black Mass (see figure
4-       15). When the offered food clearly relates to the Self it becomes the
food of immortality about which Christ speaks. “1 am the bread of life. Your
fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. This is the bread
which comes down from heaven that a man may eat of it and not die. I am the
living bread which came down from heaven; if anyone eats of this bread, he
will live forever; and the bread which 1 shall give for the life of the world is
my flesh” (John 6:48—51, RSV).
    The Christian sacrament of Holy Communion is a coagulatio rite. It is
interesting to note that several of the other s acraments are also linked with
the symbolism of alchemical operations. The sacrament of baptism pertains
to solutio, the sacrament of extreme unction to mortificatio, and the sacrament
of matrimony to coniunctio. However, the Eucharist is the central ritual of
Christianity and, as Jung has observed, can be considered to be the “rite of
the individuation process.” 45 From the standpoint of coagulatio symbolism, to
partake of the Eucharistic meal signifies the ego‟s incorporation of a relation
to the Self.




‟Jung, Psychology and Religion: West and East. CW II, par. 414.
                                  FIGURE 4 - 1 5
The Last Supper. Note the Tiny Black Devil Entering Judas‟ Mouth (The Hours of
Catherine of C/eves. The Guennol Collection and the Pierpont Morgan
                                       Library.)


Henry Vaughn‟s poem “The Incarnation and the Passion” makes use of
several coagulatio images and again illustrates the theme of desire (love)
as the motive of incarnation.
                Lord! when thou didst thy selfe undresse
                Laying by thy robes of glory.
                To make us more, thou wouldst be lesse,
                And becam‟sl wofull story.
                To put on Clouds instead of light.
                And cloath the morning-starre with dust.
                Was a translation of such height As, but in
                thee, was ne‟r exprest;
                Brave wormes, and Earth! that thus could have A God
                Enclosed within your Cell,
                   Your maker pent up in a grave.
                   Life lockt in death, heaven in a shell;
                   Ah, my deare Lord! what couldst thou spye In this
                   impure, rebellious clay,
                   That made thee thus resolve to dye For those that kill
                   thee every day?

                   O what strange wonders could thee move To slight
                   thy precious bloud, and breath!
                   Sure it was   ¡Mve, my Lord; for ¡Mve Is only stronger
                   far than death. 46

   As a final illustration of coagulatio symbolism, I shall present the most
remarkable dream on this theme that I have yet encountered. The dreamer, a man in
his early thirties, was characterized by a striking discrepancy between his high
potential for psychological development and the limitations imposed by the severe
psychic deprivation of his childhood environment. The result was that a sizable
portion of ego development, which ordinarily occurs in childhood, was delayed and
took place in adulthood during a lengthy course of psychotherapy. The following
dream, which occurred after two years of about a ten-year treatment, presents the
essence of that process. It can be seen as a kind of micromyth of ego development.
The dream is as follows:
   / am sitting before an ancient intaglio of a crucifixion. It is metal but it is partially
   covered with a waxlike substance which leads me to discover that there are candles
   above it, one on each side, and / realize / am to light these, and make the wax run
   down into the intaglio and that this has something to do with the ritual-like meat / am
   about to eat. / light the candles and the wax does run down into the empty form of the
   crucifixion. When it is full / take it down from the wall above me and am at my meal. /
   have taken the head of the image which has been formed by filling up the intaglio and
   am eating it. It is a substance like lead—very heavy—and / begin to wonder if / can
   digest it. / wonder if humans can digest lead. I realize we eat a little every day. and
   that we eat silver, too. / think, therefore, that it is a safe thing to have eaten, but / am
   wary of eating too much. The dream ends while / am at the meal.
   This dream contains several coagulatio themes: solidification of a liquid, lead,
eating, and the crucifixion. The ancient crucifixion intaglio symbolizes the innate
archetype of the Self, an empty form waiting to




The Complete Poetry of Henry Vaughn, p. 163.
  be realized by an influx of living matter. The dream illustrates nicely
  Jung‟s statement that “archetypes are not determined as regards their
  content, but only as regards their form and then only to a very limited
  degree. A primordial image is determined as to its content only when it has
  become conscious and is therefore filled out with the material of conscious
  experience....The archetype in itself is empty and pure ly formal, nothing
  but a facultaspraeformandi. a possibility of representation which is given a
  priori."*1
      The two lighted candles provide the molten wax that fills the empty
  form. They represent the psychic life process itself. This is suggested by
  such phrases as “burning the candle at both ends,” or “out, out brief
  candle.” 4 * The burning candle generates not only light but also molten
  matter, as though the living process of the psyche generates substance— a
  coagulatio of spirit. But why are there two candles? Adler reports this dream
  of a patient.

         / carry two lighted candles of which I blow out one and keep the
         other alight, saying: "This is life and death.‟‟*9
  Adler associates these two candles to the two torch bearers who flank
  Mithras in the conventional representations of him. One has his torch
  upright, the other, pointing downward. Perhaps the two candles will
  indicate the interplay of opposites, and the flowing of the two molten
  streams into one shape will signify a coniunctio of the opposites.
      The eating of the wax figure corresponds to well known ritual meals in
  which the participant cats a representation of the deity—for example, the
  Christian Eucharist. In the early church, wax was used as a symbol for the
  flesh of the Agnus Dei. “It was customary in Rome and in the whole
  Occidcnl to make little lambs out of the consecrated wax of the Paschal
  candle and to keep them for the octave of Easter, when they were
  distributed to the communicants after the Lord's supper.” 50 Amala- rius of
  frier gives the following explanation of this rite: “The wax symbolizes, as
  Gregory (the Great) says in his sermons, the humanity of the Christ; for the
  honeycomb consists of honey in wax; the honey in wax, however, is the
  divinity in the humanity. The lambs, which the Romans make (of wax),
  symbolize the immaculate Lamb, which was made for our benefit.”‟ 1




           Thr Arthrlvpr* ond thr Colltt'livf Untttrt.wiou.i, C W 9i. par 155, "Mutbrth.
Act 9. w 5. line 2i.
«Adler, Thr Living Symbol, p. 157.
‟"Euler. Orphru* thr Fhher. p 248
»Ibid.
The concern regarding the digestibility of the substance is characteris tic. How much
reality can the ego stand? This is an urgent question for us all. The dream seems to
advise regular small doses of this bitter medicine.
       In summary, this dream pictures ego development as a process in which the
latent, preexistent totality, the Self, is first incarnated and then assimilated through
the living efforts of the individual. It demon strates Jung‟s statement that, “The self,
like the unconscious, is an a priori existent out of which the ego evolves. It is, so to
speak, an unconscious préfiguration of the ego.” 52
       In conclusion, the alchemical operation of coagulatio, together with the imagery
that clusters around this idea, constitutes an elaborate symbol system that expresses
the archetypal process of ego formation. When the ego‟s relation to the Self is being
realized—that is, when the ego is approaching the coagulatio of the psyche in its
totality—then the symbolism of ego development becomes identical with that of
individuation. Jung puts it better.
       God wants to be born in the flame of man‟s consciousness, leaping ever higher. And what
       if this has no roots in the earth? If it is not a house of stone where the fire of God can
       dwell, but a wretched straw hut that flares up and vanishes? Could God then be born? One
       must be able to suffer God. That is the supreme task for the carrier of ideas. He must be the
       advocate of the earth. God will take care of himself. My inner p rinciple is: Deus et homo.
       God needs man in order to become conscious, just as he needs limitation in time and space.
       Let us therefore be for him limitation in time and space, an earthly tabernacle. 53




 52
      Jung, Psychology and Religion: West and East, CW II, par. 391.

 "Jung, Letters l:65ff.
         -5-5 Sublimation
     ust as calcinatio pertains to fire, solutio to water, and coagulaiio

J     to earth, so sublimatio is the operation pertaining to air. It turns the
material into air by volatilizing and elevating it. The image derives from
the chemical process of sublimation in which a solid, when heated,
passes directly into a gaseous state and ascends to the top of the vessel,
where it resolidifies on the upper, cooler region. Distillation is a similar
process, in which a liquid vaporizes on heating and condenses again in a
cooler area.
    The term “sublimation” derives from the Latin sublimis, meaning “high.” This
indicates that the crucial feature of sublimatio is an elevating process whereby a low
substance is translated into a higher form by an ascending movement. Earth is
transformed into air; a fixed body is volatilized; that which is inferior is changed
into something superior (inferus, below; superus, above). All images that refer to
upward movement—ladders, stairs, elevators, climbing, mountains, flying, and so
forth—belong to sublimatio symbolism, as do all the psychological and value
connotations associated with being high rather than low. An alchemical text sa ys,
“The spirit, therefore, by the help of the water and the soul, is drawn forth from the
bodies themselves, and the body thereby is made spiritual; for that at the same
instant of time, the spirit, with the soul of the bodies, ascend on high to the super ior
part, which is the perfection of the stone, and is called sublimation.” 1 According to
this text, the body is “made perfect” by spiritualizing it. Psychologically, this
corresponds to a way of dealing with a concrete problem. One gets “above” it by
seeing it objectively. We abstract a general meaning from it and see it as a
particular example of a larger issue. Just to find suitable words or concepts for a
psychic state may be sufficient for a person to get out of it enough to look down on
it from




The Lives of ihe Alchemyslical Philosophers, p. 138.
                                    ANATOMY       or   THE PSYCHE


above. For instance, to label a resentful mood an “anima possession" may
release the grip of the mood. To identify a man‟s reaction to his wife as an
example of his mother problem, or a reaction to his boss as part of a father
complex, conceptualizes the experience and helps him to get above it. A
striking example of such word power is that of a priest who had anxiety while
celebrating the Eucharist. He experienced a definite alleviation of symptoms
upon learning that he had a well- known condition called performance anxiety.
    Sublimatio is an ascent that raises us above the confining entanglements of
immediate, earthy existence and its concrete, personal particulars. The higher
we go the grander and more comprehensive is our perspective, but also the
more remote we become from actual life and the less able we will be to have an
effect on what we perceive. We become magnificent but impotent spectators
(see figure 5-1). Heaven is the abode of the eternal Platonic forms, the
universals, the archetypal images. Hence, whenever a dream or life situation is
interpreted from the archetypal standpoint, it is promoting sublimatio. The
success of such interpretations may be expressed in dreams by the escape or
release of caged birds or some other auspicious upward movement.
    It should be stated at the outset that the symbolism of the alchemical
sublimatio has nothing to do with Freudian theory of sublimation. According to
Hinsie and Campbell‟s Psychiatric Dictionary, the term “sublimation” as used in
psychoanalysis is defined as, .the process of modifying an instinctual impulse
in such a way as to conform to the demands of society. Sublimation is a
substitute activity which gives some measure of gratification to the infantile
impulse which has been repudiated in its original form           Unlike the usual
defenses, in sublimation the ego is not acting in opposition to the id; on the
contrary, it is helping the id to gain external expression. Sublimation, in other
words, does not involve repression.” 2
    Jung distinguishes Freudian sublimation from the alchemical sublimatio in
this passage from his letters; “Sublimatio is part of the royal art where the true
gold is made. Of this Freud knows nothing, worse still, he barricades all the
paths that could lead to the true sublimatio. This is just about the opposite of
what Freud understands by sublimation. It is not a voluntary and forcible
channeling of instinct into a spurious field of application, but an alchymical
transformation for which fire and the black prima materia are needed. Sublimatio is
a great mystery. Freud has appropriated this concept and usurped it for the
sphere of the will and the bourgeois, rationalistic ethos.” 3




   2
       Hinsie and Campbell, Psychiatric Dictionary, pp. 699f.
   JJung, Letters. 1:171.
Sa
     tellite Ph o fo .         FIGURE 5 - 1
                         8 r aph of Cape Cod and Vicinity (Photo Atlas of the United
                                    States.)
   For the alchemist, the process of sublimation was experienced in symbolic
images. He, for example, might see a bird flying up from the matter in the lower
part of the vessel to the upper regions. The alchemical vessel was equated with
the macrocosm, its lower part being the earth and its upper part, heaven. The
sublimate flees earth and is transported to heaven. A text says, “At the end of the
sublimation there germinates through the mediation of the spirit, a shining white
soul [anima Candida] which flies up to heaven with the spirit. This is clearly
and manifestly the stone” 4 (see figure 5-2).
   This “white soul” is often represented by a white bird being released from the
material being heated. One picture shows a man being cooked in a water bath
with a white bird emerging from his head (see figure 5-




                                       F1GURE 5-2
 Sublimalio. (Sapentia veierum philosophorum sive doctrina eorunduni de summa el universali
   medicina. 18th century. Paris, Bibliothèque de 1 ‟Arsenal, MS. 974. Reprinted in
                             Derola, The Secret Art of Alchemy.)



„Quoted in Jung. Psychology anil Alchemy. ÇW 12. par. 462.
                                    SUBUMA no




                                     FIGURE 5-3
             Extraction of the White Dove (Trismosin, Splendor Solis. 1582.)



3)   . A parallel to this picture occurred in the case of a young woman who was
enduring an intense and painful activation of the unconscious. She dreamed,

     I am in a hospital, pregnant but not quite ready for birth. I go to sleep and
     when I wake up it is very dark. I feel something pressing on my ribs very hard
     and it seems as if this unseen exterior pressure is forcing me to give birth. A
     voice says, “How would you like to have a son?" As I woke up the imagery
     continued. I saw a girl like the one in Munch‟s lithograph, “The Cry.” Her
     mouth is a circular opening. She is in a white circle surrounded by more circles
     of black lines. Out of her mouth comes a horde of doves or white pigeons (see
     figure 5-4).

     This dream informs the patient that the anxiety she is enduring is Part of a
                   larger transformation process, in which the ego is heated by
                                 FIGURE 5-4
 The Cry (Munch, 1895. Oslo, National Museum. Reprinted in   Graphic Works of
                               Edvard Munch.)


horror in order to bring forth a new birth, the “sublimate,” represented by the
flock of doves. Dreams of birds generally refer to sublimaiio, and bird
phobias may indicate fear of a necessary sublimaiio. They are also often
connected with a fear of death, death being the ultimate sublimaiio whereby
the soul is separated from the body.
   One aspect of sublimaiio overlaps with separatio symbolism—namely, its
use as an extraction procedure. For instance, mercury can be extracted from
certain compounds by heating. It vaporizes, sublimates, and reappears on the
cooler portion of the vessel. An early text alludes to this process: “Go to the
waters of the Nile and there you will find a stone that has a spirit (pneuma).
Take this, divide it, thrust in your hand and draw out its heart: for its soul
(psyche) is in its heart. [An interpolator
adds:] There, he says you will find this stone that ha* a spirit, which refers to
the expulsion of the quicksilver (exhydrargyrosis),"5 This “expulsion of the
quicksilver” is done by sublimatio, which releases the spirit hidden in matter.
In the largest sense, this refers psychologically to the redemption of the Self
from its original unconscious state. The expulsion of the quicksilver can also
be experienced in lesser ways as the extraction of meaning from heavy moods,
from concrete events, or from the factuality of nature (see figure 5 -5).
   Berthelot points out that the Greek word that the Latin alchemists
translated as “sublimatio” was rhinisma, which originally meant “filings." This
expressed the idea of the extreme attenuation of matter. The same idea was
attached later to the term “alcoolisation” which signifies reduc tion to the
state of an impalpable powder. 6 A text says, “If you do not make the bodies
subtle, so that they may be impalpable to touch, you will not gain your end.
If they have not been ground, repeat your operation, and see that they are
ground and subtilized.” 7 Thus, sublimatio can mean “grinding” or
“hammering” to bring about an attenuation of the material. Very fine powder
approaches a gas in its consistency. Note also that the symbolism of grinding
contains the moral categories of good and bad. Powder made up of small
particles is called “fine,” that with large particles is “coarse.” To be good is
to be well pulverized. Encounter with the numinosum may have a pulverizing
effect, as indicated by the saying, “Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet
they grind exceeding small.” “Foliation” has the same impli cation. A recipe
mentioned earlier reads, “Sow your gold in white foliated earth” —that is, in
sublimated earth. Foliation is done by hammering. These lines by Rilke can
thus be considered as announcing an impending sublimatio'.
                    What locks itself in endurance grows rigid; sheltered in
                    unassuming greyness, does it feel safe?
                    Wait, from the distance hardness is menaced by something still
                      harder.
                    Alas—: a remote hammer is poised to strike.*
   In Shakespeare‟s Antony and Cleopatra, as Enobarbus commits suicide in
 remorse for his defection from Antony, this image of sublimatio by
 pulverization is wrung from him. He is speaking to the moon.




‟Ibid., par. 405.

„Berthelot, Collection des Anciens Alchemistes Grecs, 1:210.
Kelly, The Alchemical Writings of Edward Kelly, p. 34.
"Rilke, Sonnets to Orpheus, pt. 2, sonnet 12. (I have not been able to locate the source of thii
translation, but see Sonnets to Orpheus, trans. C. F. MacIntyre, cited in the Bibliography.)
                                     FIGURE 5-5
Extraction of Mercurius and Coronation of the Virgin. Lower Level: Mercurius (Represented
as a Monstrosity) Being Extracted from the Prima Materia. Upper Level: Assumption and
Coronation of the Virgin, Transforming the Trinity into a Quaternity (Speculum trinitatis from
Reusner, Pandora, 1588. Reprinted in Jung. Psychology and Alchemy.)
                  O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
                  The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me.
                  That life, a very rebel to my will,
                  May hang no longer on me; throw my heart Against the
                  flint and hardness of my fault.
                  Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
                  And finish all foul thoughts.
                                                               (Act 4, sc. 9, lines 12-18)
    A text from Paracelsus says, “For, as from all phlegmatic and watery
 objects, water ascends in distillation, and is separated from its body, so,
 in the process of sublimation, in dry substances such as minerals, the
 spiritual is raised from the corporeal, subtilised, and the pure separated
 from the impure.” 9
    Here sublimatio is described as a purification. When matter and spirit are
 intermixed in a state of unconscious contamination, they must be purified
 by separation. In this impure state, the spirit must first seek its own
 purity and will see all that pertains to flesh and ma tter—the concrete, the
 personal, the desire-laden—as the enemy to be overcome. The whole
 history of cultural evolution can be seen as a great sublimatio process in
 which human beings learn how to see themselves and their world
 objectively. Stoic philosophy was one vast effort to teach humans how to
 achieve the Stoic goal of apathia by getting above the passions that tie
 them to the earth. Similarly, Plato‟s idealism, as well as all later
 idealistic systems, strive to present life in terms of eternal forms a nd
 universal ideas in order to overcome the galling human bondage to the
 contingencies of matter. Reason, which gives people a standpoint outside
 their personal likes and dislikes, becomes an indispensable agent of
 sublimatio by teaching them how to be reflective spectators of themselves.
 Schopenhauer puts it beautifully:
    [It is] indeed wonderful to see, how man, besides his life in the concrete, always
    lives a second life in the abstract. In the former he is abandoned to all the storms
    of reality and to the influence of the present; he must struggle, suffer, and die
    like the animal. But his life in the abstract, as it stands before his rational
    consciousness, is the calm reflection of his life in the concrete.
    and of the world in which he lives ____ Here in the sphere of calm deliberation,
    what previously possessed him completely and moved him intensely appears to
    him cold, colorless, and, for the moment, foreign and strange; he is a mere
    spectator and observer. In respect of this withdrawal into reflection, he is like an
    actor who has played his part in one scene, and takes his place in the audience
    until he must appear again. In the audience he quietly looks on at whatever may
    happen, even though it be the preparation for his own death [in the play]; but
    then he goes on the stage, and acts and suffers as he must. 10



‟Paracelsus, The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelsus, 1:152.

"Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, p. 152.
            The capacity to get above and see oneself objectively is the ability to
         dissociate. The use of this word immediately indicates the danger of
         sublimatio. Each of the alchemical operations has its own pathological
         symptomatology when carried to extremes, but modern individuals probably
         misuse sublimatio more than the others. The ability of the psyche to
         dissociate is both the source of ego consciousness and the cause of mental
         illness. As a single example, I recall a young man whom I saw while
         working at Rockland State Hospital. He was a brilliant st udent of
         mathematics. However, he had had no friends or social relations, and he did
         not even learn that there are anatomical differences between boys and girls
         until he went to college. He was unemployed and living with his mother
         until hospitalized following an outburst of violence at his mother for not
         having the television set repaired. When 1 asked him about his dreams, he
         told me the following:
           / once dreamed that / had climbed a ladder to a high platform, and that then
           somebody removed the ladder so that I was left stranded on the height with no
           way of getting down again.
           Another time I was climbing a ladder miles above the earth's surface with
           something impelling me onward. I dared not to look down for fear of becoming
           dizzy and letting go of the rung.
            Another time / was spread-eagled on the glass floor of a wall-less
         elevator. There was no shaft. A hydraulic piston was pushing the floor
         ever upwards. I was fearfully peering over the edge of the floor, watching
         the earth recede in the distance.
         This young man was tragically caught in the archetypal dynamism of
     sublimatio as an autonomous process of dissociation. It impelled him
     further and further from personal, earthy reality until the inevitable
     enantiodromia sent him crashing to the ground.
         A dream with similar imagery but vastly different outcome is reported
     by Emerson. In 1840 at the age of 37 while preparing his Essays: First
     Series for publication he dreamed:
         / floated at will in the great Ether, and I saw this world floating also not far
         off, but diminished to the size of an apple. Then an angel took it in his hand
         and brought it to me and said “This must thou eat.” And I ate the world. 11
     A dream of floating in the “great Ether” seems symbolically appropriate
     for the author of Emersonian transcendentalism. This dream is grand
     rather than grandiose. In contrast to the previous dreams, this one




11
  The Journals and Miscellaneous Notebooks of Ralph Waldo Emerson,
                                                                                  7:525.
                                            SUBI.IMA   no

 contains its own corrective factor. The extreme sublimatio is com pensated by
 the coagulalio image of eating the apple of the world.
    A beautiful poetic evocation of the sublimatio mood is found in these lines
 from Milton‟s // Penseroso:
                          Or let my lamp at midnight hour,
                          Be seen in some high lonely Tower,
                          Where 1 may oft out-watch the Bear,
                          With thrice great Hermes, or unsphere The spirit
                          of Plato to unfold What worlds, or what vast
                          Regions hold Th‟ immortal mind that hath
                          forsook Her mansion in this fleshly nook.
    The image of the tower is a typical sublimatio symbol. Hexagram 20 of the
 I Ching entitled “Contemplation (View)” represents a tower and describes the
 same kind of contemplation of the archetypal realm as does Milton. The I
 Ching speaks of those who contemplate “the meaning underlying the workings
 of the universe” and “apprehend the mysterious and divine laws of life, and
 by means of profoundest inner concentration they give expression to these
 laws in their own persons.” 12 The tower image came up in a dream of mine
 after attending an impressive lecture on mythology. I dreamed:
    I see a stupendously high tower. It is a broadcasting tower for a radio network.
    One climbs it by a ladder built on the outside. A man is there whose job it is to
    operate the tower. Each day he climbs to the top in the morning and descends
    again at night. I ask him if it isn‟t difficult. He says, "not at all." I realize that I
    would be very reluctant to climb to such a height.
    The dream pictures my reaction to the lecture. 1 wa s dazzled by its
 brilliance and broad perspective. Ascent to a height gives one a perspec tive
 view not available from the ground. Thus in mythological and religious
 imagery ascension often accompanies revelation of the divine realm. God
 meets humanity on the mountain—for example, Moses on Sinai. The person
 who is vouchsafed a revelation from God is often “lifted up” and transported
 to heaven. For instance, a vision of Ezekiel begins, “Then 1 beheld, and lo, a
 form that had the appearance of a man; below what appeared to be his loins it
 was fire, and above his loins it was like the appearance of brightness, like
 gleaming bronze. He put forth the form of a hand, and took me by a lock of
 my hair; and the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven, and brough t
 me in visions of God to Jerusalem” (Ezek. 8:2, 3, RSV).




l2
     Wilheltn, trans., / Ching or Book of Changes, p. 33.
        Enoch is another figure who receives a revelation by ascension. In the
     pseudepigraphal Secrets of Enoch he is lifted up by angels and given a
     guided tour through the ten heavens, and finally he sees God himself.
     According to popular legend, Mohammad was transported bodily through
     the seven heavens to the presence of God for the purposes of revelation.
     The symbolism of shamanism also has the motif of ascent to revelation.
     The shaman climbs the world pillar, or the cosmic ladder, or makes a
     magical flight in search of a supernatural revelation. 13
        A good example of sublimatio symbolism is found in an ancient Mithraic
     ritual of initiation. This same ritual contains the image of the sun‟s
     phallus that first led Jung to the discovery of the archetypes. 14 The ritual
     begins with a prayer: “O Providence, O Fortune, bestow on me Thy
     grace—imparting these the mysteries a Father only may hand on, and that,
     too, to a son alone—his immortality—[a Son] initiate, worthy of this our
     craft, with which Sun Mithras, the Great God, commanded me to be
     endowed by his archangel; so that I Eagle (as I am by my own self) alone
     may soar to Heaven, and contemplate all things.”
        After further prayers, the ritual proceeds with these instructions:
       Take from the [sun-] rays breath, inhaling thrice [as deeply] as thou canst; and
     thou shalt see thyself being raised aloft, and soaring towards the Height, so that
     thou seem‟st to be in midst of air. Thou shalt hear naught, nor man nor beast; nor
     shalt thou see aught of the sights upon the earth, in that same hour, but all things
     thou shalt see will be immortal. For thou shalt see, in that same day a nd hour, the
     Disposition of the Gods—the ruling Gods ascending heavenwards, the other ones
     descending. And through his disc— the God's, my Father‟s—there shall be seen the
     Way-of-going of the Gods accessible to sight.
   This is followed by encounters with various divine figures and culminates
in the apotheosis of the initiate with these words: “O Lord, being born
again, 1 pass away in being made Great, and, having been made Great, I die.
Being born from out the state of birth-and-death that giveth birth to (mortal)
lives, I now, set free, pass to the state transcending birth, as Thou hast
stablished it, according as Thou hast ordained and made the Mystery." 15
   This ritual was meant to bring about a revelation of the divine realm and
to confer immortality on the initiate by means of an ascent to heaven. In
psychological terms, it is a revelation of the archetypal psyche which
releases one from a personal ego-attitude, enabling one to experience
oneself as an immortal—that is, as living with archetypal




l5
  Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic
Techniques
14                 of Ecstasy
  Jung, The Symbolic    Life. CW
                              , pp. 259ff.
                                      18.
pars. 85ff. A Mithraic Ritual.
‟‟Dieterich,
realities and making a contribution to the archetypal psyche. Similar
experiences of revelation occur in modern dreams and visions. For example,
Dr. Liliane Frey had been thinking deeply about death and her own myth
concerning death as a transformation. She writes: “Death consists of the
miracle of transformation into a new form of existence. Death is fo r me the
gate to a new birth, and the breaking-through of the transcendental realm
into our empirical existence. 1 am convinced that we experience a complete
transformation of our being in the last moments of our life. Simultaneously
with the death of body and ego- personality, something new gets born which
                                                                          16
is neither matter nor spirit but both together in an indeterminable way.”
While developing these thoughts she had a very impressive dream in which
     she was flying higher and higher in a plane especially constructed for her and
     she had a wonderful view of the Alps, all immersed in deep blue.'1
     J. B. Priestley reported this very impressive sublimatio-revefaiion dream:
     I dreamt that 1 was standing at the top of a very high tower, alone, looking
     down upon myriads of birds all flying in one direction; every kind of bird was
     there, all the birds in the world.
     It was a noble sight, this vast aerial river of birds. But now in some mysterious
     fashion the gear was changed, and time speeded up, so that I saw generations of
     birds, watched them break their shells, flutter into life, mate, weaken, falter, and
     die. Wings grew only to crumble; bodies were sleek and then, in a flash, bled
     and shrivelled; and death struck everywhere at every second. What was the use
     of all this blind struggle towards life, this eager trying of wings, this hurried
     mating, this flight and surge, all this gigantic meaningless biological effort? As I
     stared down, seeming to see every creature‟s ignoble little history almost at a
     glance, Ifelt sick at heart. It would be better if not one of them, if not one of us
     all, had been born, if the struggle ceased forever. I stood on my tower, still
     alone, desperately unhappy. But now the gear was changed again, and time
     went faster still, and it was rushing by at such a rate, that the birds could not
     show any movement, but were like an enormous plain sown with feathers. But
     along this plain, flickering through the bodies themselves, there now passed a
     sort of white flame, trembling, dancing, then hurrying on; and




^ Well of Living Waters, pp. 13f.
"•bid., p. |4.
    as soon as / saw it I knew that this white flame was life itself, the very quintessence of
    being; and then it came to me in a rocket- burst of ecstacy, that nothing mattered,
    nothing could ever matter, because nothing else was real, but this quivering and
    hurrying lambency of being. Birds, men or creatures not yet shaped and colored, all
    were of no account except so far as this flame of life travelled through them. It left
    nothing to mourn over behind it; what / had thought was tragedy was mere emptiness
    or a shadow show; for now all real feeling was caught and purified and danced on
    ecstatically with the white flame of life. 18
   A similar vision of the process of huma n history as though seen from
a vast height was experienced by a woman who is a poet:
    / saw the earth covered by a single great tree whose multiple roots fed on the inner
    sun of gold, the lumen naturae. It was a tree whose limbs were made of light and
    the branches were lovingly entangled so that it made of itself a network of beauteous
    love. And it seemed as if it were lifting itself out of the broken seeds of many, countless
    egos who had now allowed the one Self to break forth. And when one beheld this, the
    sun and the moon and the planets turned out to be something quite, quite other than
    one had thought. From what I could make out. the Lord Himself was the Alchemist
    and out of the collective swarming and suffering, ignorance and pollution. He was
    "trying' the gold. 19
    Another example of a sublimation revelation comes from the LSD
experience of a professional woman who is also the mother of three
children. She describes her experience in these words:
    I knew I was on my way when a releasing and delicious sense of floating in the
    atmosphere took over and engulfed my entire being. My sense of being
    contained by body dissolved. I laughed with delight and said out loud. "Now I
    remember what it's like to be without a body." I was in contact with some level
    of being, fully conscious but without embodiment. An awareness took form in
    my mind that I had resisted being born into the world in my present
    incarnation. I understood why. Air is my true element, the matrix of my being.
    The ecstacy of being free of body, the aging process, backaches, headaches,
    creaky joints lasted an eternity. I was no longer confined by the space -time
    dimensions of earth. How amazing to be "me,” fully aware and conscious, and
    yet without any physical vchiclc.
  This was followed by other experiences, including the reliving of her
own birth, and then came this final vision:




       Studies in Analytical
••Quoted in Adler.
Psychology,                   p. 143.
i9| ar n indebted to Alicc Howell for permission to quote.
    Then began a complex cycle of laughter and tears; the laughter usually
    connected with an opening of the arms and legs, the weeping with a contrac tion
    and closing of the body. I moved back in time through countless ages of
    mankind, experiencing in my body countless birth, death, an d rebirth cycles.
    1 found myself in different parts of the world (mainly Europe), more with
    simple peasants, farmers, craftsmen than kings and nobles. I was buried or
    buried others dear to me, having my eyelids closed and arms crossed or
    performing this ritual for others. The plain wooden box is lowered into the
    grave, the dirt is sprinkled over the box, the mourners grieve. Then I am a
    woman giving birth or assisting in the process. There is the cry of the newborn
    infant, the circular sweep of the mother's arms to gather the child to her breast.
    Birth cries and death rattles intermingle in a flicker of an eyelash. I realize that
    my own place in the rhythmic pattern of death and birth is but a moving
    instant—and that is more than enough. The sense of oneness with the universe,
    with the birth-death process experienced through my Body-Self totality
    overwhelms me with grace. It is as though I have been given a gift so precious I
    need never ask again, “What is the meaning of my life?" 20

   The remarkable similarity between this LSD vision and Priestley‟s
dream indicates that such experiences have an objective validity; that is,
they bear witness to the reality of the psyche.
   Another aspect of ascent symbolism is the theme of translation to
eternity. For instance, Heracles ascended to Olympus from his funeral
pyre, a quite literal sublimatio. He disappeared from the earth and
reappeared on a higher level as a result of being heated. The same thing
happened to Elijah (2 Kings 2:11, RSV): “Behold, a chariot of fire and
horses of fire separated the two of them [Elisha and Elijah]. And Elijah
went up by a whirlwind into heaven” (see figure 5 -6).
   Fire also sublimates Elijah. According to I Maccabees 2:58, it was
Elijah's fiery religious intensity that accounted for his ascen sion. “Elijah
for his consuming fervour for the law was caught up to heaven itself”
(JB). Christ ascended to heaven forty days after his resurrection (Acts
1:9). According to legend, the Virgin Mary ascended into heaven at the
time of her death, and the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin has been
on the Church calendar (August 15) since the seventh century, although
the assumption was not proclaimed as dogma until 1950 (see figure 5 -7),
   The origin of the symbolism of translation to eternity is probably
Egypt. In early Egyptian religion the dead were thought to be turned into
stars or companions of the sun. James Breasted writes: “In the 'plcndor of
the mighty heavens the Nile-dweller.. .saw the host of those who had
preceded him; thither they had flown as birds, rising above all foes of the
air, and received by Re as the companions of his celestial barque, they
now swept across the sky as eternal stars.” 21



*1 want lo (hank the author of this account for her generosity in sharing this important Mperience.

Breasted.   A History of Egypt, p. 64.
             FIGURE 5-6 Ascension of Elijah (Doré, Bible Illustrations.)


   A pyramid text describes the translation of the dead king to the
heavenly realm in these words: “The king ascends to the sky among
the gods dwelling in the sky        He [Re] gives thee his arm on the
stairway to the sky. „He who knows his place comes,‟ say the gods. O
Pure One. assume thy throne in the barque of Re and sail thou the sky
         Sail thou with the imperishable stars, sail thou with the
Unwearied Stars.” 22 And E. A. Wallis Budge writes the following:
  The primitive Egyptians believed that the floor of heaven, which also formed
  the sky of this world, was made of an immense plate of iron, rectangular in
  shape, the four corners of which rested upon four pillars which served to
  mark the cardinal points. On this plate of iron lived the gods and the blessed
  dead, and it was the aim of every good Egyptian t o go there after death. At




 “Breasted, Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt. P- 136.
                                         FIGURE 5-7
     Assumption of the Virgin (The Hours of Catherine ofCleves. The Guennol Collection and
                                the Pierpont Morgan Library.)



       certain sacred spots the edge of the plate was so near the tops of the mountains that
       the deceased might easily clamber on to it and so obtain admission into heaven, but
       at others the distance between it and the earth was so great that he needed help to
       reach it. There existed the belief that Osiris himself experienced some difficulty in
       getting up to the iron plate, and that it was only by means of the ladder which his
       father Ra provided that he at length ascended into heaven. On one side of the ladder
       stood Ra. and on the other stood Horus, the son of Isis, and each god assisted Osiris
       to mount it. Originally the two guardians of the ladder were Horus the Elder and
       Set. and there are several references in the early texts to the help which they
       rendered to the deceased, who was, of course, identified with the god Osiris. But,
       with a view either of reminding these gods of their supposed dutv, or of




L:
  the dead body in the tomb, and a special composition was prepared which had
  the effect of making the ladder become the means of the ascent of the
  deceased into heaven. Thus in the text written for Pepi the deceased is made
  to address the ladder in these words: “Homage to thee, O divine Ladder!
  Homage to thee, O Ladder of Set! Stand thou upright, O divine Ladder! Stand
  thou upright, O Ladder of Set! Stand thou upright, O Ladder of Horns,
  whereby Osiris came forth into heaven.” 23
   The injunction to stand upright is reminiscent of the Djed or Tet
pillar. This classic image of the resurrected Osiris looks remarkably
like a ladder in some pictures (see figure 5 -8). The process of
translation to eternity was graphically represented in antiquity by the
image of ascending the ladder of the planetary spheres. When a soul is
born into an earthly body it descends from heaven through the
planetary spheres and acquires the qualities pertaining to each.
Macrobius writes:
  By the impulse of the first weight the soul, having started on its downward
  course from the intersection of the zodiac and the Milky Way to the
  successive spheres lying beneath, as it passes through these spheres...ac quires
  each of the attributes which it will exercise later. In the sphere of Saturn it
  obtains reason and understanding, called logislikon and theoreti- kon; in Jupiter's
  sphere, the power to act, called praktikon\ in Mars‟ sphere, a bold spirit or
  ihymikorr, in the sun‟s sphere, sense-perception and imagination, aislhetikon
  and phantastikon; in Venus‟ sphere, the impulse of passion, epllhymellkon', in
  Mercury‟s sphere, the ability to speak and interpret, hermeneutikon; and in the
  lunar sphere, the function of molding and increasing bodies, phytikon. This last
  function being the farthest removed from the gods, is the first in us and all the
  earthly creation. 24
   When the soul has purified itself it may ascend the ladder of the
planetary spheres, “for when it has rid itself completely of all taint of
evil and has deserved to be sublimated, it again leaves the body and,
fully recovering its former state, returns to the splendor of everlasting
life." 25 The ascent of the spheres is described in a poem by Henry
Vaughn:
                  The power of my soul is such, I can Expire, and so
                  analyse all that‟s man.
                  First my dull clay I give unto the Earth,
                  Our common Mother, which gives all their birth.
                  My growing faculties I send as soon Whence first 1
                  took them, to the humid Moon.
                  All subtilties and every cunning art To witty Mercury
                  I do impart.


 »Quoted in Cook, Zeus: A Study in Ancient Religion, 2:l25f; see also Budge, Osiris: The
 Egyptian Religion of the Resurrection, 2:167.
 M
     Macrobius, Commentary on the Dream of Scipio, pp. I36f.
  «Ibid., p. 137.
                   FIGURE 5-8                          D - nted
Ladder (From the papyrus of Ani, British useum. in Budge, Osiris:
              The Egyptian Religion oj Resurrection.)

Those fond affections which made me a slave To handsome faces,
                        Venus thou shall have.
            And saucy pride (if there was aught in me,)
Sol, I return it to thy royalty.
My daring rashness and presumptions be To
Mars himself an equal legacy.
             My ill-plac‟d avarice (sure ‟tis but small,)
               Jove, to thy flames 1 do bequeath it all.
             And my false magic, which 1 did believe.
                 And mystic lyes to Saturn 1 do give.
                 My dark imaginations rest you there.
             This is your grave and superstitious sphere.
                        Get up my disintanglcd soul, thy fire Is now refined
                        and nothing left to tire.
                        Or clog thy wings. Now my auspicious flight Hath
                        brought me to the Empyrean light.
                        I am a sep‟rate essence and can see The emanations of
                        the Deity. 26
       It is also Henry Vaughn who wrote these well-known lines describing
       a sublimatio experience:
                        I saw Eternity the other night
                        Like a great Ring of pure and endless light,
                        All calm as it was bright,
                        And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years
                        Driv‟n by the spheres Like a vast shadow mov'd, In
                        which the world And all her train were hurl‟d. 27
       There is a kabbalistic parallel to the theme of returning to the
       planetary archons the qualities pertaining to each, as indicated in this
       passage by Gershom Scholem:
       The task of the Kabbalah is to help guide the soul back to its native home in the
       Godhead. For each single Sefirah there is a corresponding ethical attribute in
       human behavior, and he who achieves this on earth is integrated into
       the mystic life and the harmonic world of the Sefiroi _________ The kabbalists
       unanimously agreed on the supreme rank attainable by the soul at the end of
       its mystical path, namely, that of devekut, mystical cleaving to God _____ (This
       is achieved by climbing) the ladder of devekut.1*
       The state of devekut, or cleaving to God, was thought by the kabbalists
       to be achieved by prayer:
       The worshipper uses the fixed words of the prayer as a banister during his
       meditation which he grasps on his road of ascension so that he should not be
       confused or distracted. Such meditation results in the joining of human
       thought to the divine thought or the divine will ____ The thought expands and
       ascends to its origin, so that when it reaches it, it ends and cannot ascend any
       further...therefore the pious men of old raised their thought to its origin while
       pronouncing the precepts and words of prayer. As a result of this procedure and
       the state of adhesion (devekut) which their thought had attained, their words
       became blessed, multiplied, full of (divine) influx. 2 *
       Certain Hasidic sayings use the image of the ladder, such as the
       following: “The souls descended from the realm of heaven to earth, on
       a




!r
     Tht Importunate Fortune," in The Complete Poetry of Henry Vaughn, pp. 384f.
2,
     “Thc World," op. cit., p. 231.
M
     Scholcm, Kabbalah, pp. I74f.
»Ibid., p. 370.
 long ladder. Then it was taken away. Now, up there, they are calling home the
 souls. Some do not budge from the spot, for how can one get to heaven
 without a ladder? Others leap and fall and leap again, and give up. But there
 are those who know very well that they cannot achieve it, but try and try over
 and over again until God catches hold of them and pull s them up.” 30 Another
 saying states, “Man is a ladder placed on the earth and the top of it touches
 heaven. And all his movements and doings and words leave traces in the upper
 world.” 31 The image of the spiritual ladder was used extensively by ascetic
 Christian mystics (see figure 5-9). It derives probably from the passage in
 Augustine‟s Confessions concerning the ascent of the soul to the heavenly
 Jerusalem. “We ascend thy ladder which is in our heart, and we sing a canticle
 of degrees; we glow inwardly with thy fire—with thy good fire—and we go
 forward because we go up to the peace of Jerusalem” (13, 9).
  Several Christian martyrs are associated with the image of a ladder. Most
notable is St. Perpetua, who had the following dream while in prison shortly
before her martyrdom in the arena of Carthage in the year a.d. 203:

  / beheld a ladder of brass, of miraculous size, which reached up to heaven, and was
  so narrow that it could only be ascended singly. On either side of the ladder, all
  manner of iron implements were fastened-swords, lances, hooks, daggers and
  spears- so that anyone who was careless, or did not hold himself erect while
  climbing, was torn to pieces and remained hanging. Beneath the ladder lay a
  gigantic dragon, lying in wait for the climbers and frightening them away. Saturus,
  however, went up before me (just as he later chose to be put to death first, for love of
  us, because it was he who had taught us but afterwards was not with us when we
  were thrown into prison). And he reached the top of the ladder and, turning to me,
  spake: “Perpetua, I am holding thee, but see that the dragon does not bite thee. ”
  And / answered: “He shall not harm me, in the name of Jesus Christ." And the
  dragon slowly lifted his head out from under the ladder, as if in fear of me, and I
  trod on it, as though I were treading on the first rung of the ladder, and ascended to
  the top. And I beheld a vast garden and seated in the centre of it, a tall white- haired
  man, in shepherd‟s dress, who was milking sheep, and




Buber, Ten Rungs: Hasidic Sayings, p. 40.
                                   FIGURE 5 9          Monastery. M ou nt
The Mystics‟ Ladder to Heaven (Icon from St. Cat f       ¡con.)
      Sinai. Uth-I2th century. Reprinted in Weitzrna
round about   him many thousands of people clad in white And he raised his head, looked at
me, and spake: "It is well that thou art come, child!" And he called me to him and gave me
also a morsel of the cheese which he was milking, and / received it h uh folded hands and
ate. And all who stood around said, “Amen "
And at the sound of this invocation I awoke, and was aware that I was still eating
something sweet, / know not what. And I immediately reported the vision to my brother,
and we understood that it meant the coming passion. And from that time we began to put
no more hope in this world.*2
This awesome dream illustrates the Zeitgeist of the Christian era then just
beginning. The new Christian spirit was the spirit of sublimâtio (see figure 5-
10). This is illustrated in the following passage f rom the Syrian poet, Jacob
of Batnae, who uses the idea of Jacob‟s ladder as a préfiguration of
Christ‟s cross. “The cross is set up as a wonderful ladder upon
which mankind is in truth led up to heaven _____ Christ arose upon earth
as a ladder of many steps, and raised himself on high, so that all earthly
beings might be exalted through Him ______ In the ladder, Jacob truly
perceived the crucified one....On the mountain, He (the Lord) made fast the
mysterious cross, like a ladder, set Himself on the top of it and
from thence blessed all the nations ___ At that time, the cross was set up
as a guiding ideal, as it were a ladder, and served all peoples as a path
leading up to God.” 33
    In Dante‟s Paradiso there is a beautiful example of the sublimatio ladder. In
canto 21, accompanied by Beatrice, Dante is shown the seventh heaven of
Saturn, the abode of contemplative souls (see figure
5-11).
                    Within the crystal that bears round the world the name of
                    its great king in that golden age When evil‟s flag had not
                    yet been unfurled,

                    like polished gold ablaze in full sunlight,
                    1 saw a ladder rise so far above me it soared beyond the reaches
                    of my sight.
                    And 1 saw so many splendors make their way down its bright
                    rungs, I thought that every lamp in all of heaven wa s pouring
                    forth its ray . 34
   In the foregoing 1 have given a number of examples of the symbolic
theme of transition to eternity. Now comes the question, What does this




              The Passion of
'•‟Quoted in von Franz.
Perpetua, pp. 1 Of. "Ibid.. p 95.
M
 Dante. The Paradiso, trans. John Ciardi, pp. 235ff.
                                    FIGURE 5 - 10
Simeon Stylitcs on His Column Besieged by a Serpent (Reliquary, 6th century. Paris,
the Louvre. Reprinted in The Early Christian and Byzantine World.)




mean psychologically? We are speaking here of the greater suhlimatio as
contrasted with the lesser one. The lesser sublimatio must always be followed
by a descent, whereas the greater sublimatio is a culminating process, the final
translation into eternity of that which has been created in time. What does it
mean psychologically to translate into eternity that which has been created in
time? Individual consciousness or real* i/ation of wholeness is the
psychological product of the temporal pro* cess of indi viduation. For that to
be made eternal is a mysterious idea. It seems to imply that consciousness
achieved by individuals becomes a permanent addition to the archetypal
psyche. There is indeed evidence for this idea. 35 For instance, Jung had
sublimatio visions when close to



‟‟See Edingcr. The Creation of Consciousness, p. 23ff.
                                  FIGURE 5 11
       Dante‟s Ladder of Saturn (Doré, Illustrations for Dante's Divine Comedy.)



death in 1944. He found himself elevated far above the earth and strippe d
down to an “objective form”:

  1 had the feeling that everything was being sloughed away; everything I aimed at
  or wished for or thought, the whole phantasmagoria of earthly existence fell away
  or was stripped from me—an extremely painful process. Nevertheless something
  remained; it was as if 1 now carried along with me everything 1 had ever
  experienced or done, everything that had happened around me. I might also say: it
  was with me and 1 was it. I consisted of all that, so to speak. 1 consisted of my
  own history, and I felt with great certainty: this is what 1 am. “1 am this bundle of
  what has been, and what has been accomplished.”
     This experience gave me a feeling of extreme poverty, but at the same time of
  great fullness. There was no longer anything 1 wanted or desired. 1 existed in an
  objective form; I was what 1 had been and lived. At first the sense of annihilation
  predominated, of having been stripped or pillaged; but suddenly that became of no
  consequence. Everything seemed to be past; what remained was a fait accompli,
  without any reference back to what had
   been. There was no longer any regret that something had dropped away or been taken
   away. On the contrary: I had everything that I was, and that was everything . ,6

    I understand this passage to be a description of the greater sublimatio in its
total and ultimate form. Partial aspects of the same process occur,
I think, whenever an item in one‟s personal psychology is decisively
objectified. It then becomes an eternal fact, untouchable by joy or grief or
change.
    The majority of sublimatio images we encounter as therapists belong to the
lesser sublimatio. In fact, for contemporary patients, images of ascent, heights,
and flying almost always indicate the need for a down - going. Modern
individuals have had entirely too much sublimatio, at least of the lesser kind.
They need descent and coagulatio (see figure 5- 12). The relative freedom of the
sublimated state is an important achievement in psychic development, but only
a part. It can be disastrous to be stuck in the sky. Ascent and descent are both
needed. As an alchemical dictum says, “Sublimate the body and coagulate the
spirit.”
    Just as ascending birds represent sublimatio and translation from the temporal
to the eternal, so descending birds represent contents from the archetypal world
that are incarnating by breaking into the personal ego realm. The dove of the
Holy Spirit descended on Christ at the time of his baptism, in dicating the
incarnation process. An eagle descended on Tarquin Priscus on his way to
Rome signifying his destined kingship. For ages birds have been considered the
messengers of God. In ancient times the auspices (from avis, “bird” and specio
“to look at”) were taken by examining the behavior of birds. Psychotic patients
have told me that they receive messages from God delivered by birds. Upward
movement eternalizes; downward movement personalizes. When these two
movements are combined, we get another alchemical process, namely, circulatio.
A paragraph from the Emerald Tablet of Hermes refers to circulatio: “It ascends
from the earth to the heaven, and descends again to the earth, and receives the
power of the above and below. Thus you will have the glory of the whole
world. Therefore all darkness will flee from you.”
    In astrological imagery, circulatio refers to the repeated ascent and descent of
the planetary spheres whereby each of the archetypal princi ples, symbolized by
the planetary archons, is encountered successively. Chemically, circulatio refers
to the process in which a substance is heated in a reflux flask. The vapors
ascend and condense; then the condensed fluid is fed back into the belly of the
flask, where the cycle is




•‟Mung, Memories. Dreams. Reflections, pp. 290f.
                                     FIGURE 5 12
    The Tower of Babel    (Bruegel, 1563. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum.
                           Reprinted in The World oj Bruegel.)


repeated.   Suhlimatio and coagulatio are thus repeated alternately, again and again.
  Psychologically,   circulatio is the repeated circuit of all aspects of one‟s being,
which gradually generates awareness of a transpersonal center uniting the conflicting
factors. There is a transit through the opposites, which are experienced alternately
again and again, leading finally to their reconciliation. Jung describes   circulatio in
these words:
  Ascent and descent, above and below, up and down, represent an emotional
  realization of opposites, and this realization gradually leads, or should lead,
  to their equilibrium. This motif occurs very frequently in dreams, in the
  form of going up- and downhill, climbing stairs, going up or down in a lift,
  balloon, aeroplane, etc. It corresponds to the struggle between the winged
  and the wingless dragon, i.e., the uroboros        This vacillating between
  the opposites and being tossed back and forth means being contained in the
  opposites. They become a vessel in which what was previously now one
  thing and now another floats vibrating, so that the painful suspension
  between opposites gradually changes into the bilateral activity of the point
  in the centre. 57




  •* u ng, Mvstcrium Coniuni tionis, C W 14, par. 296.
    Circulatio is an important idea in psychotherapy. Circular motion around a
center and up and down are common in dreams. One must make the circuit of
one‟s complexes again and again in the course of their transformation. The
“powers of the above and the below" are combined to the extent that the
unified personality is created that connects the personal psyche (below) with
the archetypal psyche (above).
    The above passage from the Emerald Tablet gives a clear expression of the
difference between the alchemical attitude and the Christian religious attitude.
Jung emphasizes this point since it makes clear the nature of the
psychological-empirical standpoint of which the alchemists were forerunners.
He writes, “[In the Emerald Tablet] it is not a question of a one-way ascent to
heaven, but, in contrast to the route followed by the Christian Redeemer, w ho
comes from above to below and from there returns to the above, the filius
macrocosmi starts from below, ascends on high, and, with the powers of Above
and Below united in himself, returns to earth again. He carries out the reverse
movement and thereby manifests a nature contrary to that of Christ and the
Gnostic Redeemers.” 38
    The difference in the images corresponds to the difference between
religious faith and psychological empiricism. In another place Jung puts it this
way: “(From the religious viewpoint]... man attributes to himself the need of
redemption and leaves the work of redemption, the actual aihlon or opus, to
the autonomous divine figure;...[From the alchemical viewpoint] man takes
upon himself the duty of carrying out the redeeming opus, and attributes the
state of suffering and consequent need of redemption to the anlma mundi
imprisoned in matter.” 39 And again, “[The alchemist‟s] attention is not
directed to his own salvation through God‟s grace, but to the liberation of God
from the darkness of matter.” 40
    The alchemical filius philosophorum begins and ends on earth. This suggests
that primary importance is given to the concrete, spatio-temporal reality of the
ego. The fulfillment of the limited human condition is placed above ideal
perfection. Nevertheless, this distinction must not be pushed too far. Very
interestingly, our chief scriptural reference to the ascension of Christ (Acts
1:9-11) is immediately followed by a statement concerning his return to earth:
“... as they were looking on, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of
their sight. And while they were gazing into heaven as he went, behold, two
men stood by them in white robes, and said, „Men of Galilee, why do you
stand looking into heaven?




'"Jung. Alchemical
Studies. CW 13. par.
280. wJung.
Psychology and
Alchemy. CW 12.
par. 414. "Ibid., par.
420.
This Jesus, who was taken up from you into heaven will come in the same
way as you saw him go into heaven‟” (RSV).
In spite of the danger of sublimatio for the modern mind, it* symbol' ism
remains at the core of all human effort for development. All that evokes our
better, “higher” nature, indeed, all morality partake* of sublimatio imagery.
This is well expressed by Longfellow, from whose poem “The Ladd er of St.
Augustine” I shall quote a few stanzas to conclude this chapter:
                   St. Augustine! well hast thou said.
                   That of our vices we can frame A
                   ladder, if we will but tread
                   Beneath our feet each deed of
                   shame!
                   All common things, each day‟s events,
                   That with the hour begin and end,
                   Our pleasures and our discontents,
                   Are rounds by which we may ascend.



                   The longing for ignoble things;
                   The strife for triumph more than truth; The
                   hardening of the heart that brings
                   Irreverence for the dreams of youth;


                   All these must first be trampled down
                   Beneath our feet, if we would gain In the
                   bright fields of fair renown The right of
                   eminent domain.


                   Standing on what too long we bore With
                   shoulders bent and downcast eyes. We may
                   discern—unseen before—
                   A path to higher destinies.
                   Nor deem the irrevocable Past,
                   As wholly wasted, wholly vain If,
                   rising on its wrecks, at last To
                   something nobler we attain.
     •* 6 Mortification-
    ung gives us an excellent R£suM£of    the alchemical opus in a
  1952 interview:
  Alchemy represents the projection of a drama both cosmic and spiritual in
  laboratory terms. The opus magnum had two aims: the rescue of the human
  soul and the salvation of the cosmos ______ This work is difficult and strewn
  with obstacles; the alchemical opus is dangerous. Right at the beginning you
  meet the "dragon," the chthonic spirit, the “devil” or, as the alchemists called
  it, the “blackness,” the nigredo, and this encounter produces suffering ______ In
  the language of the alchemists, matter suffers until the nigredo disappears, when
  the “dawn” (aurora) will be announced by the “peacock‟s tail" (cauda pavonis) and
  a new day will break, the leukosis or albedo. But in this state of “whiteness” one
  does not live in the true sense of the word, it is a sort of abstract, ideal state. In
  order to make it come alive it must have “blood," it must have what the
  alchemists call the rubedo, the “redness” of life. Only the total experience of
  being can transform this ideal state of the albedo into a fully human mode of
  existence. Blood alone can reanimate a glorious state of consciousness in which
  the last trace of blackness is dissolved, in which the devil no longer has an
  autonomous existence but rejoins the profound unity of the psyche. Then the opus
  magnum is finished: the human soul is completely integrated. 1

   According to this passage the alchemical opus has three stages: nigredo,
albedo, and rubedo: the blackening, the whitening, and the reddening. This
chapter is concerned with the first of these, the nigredo or blackening,
which belongs to the operation called mortificatio (see figure 6-1).
  The two terms "mortificatio" and "putrefactio" are overlapping ones and refer
to different aspects of the same operation. Mortificatio has no chemical
reference at all. Literally it means “killing” and hence will refer 10 l he
experience of death. As used in religious asceticism it means “subjection
of the passions and appetites by penance, abstinence, or




  ■* Un 8 > G. Jung Speaking, pp. 228f.
                                                           FIGURE 6 - 1
                           Skeleton as Morlificalio Image (77?? Hermetic Museum, trans. by A. E. Waite.)


                       painful severities inflicted on the body” (Webster). To describe a chemi -
                       cal process as morlificalio is a complete projection of a psychol ogical
                       image. This did in fact happen. The material in the flask was personi fied,
                       and the operations performed on it were thought of as torture.
                           Putrefactio is “rotting,” the decomposition that breaks down dead
                       organic bodies. It, likewise, is not somethi ng that would occur in the
                       operations of inorganic chemistry with which the alchemists were large ly
                       concerned. However, witnessing the putrefaction of a dead body,
                       especially a human corpse, which was not an unusual experience in the
                       Middle Ages, would have a powerful psychological impact. The effects of
                       this experience might then be projected into the alchemical process (see
                       figure 6-2).
                           Morlificalio is the most negative operation in alchemy. It has to do
                       with darkness, defeat, torture, mutilation, death, and rotting. However,
                       these dark images often lead over to highly positive ones —growth,
                       resurrection, rebirth—but the hallmark of mortificalio is the color black.
                       Let us begin by sampling a few texts.
                             That which does not make black cannot make white, because blackness is the
                             beginning of whiteness, and a sign of putrefaction and alteration, and that the
                             body is now penetrated and mortified. 2


2
    The Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers, p. 145.
                              FIGURE 6-2
The Triumph of Death (Fresco by Francesco Traini, c. 1350. Pisa, Camposanto.
            Reprinted in The Picture History of Painting.)




   0 happy gate of blackness, cries the sage, which art the passage to this so glorious
   change. Study, therefore, whosoever appliest thyself to this Art, only to know this
   secret, for to know this is to know all, but to be ignorant of this is to be ignorant
   of all. For putrefaction precedes the generation of e very new form into existence. 3

   Putrefaction is of so great efficacy that it blots out the old nature and transmutes
   everything into another new nature, and bears another new fruit. All living things
   die in it, all dead things decay, and then all these dead things regain life.
   Putrefaction takes away the acridity from all corrosive spirits of salt, renders them
   soft and sweet. 4

  In psychological terms blackness refers to the shadow. These texts that
speak positively of blackness would thus be alluding, on the personal
level, to the positive consequences of being aware of one‟s shad ow. On
the archetypal level it is also desirable to be aware of evil “bccause
blackness is the beginning of whiteness.” By the law of oppo sites, an
intense awareness of one side constellates its contrary. Out of



'Scholia to “The Golden Treatise of Hermes," quoted in Atwood. Hermetic Philosophy and
Alchemy, pp. I26f.
'Paracelsus, Hermetic and Alchemical Writings. 1:153.
darkness is born the light. In contrast, dreams that emphasize blackness
usually occur when the conscious ego is one-sidedly identified with the
light. For example, a white man who was very active in the black civil
rights movement had this dream:

   / am in Hades and trying repeatedly to escape without success.
   There is some sort of wild sexual orgy. Everyone is covered with
   black tar.

This patient had exteriorized his personal need to accept blackness by
engaging in social action to force society to accept b lacks. This was done
very self-righteously by projecting the shadow on all who did not agree
with him. Although in his conscious life he was involved in demonstrations
to overcome discrimination against blacks in white restaurants, he had
dreams that he was in black restaurants that discriminated against whites.
    The blackness, when it is not the original condition, is brought about by
the slaying of something. Most commonly it is the dragon that is to be
killed (see figure 6-3). The dragon is “a personification of the instinctual
psyche” 5 and is one of the synonyms for the prima materia. This image links
the alchemical opus with the myth of the hero who slays the dragon. Just as
the hero rescues the captive maiden from the dragon, so the alchemis t
redeems the anima mundi from her imprisonment in matter by mortificatio of
the prima materia. Or, as Jung puts it, “the slaying of the dragon [is] the
mortificatio of the first, dangerous, poisonous stage of the anima (=
Mercurius), freed from her imprisonment in the prima material The
mortificatio of the first, dangerous, poisonous stage of the anima (women
read “animus”) is an important part of the process of psychotherapy.
Outbursts of affect, resentment, pleasure, and power demands —all these
must undergo mortificatio if the libido trapped in primitive, infantile forms
is to be transformed.
    Another frequent subject for mortificatio is the “king” (sec figure 6-
4) . For example, an alchemical picture shows a group of armed men
slaying a king 7 (see figure 6-5) Instead of the king it may be Sol, the sun.
who is to be killed. For instance, in this text Sol says, “Unless ye slay me,
your understanding will not be perfect, and in my sister the moon the
degree of your wisdom increases.”" It may be the lion who u ndergoes
mortificatio—the king of beasts and the theriomorphic aspect of the



   5
       Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14. par. 548.

   Mbid.. par. 168.
   7
       Fig. 173 in Jung,
   Psychology and
   Alchemy. CW 12.
   *Mysterium
   Coniunctionis. CW 14.
   par. 164.
                                      FIGURE 6-3
               Sol and Luna Kill the Dragon (Maier, Atalanta Fugiens, 1618.)


sun. In one version the lion has its paws cut off. 9 Again, an eagle may have
its wings clipped.
   King, sun, and lion refer to the ruling principle of the conscious ego and
to the power instinct. At a certain point these must be mortified in order
for a new center to emerge. As Jung says, “Egocentricity is a necessary
attribute of consciousness and is also its specific sin.” 10 On the archetypal
level the mortificatio of the king or the sun will refer to the death and
transformation of a collective dominant or ruling princi ple. This is alluded
to in the following text, which, interestingly, equates the king as old man
with the dragon:
  I am an infirm and weak old man, surnamed the dragon; therefore am I shut
  up in a cave, that I may be ransomed by the kingly crown _______ A fiery sword
  inflicts great torments upon me; death makes weak my flesh and bones _________
  My soul and my spirit depart; a terrible poison, 1 am likened to the black raven,
  for that is the wages of sin; in dust and earth 1 lie, that out of Three may come
  One. O soul and spirit, leave me not, that I may see again the light of day, and the
  hero of peace whom the whole world shall behold may arise from me."




   Pig. 4 in Jung,
   Psychology and Alchemy,
"■bid.,
  CW 12.par.Mysieriuni
             733.

   Coniunclioni.i, CW 14,
   par. 364.
                                     FIGURE 6-4
         Death Pours a Drink for the King (Holbein, The Dance of Death. 1538.)


   The infirm and weak old man represents a conscious dominant or spiritual
principle that has lost its effectiveness. It has regressed to the level of the
primordial psyche (dragon) and must therefore submit to transformation. The
cave in which it is shut up is the alchemical vessel. The torture is the fiery
ordeal that brings about transformation in order that “out of the Three may come
One”; that is, that body, soul, and spirit may be unified within an integrated
personality.
   The “hero of peace whom the whole world shall behold" is the Philosophers‟
Stone, the reconciler of opposites, but this way of putting it implies that what is
undergoing mortificatio and rejuvenation is nothing less than the collective God-
image.
   We get an interesting picture of mortificatio and putrefactio in the so-called
Vision of George Ripley:
        When busy at my book I was upon a certain night,
        This vision here expressed appeared unto my dimmed sight.
                                  FIGURE 6-5
Death of the King (Stolcius, Viridarium Chymicum, 1624. Reprinted in Prelude to
                                   Chemistry.)




   A Toad full red 1 saw did drink the juice of grapes so fast. Till
   over charged with the broth, his bowels all to braas , And after
   that from poisoned bulk he cast his venom . For grief and pain
   whereof his members all began to s , With drops of poisoned
   sweat approaching thus is s His cave with blasts of fumous air
   he all be-whyt t en, And from the which in space a golden
   humor di ensue, Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil
   wit ru y And when this corpse the force of vital breath began to
   a Thi* dying Toad became forthwith like coal for co or a Thus
   drowned in his proper veins of poisoned flood,
   For term of eighty days and four he rotting stood.
   By trial then this venom to expel 1 did desire,
   For which 1 did commit his carcass to a gentle fire.
   Which done, a wonder to the sight, but more to be re ears The
   Toad with colors rare through every side was pierce *nd white
   appeared when all the sundry hues were past. Which after
   being tincted Red, for evermore did^ last. y hcn of the venom
   handled thus a medicine 1 did make; hich venom kills and
   saves such as venom chance to ta
            Glory be to him the granter of such secret ways.
            Dominion, and honor, both with worship and with prais e. Amen . 12
    This vision is a summary of the entire opus. The toad as prima materia is
destroyed by its own greed or unbridled concupiscence. It is the theme of
drowning in one‟s own surfeit. As it dies it turns black, putrefies, and is
filled with poison. The alchemist then enters the picture and subjects the
poison-laden carcass to the fire of the alchemical process. This brings
about a progressive color change from black to many colors to white to red.
At the same time the poison is changed to a paradoxica l medicine that can
kill or save, the elixir. The toad is a symbolic variant of the “poisonous
dragon.” 13 It also represents the “philosophic earth” that cannot be
sublimated. 14 Earth signifies coagu- latio, alluding to the fact that mortificatio
must follow coagulatio. That which has become earth or flesh is subject to
death and corruption. As the Apostle Paul says, “For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live” (Rom. 8:13 AV).
    Just as coagulatio is followed sooner or later by mortificatio, so likewise
does consummation of the lesser coniunctio lead to mortifi- catio. Examples
are Tristan and Isolde, Romeo and Juliet, and the sequence depicted in the
Rosarium pictures. 15 This fact helps to account for the reluctance sensitive
people have to committing themselves to the individuation process. They
sense in advance the suffering they are letting themselves in for.
    The poisonous toad was thought to have a jewel in its head, as does the
dragon. Ruland says: “Draconites is a precious stone... to be found in the
brain of serpents, but unless it is removed while they are alive, it will never
become a precious stone, by the inbred malice of the animal who, conscious
of death approaching, destroys the virtue of the stone. Therefore the head is
removed from dragons while asleep, and thus the
gem is secured __ The color of the Draconite is white; it drives away all
poisonous animals and cures envenomed bites.” 16
    The precious stone is the Philosophers* Stone extracted from the ugly
prima materia, which is poison in its original form but panacea after
undergoing the mortificatio. Shakespeare expresses this same idea:




  l2
       Ashmole, ed., Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum. p. 374.
  13
        Mysierium Coniunctionis, CW 14. par. 30.
  'Mbid.i par. 2.
   ls
        Figs.. 1-10 in Jung. The Practice of Psychotherapy. CW 16.
   "„Ruland, Lexicon, p. 128.
               Sweet are the uses of adversity,
               Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
               Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
               And this our life exempt from public haunt,
               Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks.
               Sermons in stones, and good in everything . 17 The uses of adversity also
come up in that great mortificatio manual. The Imitation of Christ by Thomas k
Kempis. There we read the following:
It is good that we sometimes have griefs and adversities, for they drive a man to behold
himself and to see that he is here but as in exile, and to learn thereby that he ought not
put his trust in any worldly thing. It also is good that we sometimes suffer
contradiction; and that we be thought of by others as evil and wretched and sinful,
though we do well and intend well; such things help us to humility, and mightily
defend us from vainglory and pride. We take God better to be our judge and witness
when we are outwardly despised in the world and the world does not judge well of us.
Therefore, a man ought to establish himself so fully in God that, whatever adversity
befall him he will not need to seek any outward comfort . 18

A clean, pure and constant heart is not broken or easily overcome by spiritual labors,
for he does all things to the honor of God, because he is clearly mortified to himself.
Therefore, he desires to be free from following his own will. What hinders you more
than your own affections not fully mortified to the will of the spirit? Truly, nothing
more . 19

So far we have noted several possible subjects of mortificatio, namely, dragon,
toad, king, sun, and lion. Another such subject is the figure of purity and
innocence. One text reads:
                    Take it fresh, pure, living white and clear.
                    Then bind firmly both hands and feet With the very
                    strongest cords.
                    That it suffocate and die,
               In the closed house of Putrefaction. 20 This corresponds to the
classic victim for sacrifice which must be pure and unblemished like the
Pascal lamb(Exod. 12:5). An alchemical drawing pictures Herod‟s massacre
of the innocents as the “dissolution of the metallic seeds,” which are then
poured into the alchemical vessel 21 (see figure 6-6). The psychological idea
behind these images is that the




"At You Uke It. Act 2, sc. 1, lines 12-17.
Kempis, The Imitation of Christ 1:12.
"Ibid., 1:3.
    Figulus, A Golden and Blessed Casket of Nature's Marvels, p. 319, y> A
                     Pictorial History of Magic and the Supernatural, p. 112.
 Dissolution des tfcrmc* métalliques re pré» »in tea par leu innocents <ju 'Uórode tait
                                           é^of4 «r




                                     FIGURE 6 6
Massacre of the Innocents (Alchemical drawing. Reprinted in Bessy. A Pictorial History of
                              Magic and the Supernatural.)


childhood state of purity and innocence must be sacrificed. A woman who
could not face this issue once dreamed that a lamb was to he sacrificed and she
                         22
couldn't bear to watch . Another patient, a young man who was moving
toward maturity, dreamed that a pure white turkey was being killed. In the
process the dreamer is stained with blood. In these cases the nigredo is not the
initial stage. A preliminary albedo must be first destroyed. When something
white has been killed it putrefies and turns black. It enters the “gate of
blackness.” Ruland


22
     Edinger, Ego and Arch type. p. 234.
says. “Putrefaction or corruption takes place when a body become» black.
Then it stinks like dung and true solution follows. The elements are separated
and destroyed. Many colors are afterwards developed, until the victory is
obtained and everything is reunited.” 2 *
   Feces, excrement, and bad odors refer to the putrefactio. The common
dreams of neglected or overflowing toilets which plague puritan - minded
people belong to this symbolism. Odor sepulcrorum (the stench of the graves) is
another synonym for the putrefactio. Since people today seldom smell a rotting
corpse, this image does not appear often in dreams. One modern equivalent I
have encountered is a dream of severe air pollution. Worms accompany
putrefaction, and dreams of worms convey this image with powerful impact
(see figure 6-7). In the I Ching. Hexagram 18 is entitled “Work on What has
been Spoiled,” and the text tells us that “the Chinese character ku represents a
bowl in whose




                                        FIGURE 6 - 7
 Death Blowing the Worm Trumpet (J. Meydenbach, Doten Dam:, c. 1492. Mainz.
 Reprinted in Hind, An Introduction to a History of Woodcut.)



^Lexicon,   p. 266.
contents worms are breeding. This means decay.” 24 Typical of the paradoxical
imagery of the unconscious, the despicable worm can turn into the supreme
value. Thus the Messiah is equated with a worm in the messianic Psalm 22,
verse 6: “But I am a worm and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the
people” (AV).
    An alchemical text says, “Know, O Sons of the Doctrine, that it behooves
you to allow the composition to putrefy for forty days.” 25 This passage
connects the putrefactio with the theme of the wilderness through the symbolism
of the number 40. The Israelites wandered in the wilderness for forty years;
Elijah fasted in the wilderness for forty days; and Jesus was tempted in the
wilderness for forty days. Also, the Egyptian embalming procedure was said to
take forty days (Gen. 50:3), and, analogous ly, forty days elapsed between
Christ‟s resurrection and ascension. Concerning the alchemical opus, Jung says,
“the blackening
usually took forty days ______ In this state the sun is surrounded by the
anima media natura and is therefore black. It is a state of incubation or
pregnancy.” 26 The anima media natura corresponds to Sophia caught in the
embrace of Physis and is equated with Divine Wisdom, the feminine
counterpart of God (see figure 6-8). Even if it is caused by the wisdom of God,
the blackening or eclipse of the sun remains a fearful experience. In fact, fear
is proverbially linked to wisdom in the saying, “The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom” (Prov. 1:7). Fear as an agent of mortificatio is described
in this passage from Emerson‟s essay “Compensation”:
       All infractions of love and equity in our social relations are speedily punished. They
       are punished by fear. Whilst I stand in simple relations to my fellow -
       man, 1 have no displeasure in meeting him _________ But as soon as there is any
       departure from simplicity and attempt at halfness, or good for me that is not good for
       him, my neighbor feels the wrong; he shrinks from me as far as I have shrunk from
       him; his eyes no longer seek mine; there is war between us; there is hate in him and
       fear in me.
           All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all unjust accumu lations of
       property and power, are avenged in the same manner. Fear is an instructor of great
       sagacity and the herald of all revolutions. One thing he teaches, that there is
       rottenness where he appears. He is a carrion crow, and though you see not well what
       he hovers for, there is death somewhere.27
    A classic biblical description of the wilderness nigredo is that of Jeremiah.
St. John of the Cross uses this passage in his description of




24
     Wilhelm, trans., The I Ching or Book of Changes, p 75.
25
     Waite, trans., Turba Philosophorum, p. 87, dictum 26.
26
     Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis, CfY 14, par. 729.
27
     Emerson, “Compensation,” in Selected Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, p. 180.
the   dark night of the soul ” Jeremiah here lament, both h
                                                                ovvn
ings   and those of Zion (Lam. 3:1 20, NAB):                             «uffer-
            1 am a man who knows affliction from the
                                                              nger
            One whom he has led and forced to walk                   ‟
            in darkness, not in light;
            Against me alone he brings back his hand
            again and again all the day.
            He has worn away my flesh and my skin.
             he has broken my bones;
             He has beset me round about with
             poverty and weariness;
             He has left me to dwell in the dark like
             those long dead.
             He has hemmed me in with no escape
             and weighed me down with chains;
             Even when I cry out for help, he stops
             my prayer,
             He has blocked my way with fitted stones, and
             turned my paths aside.
             A lurking bear he has been to me, a lion in
             ambush!
             He deranged my ways, set me astray, left me
             desolate.
             He bent his bow, and set me up as the target for
             his arrow.
             He pierces my sides with shafts from his
             quiver.
             I have become a laughing stock for all nations, their
             taunt all the day long;
             He has sated me with bitter food, made me drink my
             fill of wormwood.
             He has broken my teeth with gravel, pressed my face
             in the dust;
             My soul is deprived of peace,
             I have forgotten what happiness is;
             I tell myself my future is lost, all that I hoped for
             from the Lord.
    Probably the biblical reference most frequently connected with putre-
factio by the alchemists is this passage from the Gospel of John; “Truly,
truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it
remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. He who loves his life loses
it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life”
(12:24-25 RSV).
    For example, a text says, “As the grain of wheat sown in the earth
putrefies before it springs up into a new growth or vegetation, so our
Magnesia...being sown in the Philosophic Earth, dies and corrupts, that it
may conceive itself anew.” 29
    Another text refers to the sowing of gold:
   The whole Fundament of the Philosophers‟ Stone consists in bringing to a new
   birth the primary matter of metals—i.e., Mercurial Water, the perfect Corpus
   Solis—that it be born again by water and of the spirit, just as Christ says: “Except
   a man be born again by water and the Spirit, he cannot see the



   z,
        Quoted in Atwood, Hermetic Philosophy and Alchemy, p. 11 Sn.
  Kingdom of God.” So also here in this art, I tell thee, my *on: Except Corpus Solis
  be sowed, all else is vain, and there will be no fruit. Even as Chmt says: “Except
  the seed fall into the earth and die, it shall bear not fruit.” 30

   The sowing of gold (corpus solis) is an interesting image. Gold signifies
light, value, consciousness. To sow it means to sacrifice it, to offer it up
to mortificatio in the hope that it will multiply. Just as seed grain is kept
apart and not eaten, so seed consciousness will not be used to live on.
Instead, it is offered up to the unconscious by a kind of voluntary death of
one‟s psychic comfort, rightness, and rationality. One allows oneself to be
less in order to be more—less nearly perfect, but more nearly whole.
   The image of death and burial has always been associated with the
planting of seeds and their germination. Pictures from ancient Egypt show
stalks of grain sprouting from the dead body of Osiris (see figure
6- 9). The Apostle Paul uses this image in his famous passage concerning
the resurrection of the dead: “It is sown in corruption; it is raised in




                                    FIGURE 6-9
  Grain Growing from the Corpse of Osiris (From a bas -relief at Philae.
  Reprinted in Budge, Osiris: The Egyptian Religion of Resurrection.)


 igulus, A Golden and Blessed Casket of Nature's Marvels, p. 299.
incorruption. It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory; it is sown i
weakness; it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body; it is raised a
spiritual body” (I Cor. 15:42-44, AV).
   I was once told of a striking dream on this subject, which, incidentally
was dreamed on Halloween.
   The dreamer was attending a party for a deadfriend and perhaps other
   departed spirits. The dead friend recounts a dream that he had before his
   death. Its major image was a great circle of grain standing 80 inches high. It
   grew out of a pit in the earth which contained dead bodies that were also
   buried treasure. The dreamer was trying to convey to his friend the
   importance of the dream (cf. figure 6-10).
It is to be noted that dead bodies equal buried treasure.
    In a Gnostic text the perfect man, or Anthropos, is called a corpse
because he is “buried in the body like a mummy in a tomb.” 31 Jung points
out that there is a parallel idea in Paracelsus, who says, “Life,




                                  FIGURE 6 10
   Grain Growing from the Grave, Symbolizing Resurrection (The Hem,fll( Museum,
                             trans. by A. E. Waite.)


»'Jung, A ion. CIV 911, par. 334.
verily, is naught but a kind of embalmed mummy, which preserve* the mortal
body from the mortal worms.” 32 It turns out that this "mumia" it symbolically
identical with the original man or Anthropos. This Gnostic corpse or
Paracelsian mummy is thus the Self as the product of morti- ficatio—the
incorruptible body that grows out of the death of the cor ruptible seed. It
corresponds to the alchemical idea that death is the conception of the
Philosophers‟ Stone. 33
   Germination and decay, light changing to darkness, death and rebirth—all
these belong to the symbolism of the moon, which dies and is reborn each
month. One text states the following:
    The lion, the lower sun, grows corrupt through the flesh. Thus is the lion corrupted in
    his nature through his flesh, which follows the times of the moon, and is eclipsed. For
    the moon is the shadow of the sun, and with corruptible bodies she is consumed, and
    through her corruption is the lion eclipsed with the help of the moisture of
    Mercurius...the moisture of the moon, when she receives his light, slays the sun, and
    at the birth of the child of the Philosophers she dies likewise, and at death the two
    parents yield up their souls to the son, and die and pass away. And the parents are the
    food of the son.**

   The statement that the lion or lower sun grows corrupt through the flesh can
be understood to mean that the ego, by incarnating, by daring to exist as an
autonomous center of being, takes on substantial reality but also becomes
subject to corruption and death (see figure 6-11). The ego is eventually
eclipsed—falls into the blackness of mortificatio—but from its death the “child
of the philosophers”—the Philosophers‟ Stone— is born. Both sun and moon
die and transfer their power to their off spring—the son of the philosophers.
   Jung says that this passage may have inspired the picture of the death of the
                            35
royal pair in the Rosarium, In that picture 36 the king and queen, following
intercourse, have merged into one body with two heads and are lying dead in a
tomb. The picture is captioned “conception or putrefaction.” The statement
that “the parents are the food of the son” is particularly interesting.
Psychologically this suggests that the conscious endurance of darkness and the
conflict of the opposites nourishes the Self (cf. Figure 3-16 in chapter 3).




°lbid.

         The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16, par. 473. 'Jiing,
                      Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14, par. 21.
»Ibid.

    The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16. fig. 6.
                                    FIGURE 6 - 1 1
          Death and the Landsknecht (Dürer. Reprinted in The Complete Woodcut* of
                                     Albrecht Dürer.)


   A common term for the nigredo is "corvus," crow or raven, 37 perhaps because it is
black and is a carrion eater (see figure 6 -12). The crow appears in Greek mythology
in the birth of Asklepios. His mother was Coronis, the crow maiden, who, while
pregnant with Asklepios by Apollo, had intercourse with Ischys. This infidelity was
reported to Apollo by the crow, who was turned from white to black for bringing the
bad news. Coronis was killed for her crime, but the infant Asklepios was snatched
from her womb while she was on the funeral pyre. As Kerenyi has demonstrated, the
birth of healing power from the nigredo belongs to the archetype of the wounded
healer. In Kerenyi‟s words, the



 37
      Jung, Mysterium Coniunciionis. CW 14, par. 727.
                                  FIGURE 6 - 1 2
The Nigredo (Mylius, Philosophia reformata. 1622. Reprinted in Derola, The Secret Art of
                                       Alchemy.)




myth refers psychologically to the capacity “to be at home in the darkness of
suffering and there to find germs of light and recovery with which, as though by
enchantment, to bring forth Asklepios, the sunlike healer." 3 ®
       Related to “corvus” is the term “caput corvi," head of the raven. This in turn is
synonymous with “caput mortuum," dead head. It is not immediately evident why the
nigredo should be associated with head symbolism. One reason seems to be the
connection between the term “head" and top or beginning. Blackness was considered
to be the start- •ng point of the work. 39 A text says, “When you see your matter going
black, rejoice: for that is the beginning of the work.” 40 Another text *pcaks of the
work as made up of three ravens: “The black which is the head of the art, the white
which is the middle, and the red which brings all things to an end.” 41




       cr n
         ^ yi, Asklepios; Archetypal Image of the Physician's Existence, p. 100. ^ u n g. Mvsterium
Coniunctionis, CW 14, par. 729.

4,
       .. n . |82.
     lbid.
    The head is the principle thing. A capital offense is the gravest one involving
the loss of one‟s head. Thus, the connection of the nigredo with head imagery
indicates the great importance alchemy attached to this experience. According to
one derivation, the word “alchemy” derives from khem or chemia meaning black
and referring to Egypt, the land of the black soil. 42 Decapitation or separation of
the head from the body also belongs to the mortificatio. Jung writes: “Beheading is
significant symbolically as the separation of the „understanding‟ from the „great
suffering and grief which nature inflicts on the soul. It is an emancipa tion of the
"cogitatio' which is situated in the head, a freeing of the soul from the „trammels of
nature.‟ Its purpose is to bring about, as in Dorn, a unio mentalis in the overcoming
of the body” 43 (see figure 6-13).




                                FIGURE 6 13
 Salome with the Head of John the Baptist (/.«*.$ Belles Heures du Duc de Berry- New
                   York. The Metropolitan Museum of Art.)


  See Read. Prelude lo Chemistry, p. 4n.; see also Jung. Mysterium Coniundionis. (■ ^ * par.
 42

 14.

 ■•‟Jung. Mysterium Coniundionis, CW 14. par. 14.
    From another standpoint, beheading extracts the rotundum, the round, complete
man, from the empirical man. The head or skull becomes the round vessel of
transformation. In one text it was the head of the black Osiris or Ethiopian that,
when boiled, turned into gold. 44
    The term “caput mortuum” was used to refer to the residue left after the distillation
or sublimation of a substance. A text describes this caput mortuum: “What remains
below in the retort is our salt, that is, our earth, and it is of a black color, a dragon
that eats its own tail. For the dragon is the matter that remains behind after the
distillation of water from it, and this water is called the dragon‟s tail, and the dragon
is its blackness, and the dragon is saturated with his water and coagulated, and so he
eats his tail.” 45 The dead, worthless residue is the stuff of the nigredo phase. The fact
that it is called a caput or head indicates a paradoxical reversal of opposites. The
worthless becomes the most precious, and the last becomes first. This is a lesson that
we each must learn again and again. It is the psyche that we find in the worthless,
despised place. By the conventional standards of our environment the psyche is
nothing, nothing at all. A personal example: I feel empty and out of sorts; I sit for
hours in my chair seeking my lost libido. What a painful humiliation to be subjected
to such catatonic impotence. Even active imagination refuses to function. Finally I
get one meager image—a small, black, earthenware pot. Does it contain something,
or is it empty like me? I turn it over. One drop of golden fluid comes, which
solidifies on contact with the air. That was all I needed! That single drop of solid
gold released a stream of associations, a nd with them, libido. It had come from the
black pot, the black head of Osiris, which personified my dark and empty state, a
state I despised while 1 was in it.
   The death head also leads into the idea of a dialogue with a head or skull. Jung
speaks of the oracular head, 46 which would symbolize the consulting of one‟s
wholeness for information beyond the vision of the ego. The dramatic theme of
soliloquy with a skull is a variant of this same archetypal image. The classic
example is found in Hamlet. He contemplates Yorick‟s skull and concludes with these
thoughts:
   To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
   Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?... As thus: Alexander died, Alexander was
   buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam, and why of
   that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer -barrel?




  “Ibid.

  „‟Ibid.. par. 244.
  “Jung. Psychology and Religion: West and East. CW II. par. 363ff: see also Mysterium (oniunctionis.
  CW 14. par. 626.
                  Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay.
                  Might stop a hole to keep the wind away;
                  O! that that earth, which kept the world in awe.
                  Should patch a wall to expel the winter‟s flaw.

                                                                       (Act 5, sc. 1, lines 222-38)
   Goethe‟s Faust also has a brief soliloquy to a skull near the beginning of
the drama:
                  Yon hollow skull, what has your grin to say,
                  But that a mortal brain, with trouble tossed.
                  Sought once, like mine, the sweetness of the day,
                  And strove for truth, and in the gloam was lost. 47
   The skull as a memento mori is an emblem for the operation of mor- tifieatio.
It generates reflections on one‟s personal mortality and serves as a
touchstone for true and false values. To reflect on death can lead one to view
life under the aspect of eternity, and thus the black death head can turn to
gold (see figure 6-14). In fact, the origin and growth of consciousness seem
to be connected uniquely with the experience of death. Perhaps the first pair
of opposites to penetrate the dawning awareness of primitive humans was the
contrast between the living and the dead. Probably it is only a mortal
creature that is capable of consciousness. Our mortality is our greatest and
our ultimate weakness. And it is weakness, according to Jung, that gave Job
the edge over Yahweh:

       What does man possess that God does not have? Bccause of his littleness, puniness,
       and defencelessness against the Almighty, he possesses, as we have already
       suggested, a somewhat keener consciousness based on self-reflection: he must, in
       order to survive, always be mindful of his impotence. God has no need of this
       circumspection, for nowhere does he come up against an insuperable obstacle that
       would force him to hesitate and hence make him reflect on himself. 4 *

   The earliest forms of religious expression-—which indicate the first
separation of the ego from the archetypal psyche—seem to be associated
with burial rites. The outstanding example of death as the genesis of religion
and consciousness is the elaborate mortuary symbolism of ancient Egypt.
This is also clearly the origin of alchemy. The embalm ing of the dead king
transformed him into Osiris, an eternal, incorrupt ible body. This is the
prototype of the alchemical opus, which attempts to create the incorruptible
Philosophers‟ Stone. The alchemical vessel




 4,
      Goethe. Faust, p. 3.
 4
     "Jung. Psychology ami Religion: West and East, CW II. par. 579.
                                   FIGURE 6 - 1 4
        The Death Head Points to the Cosmic Sphere (Holbein, The Dance of Death.
                                        1538.)


has been equated with “the sealed tomb of Osiris, containing all the limbs of the
god.” 49 The Egyptian mortuary symbolism is the first great witness to the reality of
the psyche. It is as though the psyche cannot come into existence as a separate entity
until the death of the literal, the concrete, and the physical. The collective
unconscious is equivalent to the land of the dead or the afterlife, and a descent into
the collective unconscious is called a nekyia because an encounter with the autono-
mous psyche is felt as a death of this world.
   Plato explicitly connects wisdom with death. For him , philosophy, the love of
wisdom, is quite literally a mortificatio. In the Phaedo he writes:




"Jung, Alchemical Studies, CW 13, par. 97.
            “Purification, as we saw some time ago in our discussion, consists in
       separating the soul as much as possible from the body, and accustoming it to
       withdraw from all contact with the body and concentrate itself by itself, and to
       have its dwelling, as far as it can, both now and in the future, alone by itself,
       freed from the shackles of the body. Does not that follow?"
            “Yes, it does," said Simmias.
            “Is not what we call death a freeing and separation of soul from body?”
            “Certainly," he said.
            “And the desire to free the soul is found chiefly, or rather only, in the true
       philosopher. In fact the philosopher‟s occupation consists precisely in the
       freeing and separation of soul from body. Isn‟t that so?"
            “Apparently.”
            “Well then, as 1 said at the beginning, if a man has trained himself
       throughout his life to live in a state as close as possible to death, would it not
       be ridiculous for him to be distressed when death comes to him?"
            “It would, of course.”
            “Then it is a fact, Simmias, that true philosophers make dying their
       profession, and that to them of all men death is least alarming. Look at it in
       this way. If they are thoroughly dissatisfied with the body, and long to have
       their souls independent of it, when this happens would it not be entirely
       unreasonable to be frightened and distressed? Would they not nat urally be glad
       to set out for the place where there is a prospect of attaining the object of their
       lifelong desire—which is wisdom —and of escaping from an unwelcome
       association? Surely there are many who have chosen of their own free will to
       follow dead lovers and wives and sons to the next world, in the hope of seeing
       and meeting there the persons whom they loved. If this is so, will a true lover
       of wisdom who has firmly grasped this same conviction -that he will never
       attain to wisdom worthy of the name elsewhere than in the next world -will he
       be grieved at dying? Will he not be glad to make that journey? We must
       suppose so, my dear boy, that is, if he is a real philosopher, becausc then he
       will be of the belief that he will never find wisdom in all its purity in any other
       place.” 50

    What stands out in this passage is the startling statement that “true
philosophers make dying their profession." The same can be said of an important
aspect of analysis. As we pursue the withdrawal of projections, we make dying our
profession.
    These ideas of Plato lead directly into Jung's discussion of the unio mentalis in
Mysierium Coniunctionis. There he describes the coniunctio as taking place in three
stages. In the first stage of this operation soul and spirit are unite d with each other.
The united product is then separated from the body. This separation is experienced
as a death. Jung writes:

       The unio mentalis. the interior oneness which today we call individuation, he
       (Dorn) conceived as a psychic equilibration of opposites “in the overcoming of
       the body,” a state of equanimity transcending the body's affectivity and




w
    Plato, Phaecto, 67c-68b. in The Collected Dialogues.
                                          mo urn ica no                                  171


        instinctuality. The spirit which is to unite with the soul, he called a "spiracle
        of eternal life,” a sort of “window into eternity” (Leibnitz) ________
            But, in order to bring about their subsequent reunion, the mind {ment) must be
        separated from the body—which is equivalent to voluntary death for only
        separated things can unite. By this separation (distractio) Dorn obviously meant a
        discrimination and dissolution of the “composite,” the composite state being one
        in which the affectivity of the body has a disturb* ing influence on the rationality
        of the mind. The aim of this separation was to free the mind of the influence of
        “the bodily appetites and the heart‟s affections," and to establish a spiritual
        position which is supraordinate to the turbulent sphere of the body. This leads at
        first to a dissociation of the personality and a violation of the merely natural man.
            This preliminary step, in itself a clear blend of Stoic philosophy and Christian
        psychology, is indispensable for the differentiation of conscious ness. Modern
        psychotherapy makes use of the same procedure when it objectifies the affects and
        instincts and confronts the consciousness with them.51
        Thus the unio menialis corresponds precisely to the philosophers who make dying
 their profession.
        In this preliminary step the “natural man” must be mortified and reminded that, in
 the words of Thomas Gray,
                     The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
                     And all that beauty, all that wealth e‟er gave Await
                     alike the inevitable hour:
                     The paths of glory lead but to the grave.” 52
        Or, in the words of the Apostle Paul, “You must kill everything in you that
 belongs only to earthly life: fornication, impurity, guilty passion, evil desires, and
 especially greed, which is the same thing as worshipping a false god” (Col. 3:5, JB).
 Of course this statement is to be taken symbolically, not literally. Desires are to be
 killed in their obsessive. projected forms.
        Encounter with the unconscious is almost by definition a wounding defeat. In
 Mysterium Coniunctionis we find one of the most important sentences that Jung ever
 wrote: "The experience of the self is alw ays a defeat for the ego. "53 And in another work
 he writes, “The integration of contents that were always unconscious and projected
 involves a serious lesion of the ego. Alchemy expresses this through the symbols of
 death, mutilation, or poisoning, or through the curious idea of dropsy.” 54 This
 “lesion of the ego” is what is symbolized by the figure of the sun - hero who is lame
 or has an amputated extremity. It is the meaning of




 IJ
      ung. Mysterium Coniunctionis. CfV 14. par. 670ff.
”“Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard.”
"J Un g. Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14. par. 788.
 the Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16, par. 472.
Jason as a monosandolos who had lost a sandal while carrying an unknown woman
(Hera) across a river. It is also the meaning of Oedipus whose name means
“swollen foot.” I once dreamed that while Jung was giving a brilliant lecture I noticed
that his right foot was lame.
   Mortiftcatio is experienced as defeat and failure. Needless to say, one rarely
chooses such an experience. It is usually imposed by life, either from within or
from without. To some extent it can be experienced vicariously through that great
cultural instrument of mortiftcatio, the tragic drama. In some cases the drama can
provide even more than a vicarious experience. If the time is right, it can have an
inductive effect and initiate an authentic transformation process in the individual.
What I have written in another work is relevant here:

      Gilbert Murray has given us a valuable description of the origin and basic
      features of the classic tragedy [quoted in Harrison, Themis, 34 Iff]. It is his view
      that Greek tragedy started as the ritual re-enactment of the death and rebirth of
      the year-spirit (equated with Dionysus), and that this ritual reenactment had
      four chief features. First there is an agone or contest in which the protagonist,
      the representative of the year-spirit, is in contest with darkness or evil.
      Secondly, there is a pathos or passion in which the hero undergoes suffering and
      defeat. Third is a threnos or lamentation for the defeated hero. And fourthly,
      there is a theophany. a rebirth of life on another level with a reversal of emotion
      from sorrow to joy. This sequence is basically the same as the ritual drama of
      Osiris and of Christ, each of which has the characteristic features of the death
      and rebirth of the year-spirit. In later Greek tragedy the final phase, the
      theophany, almost disappears, perhaps remaining only as a hint. In
      psychological terms we can say that the sequence of steps which constitute the
      tragic process involves the overcoming of the ego, the defeat of the conscious
      will, in order for the Self, the final epiphany, to manifest. 55

   The pathos and threnos stages of suffering and defeat correspond to the
alchemical mortiftcatio, and the theophany corresponds to the reborn, incorruptible
body that sprouts out of the corpse of Osiris. Shakespeare‟s King Lear is a
particularly good example of tragedy as mortiftcatio. In a text previously quoted,
the old man says he is “sur- named the dragon.” Similarly, wrathful King Lear,
early in the play, identifies himself with the dragon with his words to Kent,
“Come not between the dragon and his wrath” (Act 1, sc. 1, line 124). The play
then unfolds as a progressive stripping of authority, power, and control from the
king. The will of the kingly ego undergoes total mortiftcatio to the point of
madness. Out of this nigredo state is born the theophany of Lear‟s transformation.
Through his madness he gets a glimpse of the transpersonal psyche that he is now
willing to serve. After final defeat




S5
     Edinger, “The Tragic Hero: An Image of Individuation.”
by Edmund‟s forces, as Lear and Cordelia are being led to prison, the theophany
comes in this stunning passage. Here the black death‟* head turns to gold.
                    Come, let‟s away to prison:
              We two alone will sing like birds i* the cage:
              When thou dost ask me blessing, I‟ll kneel down
              And ask of thee forgiveness: so we‟ll live,
              And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh At
              gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues Talk of court
              news; and we‟ll talk with them too,
              Who loses and who wins, who‟s in, who‟s out;
              And take upon‟s the mystery of things,
              As if we were God‟s spies: and we‟ll wear out,
              In a wall‟d prison, packs and sects of great ones That
              ebb and flow by the moon.

                                        (Act 5, sc. 3, lines 8-18)

With this statement Lear has passed beyond the opposites. Self re places
ego. Blackness turns to gold. The modern poet Theodore Roethke describes
a parallel experience of the Selfs being born out of the nigredo in his poem
“In a Dark Time”:

             In a dark time, the eye begins to see,
             I meet my shadow in the deepening shade;
             I hear my echo in the echoing wood—
             A lord of nature weeping to a tree.
             I live between the heron and the wren.
             Beasts of the hill and serpents of the den.
             What‟s madness but nobility of soul
             At odds with circumstance? The day‟s on fire!
             I know the purity of pure despair.
             My shadow pinned against a sweating wall.
             That place among the rocks—is it a cave.
             Or winding path? The edge is what I have.
             A steady stream of correspondences!
             A night flowing with birds, a ragged moon.
             And in broad day the midnight come again!
             A man goes far to find out what he is—
             Death of the self in a long, tearless night.
             All natural shapes blazing unnatural light.
             Dark, dark my light, and darker my desire.
             My soul, like some heat-maddened summer fly.
             Keeps buzzing at the sill. Which I is 1?
             A fallen man, I climb out of my fear.
                       The mind enters itself, and God the mind.
                       And one is One, free in the tearing wind .56
    This remarkable poem has the ring of complete psychological authen ticity. It is
a modern expression of the same experience as lay behind King Lear; that is, it
derives from the same archetype. The first stanza speaks of darkness bringing a
new kind of vision. The ego's lordship over nature is overthrown. Weeping to a
tree is analogous to the heath scene in King Lear. The unconscious as nature and as
animal has erupted into consciousness. The second stanza is concerned with mad -
ness, as was Lear in the storm. What is madness? It is soul in conflict with
circumstance. It is inner and outer reality confused. Illusions are being dissolved.
One's dark side is pinned and must be acknowledged. The opposites come into
view, and the ego must traverse the narrow edge between them. The third stanza
speaks of a “stream of correspondences.” When the depths of the unconscious
open, “circumstance” cracks open, synchronicities occur, and transpersonal
meanings shine through—“natural shapes blazing unnatural light.” In the fourth
stanza the author becomes disidentified from his desire and from his “soul”— that
is, the unconscious. Like Lear, he had been bound to a wheel of fire, in a state of
identity with the transpersonal energies of the Self. Now he is released and can
realize the Self as separate from the ego. As Roethke says in another poem (“The
Shape of Fire”), “the redeemer comes a dark way.”
    Another poetic expression of the moriifieaiio experience is found in these lines
from “East Coker” by T. S. Eliot:
         I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope For hope would be
         hope for the wrong thing; wait without love For love would be love
         for the wrong thing; there is yet faith But the faith and the love and
         the hope are all in the waiting.
         Wait without thought, for you are not ready for thought:
         So the darkness shall be the light, and the stillness the dancing.




             In order to arrive at what you do not know You must go by a
             way which is the way of ignorance. In order to possess what
             you do not possess You must go by the way of dispossession.
             In order to arrive at what you are not You must go through the
             way in which you are not. And what you do not know is the
             only thing you know And what you own is what you do not
             own And where you are is where you are not.




*Thf Collected Poems of Theodore Roethke. p. 231
Out of the experience of darkness and emptiness can come the encounter with
the inner companion.
   Jung speaks of such an experience:

  The state of imperfect transformation, merely hoped for and waited for, does not
  seem to be one of torment only, but of positive, if hidden, happiness. It is the state
  of someone who, in his wanderings among the mazes of his psychic transformation,
  comes upon a secret happiness which reconciles him to his apparent loneliness. In
  communing with himself he finds not deadly boredom and mela ncholy but an inner
  partner; more than that, a relationship that seems like the happiness of a secret love,
  or like a hidden springtime, when the green seed sprouts from the barren earth,
  holding out the promise of future harvests. It is the alchemical benedicta viriditas, the
  blessed greenness, signifying on the one hand the “leprosy of the metals”
  (verdigris), but on the other the secret immanence of the divine spirit of life in all
  things.57
    Mortificatio leads us directly into the imagery of Christ‟s Passion—his mocking,
flagellation, torture, and death (see figure 6-15). The alchemists sometimes explicitly
connected the treatment of the material in the vessel with the treatment Christ
received. For instance, one text says, “It is not unfitly compared with Christ when
the putrefied body of the Sun
lies dead, inactive, like ashes in the bottom of the phial ____________ So also did it
happen to Christ himself, when at the Mount of Olives, and on the cross, he was
roasted by the fire of the divine wrath (Matt. 26, 27), and complained that he was
utterly deserted by his heavenly Father..." 5 * Another text reads:
  Again, as our chemical compound ...is subjected to the action of fire, and is
  decomposed, dissolved, and well digested, and as this process, before its
  consummation, exhibits various chromatic changes, so this Divine Man, and Human
  God, Jesus Christ, had, by the will of his heavenly Father, to pass through the
  furnace of affliction, that is, through many troubles, in sults, and sufferings, in the
  course of which His outward aspect was grievously changed....
       Then again, the Sages have called our compound, while undergoing the process
  of decomposition, the Raven‟s Head, on account of its blackness. In the same way,
  Christ (Isaiah, 53) had no form nor comeliness—was despised and rejected of men—
  a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief—so despised, that men hid, as it were,
  their faces from Him— 59
  This passage connects the tortured prima materia not only with Christ hut also
  with the suffering servant of Isaiah who personifies Zion and the Messiah yet to
  come.
  This well-known saying of Jesus also belongs to mortificatio symbolism: “If anyone
  wants to be a follower of mine, let him renounce himself




  ■* Un 8.   Mysterium Coniunctionis. C W 14, par. 623. par.
          485.
  w
      aitc. trans.. The   Hermetic Museum 1:101 ff.
                                       FIGURE 6 15
The Scourging of Christ (Mair of Landshut, 15th century. London. British Museum.
Reprinted in Hind. An Introduction to a History of Woodcut.)




and take up his cross and follow me. For anyone who wants to save his life
will lose it; but anyone who loses his life for my sake will find it” (Matt.
16:24, 25 JB).
The same idea is expressed more starkly in the following noncanoni - cal
saying from a recently discovered Gnostic text: “Verily I say unto you,
none will be saved unless they believe in my cross. But those who have
believed in my cross, theirs is the kingdom of God. Therefore
become seekers for death, like the dead who seek for life ______ When you
examine death it will teach you election. Verily I say unto you, none of
I
             those who fear death will be saved; for the kingdom of death belongs to
            those who put themselves to death .”60
            Psychologically we can understand this to refer to the law of oppo-
            sites—the fact that the conscious experience of one side constellates its
            opposite in the unconscious. In Goethe‟s words, stirb unci werde, die
            and become. To the extent that the ego consciously embraces death it
            constellates life in depth. This fact is related to the psychology of sacri -
            fice. The outstanding alchemical example of the sacrificial theme is
            found in the visions of Zosimos, where we read: “I am Ion, the priest of
           the inner sanctuaries, and I submit myself to an unendurable torment.
           For there came one in haste at early morning, who overpowered me,
           and pierced me through with the sword, and dismembered me in accor -
           dance with the rule of harmony. And he drew off the skin of my head
           with the sword, which he wielded with strength, and mingled the bones
           with the pieces of flesh, and caused them to be burned upon the fire of
           the art, till I perceived by the transformation of the body that I had
           become spirit .”61
           Ion, the priest of the inner sanctuaries, is a personification of both
           the prima materia and the Philosophers‟ Stone. He is both the sacrificer
           and the sacrificed. In this respect he corresponds to the figure of Christ
           as pictured in Hebrews: “But now Christ has come, as the high priest of
           all the blessings which were to come. He has passed through the greater,
           the more perfect tent, which is better than the one made by men‟s hands
           because it is not of this created order; and he has e ntered the sanctuary
           once and for all, taking with him not the blood of goats and bull calves,
           but his own blood, having won an eternal redemption for us” (Heb.
           9:11, 12 JB).
                                Ion, the priest who submits himself to an unendurable torment, is
                          reminiscent of a remarkable passage in an unpublished letter by Jung:
           The problem of crucifixion is the beginning of individuation; there is the
           secret meaning of the Christian symbolism, a path of blood and suffering—
           like any other step forward on the road of the evolution of human conscious-
           ness. Can man stand a further increase of consciousness?...! confess that I
           submitted to the divine power of this apparently unsurmountable problem
           and I consciously and intentionally made my life miserable, because I wanted
           Cod to be alive and free from the suffering man has put on him by loving his
           own reason more than God‟s secret intentions .62
                            The idea of deliberately making oneself miserable is difficult doctrine.
                               We must remember, however, that Jung is speaking to a particular




"The Nag Hammadi Library, pp. 3 I f .

    ^Ung. Alchemical Studies. CIV 13, pur. 86.
Adler, “Aspects of Jung's Personality and Work." p. 12.
}
person in this letter. There is much evidence that Jung adjusted his mode of
speaking to the reality of the person he was talking to. For instance, in talking to
his American Indian friend, Mountain Lake, he told him that he, Jung, belonged
to a cattle-breeding tribe that lived in the mountains. So I suspect that this letter
is tailored to the psychology of the person to whom it is written. Nevertheless, its
mode of expression gives us a fresh angle of vision. To pay attention to the
unconscious does mean to deliberately make oneself miserable in order that the
autonomous psyche will be able to function more freely. It has nothing to do with
masochism but is rather a conscious participation in the process of actualizing
the Deity. In the words of Meister Eckhart, “Suffering alone is sufficient
preparation for God‟s dwelling in man‟s
heart __ God is always with a man in suffering; as he himself declared
by the mouth of the prophet, „Whosoever is sorrowful, I will myself be with
him‟” (probably Jer. 31:25). 63
    I am reminded of a woman who, in the course of her life, had more than her
fair share of suffering and frustration. She struggled in analysis for many years to
accept her fate and to master her bitterness. Her efforts were eventually crowned
with a dream that contained this image:
      / see a tree which had been struck by lightning. However, it seemed that it had not
      been destroyed completely, but that something of the electric power had gone
      through the tree and into its surroundings where it caused unusual fertility.
This dream reminded her of a previous dream in which a goat had been
sacrificed. In a picture that she drew of that dream, the blood of the sacrificed
goat is fertilizing the surrounding vegetation (see figure 6 -16). In fact, this
woman does have a favorable effect on her surroundings. She is a gifted teacher,
and her long mortificatio has heightened and matured her gifts. The dream of the
lightning-struck tree has similarities to a dream that Jung had in 1914.
      Frightful cold had again descended from out of the cosmos. This dream, however,
      had an unexpected end. There stood a leaf- bearing tree, but without fruit (my tree of
      life, / thought), whose leaves had been transformed by the effects of the frost into
      sweet grapes full of healing juices. I plucked the grapes and gave them to a large,
      waiting crowd.M
   As previously mentioned, the alchemical mortificatio has very close parallels to
the imagery of Christ‟s Passion. In fact they are both expres -




63Meister   Eckhart 1:263.
M
    Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, p. 176.
                                 FIGURE 6 16
                                 Patient‟s Drawing


 sions of the same archetype. However, the alchemical attitude to the Christ -
 image and the attitude of religious faith are very different. Jung takes great
 care to make the distinction in the followin g quotation:
    If the adept experiences his own self, the “true man,” in his work, then... he
    encounters the analogy of the true man—Christ—in new and direct form,
    and he recognizes in the transformation in which he himself is involved a
    similarity to the Passion. It is not an “imitation of Christ” but its exact
    opposite: an assimilation of the Christ-image to his own self, which is the
    “true man.” It is no longer an effort, an intentional striving after imitation,
    but rather an involuntary experience of the reality represented by the sacred
    legend....The Passion happens to the adept, not in its classic form...but in
    the form expressed by the alchemical myth. It is the arcane substance that
    suffers those physical and moral tortures__It is not the adept who suffers all
    this, rather it suffers in him, it is tortured, it passes through death and rises
    again. All this happens, not to the alchemist himself but to the “true man,"
    who he feels is near him and in him and at the same time in the retort .65
   To conclude, as a previously quoted text implied, the motif of the
 woriijicatio of the king has an application to the collective psyche. Our
 collective God-image is undergoing mortificatio as is indicated by the phrase
 “God is dead.” The collective psyche is thus going through a


“Jung.   M vsterium Coniurtctionis. CW 14, par. 492.
     nig redo. Jung alludes to this in his interpretation of Augustine‟s terms,
     “morning knowledge” and “evening knowledge.” Morning knowledge is
     knowledge of the creator, evening knowledge is the knowledge of created
     things. Morning knowledge knows about God, evening knowledge knows
     about humanity. Morning knowledge is religion, evening knowledge is
     science. The transition from morning knowledge to evening knowledge
     corresponds to the fact that “every spiritual truth gradually turns into
     something material, becoming no more than a tool in the hand of man .”66 As
     more and more falls under the rational control of the ego, humanity‟s morning
     knowledge is increasingly darkened. As Jung says, “Modern man is already so
     darkened that nothing beyond the light of his own intellect illuminates the
     world. „Oceasus Christi, passio Christi.' That surely is why such strange things
     are happening to our much lauded civilization, more like a Götterdämmerung
     than any normal twilight .”67
        “But just as evening gives birth to morning, so from the darkness arises a
     new light, the Stella matutina, which is at once the evening and the morning
     star—Lucifer, the light-bringer .”68 In terms of the symbolism of the seven
     days of creation and the seven days of the week, it was thought that each day
     takes human beings farther away from their morning knowledge until “the
     growing darkness reaches its greatest intensity on the day of Venus (Friday),
     and changes into Lucifer on Saturn‟s day. Saturday heralds the light which
     appears in full strength
     on Sun-day ___ The Sabbath is therefore the day on which man returns
     to God and receives anew the light of the cognitio matutina (morning
     knowledge). And this day has no evening .”69




“Alchemical Studies, CW 13, par. 302.
6,
     Ibid.
“Ibid., par. 299.
„»Ibid., par. 301.
           *-7 Separation



T
     he PRIM A MATERIA was thought of as a composite,   a confused mix-
     ture of undifferentiated and contrary components requiring a proc -
ess of separation. Images for this process are supplied by various chemi -
cal and physical procedures performed in the alchemical laboratory.
Metal was extracted from its crude ore by heating, pulverizing, or
various chemical means. Many substances when heated will separate
into a volatile part which vaporizes and an earthy residue which remains
behind. Amalgams, for instance, when heated release their mercury as
vapor and leave the nonvolatile metal at the bottom of the vessel. The
process of distillation will separate a more volatile liquid from a less
volatile one, and evaporation separates a liquid solvent from the solid
that had been dissolved in it. Filtration, sedimentation, and perhaps
even crude centrifuging were available to the alchemist.
   In all these examples, a composite mixture undergoes a discrimination of its
component parts. Order is brought out of confusion in a process analogous to that in
which cosmos is born out of chaos in creation myths. It is not surprising, therefore,
that many cosmogonic myths describe creation as separatio (see figure 7-1). For
instance, Ovid describes creation as follows:
   Before the sea was, and the lands, and the sky that hangs over all, the face of Nature
   showed alike in her whole round, which state have men called chaos: a rough,
   unordered mass of things, nothing at all save lifeless bulk and warring seeds of ill -
   matched elements heaped in one. No sun as yet shone forth upon the world, nor did the
   waxing moon renew her slender horns; not yet did the earth hang poised by her own
   weight in the circumambient air, nor had the ocean stretched her arms along the far
   reaches of the lands. And, though there was both land and sea and air, no one could
   tread that land, or swim that sea; and the air was dark. No form of things remained the
   same; all objects were at odds, for within one body cold things strove with hot, and
   moist with dry, soft things with hard, things having weight with weightless things.
       God -or kindlier Nature composed this strife; for he rent asunder land from iky, and
                                 sea from land, and separated the ethereal heavens from the
                                     FIGURE 7 -I
    God Creating the World (Manuscript illustration, 13th century. Vienna. Austrian
                   National Library. Reprinted in Clark. Civilization.)



   dense atmosphere. When thus he had released these elements and freed them from the
   blind heap of things, he set them each in its own place and bound them fast in
   harmony.1
   Marie-Louise von Franz tells us that creation myths often begin with a cosmic
egg and that
   after the egg has been created it is divided and generally into two parts.... Frequently
   one finds the same motif of a separation of a preconscious unit in connection with the
   separation of the first parents. In many cosmogonic myths the first parents, Father
   Heaven and Mother Earth, for instance, first exist in a continuous embrace. They
   form, as it were, a hermaphroditic being



'Ovid, Metamorphoses, 1, bk. 1, lines 5-25.
   ¡n constant cohabitation. In this state nothing can come into existence, because
   Father Heaven lies so closely on Mother Earth that there is no space for
   anything to grow between them—The first act of creation is therefore the
   separation of this divine couple, pushing them sufficiently apart so that a space
   is created for the rest of creation. This can be compared to the cutting apart of
   the egg .2 (See figure 7-2.)

  An example of the separation of the World Parents is the following Egyptian
creation myth:
  Shu was the personification of the atmosphere and his name, meaning “to raise,”
  derived from his most important act in mythology, the separation of his children,
  Geb, the earth, and Nut, the sky, which resulted in the creation of the world as
  men knew it. On the orders of Ra or, according to some, spurred by incestuous
  jealousy, Shu thrust himself between Geb and Nut, thus breaking their close
  embrace. Alternatively Shu was said to have been ordered by Ra to support Nut
  when, as a cow, she had become dizzy after raising Ra to the heights of heaven.
     Shu was usually represented as a bearded man standing or kneeling over Geb
  with arms upraised to support Nut. On his head he wore an ostrich feather, the
  hieroglyph of his name, or four tall plumes, symbolising th e four




                                     FIGURE 7-2
             Cutting the Philosophical Egg (Maier, A tat ant a Fugiens. 1618.)


Franz, Patterns of Creativity Mirrored in Creation Myths, p. 150.
     pillars of heaven which supported Nut. Sometimes he was represented as a
     lion, or as a column of air.
     Shu's name is also said to mean “to be empty” and he was treated in some
     texts as emptiness deified. In others he was accorded rather more
     importance: as god of air, Shu was seen in the later texts as personifying
     the divine intelligence. He therefore became the immediate agent of Atum‟s
     creation, and hence an embodiment of Alum's supreme power. Shu was thus
     the god who set creation in motion, forming the world by separating earth
     and sky .3 (See figure 7-3).
     Alchemical texts speak of a separation of earth and sky taking place in
the retort. For instance, Ripley says the following:
                    Separation thus must thou oft times make.
                    Thy matter dividing into parts two;
                    So that the Simple from the gross thou take Till
                    earth remain beneath in color blue.
                    That earth is fix for to abide all woe:




                                         FIGURE 7 3
 The Separation of Heaven and Earth: Nut Lifted Above Geb by Shu (Drawing after an
  illustration in A. Jercmias. Das A lie Testament im Uchte des Alien Orients. Leipzig. 1904.
Turin, Egyptian Museum. Reprinted in Neumann. The Origins and History of Consciousness.)




'Ions. Egyptian Mythology, p. 46.
I
                 The other part is Spiritual and fleeing,
                 But thou must turn them all into one thing .4
Again, in the Emerald Tablet we read, “Separate the earth from the fire, the
subtle from the dense, gently with great ingenuity ”* Psycho logically, the
result of separatio by division into two is awareness of the opposites. This is a
crucial feature of emerging consciousness.
In the evolution of Western consciousness, the opposites ( enantia) were
discovered by the pre-Socratic philosophers. The Pythagoreans established a
table of ten pairs of opposites: 6
1. limit (peras)                               : unlimited ( apeiron)
2. odd (peritton)                              : even (artion)
3. one (hen)                                   : many (plethos)
4. right (dexion)                               : left (aristeron)
5. male ( arren)                               : female (thelu)
6. resting (eremoun)                           : moving (kinoumenon)
7. straight (euthu)                            : curved, crooked (kampulon)
8. light (phos)                                : darkness (skotos)
9. good ( agathon)                             : bad (kakon)
10. square (tetragonon)                          : oblong (heteromekes)
The psychological significance of the discovery of the opposites can hardly be
overestimated. Like numbers, the newly discovered opposites carried an aura
of numinosity for the ancients. The world had been rent asunder, and between
the separated opposites space had been created, room for the conscious human
ego to live and to grow.
The elemental separatio that ushers in conscious existence is the separation of
subject from object, the I from the not-I. This is the first pair of opposites. Shu
can separate Geb from Nut only after achieving a prior separation of himself
from them. Shu thus signifies the primordial ego, the splitter of opposites, who
creates space for the existence of consciousness. To the extent that the
opposites remain unconscious and unseparated, one lives in a state of
participation mystique, which means that one identifies with one side of a pair of
opposites and projects its contrary as an enemy. Space for consciousness to
exist appears between the opposites, which means that one becomes conscious
as one is able to contain and endure the opposites within.
A major aspcct of psychotherapy is the process of separatio, of which the most
important component is the separation of subject and object. The immature ego
is notorious for its state of participation mystique




 ■Aihmole. cd . Thcatrum Chemicum Britannicum. p. 140.

 *Ct. The Uvrt of the Alchemy.itleal Philosophers, p.
 383. ‟■Aristoilc. Metaphysics, 986a 22, in The Basic
 Works of Aristotle.
 with both the inner and the outer worlds. Such an ego must go through a
 prolonged process of differentiation between subject and object. As this
 proceeds, disidentification with other pairs of opposites also occurs.
    The alchemist says, “Separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the
 dense.” Psychologically this can be applied to the separation of the
 concrete, literal aspects of an experience from its attached libido and inner
 symbolic meaning—that is, a separation of the subjective and objective
 components. A common problem in psychotherapy is conflict and
 ambivalence concerning a practical decision. Should I take this job? Should
 I make this move? Should I marry or divorce? The basis of such conflicts is
 often a lack of distinction between the concrete and the symbolic meanings
 of the proposed action. It may be, for instance, that a person obsessed with
 the idea of divorce but unable to act is being required to bring about a
 psychic separation from his or her spouse, a symbolic divorce, rather than a
 literal one. At any rate, the concrete and the symbolic are two different
 levels of reality that need to be distinguished and considered separately.
 When this is done, the objective decision is often easily reached .
    Creation by separatio is also described as division into four. Paracelsus
 says: “In the creation of the world, the first separation began with the four
 elements, when the first matter of the world was one chaos. From that chaos
 God built the Greater World, separated into four distinct elements, Fire, Air,
 Water, Earth.” 7 Again, in the Golden Treatise of Hermes we read: “Understand
 ye then, O sons of wisdom, that the knowledge of the four elements of the
 ancient philosophers was not corporally or impruden tly sought after, which
 are through patience
 to be discovered according to their causes and their occult operation _______
 Know, then, that the division that was made upon the Water, by the ancient
 philosophers, separates it into four substances.“ 1 These passages hark back
 to Plato‟s account in the Timaeus, in which he speaks of chaos in the process
 of creation
  being full of powers which were neither similar nor equally balanced, was
  never in any part in a state of equipoise, but swaying unevenly hither and
  thither, was shaken by them, and by its motion again shook them, and the
  elements when moved were separated and carried continually, some one way,
  some another. As, when grain is shaken and winnowed by fans and other
  instruments used in the threshing of corn, th e elose and heavy particle» are
  borne away and settle in one direction, and the loose and light particles in
  another. In this manner, the four kinds or elements were then shaken by the
  receiving vessel .9




‟Waite, tram..   Hermetic and Alchemical Writings, p.
160.

•The Golden Treatise of Hermes in Atwood.
Hermetic Philosophy and Alchemy, p. | 6. ‟Plato,                     0

Timaeus, in The Collected Dialogues, p I                                 179
  A more complex account of creation by separatio is found in Philo, as
summarized by Goodenough:
  God projects the Logos which is the principle of unity and which at the same
  time is given the peculiar name the “Cutter.” The Logos -Cutter form* first
  the intelligible world (world of archetypal forms) and then the material world
  after the manner and model of the intelligible world. Crude matter, which is
  again a datum of creation, was first bisected by the Logos -Cutter into light
  and heavy, then these two were each bisected to produce four, which became
  the four elements. Each of these was again divided, as earth into mainland
  and islands, water into fresh and salt. The process of division kept on until it
  had produced animate and inanimate objects, wild and cultivated fruits, wild
  and tame animals, male and female, and the rest. In every case the division
  was not only a separation but a reunion, for the Logos was the Glue as well
  as the Cutter; that is, it was the principle of cohesion which makes the
  universe a unit in spite of its manifold divisions. 10
  This passage is remarkable for its loyalty to the opposites in its description of
the cosmogonic principle. What is here called Logos is actually Logos -Eros,
since it is not only a cutting edge but also a glue. This way of thinking is
absolutely alchemical and corresponds to some of the paradoxi cal descriptions
of Mercurius. 11
  The motif of division into the four elements corresponds psychologi cally to
the application of all four functions to a given experience. Sensation tells us
what the facts are. Thinking determines in what general concepts t he facts can
be placed. Feeling tells us whether or not we like the facts. Intuition suggests
where the facts may have come from, what they may lead to, and what
connections they may have with other facts. It presents possibilities, not
certainties.
  It is important that the four functions be separated. For example, one's feeling
reaction to a fact should not hinder one‟s ability to see its existence; or, a
possibility should not be confused with a certainty. Although the four elements
cannot be equated precisely with the four functions, there is an approximate
parallel. There is a similar approximation with the four suits of the Tarot:
Swords, Cups, Coins, and Staves (see figure 7 -4). Each of these fourfold
patterns is a particular embodiment of the Quatemi ty archetype, which
structures undifferentiated matter. Specifically, the four elements signify the
four different degrees of material aggregation, ranging from disembodied
energy (fire) to full solidity (earth). Presumably, there are analogous degrees of
aggregation of the psychic substance that remain to be elucidated.
     Every newly encountered area of the unconscious requires a cosmogonic act
                        of separatio. Each new increment of prima materia calls forth




    ««Goodenough. An Introduction
    to Philo Judaeus, pp. |07f. "Jung
    Alchemical Studies, CW 13, par.
    267.
                            FIGURE 7 - 4
lhc
      Aces of the Four Tarot Suit»: Swords. Staves. Coins, and Cups
                          (Marseilles Tarot.)
a sharp-edged action by Philo‟s “Logos-Cutter.” The creation of con-
sciousness requires that new contents be carved out of the unconscious. The
dream of a middle-aged man of multiple talents and ambitions who was tom
between different professions and different life -goals illustrates this issue:
   Pieces of a map were to be cut out and assembled. A sharp blade
   was needed. In the dream I could not get the blade sharp enough.
The dreamer needed a better contact with the Logos -Cutter than he had as yet
achieved.
   Swords, knives, and sharp cutting edges of all kinds belong to the
symbolism of separatio. It is surely significant that one of the first tools of
aboriginal human beings was a cutting edge. Logos is the great agent of
separatio that brings consciousness and power over nature—both within and
without—by its capacity to divide, name, and categorize. One of its major
symbols is the cutting edge that can dissect and differ entiate on the one hand
and can kill on the other. By separating the opposites, the Logos brings
clarity; but, by making the opposites visible, it also brings conflict. An
example of this paradoxical symbolism is the classic separatio text in the
Gospels: “I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. For 1 have come to
set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a
daughter-in-law against her mother- in-law; and a man's foes will be those of
his own household” (Matt. 10:34-36, RSV). (See figure 7-5.)
   An even sterner version of the same idea is found in the Gnostic Gospel of
Thomas: “Jesus said, „Men think, perhaps, that it is peace which I have come
to cast upon the world. They do not know that it is dissension which I have
come to cast upon the earth; fire, sword, and war. For there will be five in a
house: three will be against two, and two against three, the father against the
son, and the son against the father. And they will stand solitary .’"12
   Christ, the Self as Logos-Cutter, comes to dissect or dismember the
participation mystique of the family psyche (“a man‟s foes will be those of his
own household”). The Gnostic version states explicitly that the goal is to
make the individual (“they will stand solitary”).
   Separatio may be expressed by images of death or killing. Death dreams
and death wishes directed against a particular person often indicate the need
for separation from a relationship of unconscious identification that has
become suffocating. A separatio process may be heralded by increasing
conflict and antagonism in a previously amicable

  "Thr Nat Itammadl Library, p. 1 20.
r. .                                  FIGURE 7 - 5
         °f the Apocalypse (Dürer. Reprinted in The Complete Woodcut% «/ Albrecht Dürer.)
 hrisl
relationship. If the participants lack an understanding of what they are
experiencing the process may become dangerous or even violent. This will be
especially likely if a relationship of unconscious identification is standing in
the way of the activated urge to individuation. A man in such a situation had
this dream:
  It is night. There is the feeling that dawn is approaching. Two shepherds
  dressed in sheepskin, holding staffs and identical in looks are on a mountain
  path. There is an intense look in both their eyes that says they know they must
  go their separate ways.
  One has the look of the desire for vengeance and the other has a feeling of
  sadness. They embrace and kiss each other on the cheek with a kiss of peace
  and the one who had the feeling of sadness begins his climb up the mountain.
  The other shepherd pauses and looks at him as though to say, "I could have
  killed youT and then turns and goes down the mountain and dawn has arrived.
   This dream pictures the purely archetypal aspect of the separatio process
that was activated between the dreamer and his friend. Devoid of personal
features, it is as though the dream were speaki ng to the ego about the loss of
its friend in the same fashion as John Milton wrote his poem Lycidas to mourn
the drowning of Edward King, or as Shelley wrote his Adonais at the death of
John Keats. The archetypal pattern behind the personal event is revea led,
which sets it in a larger context, brings comfort to the bereaved, and
illuminates the tragedy with mean ing. Such dreams are apt to come when the
situation is particularly dangerous. It seems that, as with all instincts,
archetypal wisdom is called forth in times of greatest need.
   Eris, the Goddess of Discord and sister of Ares, presides over sepa- ratio. It
was she who came uninvited to a marriage on Olympus and flung into the
midst of the gathering an apple inscribed “to the fairest.** Thus she brou ght
about the judgement of Paris. Comparisons are odious and comparison is
what the golden apple provoked. To determine what is “more** and what is
“most** requires and leads to judgements. Such actions disturb the
participation mystique of the status quo and generate conflict, but they may
lead to greater consciousness. Thus Heraclitus says, -War (between the
opposites) is the father of all and the king of all, and some he shows as gods,
others as men; some he makes slaves, others frcc.** , J (See figure 7-6.)




  ■Kirk and Raven. The PreSocratic Philosophers, p. 195 .
                                     FIGURE 7-6
      Joust Between Sol and Luna (Aurora Consurgens. 14th century. Zurich. Zen-
 tralbibliothek. Cod. rhenovacensis 172, fol. 10. Reprinted in Derola, The Secret Art of
                                       Alchemy.)



   Eris‟ golden apple brought comparison, judgement, choice, and war. The burden
fell on Paris, the human victim of divine buck passing, to make a judgement among
Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite. The innocent shepherd was faced with an ordeal of
manhood requiring him to choose his central life -value among power, knowledge,
and beauty. His choice was an act of separaiio and led him on to the next stage of
development. In an alchemical picture (see figure 7 -7), the judgement of Paris is
accompanied by the awakening of a sleeping king This suggests that such an act of
judgement can bring into consciousness a connection with the Self.
   Separaiio may be wrongly applied, in which case it will be destructive. It is
improper to divide an organic whole mechanicall y in the name of an arbitrary notion
of equality. Paris tried to evade his responsibility by suggesting that the apple be
divided into three equal parts, but this was not allowed. There is a similar idea in the
story of the judgement of Solomon. Two women came before Solomon, each claiming
to be the mother of the same child.
    Bring me a sword said the king; and a sword was brought into the kings presence.
    “Cut the living child in two,” the king said, and give half to one. half to the other.” At
    this the woman who was the mother of the living child addressed the king, for she burned
    with pity for her son. If it please you. my lord” she said, “let them give her the child; only
    do not let them think of
The Awakening of the Sleeping King as a Judgment of Paris (Thomas Aquinas |pseud.],
“De Alchemia," 16th century. Leiden, Bibliothek der Rijksuniversiteit. Cod. Vossianus
29, fol. 78. Reprinted in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy.)



  killing it!” But the other said, “He shall belong to neither of us. Cut him up.”
  I hen the king gave his decision. “Give the child to the first woman.” he said, “and do
  not kill him. She is his mother.” All Israel came to hear of the judgement the king
  had pronounced, and held the king in awe. recognising that he posse ssed divine
  wisdom for dispensing justice. (I Kings 3:24 28, JB)

  A living whole may not be carved up into equal portions in order to satisfy opposing
  standpoints. This is a danger for one who knows the theory of the union of opposites
  but not its living reality. A striking image of scparaiio gone wrong is found in canto
  28 of Dante's Inferno.
in   which the sowers of discord are subject to eternal mutilation by sharp blades
(see figure 7-8):
          No cask without an end stave or a head E‟er gaped so wide as one shade I
                                             beheld,
                        Cloven from chin to where the wind is voided.
                          Between his legs his entrails hung in coils;
         The vitals were exposed to view, and too That sorry paunch which changes
                                          food to filth.
          While I stood all absorbed in watching him He looked at me and stretched
                                        his breast apart,
                          Saying: “Behold, how 1 now split myself!
              Behold, how mutilated is Mahomet!
              In front of me the weeping Ali goes,
                       His face cleft through from forelock to the chin;
              And all the others that you see about
              Fomenters were of discord and of schism:




       o ..                           FIGURE 7 8
              smatics (Doré, Illustrations for Dante's Divine Comedy.)
                   And that is why they are so gashed asunder.
                        “A demon stands behind here, unrelenting,
                   Who tricks us cruelly; for every one Must taste again the
                   keenness of his blade When he has trod the path of anguish
                   round;
                   And all the wounds are healed and well again Ere one of us
                   may pass once more before him .”14
   This passage reminds me of certain people who have nothing but the sharp blade of
rational intellect with which to understand their tender and sensitive soul -life. Their
self-examination is a perpetual torture of self-dissection.
   Measurement, numbering, weighing, and quantitative consciousness in general belong
to the operation of separatio. So, likewise, do applied arithmetic, the geometrical imagery
of lines, planes, and solids, and the surveyor‟s and navigator‟s procedures of setting
boundaries, measuring distances, and establishing locations within a system of
coordinates. Thus, compass, ruler, square, scales, sextant, and plumb line all pertain to
separatio, as do clocks and other modes of temporal reckoning. The very categories of
space and time, the foundation of conscious existence, are t he products of separatio (see
figure 7-9).
   The ancients held in high esteem their newly discovered insights regarding numbers,
measurement, and relations between quantities. Proportion and the mean between
extremes evoked particular fascination. According to Plato‟s account, the Demiurge
created the world by means of proportion .15 The early geometers attached special
significance to an ideal proportion achieved by the so-called golden section. This is done
by bisecting a line of given magnitude in such a way that the lesser part is to the greater
part as the greater part is to the whole. Thus, if a line of length c is bisected into a
shorter part a and a longer part   b,   the proportion will be a / b = b / c; b will be the so-called
golden mean. This proportion was considered to be the most beautiful one.
   The golden section is a very interesting separatio symbol. It expresses the idea that
there is a particular way to separate the opposites that will create a third thing (the
proportion or mean between them) of great value. The value is indicated by the term
golden and by the presumed beauty of the proport ion. The same image of the mean was
used by Aristotle in an ethical context to define the nature of virtue. He writes: “Moral
virtue is a mean. It is a mean between two vices, the one involv ing cxccss, the other
deficiency. It is such because its character is to aim at what is intermediate in passions
and in actions _________________________________________ Hence also it is no


»„Dante. The Divine Comedy, tram. Lawrence Grant White, p. 49.
" h m a r u t . 31b 32c. in The Collet led Dialogues, p. 1163.
              FIGURE 7 9 The Alchemist as Geometer (Maier, A i ulani a
                                 Fugiens. 1618.)



easy task to be good. For in everything it is no easy task to find the middle, e.g.,
to find the middle of a circle is not for everyone but for him who knows .”16
   The image of the golden mean can be understood psychologically as a
symbolic expression of the ego‟s relation to the Self. This accounts for the
numinosity of the idea of the golden section to the ancients. This slender
geometric parable contains the same mystery as the dogma of the Christian
Trinity.
   Not only is virtue associated with a mean or balance between the opposites,
but also law (jus) and justice. The balance in the hand of the traditional
personification of Justice indicates that justice is a bal ance between the
opposites (see figure 7-10). Nature is just, but the coming of consciousness splits
the opposites apart and is a crime, according to the myths. Anaximander says,
“Things perish into those things out of which they have their birth, accordin g to
that which is ordained; for they give reparation to one another and pay the
penalty of their injustice accord-


“Aristotle, Niconwchean Ethics, in The Basic Works of Aristotle.
                                                                   p. 963.
                                 SEP A HA TIO




                                 FIGURE 7 10 Justice
                                  (Marseilles Tarot.)



ing lo the disposition of time .'*17 Cornford interprets this to mean that “injustice
was committed by the very fact of their birth into separate existence. The manifold
world, in Anaximander‟s view, can arise only by robbery and misappropriation .”18
In other words, the separation of the opposites is the original crime, and justice
can be served only by their reconciliation. This is achieved by death or perhaps,
alternatively, by individuation.


 C ited in Cornford. From Religion to Philosophy, p. 8.


 •Ibid . p. 10
     Just as the establishment of limit, measure, and line brings order out of chaos, so
     a loss of boundaries can reverse the process. Emerson describes such a situation
     in the following lines from his poem “Uriel.” Uriel addressed the gods and
                         Gave his sentiment divine Against the being of
                         a line.
                         “Line in nature is not found;
                         Unit and universe are round;
                         In vain produced, all rays return;
                         Evil will bless, and ice will burn.”
                         As Uriel spoke with piercing eye,
                         A shudder ran around the sky;
                         The stern old war-gods shook their heads,
                         The seraphs frowned from myrtle-beds;
                         Seemed to the holy festival The rash word
                         boded ill to all;
                         The balance-beam of Fate was bent;
                         The bounds of good and ill were rent;
                         Strong Hades could not keep his own.
                         But all slid to confusion .19
     Robert Frost‟s poem “Mending Wall” takes up the same theme —that is, the
     conflict between the author's sentiment, “Something there is that doesn‟t love a
     wall,” and his neighbor‟s idea that “Good fences make good neighbors ."20 Too
     much concern with separatio constellates its opposite, coniunctio, and Mercurius
     reverses himself from Logos -Cutter to Eros-Glue.
     Another aspect of separatio is conveyed by the term "extractio." Extraction is a
     particular case of separation. Ruland says, “Extraction is the separati on of the
     essential part from its body .”21 A graphic description of extractio is presented in
     this recipe: “Go to the waters of the Nile and there you will find a stone that has
     a spirit (pneuma). Take this, divide it, thrust in your hand and draw out its heart;
     for its soul (psyche) is in its heart .”22
     The image of extraction from a stone is found also in Ripley:
                And of this separation I find a like figure Thus spoken
                by the prophet in the Psalmody.
                God brought out of a stone a flood of water pure.
                And out of the hardest stone oil abundantly:




                  Selected Writings of Ralph
•‟Emerson, “Uriel.” in
Waldo Emerson,      Complete
“Frost, “Mending Wall," in   p. 764 Poems of

Rohen          Frost, p. 47.
 Ruland, A Lexicon
2l
                         of Alchemy, p. 139.
Cited by Jung. Psychology and Alchemy. CW
M



12. par. 405.
                     Right so of our precious stone if thou be witty.
             Oil incombustible and water thou shalt draw ,25
   This text probably refers to Psalms 8:15(RSV): “He cleft rocks in the wilderness,
and gave them drink abundantly as from the deep. He made streams come out of the
rock, and caused waters to flow down like rivers" (see figure 7 -11). The other
reference may be to Job 29:5-7 (RSV): “When the Almighty was yet with me...when
my steps were washed with milk and the rock poured out for me streams of oil.”
   These texts that speak of the extraction of spirit, water, and oil from a stone are
expressing paradoxical, miraculous events and thus refer to the Self. The miraculous
agent is the Philosophers* Stone, which is identified with Yahweh by the biblical
associations. When the stony facts of the world yield living meaning (as in events of
synchronicity), one glimpses the goal of the opus. In order for this to happen, spirit,
meaning, and libido must be extracted from matter —that is, from the concrete
objects of our yearning.
   The separation of spirit and matter is an important feature of many religions and
philosophies. For instance, the thirteenth chapter of the




   Bayerischc Staatsbibliothck, Clm. 8201, fol. 86v. Reprinted in Evans, Medieval
                                     Drawings.)


 >'A»hmok.   cd . Theatrum   Chcmlcum Uritannicum, p. 139
      Bhagavad-Gita is entitled “The Book of Religion by Separation Matter and
      Spirit” and concludes with these verses:
                  That Ultimate, High Spirit, Uncreate,
                  Unqualified, even when it entereth flesh Taketh no
                  stain of acts, worketh in naught!
                  Like to th‟ etherial air, pervading all,
                  Which, for sheer subtlety, avoideth taint,
                  The subtle Soul sits everywhere, unstained:
                  Like to the light of the all-piercing sun (Which is not
                  changed by aught it shines upon)
                  The Soul‟s light shineth pure in every place;
                  And they who, by such eye of wisdom, see How
                  Matter, and what deals with it, divide;
                  And how the Spirit and the flesh have strife,
                  Those wise ones go the way which leads to Life !24
     In the texts previously cited, separatio has been described as the separation of
 the fixed earth from the fleeing spirit, the subtle from the dense, and the spirit
 from the stone that was imprisoning it. Another expression for it is the se paration
 of the soul from the body. For example, Kelly speaks of “when the soul of gold
 has been separated from its body, or when the body, in other words, has been
 dissolved ."25 The separation of the soul from the body is synonymous with death .26
 For instance, Plato says, “We believe, do we not, that death is the separation of
 the soul from the body, and that the state of being dead is the state in which the
 body is separated from the soul and exists alone by itself and the soul is separated
 from the body and exists alone by itself .”27
     As indicated in the last chapter, separatio is closely connected to the
 symbolism of mortificatio. which means that separatio may be experienced as death.
 The extraction of the spirit from the stone or the soul from the body corresponds
 to the extraction of meaning or psychic value from a particular, concrete object or
 situation. The body—that is, the concrete manifestation of the psychic content —
 then dies. This corresponds to the withdrawal of a projection, which, if sizable,
 entails a mourning process. Thus, the death of a loved one is an aspect of indi -
 viduation. The death of a parent, a sibling, a child, a lover, or a spouse is an
 individuation crisis that challenges elementary states of identifi cation and
 participation mystique. The ego‟s unconscious connection




24The      Song Celestial or
Bhagavad-Gita.
»Kelly.  The Alchemical  p. 121. Writings of

Edward
»„Jung.  The Practice
             Kelly. PP    of
                        133


Psychotherapy.
»‟Plato,                 CW 16. 1:223ff.
         Phaedo. 64c. in Plato    fig       7
with the Self is embedded in these primary identifications, and therefore the
occasion of such a death is crucial. Either it will lead to an increased realization of
 the Self, or, if the potential for consciousness is aborted, then negative, regressive,
 and even fatal effects may follow. It is not unusual, after a major bereavement, for
 the surviving one to die soon after by suicide, accident, or fatal illness.
   The images of widow, widower, or orphan belong to this symbolism. 2 * They are
separated ones who are on their way to the “indivisible.” The ancient Greek
philosophers were preoccupied with the idea of an indi visible magnitude (atomon
megethos), which might be reached by an infinite series of divisions. The goal of
separado is to reach the indivisible—that is, the individual .29 For Anaxagoras, the
one indivisible entity is Nous, which also initiates the process of separaiio. I quote
in full his important Fragment 12 (Diels):
   All other things partake in a portion of everything, while Nous is infinite and
   self-ruled, and is mixed with nothing, but is alone, itself by itself. For if it were
   not by itself, but were mixed with anything else, it would partake in all things if
   it were mixed with any; for in everything there is a portion of everything, as has
   been said by me in what goes before, and the things mixed with it would hinder
   it, so that it would have power over nothing in the same way that it has now
   being alone by itself. For it is the thinnest of all things and the purest, and it has
   all knowledge about everything and the greatest strength; and Nous has power
   over all things, both greater and smaller, that have life. And Nous had power
   over the whole revolution, so that it began to revolve in the beginning. And it
   began to revolve first from a small beginning; but the revolution now extends
   over a larger space, and will extend over a larger still. And all the things that are
   mingled together and separated off and distinguis hed are all known by Nous.
   And Nous set in order all things that were to be, and all things that were and are
   not now and that are, and this revolution in which now revolve the stars and the
   sun and the moon, and the air and the aether that are separated o ff. And this
   revolution caused the separating off, and the rare is separated off from the
   dense, the warm from the cold, the light from the dark, and the dry from the
   moist. And there are many portions in many things. But no thing is altogether
   separated off nor distinguished from anything else except Nous. And all Nous is
   alike, both the greater and the smaller; while nothing else is like anything else,
   but each single thing is and was most manifestly those things of which it has
   most in it.»
   The Nous of Anaxagoras can be understood psychologically as the Self in its
dynamic aspect, which is both the source and goal of the separaiio operation.




•■Jung.    Mvsierlum                            W
                                  Conluncilonls. C    14. pars. Off,
~i he word “individual" is cognate with the word “widow." See Ed inger, Ego and Arche   type.
  P   I»‟

»Burnet.   Earli Orrrk Philosophy,                        pp. 259f.
    A very interesting separalio text is found in Hippolytus‟ account of the
doctrine of Basilides, the Gnostic:
   All the events in our Lord‟s life occurred... he says, in order that Jesus might
   become the first-fruits of the distinction of the different orders (of created
   objects) that has been confused together. For when the world had been
   divided into an Ogdoad, which is the head of the entire world... and int o a
   Hebdomad... the Demiurge of subjacent entities, and into this order of
   creatures (that prevails) amongst us, where exists Formlessness, it was
   requisite that the various orders of created objects that had been confounded
   together should be distinguished by a separating process performed by
   Jesus....Jesus, therefore, became the first -fruits of the distinction of the
   various orders of created objects, and his Passion took place for not any other
   reason than the distinction that was thereby brought about i n the various
   orders of created objects that had been confounded together .11

    This text takes on special importance because Jung used a portion of it as a
motto for his book Aion. It suggests the interesting psychological idea that
Christ‟s Passion brings about a separation of personal and archetypal contents
(“various orders of created objects”). This is reminiscent of another separalio
image in the Gospel of Luke in which Jesus says, “I watched Satan fall like
lightning from heaven” (10:18 JB). Jung says about this passage: “In this vision
a metaphysical event has become temporal: it indicates the historic and —so far
as we know—final separation of Yahweh from his dark son. Satan is banished
from heaven and no longer has any opportunity to inveigle his fat her into
dubious undertakings ."32
    The advent of Christian symbolism brought with it a decisive sepa ration of
the opposites, good and evil, in the Godhead. Christ offered himself as a
sacrifice (first-fruits) to appease the wrathful side of Yahweh and ther eby
brought about the separation between Yahweh and Satan (see figure 7 -12). At
the same time, according to the Gnostic text, there occurred a “distinction in the
various orders of created objects that had been confounded together." I take this
to mean that Christ‟s Passion purged the human ego by separating personal from
transpersonal contents, which had been confounded together in an inflated
mixture.
    Another powerful separalio document has also been expressed in the name of
Basilides, namely, Jung‟s inspired writing entitled. “Seven Sermons to the
Dead.” The relevant portion is as follows:
             Our very nature is distinctiveness. If we are not true to this nature we do not
    distinguish ourselves enough. Therefore must we make distinctions of qualities What
        is the harm, ye ask. in not distinguishing oneself? If we do not distinguish, we get
                                 beyond our own nature, away from crcatura. We fall into




"Hippolytus, "The Refutation of All Heresies." in The Ante-Nuene Father* 5:109 '»Jung,

Psychology und Religion. C W II. P ar 650.
FIGURE 7 12 Cruciii*'on and Last Judgement (H. Van Eyck. New York, The
 Metr opolitan Museum of Art. Reprinted in Masterpieces of Painting in the
                     Metropolitan Museum of Art.)
   indistinctiveness, which is the other quality of the pleroma. We fall
   into the pleroma itself and cease to be creatures. We are given over to
   dissolution in the nothingness. This is the death of the creature.
   Therefore we die in such measure as we do not distinguish. Hen ce the
   natural striving of the creature goeth towards distinctiveness, fighteth
   against primeval, perilous sameness. This is called the PRINCIPIUM
   INDIVIDUATIONIS . This principle is the essence of the creature. From this
   you can see why indistinctiveness and nondistinction are a great danger
   for the creature.
        We must, therefore, distinguish the qualities of the pleroma. The
   qualities are PAIRS OF OPPOSITES , such as—
                        The Effective and the Ineffective.
                        Fullness and Emptiness.
                        Living and Dead.
                        Difference and Sameness.
                        Light and Darkness.
                        The Hot and the Cold.
                        Force and Matter.
                        Time and Space.
                        Good and Evil.
                        Beauty and Ugliness.
                        The One and the Many, etc.
        The pairs of opposites are qualities of the pleroma which are not,
   because each balanceth each. As we are the pleroma itself, we also
   have all these qualities in us. Because the very ground of our nature is
   distinctiveness, therefore we have these qualities in the name and sign
   of distinctiveness. which meaneth—
        1. These qualities are distinct and separate in us one from the other,
        therefore they are not balanced and void, but are effective. Thus
        are we the victims of the pairs of opposites. The pleroma is rent in
        us.
   2. The qualities belong to the pleroma, and only in the name and sign
        of distinctiveness can and must we possess or live them. We must
        distinguish ourselves from qualities. In the pleroma they are
        balanced and void; in us not. Being distinguished from them
        delivereth us.
   When we strive after the good or the beautiful, we thereby forget our
   own nature, which is distinctiveness, and we are delivered over to the
   qualities of the pleroma, which are pairs of opposites. We labor to
   attain to the good and the beautiful, yet at the same time we also lay
   hold of the evil and the ugly, since in the pleroma these ar e one with
   the good and the beautiful. When, however, we remain true to our own
   nature, which is distinctiveness, we distinguish ourselves from the
   good and the beautiful, and, therefore, at the same time, from the evil
   and the ugly. And thus we fall not into the pleroma. namely, into
   nothingness and dissolution .33
    A profound expression of the separatio archetype is encountered in the
symbolism of the Last Judgment. The notion of a postmortem judgment is
found in almost all cultures. Psychologically, this i dea can be understood
as a projection into the afterlife of an anticipated en counter with the Self
that will
»Jung,    determine
       Memories.      whether
                 Dreams.           or(New
                         Reflections  not York:
                                          one has   reached
                                                Vintage. 1963) Appendix 5. pp. 380ff.
    (This appendix is missing from the hard-cover edition.)
the condition of indivisibility. According to ancient Egyptian religion, the
soul of the deceased was weighed on a balance against a feather signifying
Maat, the Goddess of Truth. If it balanced, the deceased was escorted
victoriously into the presence of Osiris. If not, the soul was fed to a waiting
monster (see figure 7-13).
   The Gospels present another version of separatio at the Last Judgement.
“When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be
gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, but the goats on the left” (Matt. 25:31 -33, AV).
   The text informs us further that the sheep will inherit the kingdom, whereas
the goats will be sent into everlasting fire. Again, this can be understood as
an encounter with the Self transferred to the afterlife. It is as though the Last
Judgment separates the completed ones from the incomplete. The incomplete
ones are subjected to further calcinatio and perhaps other operations (see
figure 7-14).
   In spite of the apparent finality of the Egyptian and Christian versions of
the Last Judgement, according to alchemy, separatio is not a final process. It
is described as a beginning or intermediate operation that is a
                                 FIGURE 7 14                  | 5t h century. Bour-
The Archangel Michael Weighing Souls (Van der   ey ^   Judgcm cnt   of
                                         ran
gogne. Hospice de Beaume. Reprinted in
                                    Dead.)
   I
                                            SEP A RATIO                                             209

prerequisite for the greater coniunctio. The Aurora Consurgens says, “...a certain
purification of things precedeth the work of perfect prepa ration, which by some is
called administration or cleansing (munclifi- caiio), by others rectification, and by some
it is called washing (ablutio) or separation .”34 Kelly quotes Avicenna: “Purify husband
and wife separately, in order that they may unite more intimately; for if you do not
purify them, they cannot love each other .”35 These texts state that separatio must
precede coniunctio, and they also speak of it as a cleansing operation. This corresponds
psychologically to the fact that attitudes contaminated by unconscious complexes give
one the distinct impression of being soiled or dirty. Kelly says:
   When the soul of gold has been separated from its body, or when the body, in other
   words, has been dissolved, the body of the Moon should
   be watered with its proper menstruum and reverberated _________ For unless the
   moon or Earth is properly prepared and entirely emptied of its soul, it will not be fit
   to receive the Solar Seed; but the more thoroughly the earth is cleansed of its
   impurity and earthiness, the more vigorous it will be in the fixation of its ferment.
   This earth or moon of the Sages is the trunk upon which the solar branch of the
   Sages is engrafted .36
   The product of the cleansing of the earth is the so-called “white foliated earth .”37
This is then brought together with the purified “sun” or “gold” principle by the recipe:
“Sow your gold in white earth .”38 The two protagonists—sun and moon, husband and
wife, earth and spirit— stand for all the pairs of opposites. They must be thoroughly
cleansed from contamination with each other, which means diligent and pro longed
scrutiny of one‟s complexes. When the separatio is completed, then the purified
opposites can be reconciled in the coniunctio, which is the goal of the opus.




“von I ran/. Aurora Ctmturgeru, pp. 94ff.
"Kelly, the Alchemical Writings oj Edward Kelly, p. 35.
*lbid., pp. I33f<
"Cued in Jung. Mysterlum Coniunctlonls, CW 14. par. 154 n. 181.
■ M.ucr. Atalanta f ugtrn*. tiled by Head in Prelude to Chemestrv. facing p. 57 See Figure 4-10. P• 106.
       *8 C onmnctio 3                               -   »




                                              Historically, as
     he CONIUNCTIO is the culmination of the opus.

T     well as psychologically, it has both an extraverted and an introverted
aspect. The alchemists‟ fascination with the coniunctio on the extraverted
side promoted a study of the miracle of chemical combination and led
to modern chemistry and nuclear physics. On the introverted side, it
generated interest in unconscious imagery and processes, leading to
twentieth-century depth psychology.
   The alchemists had the opportunity to witness in their laboratories many
examples of both chemical and physical combination in which two substances
come together to create a third substance with different properties. These
experiences provided important images for alchemical fantasy. An impressive
example of physical combination is the fusion of molten metals and, in
particular, the formation of amalgams by the union of mercury with other metals.
The common alchemical image of the sun and moon entering the mercurial
fountain had its origin in the dissolving of gold and silver in mercury. In the
realm of chemical combination an impressive example available to the
alchemists is the union of mercury and sulphur to make red mercuric sulphide
(Hg + S — HgS). This chemical reaction may have been the original laboratory
image that underlay the idea of the red stone of the philosophers.
   In attempting to understand the rich and complex symbolism of the coniunctio
it is advisable to distinguish two phases: a lesser coniunctio and a greater. The
lesser coniunctio is a union or fusion of substances that are not yet thoroughly
separated or discriminated. It is always followed by death or mortiftcatio. The
greater coniunctio, on the other hand, is the goal of the opus, the supreme
accomplishment. In actual reality these two aspects are combined with each
other. The experience of the coniunctio is almost always a mixture of the lesser
and the greater aspect». However, for descriptive purposes it is helpful to
distinguish the
                                The Lesser C ONIUNCT / O
The union of opposites that have been imperfectly separated character -
izes the nature of the lesser coniunctio. The product is a contaminated
mixture that must be subjected to further procedures. The product of the
lesser coniunctio is pictured as killed, maimed, or fragmented (an overlap
with solutio and mortificatio symbolism). For example, referring to the
marriage of Mother Beya and her son Gabritius, a text reads: “But this
marriage, which was begun with the expression of great joyfulness,
ended in the bitterness of mourning. „Within the flower itself there grows
the gnawing canker Where honey is, there gall, where swelling breast,
the chancre.‟ For, „when the son sleeps with the mother, she kills him
with the stroke of a viper .’”1 Here we are in the familiar territory of the
so-called Oedipus complex. However, for the alchemist, the mother was
the prima materia and brought about healing and rejuvenation as well as
death. This image of the coniunctio refers to one phase of the
transformation process, death, to be followed, one hopes, by rebirth.
Certainly the dangerous aspect of the coniunctio is pictured here. The
immature son-ego is eclipsed and threatened with destruction when it
naively embraces the maternal unconscious. However, other images
indicate that such an eclipse can be inseminating and rejuvenating.
  Another text, quoted earlier, speaks of the woman who slays her
husband while he is in her embrace:
     Nevertheless the Philosophers have put to death the woman who slays her hus band,
     for the body of that woman is full of weapons and poison. Let a grave be dug for
     that dragon, and let that woman be buried with him, he being chained fast to that
     woman; and the more he winds and coils himself about her, the more will he be cut
     to pieces by the female weapons which are fashioned in the body of the woman.
     And when he sees that he is mingled with the limbs of the woman, he will be
     certain of death, and will be changed wholly into blood. But when the
     Philosophers see him changed into blood, they leave him a few days in the sun,
     until his softness is consumed, and the blood dries, and they find that poison. What
     then appears, is the hidden wind .2

  This text needs elucidation. As with dreams, the images arc fluid and
flow into one another. Who is the dragon that is to be chained fast to the
woman? He is apparently the husband who is slain by the woman. The
sequence of the text suggests that as the husband begins to lie with the
woman he turns into a dragon; or, alternatively, as they lie toge ther, the
dragon aspect of the instinctual relationship (lust) is constellated.




'Quoted by Jung, Mysterium Coniunctiortis. CW 14. par. 14
2
    lbid., par. IS.
The ensuing coniunctio is a dismemberment of the dragon (primitive desirousness)
and is followed by its transformation into spirit (hidden wind). (See figure 8 -1.)
   The passage immediately preceding the above-quoted text prove* that the woman
                                 whose embrace kills is associated with lust. It reads:
   In the same way that woman, fleeing from her own children, with whom she
   lives, although partly angry, yet does not brook being overcome, not that her
   husband should possess her beauty, who furiously loves her, and keeps awake
   contending with her, till he shall have carnal intercourse with her, and God make
   perfect the foetus, when he multiplies children to himself according to his
   pleasure. His beauty, therefore, is consumed by fire who does not approach his
   wife except by reason of lust .3

                    Lust as a lace rater brings to mind Shakespeare‟s great Sonnet 129:
                Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in
                action; and, till action, lust Is perjured, murd‟rous,
                bloody, full of blame.
                Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;




                                              FIGURE 8 I
       Jhc Dragon Kills the Woman and She Kills It (Maicr, Atalania Fugiens. 1618.)



  ■Waiic. Iran* . Turha Philotophorum,   p. 178, dictum 39.
                 Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight;
                 Past reason hunted, and no sooner had,
                 Past reason hated as a swallowed bait On purpose
                 laid to make the taker mad;
                 Mad in pursuit, and in possession so;
                 Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
                 A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe,
                 Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
                    All this the world well knows, yet none knows well
                    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
    This is Shakespeare‟s negative coniunctio sonnet and should be contrasted with
his positive Sonnet 116, quoted later in this chapter. Note the play of opposites so
characteristic of coniunctio symbolism: enjoyed—despised, hunted—hated,
reason—madness, bliss—woe, heaven—hell.
    The woman who slays her husband with her embrace appears in the apocryphal
Book of Tobit. Sarah, who is to be married to Tobias, has had seven previou s
husbands. Every wedding night, when the husband retired to bed with his bride,
the demon Asmodeus killed him. Seven successive husbands had died that way.
Raphael, his guardian angel, gives Tobias specific instructions on how to deal with
the danger. On the way to his bride‟s house, Tobias encounters a huge fish that
leaps out of the water at him. He is instructed to kill the fish and extract its heart,
liver, and gall. On his wedding night he must burn the heart and liver as an incense
offering to protect him from the evil demon. The gall is to be applied to the eyes
of his blind father in order to restore his sight.
    The symbolic idea behind this story is that the coniunctio leads to death—
extinction of consciousness—until the energy of instinctual desirousness (fish) has
been extracted from its original form and transformed into spirit (incense)—that
is, conscious understanding. This interpretation is supported by a variant passage
in the Vulgate. “Then the angel Raphael said to him, „Listen and 1 will show you
those whom the demon has power to overcome. They are those who at the time of
their marriage put God out of their thoughts and so abandon themselves to their
instincts that they have no more reason than horse or mule‟” (Tobit 6:16^)*
    The gall of the fish, when applied to the eyes of Tobias‟ blind father, restores
his sight. Gall is bitter, corresponding to the bitterness of frustrated desire. But the
experience of bitterness, properly understood (applied to the eyes), brings wisdom.
While discussing the symbolism of salt, Jung has made relevant comments about
bitterness, as quoted earlier:




4
    The Jerusalem Bible, p. 613.
    ...the most outstanding properties of salt are bitterness and wisdom . The factor
    common to both, however incommensurable the two ideas may seem, is,
    psychologically, the function of feeling. Tears, sorrow and disappointment are
    bitter, but wisdom is the comforter in all psychic suffering. Indeed, bitterness and
    wisdom form a pair of alternatives: where there is bitterness wisdom is lacking,
    and where wisdom is there can be no bitterness. Salt, as the carrier of this fateful
    alternative, is coordinated with the nature of
    woman ___ The novilunium (darkness) of woman is a source of countless
    disappointments for man which easily turn to bitterness, though they could equally
    well be a source of wisdom if they were understood .3

    The lesser coniunctio occurs whenever the ego identifies with con tents emerging
from the unconscious. This happens almost regularly in the course of the analytic
process. The ego is exposed successively to identifications with the shadow, the
anima/ animus, and the Self. Such contaminated coniunctios must be followed by
mortificatio and further separaiio. A similar sequence occurs in the extraverted aspect
of the process. The ego identifies with certain individuals, groups, institutions, and
collectivities (individual and collective transferences). These identi fications are
contaminated mixtures, containing both the individual‟s potential for noble loyalties
and object love and also unregenerate desires for power and pleasure. They must
undergo further purification before the greater coniunctio is possible.



                                         The Greater CONIUNCTIO

    The goal of the opus is the creation of a miraculous entity variously called the
“Philosophers‟ Stone,” “Our Gold,” “Penetrating Water,” “Tincture,” and so forth. It
is produced by a final union of the purified opposites, and, because it combines the
opposites, it mitigates and rectifies all one -sidedncss. Thus the Philosophers‟ Stone is
described as “a stone having power to give life to all mortal, to purify all corrupt, to
soften all hard, and harden all soft bodies .”6 Again, the Stone (personified as the
Sapientia Dei) says of itself: “I am the mediatrix of the elements, making one to agree
with another; that which is warm I make cold, and the reverse; that which is dry I
make moist, and the reverse; that which is hard I soften, and the reverse . I am the end
and my beloved is the beginning. I am the whole work and all science is hidden in
me .”7
    As the Stone is being prepared, the material is subjected to re peated reversals and
turnings-into-the-opposite. The Turba says: “For

'Jung. My»tertum Conlunctlonls, CW 14, par«. 330 332 *P 1gulu*. A Golden and
Blessed Casket of Nature's Marvels, p. 301. von Han/. Aurttra C on*urgent, n. J4J
the dements, being diligently cooked in the fire, rejoicc, 2nd are changed into
different natures, because the liquefied... becomes not-liquefied, the humid
becomes dry, the thick body becomes a spirit, and the fleeing spirit becomes
strong and fit to do battle against the fire. Whence the Philosopher saith:
Convert the elements and thou shalt find what thou seekest. But to convert the
elements is to make the moist dry and the fugitive fixed.”*
   Another text says: “Now that the clearness may be manifest through out
without obscurity...the body must be repeatedly opened and made
thin after its fixation and dissolved and putrefied ________ It is purified by
separation, and is dissolved, digested, and coagulated, sublimed, incer - ated,
and fixed by the reciprocated action of its own proper Identity, as agent and
patient, alternating to improve" (Italics mine ).9
   The psychotherapeutic process is likewise an walternating to improve ” One
is thrown back and forth between the opposites almost intermina bly. But very
gradually a new standpoint emerges that allows the opposites to be
experienced at the same time. This new standpoint is the coniunctio, and it is
both releasing and burdensome. Jung says: “The one -after-another is a
bearable prelude to the deeper knowledge of the side -by-side, for this is an
incomparably more difficult problem. Again, the view that good and evil are
spiritual forces outside us, and that man is caught in the conflict between
them, is more bearable by far than the insight that the opposites are the
ineradicable and indispensable precondition of all psychic life, so much so that
life itself is guilt .”10
   The term “Philosophers‟ Stone” is itself a union of opposites. Philos ophy,
love of wisdom, is a spiritual endeavor, whereas a stone is crude, hard,
material reality. The term thus suggests something like the con crete, practical
efficacy of wisdom or consciousness. It is “a stone which is not a stone” about
which Ruland says, “The Stone which is not a stone is a substance which is
petrine as regards its efficacy and virtue but not as regards its substance.”"
The alchemical Philosophers' Stone is thus a forerunner of the modern
discovery of the reality of the psyche. Jung says: “What unconscious nature
was ultimately aiming at when she produced the image of the lapis can be seen
most clearly in the notion that it originated in matter and in man ... .Christ‟s
spirituality was too high and man‟s naturalness was too low. In the image of..
the




                                    .
  "Waite, Iran*., Turba Phllaxophorum p. 190, dictum 65.
   ■'Scholium to “The Golden Treatise of Hermes." quoted in Atwood. Herman Philosophy and
     Alchemy, p. I I5n.
  '“Jung, Myuerium Conluncllonb. C W 14. par. 206.
  "Ruland, A Lexicon oj Alchemy, p. 189.
lapis the „flesh‟ glorified itself in its own way; it would not transform itself into
spirit but on the contrary, „fixed‟ the spirit in stone .”'2 A major symbolic image
for the coniunctio is the marriage and/or sexual intercourse between Sol and
Luna or some other personification of the opposites (see figure 8 -2). This image
in dreams refers to the coniunctio, either the lesser or the greater, depending on
the context. An impressive example is a dream published by Esther Harding:




                                        FIGURE 8 2
 ( oniuncllo in Ihc Alchemical Vc*»cl (17th ccntury. Paris, Bibliothèque de 1‟Arsenal. MS
 975. fol. 13 Reprinted in Dcrola, The Secret An of Alchemy.)



  Jun*. Alchemical SiuJlrt. CW 13. par. 127
   A woman dreamed that she went into an underground cavern that was divided into
   rooms containing stills and other mysterious-look- ing chemical apparatus. Two
   scientists were working over the final process of a prolonged series of experiments,
   which they hoped to bring to a successful conclusion with her help. The end product
   was to be in the form of golden crystals, which were to be separatedfrom the mother
   liquid resulting from the many previous solutions and distillations. While the chemists
   worked over the vessel, the dreamer and her lover lay together in an adjoining room,
   their sexual embrace supplying the energy essential for the crystallization of the
   priceless golden substance.


  This dream has a close parallel in an alchemical text: “Do ye not see that the
complexion of a man is formed out of a soul and a body; thus, also, must ye
conjoin these, because the Philosophers, when they prepared the matters and
conjoined spouses mutually in love with each other, behold there ascended from
them a golden water !”14 The image of sexual intercourse as producing the golden
substance brings up the paradoxical aspect of the ego‟s rel ation to the Self. The
usual formulation is that the Self unites and reconciles the opposites. However,
this dream and the parallel text suggest, as is implicit in all of alchemy, that the
operator—that is, the ego—brings about the union of opposites and thereby
creates the Self, or at least brings it into manifestation. Thus is underscored the
supreme importance of the conscious ego. It must unite the opposites, which is
no easy task. To hold opposites simultaneously is to experience paralysis
amounting to a veritable crucifixion. The symbolism of the cross includes the
union of opposites, and many medieval pictures represent the crucifixion of
Christ as a coniunctio of Sol and Luna (see figure 8-3). Augustine makes an
amazingly explicit identity between the coniunctio and the crucifixion. “Like a
bridegroom Christ went forth from his chamber, he went out with a presage of
his
nuptials into the field of the world ______ He came to the marriage bed of
the cross, and there, in mounting it, he consummated his marriage. And when he
perceived the sighs of the creature, he lovingly gave himself up to the torment in
the place of his bride...and he joined the woman to himself for ever .”15
   A classic and profound coniunctio image is the union of Zeus and Hera in
book XIV of the Iliad. Leading Hera to his secret bower. Zeus says:




‟‟Harding, Psychic Energy: Its Source and Coal. pp. 453 54.
'„Waite, trans., Turbo Philosophorum. p. 134. dictum 42 1 ‟Quoted by Jung,
Mvsierium Coniunctionis, CW 14, P a r - 25» ^
                                   FIGURE 8 3
    I he Crucifixion as a Conlunctio Between Sol and l.una (Late 9th century. Paris,
Bibliothèque Nationale. MS. lat. 257, fol. I2v. Reprinted in Swarzenski, Monument a    of
                                  Romanesque Art.)

              **Nor God. nor mortal shall our joys behold,
              Shaded with clouds, and circumfus'd in gold,
              Not cv'n the Sun. who darts thro‟ Heav'n his rays,
              And whose broad eye th* extended earth surveys."
              Ga/ing he «poke, and kindling at the view.
              Hi* eager arms around the Goddess threw.
              Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours Unbidden
              herbs, and voluntary flowers;
              I hick new-born violets a soft carpet spread.
              And clust'ring lotos swell‟d the rising bed.
              And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,
              And flamy crocus made the mountain glow There
              golden clouds conceal the heav‟nly pair Steep‟d in
              soft joys, and circumfused with air;
                Celestial dews, descending o‟er the ground,
                Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round.
                At length with Love and Sleep‟s soft power oppress‟d,
                The panting Thund‟rer nods, and sinks to rest.*
       The image of a miraculous growth of flowers or vegetation comes up in
dreams as evidence of proximity to the coniunctio. It is not invariably auspicious,
since it can signify inflation for an immature ego.
    Another traditional coniunctio image is the biblical Song of Songs. The rabbis
interpreted it as referring to the marriage of Yahweh and Israel; the church
fathers interpreted it as the marriage of Christ with the church; certain
alchemists interpreted it as representing the alchemical opus (for example,
Aurora Consurgens); and finally, the Jewish kabbalists interpreted it as the union
of Yahweh with his exiled feminine essence, the Shekinah. The Song of Songs
speaks of “love strong as death" ( 8: 6), an allusion to the fact that the coniunctio
is outside of time (see figure 8-4).
    The major coniunctio image in the Christian Scriptures is the “Mar riage of the
Lamb” in Revelation:
       The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her self
       ready.
       (Rev. 19:7. AV)
       And 1 John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from
       God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
       And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying. Behold, the
       tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
       they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and
       be their God. (Rev. 21:2,3, AV)
    This is followed by a detailed description of the new Jerusalem as a
beautiful, bejewelled city in the shape of a mandala. The new (that is, purified)
Jerusalem is the bride of God (the Lamb). Heaven and earth, which were
separated at the beginning of creation, are to be rejoined, healing the split in the
psyche and reconnecting ego and Self (“the tabernacle of God is with men”).
The city as an image of totality reminds us that the city is also the vessel for the
collective transformation of humanity. The process of civilization takes place in
the city (civitas). (See figure 8 5.)
The marriage of heaven and earth represented as Tifereth and Mal - chuth also
appears in the (Cabbala. Rabbi Simon ben Yochai, the reputed author of the
Zohar is said to have described the sacred coniunctio on his deathbed in these
words: “When... the mother is separated and conjoined with the King face to
face in the excellence of the Sabbath, all things become one body. And then the
Holy One blessed be He!— sitteth on His throne, and all things are called the
Complete Name, the Holy Name. Blessed be His Name for ever and unto the
ages

*(XIV, 389-406 Pope tr.)
                                   FIGURE 8 4
   I he C ircle of the Year as a Coniunciio of Sol and l.una (Medieval Drawing.
   Stuttgart. Wurttcmbergischc l.andcsbibliothek, Cod. hist. fol. 415, fol. 17v.
                      Reprinted in Evans, Medieval Drawings.)


of the ages..,, When this Mother is conjoined with the King, all the worlds reccive
blessing, and the universe is found to be in joy .”16 This is a profound vision of the
Unus Mundus whose only equal in modern times is Jung's coniunciio vision. In
Memories, Dreams, Reflections Jung describes his experience of the coniunciio during
convalescence from a grave illness in 1944:
   ILvcrything »round me seemed enchanted. At this hour of the night the nurse
   brought me some food she had warmed - for only then was 1 able to take




„Mathctv tram . Ihr Kabbalah Unveiled, p. 337
                                    FIGURE 8-5
The New Jerusalem as a Coniunctiu of Sol and Luna (The Cloisters Apocalypse, fol. 36. New
                      York, the Metropolitan Museum of Art.)




   any, and I ate with appetite. For a time it seemed to me that she was an old Jewish
   woman, much older than she actually was, and that she was preparing ritual kosher
   dishes for me. When I looked at her, she seemed to have a blue halo around her
   head. I myself was, so it seemed, in the Pardes Rimmonim, the garden of
   pomegranates, and the wedding of Tifereth with Malchuth was taking place. Or else
   I was Rabbi Simon ben Jochai. whose wedding in the afterlife was being celebrated.
   It was the mystic marriage as it appears in the Cabbalistic tradition. 1 cannot tell
   you how wonderful it was. I could only think continually, “Now this is the garden of
   pomegranates! Now this is the marriage of Malchuth with Tifereth!“ I do not know
   exactly what part I played in it. At bottom it was I myself: I was the marriage. And
   my beatitude was that of a blissful wedding.
      Gradually the garden of pomegranates faded away and changed. There followed
   the Marriage of the Lamb, in a Jerusalem festively bedecked. I cannot describe what
   it was like in detail. These were ineffable states of joy. Angels were present, and
   light. 1 myself was the “Marriage of the Lamb.
      That, too, vanished, and there came a new image, the last vision. I walked up a
   wide valley to the end, where a gentle chain of hills began. The valley ended in a
   classical amphitheater. It was magnificently situated in the green landscape. And
   there, in this theater, the hierosgamos was being celebrated. Men and women dancers
   came onstage, and upon a flower-decked couch
   All-father Zeus and Hera consummated the mystic marriage, as it is described in the Iliad.
     All these experiences were glorious. Night after night I floated in a state of purest bliss,
   “thronged round with images of all creation ."'7

   That which goes by the name of love is fundamental to the pheno menology of the
coniunctio. Love is both its cause and effect. The lesser coniunctio derives from love
as concupiscence, whereas transpersonal love (analogous to Plato‟s Heavenly
Aphrodite) both generates and is generated by the greater coniunctio: It has been said
truly that object love is the extraverted aspect of individuation. Object love is
objective love, a love purged of personal desirousness, not one side of a pair of
opposites, but rather beyond the opposites. This transpersonal love is at the root of
all group and social loyalties such as allegiance to family, party, nation, church, and
humanity itself. The extraverted aspect of the coniunctio promotes social interest and
the unity of the human race; the introverted aspect promotes connection with the Self
and the unity of the individual psyche. That which holds things together is adhesive,
thus, in alchemy, “glue,” “gum,” and “resin” are synonyms for the transforming
substance. “This substance, as the life force (vis animans), is likened by another
commentator to the „glue of the world‟ (glutinum mundi) which is the medium
between mind and body and the union of both.” 18
   Beginning with Plato‟s Symposium, some of the world‟s most inspired texts bear
witness to the transpersonal cosmogonic love. Lucretius ex presses the pagan feeling
in the beginning lines of De Rerum Natura:
             Mother of Rome, delight of Gods and men,
             Dear Venus that beneath the gliding stars Makest
             to teem the many-voyaged main And fruitful lands-
             for all of living things Through thee alone are
             evermore conceived,
             Through thee are risen to visit the great sun —
             Before thee. Goddess, and thy coming on,
             Flee stormy wind and massy cloud away,
             For thee the daedal Earth bears scented flowers,
             For thee the waters of the unvexed deep Smile, and
             the hollows of the s 6rene sky Glow with diffused
             radiance for thee!
             For toon as comes the springtime face of day,
             And procreant gales blow from the West unbarred.




      ■Jung. Memories, Dreamt. Reflections, p. 294. '•Jung. Psychology and Alchemy. CW 12. par. 209
          First fowls of air, smit to the heart by thee.
          Foretoken thy approach, O thou Divine,
          And leap the wild herds round the happy fields Or swim the
          bounding torrents. Thus amain.
          Seized with the spell, all creatures follow thee
          Whithersoever thou walkest forth to lead,
          And thence through seas and mountains and swift streams, Through
          leafy homes of birds and greening plains,
          Kindling the lure of love in every breast,
          Thou bringest the eternal generations forth,
          Kind after kind. Since ‟tis thou alone Guidest the Cosmos .19
The classic description of transpersonal love for our era is that of the Apostle
Paul:
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am a noisy gong or a
clanging cymbal. And if I have prophetic powers, and understand all mysteries and all
knowledge, and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not love, 1 am
nothing. If I give away all I have, and if I deliver my body to be burned, but have not
love, I gain nothing.
Love is patient and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love
does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at
wrong, but rejoices in the right. Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all
things, endures all things. (1 Cor. 13:1-7. RSV)
Dante continues the testimony in the description of his vision of eternal light,
which concludes The Divine Comedy (see figures 8-6 and 8-7):
               I saw that in its depths there are enclosed.
               Bound up with love in one eternal book,
               The scattered leaves of all the universe—
               Substance, and accidents, and their relations.
               As though together fused in such a way That what I speak of
               is a single light.




               0 Light Eternal, in Thyself contained!
               Thou only know‟st Thyself, and in Thyself Both known and
               knowing, smilest on Thyself!
               That very circle which appeared in Thee, Conceived as but
               reflection of a light.
               When I had gazed on it awhile, now seemed To bear the
               image of a human face Within itself, of its own coloring—
               Wherefore my sight was wholly fixed on it.
               Like a geometer, who will attempt
               With all his power and mind to square the circle.



‟Lucretius, Of the Nature of Things. PP- 3f.
                                  FIGURE 8-6
               The Heavenly Rose (Doré, Illustrations Jor Dante's Divine Comedy.)


                    Yet cannot find the principle he needs:
                    Just 10 was I. at that phenomenon.
                    I wished to see how image joined to ring,
                          And how the one found place within the other.
                    Too feeble for such flights were my own wings;
                    But by a lightning flash my mind was struck—
                            And thus came the fulfilment of my wish.
                    My power now failed that phantasy sublime:
                            My will and my desire were both revolved.
                    As is a wheel in even motion driven,
                    By Love, which moves the sun and other stars .20
   Three centuries later came Shakespeare‟s peerless description in Sonnet 116:




^OmK. The Divine   Comed v ira», i
                             d>
                              ' 'ran *   La wr c
                                                   "„* Grant White, p. | 88 .
                                FIGURE 8-7
Star Trails Around the Pole (Photo Yerkes Observatory. Reprinted in Neely, A
                            Primer for Star-Gazers.)



            Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit
            impediments; love is not love Which alters when it
            alteration finds.
            Or bends with the remover to remove.
            Oh, no, it is an ever-fixed mark.
            That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
            It is the star to every wand‟ring bark.
            Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
            Love‟s not Time‟s fool, though rosy lips and checks
            Within his bending sickle‟s compass come;
            Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks.
            But bears it out even to the edge of Doom.
            If this be error, and upon me proved.
            1 never writ, nor no man ever loved.
  Jung describes his experience of transpersonal love in these words:
  Eros is a kosmogonos, a creator and father mother of all higher conscious ness. 1
  sometimes feel that Paul‟s words—“Though I speak with the tongues of men
  and of angels, and have not love"—might well be the first condition
  of all cognition and the quintessence of divinity itself. Whatever the learned
  interpretation may be of the sentence "God is Love," the word * affirm the
  complexio oppositorum of the Godhead. In my medical experience as well as in my
  own life I have again and again been faced with the mystery of love,
  and have never been able to explain what it is ______ For we are in the deepest
  sense the victims and the instruments of cosmogonic “love.” I put the word in
  quotation marks to indicate that I do not use it in its connotations of desiring,
  preferring, favoring, wishing, and similar feelings, but as something superior to
  the individual, a unified and undivided whole. Being a part, man cannot grasp
  the whole. He is at its mercy. He may assent to it, or rebel against it; but he is
  always caught up by it and enclosed within it. He is dependent upon it and is
  sustained by it. Love is his light and his darkness, whose end he cannot see.
  “Love ceases not”—whether he speaks with the “tongues of angels,” or with
  scientific exactitude traces the life of the cell down to its uttermost source. Man
  can try to name love, showering upon it all the names at his command, an d still
  he will involve himself in endless self- deceptions. If he possesses a grain of
  wisdom, he will lay down his arms and name the unknown by the more
  unknown, ignolumper ignotius—that is, by the name of God. That is a confession
  of his subjection, his imperfection, and his dependence; but at the same time a
  testimony to his freedom to choose between truth and error .21
                                           ****
   The Philosophers‟ Stone, once created, has the power to transform base matter
into noble. This power is referred to in the texts by the operations of proiectio and
multiplicatio (or augmentatio). Strictly speaking, these operations are performed not
by the alchemist, but by the lapis. These so-called operations are thus really
properties of the Philosophers‟ Stone, which, as a powder or liquid (elixir),
projects itself upon base matter and thereby multiplies itself. A text says: “Alchimy
is a Science, teaching how to transforme any kind of metall into another: and that
by a proper medicine, as it appeareth by many Philosophers‟ Bookes. Alchimy
therefore is a science teaching how to make and compound a certaine medicine,
which is called Elixer, the which when it is cast upon metalls or imperfect bodies,
doth fully perfect them in the verie projection .”22
   The Stone‟s power of multiplicatio is reminiscent of the widow‟s cruse of oil (1
Kings 17:14), the miracle of the loaves and fishes (Matt. 14:17 21). and the
previously quoted miraculous multiplication of flow ers during the coniunctio of
Zeus and Hera.
   The psychological implications of multiplicatio are very interesting. The image
suggests that transformative effects emanate from the activa ted Self in process of
conscious realization. Certainly it is true that all events, no matter how ordinary,
take on import when they participate in

  »Jung. Memories. Dreamt. Reflections, p. 35Jf
  »Quoted by Read. Prelude io Chemistry, p. 24.
the process of individuation. Also, multiplicatio gives us a hint as to how
psychotherapy may work. To some extent, the consciousness of an individual
who is related to the Self seems to be contagious and tends to multiply itself in
others. The / Ching speaks of such a phenomenon:
     Contemplation of the divine meaning underlying the workings of the universe
     gives to the man who is called upon to influence others the means of
     producing like effects. This requires that power in inner concentration which
     religious contemplation develops in great men strong in faith. It enables them
     to apprehend the mysterious and divine laws of life, and by means of
     profoundest inner concentration they give expression to these laws in their
     own persons. Thus a hidden spiritual power emanates from them, influencing
     and dominating others without their being aware of how it happens (See
     figure 8- 8).23
   However, for the patient to be influenced by the psychotherapeutic process,
the ego must be open. This corresponds to the alch emical idea that the material
must be open to receive the effects of the tincture. Paracelsus says, “For if the
tincture is to tinge, it is necessary that the body or material which is to be tinged
should be open, and in a state of flux: for unless this we re so, the tincture could
not operate .”24 In psychotherapy, openness (to the objective psyche) is required
of both patient and therapist. Jung says: “The personalities of doctor and patient
are often infinitely more important for the outcome of the
treatment than what the doctor says and thinks _______ For two personalities
to meet is like mixing two different chemical substances: if there is any
combination at all, both are transformed. In any effective psychological
treatment the doctor is bound to influence the patient; but this influence can only
take place if the patient has a reciprocal influence on the doctor. You can exert
no influence if you are not susceptible to influ ence ."25
   Another feature of the Philosophers' Stone is its tendency to recipro cal
action. This idea appeared in the dream of a man, who, the night before, had
heard a lecture on alchemy. He dreamed that
     a group of people had discovered the alchemists' secret. One aspect of that secret
     was that when alchemical studies are undertaken with the right attitude a
     reciprocity of interest is evoked; that is. when the adept takes an interest in
     alchemy, alchemy lakes an interest in him.
Likewise, an alchemical text says: “Understand ye Sons of Wisdom, the Stone
declares: Protect me, and 1 will protect thee; give me my own.




•"Wilhelm (rans.. The t Ching or Book •>/ Change». p.
M
    Paracclsus, Hermetic and Alchemical Writing* /. 155-
»Jung. The Practice of Psychotherapy. CW 16. par. 163.
                                        FIGURE 8 8
               ohy a* a Mandala. Events in the Life of Opicinus de Canistris Ar-
Autobiograp^.^^ fr o m h l g Conception on March 24, 1296, to Completion ^("urawing on June 3,
1336. (Biblioteca Apostólica Vaticana, MS. Pal. lat. 1993, (nl Hr. Reprinted in Evans,
Medieval Drawings.)
that I may help thee.” 26 The same idea is expressed in Proverbs concerning
wisdom: “Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her and she
shall keep thee. Wisdom is the principle thing; therefore get wisdom: and
with all thy getting get understanding. Exalt her, and she shall promote
thee: she shall bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her" (Prov.
4:6-8, AV).
   Further description of the marvelous powers of the Philosophers‟ Stone
could continue almost indefinitely. 27 The reciprocal action of the Stone is
a suitable stopping place because it is a reminder that paying attention to
the imagery of the objective psyche (such as alchemy) generates
auspicious reciprocal effects. The psychological rule is: the unconscious
takes the same attitude toward the ego as the ego takes toward it. If one
pays friendly attention to the unconscious it becomes helpful to the ego.
Gradually the realization dawns that a mutual opus is being performed. The
ego needs the guidance and direction of the unconscious to have a
meaningful life; and the latent Philosophers‟ Stone, imprisoned in the
prima materia, needs the devoted efforts of the conscious ego to come into
actuality. Together they work on the Great Magistry to create more and
more consciousness in the universe.
                                            ****
     In conclusion, I shall give the final word to the alchemists by quoting in
toto, their most sacred text, The Emerald Tablet of Hermes. It was viewed “as a
kind of supernatural revelation to the „sons of Hermes‟ by the patron of
their „Divine Art.‟ ” 28 According to legend, the original Emerald Tablet was
found in the tomb of Hermes Trismegistus either by Alexander the Great
or, in another version, by Sarah the wife of Abraham. It was at first known
only in Latin, but in 1923 Holmyard discovered an Arabic version. 29 It is
likely that an earlier text was in Greek and, according to Jung, was of
Alexandrian origin. 30 The alchemists treated it with unique veneration,
engraving its statements on their laboratory walls and quot ing it constantly
in their works. It is the cryptic epitome of the alchemical opus, a recipe for
the second creation of the world, the unus mundus.3i




 »•The Golden Treatise of Hermes." in Atwood. Hermetic Philosophy and Alchemy.
 p. 128.
 f‟For further material see Edinger. Ego and Archetype. ch. 10.
 »Read. Prelude to Chemistry, pp. 5If.
 M
  Holmyard. Alchemy, p. 96.
 "•Jung. Mysterium Coniunctionis. CW 14. par. 12.
                           T ABULA S MARAGDINA H ER METIS

1. Verum, sine mendacio, certum et verissimum.
2. Quod est inferius, est sicut quod est superius, et quod est superius, est
sicut quod est inferius, ad perpetranda miracula rei unius.
3. Et sicut omnes res fuerunt ab uno, meditatione unius: sic omnes res
natae fuerunt ab hac una re, adaptatione.
4. Pater eius est Sol, mater eius Luna; portavit illud ventus in ventre suo;
nutrix eius terra est.
5. Pater omnis telesmi totius mundi est hie.
6. Vis eius integra est, si versa fuerit in terram.
7. Separabis terram ab igne, subtile a spisso, suaviter, cum magno
ingenio.
8. Ascendit a terra in coelum, interumque descendit in terram, et recipit
vim superiorum et inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam totius mundi. Ideo
fugiat a te omnis obscuritas.
9. Hie est totius fortitudinis fortitudo fortis; quia vincet omnem sub -
tilem, omnemque solidam penetrabit.
10. Sic mundus creatus est.
11. Hinc adaptationes erunt mirabiles, quarum modus est hie.
12. ltaque vocatus sum HERMES trismegistus, habens tres partes Philosophiae
     totius mundi.
13. Completum est quod dixi de operatione Solis.

                           T HE E MERALD T ABLET   OF   H ERMES

1. Truly, without deception, certain and most true.
2. What is below is like that which is above, and what is above is like
     that which is below, to accomplish the miracles of the one thing.
3. And as all things proceeded from one, through mediation of the one,
     so all things came from this one thing through adaptation.
4. Its father is the sun; its mother the moon; the wind has carried it in its
     belly; its nurse is the earth.
5. This is the father of all, the completion of the whole world.
        6. Its strength is complete if it be turned into (or toward) earth.
7. Separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the dense, gently, with
     great ingenuity.
8. It ascends from the earth to the heaven, and descends again to the
     earth, and receives the power of the above and the below. Thus you
     will have the glory of the whole world. Therefore all darkness will
     flee from you.
     9 Here is the strong power of the whole strength; for it overcomes
     every subtle thing and penetrates every solid.
 10. Thus the world has been created.
 11. From here will come the marvelous adaptations, whose manner this is.
 12. So I am called HERMES TRISMEGISTUS , having the three parts of the
     philosophy of the whole world.
 13. What I have said about the operation of the sun is finished .32



,2
  The Latin text is taken from Jung. E.T.H. Seminars: Alchemy, pp. 55f. The English
translation is taken from the same source with slight changes by comparison with other
versions. In these notes Jung gives a brief psychological commentary on the Emerald Tablet.
