The Power of the Mind:
  The Whole Brain
       Theory
          What is the Whole Brain Theory?




 Scientists, medical doctors, psychologists, and
  psychiatrists have always been fascinated with the
  brain and how it works. Studies conducted on the brain
  often starts with an attempt to understand a brain-
  related disease or malfunctions. In year 1861, Paul
  Broca conducted a study on the language and left-
  right brain specialization on a patient who had
  problems with language.
 After Several Tests, Broca Theorized that some
  language functions reside on the left side of the brain .
 Dr. Roger Sperry conducted a study for
  epilepsy, which gave him the 1981 Nobel
  Prize for Physiology or Medicine. Sperry
  explained that the brain has two hemispheres
  that the perform tasks differently from each
  other. He also discovered that the left
  hemisphere of the brain was performing
  tasks that were intuitive, creative, and
  synthesizing while the right hemisphere of
  the brain was more adept than the analytical,
  logical reasoning, and critical thinking.
 Dr. Sperry was known as the “SPLIT BRAIN
  THEORY” (The split brain experiences”
 Another neuroscientist by the name of DR. Paul Mclean
  came up with a theory that identified three distinct parts of the
  brain namely; NEOCORTEX, LYMBIC SYSTEM, and
  REPTILLIAN COMPLEX, which were referred to as “THE
  TRIUNE BRAIN THEORY”.
 To DR. Mclean, the neo-cortex or rational brain is
  responsible for intellectual tasks such as
  language, planning, abstraction, and perception
  while the limbic system or the intermediate brain
  is responsible for the motivation and emotion
  involved in feeding, reproductive behaviour and
  parental behaviour. Finally there is a primitive
  brain or the reptilian complex, which controls the
  self-preservation and aggressive behaviour similar
  to the survival instincts of animals.
 The Study of brain and its multiple functions
  continued on until an engineer at General Electric,
  Ned Herrmann, was tasked to determine why some
  individuals were more creative than others. After
  drawing from the study of Sperry, Herrmann came up
  with his own theory called the “BRAIN DOMINANCE
  THEORY”.
 Which he derived from observations
  and test that the human body, although
  symmetrical and paired in almost all
  aspects, do not necessarily function
  equally.
 Herrmann extended this dominance
  theory to the brain, which he concluded
  to having not just two parts but four, the
  upper left and right hemispheres and
  the lower left and right limbic halves.
 Herrmann is regarded as the FATHER
  OF BRAIN DOMINANCE
  TECHNOLOGY.
Herrmann’s Four Dominant
Quadrants


1. Upper Left (A) cerebral mode- key word for
   this quadrant is ANALYTICAL
2. Lower Left (B) Limbic Mode- key word for
   this quadrant is ORGANIZED
3. Lower Right (C) Limbic mode- key word for
   this quadrant is INTERPERSONAL
4. Upper Right (D) Limbic System- key word
   for this quadrant is IMAGINATIVE.
 Portion A and B are known
  as the left side of the brain
  thinking and positions C and
  D are known as the right side
  brain thinking.
 Herrmann was not trying to
  differentiate the functions of
  the quadrants and how brain
  works. Instead, he was
  pointing out the preferences
  of styles in thinking. He
  advocated for whole brain
  thinking o using the four
  styles, since most people
  utilize at least two primary
  quadrants.
QUADRANT           KEY WORDS                PREFERRED                        RESPOND WELL              VULNERABILITIES              TYPICAL
                                            ACTIVITIES                       TO                                                     OCCUPATION

A. Analytical      Logical, Factual,        Collecting data, listening       Technical or financial    Too focus, may miss          CEO of technical
thinking           Critical, Technical,     to informational lectures,       information, theories,    synergistic                  organizations, stock
                   Quantitative,            reading textbooks, judging       charts and graphs,        opportunities, favors        market broker, chemist,
                   Abstract, Impersonal     ideas based on facts,            formal approach, data     individual vs. group         computer programmer
                                            criteria, and logical            heavy content             work, tends to place         finance manager
                                            reasoning                                                  facts over people,
                                                                                                       problems with
                                                                                                       delegating



B. Sequential      Conservative,            Following directions,            Agendas, goals and        Reluctant to changes,        Technical manager,
thinking           Structured,              repetitive detailed              objectives, simple        tends to miss the big        operations manager,
                   Organized, Detailed,     homework problems, time          graphs and                picture, does not            bookkeeper, drill
                   Planned                  management and                   presentations, sticker    appreciate innovative        sergeant, supervisory
                                            schedules, planning and          for time, step-by-step    ideas, avoids dynamic        nurse, construction
                                            organizing                       procedures before         situations                   engineer
                                                                             concluding


C. Interpersonal   Emotional, Spiritual,    Listening to and sharing         Creative and free         Dislike for routine and      Marketing, sales, real
thinking           Feeling, Sensory,        ideas, looking for personal      flowing activities like   structured activities,       state, elementary school
                   Kinesthetic              meaning, sensory input,          music and art, people-    tendency to impulsive        teacher, social worker,
                                            teamwork, win-win                centered activities and   and emotional, often         counselor, secretary
                                            situation                        discussions               misses out on details



D. Imaginative     Visual, Holistic,        Looking at the big picture,      Fun activities, humor,    Can be impractical, tend     Artist, entertainer,
thinking           Intuitive, Innovative,   taking initiative, simulations   future oriented           to overlook details, may     musician, entrepreneur,
                   Conceptual               ( what if questions), visual     activities,               tend to procrastinate        strategic planner, creative
                                            aids, appreciate beauty of a     experimentation,          especially if they do not    writer, film
                                            problem, brainstorming,          thought provoking and     like what they are doing
                                            visionary.                       challenging situations,   like repetitive tasks,
                                                                             visual                    difficulty in prioritizing
Whole Brain Theory in Learning
  Quadrant A learners are very much into logical thinking.
   They enjoy analyzing information and understand better
   when presented with numbers and quantities, and they
   are also good at theorizing or concluding based on facts
   and information that support their theories. Quadrant A
   expect exact information that are straight to the point But
   they will find it difficult to express their inner thoughts and
   emotions.
  Quadrant B learners easily grasp things in sequence,
   enjoy organizing ideas and things, asses situations and
   information, and apply what they have learned into
   practice.
 Quadrant C learners are very sociable
  learners who enjoy learning with a group
  with whom they share ideas and projects.
  They are very focused and involved when
  trying to learn something.
 They get bored with data and intellectual
  discussions without activities and
  participation. The C learner is also
  emotional and would share their emotions
  with the group.
 Quadrant D learners are the Curious ones
  who enjoy discovering, experimenting, and
  exploring activities. They are strong thinkers
  when it comes to conceptualizing.
              SIMPLE TEST FOR DOMINANT LEARNING STYLES



QUADRANT A LEARNER                  QUADRANT D LEARNER
 Analyzes data                      Vivid imagination
 Down to earth                      Explores
 Critical                           Curious
 Logical thinker                    Experiments
 Understand money                   Flexible
 Works with number                  Conceptualizes
                                     Uses visual to learn and risk taker

QUADRANT B LEARNER                  QUADRANT C LEARNER
 Get things done                    Tactile
 Submits on time                    Sensitive
 Creates procedures                 Emotional
 Plans and organizes                Sociable
 Neat and organized                 Expressive
 Reliable in getting things done    Shares knowledge
                                     Uses physical movements
          Mind Mapping
According to Dictionary.
   - A mind map is a diagram used to represent ideas of
  information branching from a central key word of idea and
  used as an aid in study, organization, problem solving,
  decision-making, and writing.
o Mind maps are useful visual tools that help in linking
  together concepts and information in such a way that the
  interconnection and interrelation of these are clearly laid out
  and easily accessible to help in problem solving and for
  reference and review.
o It is also useful during brainstorming sessions, making
  decisions, organizing information, simplifying complex idea,
  note- taking, and even for personal use.
o There are five essential characteristics of mind mapping:
1.     The center image represents the main idea, subject, or
     focus.
2. The main branches radiate from the central image.
3. The branches comprise a key image or word drawn or
   printed on its line.
4. Twigs represent the lesser topics.


The branches form a connected nodal structure.


(video)
Using Mind Maps Effectively

 Use Single Words or Simple Phrases
 - Many words writing are paddling, as they ensure that
   facts are conveyed in the correct context, and in a
   format that is pleasant to read.
 Print Words
 - Joined up or indistinct writing is more difficult to read.
 Use Color to Separate different Ideas
  - This will help you to separate ideas where necessary. It
   also help you to visualize the mind map for recall.
 Use Symbols and Images
 - Pictures can help you to remember
  information more effectively than words, so
  if a symbol or picture means something to
  you, use it.
 Use Cross-Linkages
  - information in one part of a mind map may
  relate to another part. Here, you can draw
  lines to show the cross-linkages. This helps
  you to see how one part of the subject affects
  another.
  THE END

  THANK YOU….


  GROUP 3




 MARRIANE GRACE A.
  LATOZA
 ANGELYN NICOLE
  ALCANTARA
 PRINCESS BARILEA
 JEWEL PET AMOREN
