    Lectures on
 Jung's Typology




MARIE-LOUISE VON FRANZ
    JAMES HILLMAN
Part One: The Inferior Function by Marie-Louise von Franz
Copyright 0 2015 Spring Publications, Inc.
Part Two: The Feeling Function by James Hillman
Copyright    2015 Margot McLean
All rights reserved

eISBN 978-0-88214-002-5 (e-book edition, v. 1.8)

Published by Spring Publications
www.springpublications.com

Cover image from Essays on Physiognomy Designed to Promote the Knowledge
and Love of Mankind by Johann Caspar Lavater (London 1810).
MARIE-LOUISE VON FRANZ

    JAMES HILLMAN




  Lectures on
Jung's Typology




   SPRING PUBLICATIONS

      THOMPSON, CONN.
                LECTURES ON JUNG'S




                                                 Part One

                           MARIE-LOUISE VON FRANZ
                                     The Inferior Function




                                                        1%
Page 3 of 177
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                 1
  A General Characterization of the Inferior Function

PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES is one of Jung's earliest books. When he
wrote it, he was in many respects struggling in the dark. Since the
book was written, the idea of the four functions of consciousness,
and the functioning of the conscious human personality in this
fourfold way, has proved tremendously productive. The idea of
the four functions evolved in Jung's thought and even turned up
in the religious problem of the three and the four.
    For those who are unfamiliar with this field, I must give a brief
sketch of the pattern of the four functions in Jungian psychology.
Jung first differentiated two attitudinal types: the extrovert and
the introvert. In the extrovert, the conscious libido habitually
flows towards the object, but there is an unconscious secret coun-
teraction back towards the subject. In the case of the introvert,
the opposite occurs: he feels as if an overwhelming object wants
constantly to affect him, from which he has continually to retire;
everything is falling upon him, he is constantly overwhelmed
by impressions, but he is unaware that he is secretly borrowing
psychic energy from and lending it to the object through his un-
conscious extroversion.




Page   4   of 177                                                 1%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




           EXTRAVERTED TYPE           INTROVERTED TYPE
            EGO OBJECT                 EGO    OBJECT


This diagram represents the difference between the extrovert and
the introvert. The four functions - sensation, thinking, feeling
and intuition-each of which can be extroverted or introverted,
produce eight types: extroverted thinking, introverted thinking;
extroverted feeling, introverted feeling, etc.
    I am assuming you know about the arrangement of the
functions- namely, that the two rational functions, thinking and
feeling, are opposite each other, as are the two irrational fune-
tions, sensation and intuition:

                          THINKING


           INTUITION                          SENSATION



                            FEELING

The question has often been raised: why on earth should there be
four functions? Why not three? Or five? That cannot be answered
theoretically; it is simply a question of checking facts and of see-
ing whether one can find more or fewer functions and another
typology. For Jung it was a great discovery when he later found
confirmation of his more intuitively conceived idea in the fact
that everywhere in myths and religious symbolism there appears
the model of the fourfold structure of the psyche. In studying

Page 4 of 177                                                     1%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the behavior of his patients, he found that he had apparently hit
 upon a basic structure. Naturally, the basic fourfold structure of
 the psyche, which means more than only the conscious functions,
 is generally represented as a purely primitive self-manifestation
 of the unconscious, usually as an undifferentiated quaternion.
 There arejust four principles of more or less the same kind: four
 colors, or angles, or gods, etc. The more they are connected with
 consciousness, the more they tend to become three animals
 and one human being, or three good gods and one evil god. One
 also finds those more differentiated mandalas where the four
poles of the quaternary structure are different from each other,
particularly if the material has been consciously worked upona
great deal. There one often finds the classic problem of the three
and the four about which Jung has written so much. This means
that when, from this basic structure, one or the other functions
becomes conscious, or where under optimum conditions three
functions become conscious, this has the effect of also changing
the basic structure of the psyche. Neither in psychology nor in
any other field of reality is there ever a one-sided course of action,
for if the unconscious builds up a fleld of consciousness, the
repercussion of such a change produces an alteration in the un-
conscious structure as well. Therefore when one finds in dreams
and mythological material that this basic structure appears in an
altered form, it can be concluded that a part of the problem of the
functions has already become conscious, and, due to the coun-
teraction, even the basic structure of the psyche has a changed or
modified form.
     The differentiation of types starts in very early childhood. For
instance, the two attitudes- extrovert and introvert- can actually
be seen in a child of one or one-and-a-half, though perhaps not al-
ways very clearly. Jung once told of the case of a child who would


Page 5 of 177                                                      1%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  not entera room before it had been told the names of the pieces
  of furniture there - table, chair, etc. That is typical of a definitely
  introverted attitude, where the object is terrifying and has to be
  banished or put in its place by a word, a propitiating gesture by
  which the object is made known and cannot misbehave. In such
  little details, if you know how to look for them, you can observe
  the tendency towards introversion or extroversion in a very small
  child.
       The functions, naturally, do not show so early, but by the kin-
  dergarten age one can usually observe the development of a main
  function by a preference for some occupation or by the child's
 behavior towards another child. Children, like adults, tend to do
 frequently what they can do well and to avoid the things they can-
 not do well. Probably most people do as I did with my school work:
 I was gifted in mathematics and did that first, leaving whatever
 I was not good at till the end. The natural tendency is to defer
 doing, or to push off on other people, the thing in which one does
 not feel superior. By such natural behavior, the one-sidedness is
 increased more and more. Then comes the family attitude: the
 boy who is very intelligent must study later on, or the child gifted
 in practical matters must become an engineer. The surroundings
reinforce the existing one-sided tendencies, the so-called "gifts,"
and there is thus an increase in the development of the superior
function and a slow degeneration of the other side of the person-
ality. This is an unavoidable process and even has great advan-
tages. Many people fit into this pattern, and one can tell their type
at once; others may be very difficult to define.
      Some people have trouble in finding out their own type, which
very often is due to the fact that they are distorted types. This
is not a very frequent occurrence, but it does happen in cases
where someone would naturally have become a feeling type or


Page 6 of 177                                                         1%%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 an intuitive, but was forced by the surrounding atmosphere to
 develop another function. Suppose a boy is born a feeling type in
 an intellectually ambitious family. His surroundings will exert
 pressure upon him to become an intellectual, and his original pre-
 disposition as a feeling type will be thwarted or despised. Usually,
 in such a case, he is unable to become a thinking type: that would
be one step too far. But he might well develop sensation or intu-
ition, one of the auxiliary functions, so as to be relatively better
adapted to his surroundings; his main function is simply "out" in
the milieu in which he grows up.
     Distorted types have advantages and disadvantages. The
disadvantage is that from the very beginning they cannot develop
their main disposition; they therefore remain a bit below the
mark they would have reached had they developed in the one-
sided way. On the other hand, they have been forced ahead of time
into doing something that in the second half of life they would
have had to do anyway. In analysis, one can very often help people
switch back to the original type, and they are then able to pick up
the other function very quickly and reach a developed stage, for
the original disposition is a help in that direction. They are like
fish that can now return happily to the water.
    Another aspect of the early stages, when one is still developing
one's main function, is the tendency in families to distribute
the functions: one member is the family introvert, another be-
comes the family's practical engineer, a third the family's seer
and prophet and so on. The others happily give up this function
because one member can do it so much better. This sets up vital
groups that function well, and individuals only get into trouble
when the group falls apart. There is a very strong tendency in
most families, and also in other groups, to solve the function



Page 7 of 177                                                     2%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  problem by distributing the functions and relying on the superior
  function of the other.
      In marriage, as Jung points out, one tends to marry the
  opposite type, and then again he is, or so he thinks for the mo-
  ment, freed from the disagreeable task of confronting his own
  inferior function. That is one of the great blessings and sources of
  happiness in the early stages of a marriage; suddenly the whole
 weight of the inferior function is gone, one lives ina blessed
 oneness with the other, and every problem is solved! But if one of
 the partners dies, or the need comes up in one of them to develop
 the inferior function instead ofjust leaving those sections of life
 to the other, the trouble starts. The same happens again in the
 choice of analysts. Frequently people choose the opposite type as
 analyst because, for instance, the feeling type cannot think and so
 admires tremendously a person who can. This course is not to be
 recommended, because if one is always with someone who knows
 it all he gets discouraged and gives up completely. He might feel
very happy because now thinking is taken care of, but that is not
 an adequate solution. Jung, for instance, always liked to send
people with the same blind spots to each other because, he said,
if two idiots sit together and neither can think they will get into
such trouble that at least one of them will begin to think! It would,
of course, be the same with the other functions: they just sit there
and hope that the other will do the work. If one goes to the oppos-
ite type, something to be borne in mind, especially by the analyst,
is to be very careful not to display the superior function too much.
One must, against one's real feeling, constantly pretend that one
does not know, or feels incapable - has no idea -and so on. One
has to give up the superior function in order not to paralyze the
first shy attempts the analysand might make in this field.




Page 8 of 177                                                      2%
                        LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



       If we ask what determines the original basic disposition, the
 answer is that we don't know! Jung, at the end of Psychological
 Types, says that it has probably a biological parallel. He points
 out, for instance, the two ways in which animal species adapt
to reality: either by propagating tremendously and having an
 inferior defense mechanism- for example, fleas, lice and rabbits
- or by having few offspring and building up tremendous defense
 mechanisms, as for instance the hedgehog or the elephant. Thus
 already in nature there are two possibilities for dealing with
reality: either you defend yourself against it, keeping it off while
building your own life, or you pour yourself into it and overcome
or conquer it. That would be introverted and extroverted func-
tioning in the biological realm.
     I think one may go even further. When Jung brought out his
book on types, not much had been published on animal behavior,
but in the modern books one can see that among the animals
there is a mixtum compositum of factors in most patterns of be-
havior. Thus some aspects of animal behavior come more from
within-that is, they come into play without any outer stimulus
- while other animal behavior depends more on outer stimuli.
Heinrich Hediger, Professor of Zoology at Zurich University and
Director of the Zurich Zoo, has said in recent lectures that the
higher anthropoid apes are incapable of performing the sexual
acts unless they have observed another ape and learned in that
way, whereas with many other animals it is quite the opposite:
without ever having seen animals of their species mating, the
urge from within is sufficient. But if in a zoo the higher apes are
brought up without ever seeing a companion mate, they remain
ignorant and incompetent, just as a human being does. Therefore
it is obvious that the behavior of an animal depends in part on an
outer factor and is in part conditioned by an inborn disposition.


Page   9   of 177                                                  3%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



stay at home by the stove where he belongs. But it is he who usu-
ally performs the great task.
    This fourth figure - the third son, but the fourth figure in the
setup-has, according to the myths, different superficial qualities.
Sometimes he is the youngest, sometimes he is a bit idiotic, and
sometimes he is a complete fool. There are different versions, but
he is always in some such category. In a beautiful Russian fairy
tale, for instance, he is looked upon as a complete idiot. The two
elder sons ride out from their father's stable on wonderful horses,
but the youngest takes a little shaggy pony and sits on it the
wrong way round - with his head towards the horse's tail - and
goes off, derided by everybody. He is, of course, Ivan, the Russian
hero, and the one who inherits the kingdom. Then there are the
themes of the cripple and of the soldier who has deserted or has
been wounded and discharged from the army and who is lost in
the woods. Or there may be a poor peasant boy who becomes king.
    In all these cases, one knows from the very beginning of the
story that it concerns something more than the four functions,
for the fool is an archetypal religious figure, embracing more
than only the inferior function. He implies a part of the human
personality, or even of humanity, which remained behind and
therefore still has the original wholeness of nature. He symbolizes
a specific, mainly religious, function. But in mythology, as soon as
the fool appears as the fourth in a group of four people, we have
a certain right to assume that he mirrors the general behavior of
an inferior function. I have often tried, in interpreting fairy tales,
to go further into detail and to call the king the thinking and the
fourth son the feeling function, but in my experience that does
not work. One has to twist the material and play some dishonest
tricks to force the issues like this. So I have come to the conclusion
that we cannot go that far, but must just say that in mythology

Page 10 of 177                                                     4%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



such a third son, or such a fool, simply represents the general
behavior of an inferior function, whichever it may be. It is neither
individual nor specific, but a general outline.
   If one studies individual cases, one can see that the inferior
function tends to behave after the manner of such a "fool" hero,
 the divine fool or idiot hero. He represents the despised part of the
 personality, the ridiculous and unadapted part, but also the part
 that builds up the connection with the unconscious and therefore
 holds the secret key to the unconscious totality of the person.
     One can say that the inferior function always makes the bridge
 to the unconscious. It is always directed towards the unconscious
 and the symbolic world. But that is not to say that it is directed
 either to the inside or the outside; this varies individually. For
 instance, an introverted thinking type has an inferior extroverted
 feeling function; its movement will be towards outer objects, to
 other people, but such people will have a symbolic meaning for
the person, being carriers of symbols of the unconscious. The
 symbolic meaning of an unconscious fact appears outside, as the
quality of the outer object. If an introvert, with his habitual way
 of introjecting, says he need not telephone so-and-so - she is just
the symbol of his anima and therefore symbolic, and the actual
person does not matter for it only happened that his projection
falls there - then he will never get to the bottom of his inferior
function. He will never assimilate it as a problem because the
feeling of an introverted thinking type is generally genuinely
extroverted. By such a trick he simply tries to catch hold of his
inferior function by means of his superior function and pull it
inside. He introjects at the wrong moment so as to maintain the
predominance of his superior over his inferior function. An intro-
vert who wants to assimilate his inferior function must relate to
outer objects, bearing in mind that they are symbolic. He must
    ***
Page 11 of 177                                                     4%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  not, however, draw the conclusion that they are only symbolic
  and that, therefore, outer objects can be dispensed with. That is a
  lousy, dishonest trick, which many introverts play with their in-
 ferior function. Naturally extroverts do the same thing, only the
 other way round. Therefore it must not be said that the inferior
 function is always directed inward. It is directed towards the un-
 conscious, whether it appears on the inside or the outside, and it
 is always the carrier of symbolic experiences that may come from
 within or without.
     To the general outline of the inferior function belongs the
 fact that it is generally slow, in contrast to the superior function.
 Jung calls it infantile and tyrannical. We have to go into this in
 detail. One of the great troubles of the inferior function is its
 slowness, which is the reason why people hate to start work on
it; the reaction of the superior function comes out quickly and
well adapted, while many people have no idea where their infer-
ior function really is. For instance, thinking types have no idea
whether they have feeling or what kind of feeling it is. They have
to sit half an hour and meditate as to whether they have feelings
about something and, if so, what they are. If you ask a thinking
type what he feels, he generally either replies with a thought
or gives a quick conventional reaction; and if you then insist on
knowing what he really feels, he does not know. Pulling it up from
his belly, so to speak, can take half an hour. Or, if an intuitive fills
out a tax form he needs a week where other people would takea
day. He simply cannot do it, or if he is to do it accurately and in the
right way he takes forever. I know an introverted intuitive woman
- and to go with her to choose a blouse! Never again! It takes an
eternity, until the whole shop is mad! But it cannot be sped up.
It does not help to get impatient. And naturally that is what is so


Page 12 of 177                                                       5%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  discouraging about getting up the inferior function: one has not
 the time for it.
      This cannot be helped. It is a stage that cannot be skipped. If
 people lose patience and say "to hell with it," it means they give
 up. That is hopeless, for it simply means that they cut the fourth
 function out and replace it with some kind of artificial mechan-
 ism- with a crutch. It cannot be sped up, or only to a small extent;
 it can never achieve the speed of the superior function. It is this
 way for very good reasons. If you think of the turning point of
 life and the problems of aging and of turning within, then this
 slowing down of the whole life process by bringing in the inferior
 function is just the thing that is needed. So the slowness should
 not be treated with impatience and with trying to educate "the
 damned inferior function"'; one should rather accept the fact that
in this realm one has to waste time. That is just the value of it, be-
cause that gives the unconscious a chance to come in.
     Another typical aspect of the inferior function, which is
also connected with its unadaptedness and primitiveness, is its
touchiness and tyranny. Most people, when their inferior func-
tion is in any way touched upon, become terribly childish: they
can't stand the slightest criticism and always feel attacked. Here
they are uncertain of themselves; with that, naturally, they tyr-
annize everybody around them because everybody has to walk
carefully. If you want to say something about another person's
inferior function, it is like walking on eggs; people cannot stand
any criticism there. A rite d'entrée is required. One must wait for
the right moment, for a peaceful atmosphere, and then carefully,
with a long introductory speech, one might get across some slight
criticism about the inferior function.
     But simply to shoot criticism at people will only get them
absolutely bewildered and emotional, and the situation is ruined.

Page 13 of 177                                                     5%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



I learned this for the first time with amazement many years ago
when I was still studying. A fellow student showed me a paper
she had written. She was a feeling type. The paper was very good,
but in a minor passage where she switched from one theme to
another it seemed to me that there was a hiatus in the connection
of thought. What she said was quite right, but between the two
passages, for a thinking type, the logical transition was lacking.
So I said to her that I thought it was an excellent paper but that
on one page she might make a better transition. At that, she got
absolutely emotional and said: "Oh well, then it's all ruined, I shall
just burn it," and she grabbed it out of my hand saying: "I know it's
junk, I shall burn it up!" I pulled it from her: "For God's sake, don't
burn it up!"; "Oh well," she said, "I knew you thought it would
bejunk" and in this vein she went on and on. When the storm
was over I was able to get in a word and said: "You need not even
retype it, you only need to write in one little sentence to make the
transition-just one sentence between these two paragraphs." The
storm started all over again, and I gave up!
     I saw her later, and she told me that the night afterward
she dreamed that her house burnt down and, typically, the fire
started in the roof!I thought: "My God, these feeling types!" For
her, writing the paper had been such an achievement, bringing
out some thoughts, and it had been just at the limit of what she
could do. She simply couldn't stand that little bit. It wasn't even
criticism, but just the idea that it could be improveda bit. That
is an extreme case of what happens with the inferior function. It
tyrannizes its surroundings by being touchy, for all touchiness
is a form of secret tyranny. Sensitive people are just tyrannical
people: everybody else has to adapt to them instead of their trying
to adapt to others. But people who are well adapted still generally
have a kind of childish, touchy spot where one cannot talk to

Page 13 of 177                                                      6%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  them reasonably, and one has to adopt bush manners as if dealing
  with tigers and elephants.
      In Van Gennep's Les Rîtes de Passage, one finds examples of
  how explorers approach a primitive village. They have to stop
  several miles away, and then three messengers from the village
 come; the villagers have to be assured that the explorers have no
 evil designs and especially that they do not intend to use black
 magic against the inhabitants. The messengers then go back, and
 when they return gifts are exchanged. Sometimes even women
 are exchanged, or they may be given to the guests who sleep with
 them, because that establishes a kind of kinship. If a man sleeps
 with another's wife he is kin to him; he has been taken into his
 family. The Naskapi Indians on the Labrador peninsula, for ex-
 ample, do that, and many Eskimos lend their wives to foreigners
 for the night. This is to prevent any kind of evil explosion, any
 chance that a guest might murder the people in the house, or that
the latter might murder the guest. Many primitive people, also,
cut each other and exchange blood. There is also a special way of
kissing and of exchanging gifts. All those rîtes de passage come
into play as soon as you have to relate to people on the level of the
inferior function.
     One can see the same thing in everyday life. For instance, one
may have known someone for two or three years, but only on the
conventional level of having tea or dinner together and talking
about the weather and politics and theoretical questions, but
never having dared to touch the sore spots in each other or hav-
ing brought the conversation round to some ticklish point. But
then one day one feels that it is not a real relationship, that one
is not getting really close. Then there is a little wine, and if the
atmosphere is favorable the sore spots come out and one invites
the other to come out with his. So, through all the precautions of

Page 14 of 177                                                    6%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 bush politeness, two persons slowly really approach. I don't know
 any other formula than bush politeness. That is the formula with
 which to approach the other side, for the sore spots generally are
 connected with the inferior function.
     There is a difference between personal politeness and bush
 politeness. Let's take a practical example. I was once driving with
 a man, an intuitive type. We were driving home late at night, and
 he forgot to turn on the ignition. He tried over and over again
 to start the car and it would not go. I ventured politely to ask
 whether he had switched the ignition on? "Naturally," came the
 reply, but with such an affect that I did not dare say any more!
 Now that was his inferior sensation! So there we sat for half an
hour, and I felt sure of what the trouble was but didn't know how
to tell him. The slightest tone of knowing better would have pro-
duced an explosion. I felt so helpless that I actually tried to get to
a garage. I even looked at the water, but knew all the time what
was wrong and didn't know how to get round the sore spot. There
was the question of his prestige. I must add that a lot of alcohol
contributed to the abaissement, which made the affects that much
more explosive. Then, too, the man was older than I, and there
was the question of being impolite. But it isn't the persona; it is
another kind of politeness. It is rather a matter of having real feel-
ing and understanding for the other person's weakness, and not
daring to touch it.
    The inferior function and the sore spot are absolutely con-
nected. If he had not had inferior sensation, he would not have
been so touchy. IfI had said, "Have you switched it on?" he would
have replied, "Oh, my God" and done so, and off we would have
gone. But instead we sat for an hour on the road guessing what
the trouble could be, and I just did not know how to approach this
sore area of the inferior function.

Page 15 of 177
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     These examples also illustrate another general feature of the
 inferior function: namely, a tremendous charge of emotion is gen-
 erally connected with its processes. As soon as you get into this
 realm people easily become emotional. In the example you can see
 the negative side of this connection to the emotions, but there is
 also a very positive aspect. In the realm of the inferior function
 there is a great concentration of life, so that as soon as the super-
 ior function is worn out - begins to rattle and lose oil like an old
car-if people succeed in turning to their inferior function they
 will rediscover a new potential of life. Everything in the realm of
 the inferior function becomes exciting, dramatic, full of positive
 and negative possibilities. There is tremendous tension and the
 world is, as it were, rediscovered through the inferior function.
 But the disadvantage of turning to the inferior function is that it
 has this unadapted aspect. That is why in the fairy tales I men-
tioned it is the fool, the third son of the group of four royal people,
 who can find the water of life or the great treasure. The inferior
function brings a renewal of life if one allows it to come up in its
own realm.
     Many people discover relatively soon in life that the realm of
their inferior function is where they are emotional, touchy and
unadapted, and they therefore acquire the habit of covering up
this part of their personality witha surrogate pseudo-reaction.
For instance, a thinking type often cannot express his feelings
normally and in the appropriate manner at the right time. It can
happen that when he hears that the husband of a friend has died
he cries, but when he meets the widow not a word of pity will
come out. They not only look very cold, but they really do not
feel anything! They had all the feeling before, when at home, but
now in the appropriate situation they cannot pull it out. Think-
ing types are very often looked on by other people as having no

Page 16 of 177                                                      7%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  feeling; this is absolutely not true. It is not that they have no feel-
  ing, but that they cannot express it at the appropriate moment.
  They have the feeling somehow and somewhere, but not just
 when they ought to produce it. It is a great error, also, to assume
 that feeling types cannot think. They think very well, and very
 often have deep, good, and genuine thoughts, unconventional
 thoughts, but they come and go as they like. For instance, it is
 very difficult for a feeling type to pull up his right kind of thinking
 during an exam. There he ought to think, but thinking just goes!
 As soon as he is at home he can think again, but his thinking does
 not comply, is not amiable enough to come up at the right time.
 He is looked upon by society as being stupid because he cannot
 produce his thinking at will.
     Life has no mercy with the inferiority of the inferior function.
 That is why people produce such "covering up" reactions. Because
it is not their real reaction, they simply borrow from the collect-
ive. A feeling type, when pressed for thinking reactions, loves to
serve up a lot of commonplace remarks or thoughts that are not
his real thoughts, but he has to think quickly and the real thought
is not yet up to the level at which it can be expressed. So they
just make a few commonplace remarks or, what is very usual for
feeling types, they use material they have learned by heart. The
same is true for thinking types who get into the habit of produ-
cing a kind of amiable, conventional feeling. They send flowers,
bring chocolate, or make some very conventional expression of
feeling. For example, I have drawn up a form letter of condolence
with certain phrases that have struck me as being very nice and
touching. If I tried to express my real feelings, I would stick at
such a letter for three days! So in all these situations I make a
cocktail of the conventional phrases I have collected through my
life. The same applies to intuitives with their inferior sensation;

Page 17 of 177                                                        8%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



they simply have the habitual, technical ways of dealing with it,
borrowing help from the collective. One must not be deceived by
these adaptive reactions if one tries to connect with another per-
 son. You can always observe these "covering up" reactions by the
fact that they are impersonal and banal and very collective. They
have no convincing personal quality about them.
     In examining the dynamic interplay between the functions,
one must always recognize the hold that the superior function
has on the inferior. When someone tries to meet his inferior func-
tion and experiences emotional shock or pain in confronting its
real reactions, then the superior function at once says: "Ah, that
is something, now we must organize that." The superior func-
tion, like an eagle seizing a mouse, tries to get hold of the inferior
function and bring it over into its own realm. I know a natural
scientist, a very successful, introverted thinking type, who in his
fifties became very bored with his professional work and began
roaming about looking for other possibilities. His wife and fam-
ily could have told him a lot about his inferior feeling, a field for
experimentation right under his nose. He had several dreams of
collecting rare mountain flowers, which clearly showed what the
unconscious was now aiming at. He had the typical inferior feel-
ing of the thinking type, namely, rare and very special feeling. The
flowers in the mountains have a much more intense color than
those of the plains, and this is also typical for the inferior feeling
of a thinking type. He thought he had a good idea for a hobby, so
he made friends with a botanist and went off for days, all through
his holidays, collecting mountain flowers. Any attempts made
by other people at telling him that he could do something about
his feeling function only met with the reply that he had given up
his main function and was doing something with his other side.
He was studying mountain flowers! Thus he got stuck in the con-

Page 17 of 177                                                    8%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 cretistic interpretation instead of taking the dream symbolically,
 and he made a sort of science of it. He wanted knowledge of those
flowers, so the main function was at it again, and the inferior
function once more was frustrated.
    To take an irrational type: there is the intuitive who gets
into a situation where he should use his inferior sensation. He
becomes attracted by the idea of stonecutting or working with
clay. This sort of thing very often helps inferior sensation come
up in intuitives, for by such means they may get in touch with
outer purpose or reason, with some kind of concrete material,
with matter. He will, perhaps, mold something in clay - say, a very
helpless looking, childish statue of an animal. Then he experi-
ences something improving in himself, but immediately - like
an eagle -intuition pounces on it and says: "This is it, that's what
should be introduced into all the schools," and away he goes into
his intuition again, into all the possibilities of clay molding, what
could be done with it in the education of humanity, what it would
include, and how it is the key to the experience of the godhead.
The intuitive always brings in the whole world. But the one thing
that is not considered is the molding of another figure! The main
function is raving again. Having had this quickening and vivi-
fying touch with the earth, off it goes, up into the air again. The
same thing happens with the feeling type who, when cornered by
absolute necessity, sometimes produces a few thoughts. Then he
quickly escapes this hot bath and never returns to it, but he has a
feeling judgment about what thinking is like and the uses it has
and so on. He makes a number of evaluations instead of continu-
ing the process. In this way the superior function tries to get hold
of the inferior function and organize it.
    Another aspect of the dynamic interplay of the functions is
the way in which the inferior function intrudes into the superior

Page 18 of 177                                                   9%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



and falsifies it. There was a marvelous demonstration of this
some time ago in the case of a certain Professor K. who made an
attack on the psychology of the unconscious in the Neue Zürcher
Zeitung. He is a pupil of Heidegger and an absolute demonstration
of overworked introverted thinking. This has the unfortunate
effect of his being unable to assert anything more than that life is
an ontological phenomenon of existence. He enriches his state-
ment with a few more impressive adjectives, but that is what
it amounts to. This one thought, that "existence really exists,"
expresses a divine plenitude for him, as it also did for Parmeni-
des. He cannot cease reassuring us about such existence. Then
he says: "But the unconscious would be an uncanny theater of
marionettes and ghosts." There you have an excellent illustration
of what Jung means when he says: "The unconscious fantasy
becomes proportionately enriched by a multitude of archaically
formed facts, a veritable pandemonium of magical factors." That
is exactly what Professor K. expounds in his article - the idea of
the unconscious is awful, it is just a theatrical pandemonium
- and then he saves his conscious position by asserting that it
simply doesn't exist: it is just an invention of the psychologists!
If you overdo one of the conscious attitudes it becomes poor and
loses fertility; also, the unconscious counterfunction, the oppos-
ite, encroaches upon the main function and falsifies it. That is
obvious in Professor K.s article; it shows that his feeling is really
concerned with enlightening mankind as to the absurdity of the
idea of the psychology of the unconscious. He entirely loses the
objective style to which we are accustomed in scientific discus-
sion and feels himself to be a prophet whose mission it is to save
mankind from some evil poison. His whole moral, or feeling,
function came up and contaminated his thinking. His thinking


Page 19 of 177                                                    9%
                                 LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



 became subjective instead of objective, and it was obvious that he
 had not read the literature on the psychology of the unconscious.
    Another way in which the inferior function often intrudes
 upon the superior can be shown in the case of a very down-to-
  earth, realistic, introverted sensation type. Sensation types,
 whether introverted or extroverted, are generally quite good in
 their relationship to money, in not being too extravagant. But if
 such a type overdoes this, his inferior intuition becomes involved.
 I knew a sensation type who became madly stingy and could
 practically not move about in life any longer because - well, in
 Switzerland everything costs something! When one tried to find
 out where this sudden stinginess originated - hitherto he had
 been just moderately stingy like most people here - one noticed
 that he produced any number of dark possibilities in life: he might
 have an accident and be unable to work and support his family;
 something might happen to his family; his wife might have a long
 illness; his son might fail in his studies and need more years than
usual; his mother-in-law, a very rich woman, might suddenly get
furious with him and leave her money to another family instead
of his, etc. Those are instances of the dark fears of what might
happen. This is typical of negative inferior intuition. Only the
dark possibilities are envisaged. The first appearances of his infer-
ior intuition reinforced his sensation in the wrong way by making
him stingy. Life no longer flowed because everything was falsified
by the invasion of inferior intuition.
     When the time comes for the development of the other func-
tions, there are generally two associated phenomena: the superior
function degenerates like an old car that begins to run down
and get worn out, and the ego becomes bored with it because
             ************* ****----
everything you can do too well becomes boring; then, the inferior
function, instead of appearing in its own field, tends to invade
    ---     ----.   ----------     ---
                                         ---.       **************************-******---**


Page 20 of 177                                                                               10%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the main function, giving it an unadapted, neurotic twist. You are
                                                      *  *******
 thus confronted with a neurotic mixtum compositum -a thinking
                           *********



 type who can't think any longer or a feeling type who doesn't
 show any agreeable feeling any more. There is a transitional stage
 where people are neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring! For-
 merly they were good thinkers, but they can't think any more and
 they have not yet reached a new level. It is therefore very import-
 ant to know one's type and recognize what the unconscious is up
 to now, for otherwise one is caught from behind.
     One of the great difficulties in defining one's own or another
 person's type occurs when people have already reached the stage
 of being bored with their main function and their main attitude.
 They very often assure you with absolute sincerity that they
 belong to the type opposite from what they really are. The ex-
 trovert swears that he is deeply introverted, and vice versa. This
 comes from the fact that the inferior function subjectively feels
 itself to be the real one; it feels itself the most important; most
 genuine attitude. So, a thinking type, because he knows that
 everything in his life matters from the feeling aspect, will assure
you that he is a feeling type. It does no good, therefore, to think of
what matters most when trying to discover one's type; rather ask:
                 I
"What do habitually do most?" An extrovert can be constantly
extroverting but will assure you, and will mean it, that he is
deeply introverted and only concerned with the inner thing. That
is not a swindle; it is how he feels, for he knows that though it
may be only a minute a day, that minute when he introverts is the
real thing, there he is close to himself, there he is real.
    In the realm of the inferior function, too, one is overwhelmed,
one is unhappy, one has one's great problem, one is constantly
impressed by things, and therefore, in a way, the intensity of life is
very often much greater there, especially if the superior function

Page 21 of 177                                                    10%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



is already worn out. Practicaly, it is most helpful when one wants
to find out the type to ask, what is the greatest cross for the per-
son? Where is his greatest suffering? Where does he feel that he
always knocks his head against the obstacle and suffers hell? That
                                                                 *******
generally points to the inferior function. Many people, moreover,
develop two superior functions so well that it is very difficult to
say whether the person is a thinking intuitive type or an intuitive
type with good thinking, for the two seem equally good. Some-
times sensation and feeling are so well developed in an individual
that you would have difficulty in ascertaining which is the first.
But does the intuitive thinking person suffer more from knocking
his head on sensation facts or from feeling problems? Here you
can decide which is the first, and which the well-developed sec-
ond, function.
    I shall turn now to a general consideration of the problem of
assimilating the inferior function. Consciousness evolves in early
childhood from the unconscious. From our point of view, the
unconscious is a primary, and consciousness a secondary, fact.
Therefore the unconscious totality and the structure of the total
personality exist in time before the conscious personality and
could be looked at in this way:


                    EGO
                                  Fourfold structure in the field of
                                  consciousness,with the ego as center



                                  The preconscious total quaternian
                                  structure of the personality




Page 21 of 177                                                           11%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



When the functions develop in the field of consciousness-
ABCD-there comes up from below first, let us say, the thinking
function, which then becomes one of the main functions of the
ego. The ego then uses mainly the operation of thinking in the
organization of its field of consciousness. Slowly another function
appears and gradually they all - under favorable conditions-ap-
pear in the field of consciousness.
     When the fourth function comes up, however, the whole
upper structure collapses. The more you pull up the fourth, the
further the upper floor descends. A mistake some people make is
that they think they can pull up the inferior function to the level
of the other conscious functions. I can only say: "Well, if you wish
to do so, try. But you can try forever!" It is absolutely impossible to
pull up-like a fisherman with his rod-the inferior function, and
all such attempts as, for instance, speeding it up or educating it to
come up at the right moment prove failures. One can try to force
it to function in an exam or in certain situations in life, but this
succeeds only to a certain extent and only by bringing in conven-
tional, borrowed material. One cannot bring up the fourth fune-
tion, for it insists on remaining below. It is contaminated with the
unconscious and remains in that condition. Trying to fish it up
would be like trying to bring up the whole collective unconscious,
which is something one just cannot do. The fish will be too big for
the rod. So what does one do? Cut if off again? This is regression.
But if you don't give in, there is only the other alternative: the
fish will pull you into the water! At this moment comes the great
conflict, which means for the thinking type, for instance, the
famous sacrificium intellectus or, for the feeling type, the sacrifi-
cium of his feeling. It is having the humility to go down with one's
other functions to that lower level. This, then, produces a stage
between the two layers at about the level where everything is nei-

Page 22 of 177                                                     11%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 ther thinking nor feeling nor sensation nor intuition. Something
 new comes up, namely, a completely different and new attitude
 towards life in which one uses all and none of the functions all the
 time.
      Very often someone will naively say that he is a thinking
 type and is now going to develop his feeling function-what an
 illusion! Ifa person is a thinking type, he can first go either to
 sensation or to intuition. That is his choice. Then he moves to
 the opposite of the two secondary functions, and lastly to the
 inferior one. But he cannot cross directly to the opposite function.
 The reason is very simple: it is that they exclude each other com-
 pletely; they are incompatibles. Take the example of a staff oficer
 who has to plan the evacuation of a town population in the best
 possible way under given conditions. Unfortunately his own wife
 and children are in the same town. If he gives in to his own feel-
 ings about them, he won't develop a good plan. He just cannot. He
 must simply obliterate them from his mind and tell himself that
it is now his job to plan the evacuation as well as he can; he must
think of his own feelings as mere sentimentality. This is a depre-
ciation in order to free himself. One cannot make a straight jump
from one function to its opposite, but one can assimilate thinking
with sensation or have them functioning together. It is possible to
combine the other two auxiliary functions very easily, so that in
the jump from one to the other he will not suffer as much as if he
had to jump to the opposite function. When one has to move from
intuition to sensation one can still use the thinking function as a
judge, and when intuition and sensation fight he can detach him-
self from the fight by thinking.
     IfI analyze a thinking type, I never push him into feeling at
once. I see that the other functions are first assimilated to a cer-
tain extent. It is a mistake to forget this intermediary stage. Take,

Page 23 of 177                                                   12%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 for instance, a thinking type who falls madly in love with a com-
 pletely inappropriate person because of his inferior feeling. Ifhe
 has already developed sensation, which implies a certain sense of
 reality, and of intuition - the capacity to smell a rat- he will not
 fall into complete nonsense. But if he is only a one-sided thinking
type and he falls in love with an inappropriate female and has
no sense of reality and of intuition, there will happen what is so
beautifully depicted in Josef von Sternberg's 1930 film The Blue
Angel, where the school professor becomes a circus clown in the
service of a vamp. There are no intermediary fields where he can
catch himself: he is just knocked over by his inferior function. But
if his analyst could see to it, while he has not yet much feling,
that at least he has developed a certain sense of reality, then he
can break the difficulty with that intermediary function. I think
that is something to keep in mind if one is an analyst, that one
should never jump directly to the inferior function. Of course, life
does it; life does not care! But the analytical process should not go
that way, and normally it does not do so if one follows the intim-
ations given in the dreams. The tendency of the process is that the
development should follow a serpentine movement. This is the
normal way in which the unconscious tries to bring up the infer-
ior function.
    This is the end of my general outline on the problem of the
inferior function. The next step will be to give a short description
of what the inferior function of each type looks like in practical
life.

    (A period of questions and answers follows.)

Question: Why do artists tend to shy away from analysis?



Page 24 of 177                                                   12%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



Von Franz: Artists often think that analysis will educate their
inferior function to such an extent that it will lose its creative-
ness. But this is quite impossible. There is no danger, because
 even if the analyst should be stupid enough to try it, it cannot be
 done. The inferior function is a horse that cannot be educated.
 It is something that can be subjugated to the extent that you do
 not do stupid things all the time. So much is possible. I am always
reminded of a story connected with my father. He bought a horse
that was much too big for him: he was a small man. In the army
this horse was looked upon as a criminal because one could not
give it the whip. It would just bolt and throw its rider. My father
fell in love with this beautiful horse and bought it, and then he
made a pact with it: "I won't give you the whip if you don't throw
me." That is, he dealt with it as an equal, and it became his best
horse. He even won several races with it, but in cases where others
would have given the whip he didn't. If he had touched it with the
whip, the pact would have been finished. But the horse was intel-
ligent, and through intensive training he could convey his wishes
to it; it then did more or less what he wanted. That is the most you
can accomplish with the inferior function. You can never rule or
educate it and make it act as you would like, but if you are very
clever and are willing to give in a lot, then you may be able to ar-
range so that it does not throw you. It will throw you sometimes,
but not at the wrong moment.

Question: Is there a situation where functions do not differentiate
one-sidedly?
Von Franz: Yes. For instance, people who   still live completely in
nature, such as peasants and hunters and the Bushmen of whom
Laurens van der Post wrote, would not survive unless they used
all their functions, more or less. A peasant can never become as


Page 25 of 177                                                        13%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 one-sided as a town dweller: he cannot only be an intuitive, he
 simply has to use his sensation; but he cannot only use that, be-
 cause he has to plan the farming - when the sowing must be done
 and which kind of carrot or wheat must be grown, and how much,
 and what the prices are. Otherwise he would be ruined at once!
 He has also to use a certain amount of feeling because you cannot
 deal with your family or animals without it, and he has to have
that certain smell for the weather and the future in general, with-
 out which he is always in trouble. So in natural situations things
 are more or less arranged so that one must, to a certain extent, use
all the functions. That is why people who live under natural con-
ditions rarely become as one-sided. This is the old, well-known
problem of specialization. But among primitive peoples, too, you
can see that they generally distribute the functions. For instance,
my peasant neighbor always asks the fsherman who lives with
him what the weather will be. He says he does not know how the
fisherman can tell, but he just does, so he himself does not bother.
He relies on that man's intuition and does not use his own. So
even there people tend to push off certain functions on others
who are better specialists. But they cannot do it as completely as
town specialists do. If, for example, you are a bachelor and work
in a statistical office for yourself, you really need practically no
feeling! That, naturally, has its disagreeable consequences, but in
nature you simply could not do that.

Question: When something is unconscious, either for the extro-
vert or the introvert, does it always appear on the outside in its
projected form?
Von Franz: No. In the case of extrovert's, I have seen that it very
often appears within, either as a vision or a fantasy. I have often
been impressed by the fact that extrovert's, when they come to


Page 26 of 177                                                    13%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 their other side, have a much purer relationship to the inside
 than the introvert. I have even been quite jealous! They have a
 naive and genuine and pure relationship to inner facts, for they
 can have a vision and take it completely seriously at once, quite
 naively. In an introvert, it is always distorted by his extroverted
 shadow who throws doubts on it. It can be said that if an extro-
 vert falls into his introversion, it will be especially genuine and
 especially pure and deep. Extroverts are often so proud of this
 that they boast loudly about what great introverts they are. They
try to make it into a feather in their cap-which is typically extro-
 verted again - and thereby ruin the whole thing. But actually, if
they do not spoil it with vanity, you can see that they can have a
much more childlike, naive, pure and really genuine introversion
than introverts. Just as an introvert, if he wakes up to his inferior
extroversion, can spread a glow of life and make life in his sur-
roundings into a symbolic festival, better than any extrovert! He
can give outer life a depth of symbolic meaning and a feeling of
life as a magic feast, which the extrovert cannot. If an extrovert
goes to a party he is ready to say that everybody is marvelous and,
"Come on, let's get this party going!" But that is a technique and
like that the party never really reaches magical depth, or very
rarely; it remains on the level of the amiable surface. But if an
introvert can come out with his extroversion in the right way, he
can create an atmosphere where outside things become symbolic:
drinking a glass of wine with a friend becomes something like a
communion, and so on. But one must not forget that most people
cover up their genuine inferior side with a pseudo-adaptation.




Page 26 of 177                                                    14%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY




                                 2
                   The Four Irational Types



     The Extroverted Sensation Type: Inferior Introverted   Intuition

 THE extroverted sensation type is represented in someone whose
 gift and specialized function is to sense and relate in a concrete
 and practical way to outer objects. Such people observe every-
 thing, smell everything, and on entering a room know almost
 at once how many people are present. Afterward, they always
 know whether so-and-so was there and what dress she had on. If
you put such a question to an intuitive, he would say he had not
 noticed and had no idea, and what did she have on? The sensation
type is a master at noticing details.
     There is the famous story of a professor ofjurisprudence
who tried to demonstrate to his students the unreliability of
witnesses. He had two people come into the room, exchange a
few sentences, and then begin to fight each other. He stopped
them and said: "Now ladies and gentlemen, please write down
exactly what you saw." The professor then showed that nobody
was capable of giving an exact and objective account of what had
happened. They all missed certain points. Based on this staged
incident, he tried to show his students that they should not rely


Page 28 of 177                                                      14%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  on eye witnesses too much. This story illustrates the tremendous
  individual relativity of sensation. It is only relatively well devel-
  oped: some are more and others less gifted at it. I would say that
 the extroverted sensation type would score highest in this field
 and would probably miss fewest points. The extroverted sensa-
 tion type has the best photographic apparatus, as it were; he can
 quickly and objectively relate to outer facts. This is why this type
 is found among the good mountaineers, engineers and business
 people, all of whom have a wide and accurate awareness of outer
 reality in all its differentiations. This type will notice the texture
of things- whether silk or wool. He will have a certain feeling for
the material. Good taste is also generally present.
     Jung says that such people very often give an impression of
being rather soulless. Most people have met such a soulless engin-
eer type, where you have the feeling that the man is absolutely
dedicated to engines and their oils and sees everything from that
angle. He produces no feeling and does not seem to think much
either. Intuition is also completely lacking; that is for him just
the realm of crazy fantasy. The extroverted sensation type calls
everything approaching intuition "mad fantasy," completely idi-
otic imagination, something that has nothing to do with reality.
He can even dislike thought, for if he is very one-sided he will con-
sider that thinking is getting into the abstract instead of keeping
to the facts. I had such an extroverted sensation type as a teacher
in Natural Science, and we could never put a general theoretical
question to him; he would call that getting off into abstract
thinking and would say that we should stick to the facts - look at
the worm and see what it looks like and then draw it, or look in
the microscope and describe what you see there. That is Natural
Science, and all the rest is fantasy and theory and nonsense. He
was very good at explaining how factories make certain chemical

Page 28 of 177                                                     14%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 products, and I still know the Haber Bosch process by heart. But
 when it came to the general theory of the interrelation of elem-
 ents, and so on, he did not teach us much. He said that was still
 uncertain in science and that it was theory that changed every
 year and was in constant evolution. So he skipped that side of the
 work.
     Everything that might be a hunch or a guess, anything intui-
 tive, appears to this type in an unpleasant form. If such a person
 had intuitions at al, they would be of a suspicious or grotesque
 nature. This professor once, in quite an amazing way, ventured
 into graphology. One day I brought him a letter written by my
 mother excusing me for not having been able to come to his class
because I had the flu. He looked at the writing and said: "Did your
mother write that?" I said: "Yes." To which he only replied, "Poor
child!" He only sensed the negative! He was like that. He would
get suspicious fits about his colleagues and about the children in
his class. You could see that he had some kind of dark intuition of
something murky, for his intuition, being inferior, was like a dog
sniffing in garbage pails: This inferior kind of intuition was very
often right, but sometimes completely wrong! Sometimes he just
had persecution ideas -dark suspicions without any foundation.
A type who is so accurate on the factual level can suddenly get
melancholy, suspicious premonitions, ideas of dark possibilities,
and one does not know how these suddenly creep up. That is how
inferior intuition came up in his case.
     Normally, in the case of the extroverted sensation type,
inferior intuition circles round the position of the subject, very
often in dark feelings or hunches or premonitions about illnesses
he might get, or other misfortunes that might befall him. That
means the inferior intuition is, in general, egocentric. Such a
person often has a kind of negative, self-depreciative attitude. But

Page 29 of 177                                                   15%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



if you get such people nicely drunk or very tired, or know them
intimately so that they come out with their other side, they can
 produce the most amazing, weird, eerie ghost stories.
     I knew a woman who was one of the best mountaineers in
 Switzerland. She was obviously an extroverted sensation type;
 only rational facts counted, and everything had its natural causes.
 She could climb all four thousand mountains not only in Switzer-
 land but in the whole range of the Alps- the French, the Savoyan,
 and the Austrian as well. But on dark evenings afterward, with
 a good fire burning, she would switch over and tell you the most
 eerie ghost stories, of the type you normally hear among the shep-
 herds and peasants. It was quite wonderful to see this primitive
 fantasy coming out of her. The next morning, when she put on
her boots, she would laugh it off and say it was all nonsense! What
 such a person intuits is usually an expression of his personal
problem.
    Another aspect of inferior intuition in an extroverted sen-
sation type is a sudden attraction to anthroposophy or some
other cocktail of Eastern metaphysics, generality of a most
otherworldly type. Very realistic engineers join such a movement
with a completely uncritical mind and get quite lost in it. That
is because their inferior intuition has such an archaic character.
On their writing desks, amazingly enough, one will often find
mystical texts, but ofa rather second-class level. If asked why
they read these books, they will say it is just nonsense, but ithelps
them to go to sleep. Their superior function is still denying the
inferior one. But if you ask the anthroposophists at Dornach who
supplied the money for their buildings, you will find that it came
from just such extroverted sensation people. The American na-
tion has a very great number of extroverted sensation types, and
this is why such strange movements flourish especially well in

Page 30 of 177                                                   16%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the United States, to amuch greater extent than in Switzerland. In
 Los Angeles you can find practically every kind of fantastic sect.
     I remember once analyzing such a type. One day I had a tele-
phone call from him. The man was sobbing at the telephone and
 said he was overwhelmed. "It happened-I cannot tell you, I am
in danger!"' Now this was not a hysterical person, and he did not
have a latent psychosis or anything of the kind. You would never
expect him to behave in this way. I was astonished and asked him
if he would be able to go to the station and buy a ticket and come
to Zurich (he was living in another town). He said he thought he
could manage, so I told him to come. By the time he arrived he
had snapped back into his superior sensation and brought me a
basket of cherries- which we gaily ate together. I said: "And now
what?" But he could not even tell me! In the meantime, by getting
to the station and buying the cherries, he had got back into the
upper level again. He had been attacked for a minute from the
other level, and the only thingI got out of him was "For a minute
I knew what God was! It is as ifI realized God! And it shook me so
much that I thought I would go mad, and now it is gone again. I
remember it, but I cannot convey it any more, and I am no longer
in it" There, via the inferior function, intuition, he suddenly had
the whole collective unconscious and the Self. In a second - like
a flash-it all came up and completely shook the upper part of
his personality, but he could not hold it. That was the beginning
of the coming up of inferior intuition, which shows its tremen-
dously creative and positive, as well as its dangerous, aspect.
Intuition has that quality of conveying a tremendous amount of
meaningful content simultaneously. He saw the whole thing in
one second; it came up for a minute, and then it went again. There
he was munching cherries, back in his flat, ordinary, extroverted



Page 31 of 177                                                 16%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



sensation world. That would be an example of the first genuine
appearance of inferior intuition in such a type.
    A great danger comes from the grip the inferior funetion can
get on a whole personality. I once knew an extroverted sensation
type, a very efficient builder and good businessman, who had
made a tremendous amount of money. He was very practical, but
he built horrible houses. Only, the gadgets in them were perfect,
so that people liked to live there even though from an artistic
point of view the houses were awful. He was a good skier, dressed
very well, admired women, and had the kind of refined sensuality
an extroverted sensation type can display. This man fell into the
hands of an intuitive woman twenty years older than himself.
She was a wild, fantastic mother figure and enormously fat. In
her case this represented lack of discipline: introverted intuitive
types are often terribly immoderate and exceed their reasonable
limits both psychically and physically because of their inferior
sensation. This woman lived only in her fantasies and was ab-
solutely incapable of supporting herself financially. It was the
typical union where the man provides the money and looks after
the practical side oflife, and the woman contributes the fantasy
aspect.
    I once went skiing with him. I was bored to tears! The only
thing he might have talked about in an interesting way was his
business, but he did not talk of that to women, and otherwise
he had nothing to say except that the sun was nice and the food
not bad. To my great surprise, this man invited me to the an-
throposophs at Dornach to see a play. The Goetheanum was his
"spiritual mother" and held a great attraction for him. He was
absolutely gripped by the play, so moved that he was completely
carried away. Afterward I was tactless enough to say that it was
too high-up for me and that what I was longing for was a steak!

Page 32 of 177                                                    17%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 He was shocked out of his wits by my materialism. I was only
 about eighteen at the time and would be wiser novw. But that
 was how his intuition worked. On the one side, it was projected
 into this woman, and on the other side there was Dornach. He
 tried to break with the woman, having realized the mother-son
 relationship, and hoped to park his inferior intuition in Dornach
 instead. This was certainly a step forward from just having it
projected into a mother figure, for at least it was an attempt to
 assimilate it on an inner level. This is why my remark was so es-
pecially tactless. How the attempt worked out I have no idea, forI
lost contact with him. But one should never make depreciative or
hurtful remarks if people come out with their inferior function. It
is terribly touchy.
     Another example of inferior introverted intuition, but this
time really inferior, illustrates the disgusting form and desperate
abyss into which the inferior function can lead. Recently, in an
American science fiction paper, I read the story of a man who
invented an apparatus by which people could be dematerialized
and rematerialized. He could, for instance, be here in Zurich and
then suddenly materialize in New York. By means of such an
apparatus it would be possible to dispense with airplanes and
ships. First he experimented with ash trays and later with a fly. A
few mistakes occurred at the beginning, but after the adjustment
of several wires it seemed to work with the fly. In case anything
went wrong, he wanted to be the first victim; so he put himself
in the apparatus. Unfortunately, the experiment got stuck on the
way, and he came out the other end with the head of an enormous
fly! He tried to contact his wife, and covering up his head with a
cloth so that she could not see it he told her she must try to free
him and gave her various instructions. But nothing worked, and
finally, in desperation, he asked her to kill him; out of kindness

Page 32 of 177                                                  17%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 to him, she did. Afterward the story becomes one of the usual
 criminal types. When he is dead and buried, the woman goes
 mad and gets put into an asylum. But then the first fly is found,
the one that now has the man's head. The family, out of piety, has
the fly put into a matchbox, which is sentimentally deposited on
the tomb and an inscription states that the deceased was "a hero
 and a victim of science." I have spared you most of the disgusting
and perverse details in the story, which are expounded with great
gusto.
     There one sees how inferior intuition takes shape in a
 sensation production. Since the story is written by a sensation
type, it gets disguised as completely practical sensation. The fly
would represent inferior intuition, which gets mixed up with the
conscious personality. A fly is a devilish insect. In general, flies
represent involuntary fantasies and thoughts that annoy one and
buzz around in one's head and that one cannot chase away. Here,
this scientist gets caught and victimized by an idea that involves
murder and madness. In order to save the life of his wife, the
family puts her into a lunatic asylum where she spends her time
trying to catch flies, hoping to find the one that might be a part of
her husband. At the end of the story the commissioner of police
talks to the author and says that the woman was, after all, just
mad. One sees that he would represent collective common sense-
the verdict finally adopted by the writer, who admits that all this
is just madness. If the writer had established the continuity of his
inferior function, and had freed it from his extroverted sensation,
then a really pure and clean story would have come out. In genu-
ine fantasies, such as those of Edgar Allan Poe and the poet Gustav
Meyrinck, intuition is established in its own right. These fantasies
are highly symbolic and can be interpreted in a symbolic way. But



Page 33 of 177                                                   18%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



a sensation type always   wants to concretize his intuitions in some
way.


     The Introverted Sensation   Type:Inferior Extroverted Intuition

MANY years ago, in the Psychological Club, we had a meeting at
which members were asked to describe their type in their own
Words, instead of just quoting Jung's book on the types. Members
were to describe how they experienced their own superior func-
tion. I have never forgotten an excellent paper that Mrs. Jung gave.
It was only after hearing it thatI felt I understood the introverted
sensation type. In describing herself, she said that the introverted
sensation type was like a highly sensitized photographic plate.
When somebody comes into the room, such a type notices the
way the person comes in, the hair, the expression on the face,
the clothes, and the way the person walks. All this makes a very
precise impression on the introverted sensation type; every detail
is absorbed. The impression comes from the object to the subject.
It is as though a stone fell into deep water: the impression falls
deeper and deeper and sinks in. Outwardly, the introverted sen-
sation type looks utterly stupid. He just sits and stares, and you
do not know what is going on within him. He looks like a piece
of wood with no reaction at all - unless he reacts with one of the
auxiliary functions, thinking or feeling. But inwardly the impres-
sion is being absorbed.
     The introverted sensation type, therefore, gives the impres-
sion of being very slow, which is not actually the case. It is only
that the quick inner reactions go on underneath, and the outer
reaction comes in a delayed way. These are the people who, if told
a joke in the morning., will probably laugh at midnight. This type
is very often misjudged and misunderstood by others because one


Page 34 of 177                                                     18%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



does not realize what goes on within.   If such a type can express
 his photographic impressions artistically, they can be reproduced
 either in painting or in writing. I have a strong suspicion that
 Thomas Mann was such an introverted sensation type. He de-
 scribes every detail of a scene, and in his descriptions he gives the
 whole atmosphere of a room or a personality. This is a kind of sen-
 sitivity that takes in every smallest shade and detail.
     The inferior intuition of this type is similar to that of the
 extroverted sensation type, for it also has a very weird, eerie,
 fantastic quality. But it is more concerned with the impersonal,
 collective outer world. With the builder I mentioned, for example,
 you can see that he is an extroverted sensation type. He picks up
 intuitions that concern himself. In his extroverted sensation, he
 is concerned with the collective outer world - with road build-
 ing or the building of big houses. But his intuition is applied to
 himself; it is highly personal and mixed up with his personal
 problems. With the introverted sensation type, the movement
 comes from the object towards him. The novels by Thomas Mann
have a very subjective character. But the intuition of this type is
concerned with events that go on in the background; he picks up
the possibilities and the future of the outer surroundings.
     I have seen in an introverted sensation type material that
I would call very prophetic - archetypal fantasies that do not
mainly represent the problem of the dreamer, but those of his
time. The assimilation of these fantasies is very difficult because
sensation, the dominant function, is a function with which we
comprehend the here and now. The negative aspect of sensation
is that the type gets stuck in concrete reality. As Jung once noted,
for them the future does not exist, future possibilities do not
exist, they are in the here and the now, and there is an iron curtain
before them. They behave in life as though it will always be the

Page 35 of 177                                                    18%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



same as it is now; they are incapable of conceiving that things
might change. The disadvantage of this type is that when these
tremendous inner fantasies well up, such a person has great diffi-
 culty in assimilating them because of the accuracy and slowness
 of his conscious function. If such a type is at all willing to take his
 intuition seriously, he will be inclined to try to put it down very
 accurately. But how can you do that? Intuition comes like a flash,
 and if you try to put it down it has gone! So he does not know how
 to deal with the problem and goes through agonies, because the
 only way his inferior function can be assimilated is by loosening
 the hold of the superior function.
     I knew a woman, an introverted sensation type, who for many
years had very accurately painted the contents of her uncon-
 scious. It took her about three weeks to complete a painting. The
paintings were beautiful and worked out in every detail, but, as I
heard later, she did not paint the contents of her unconscious as
they came; she corrected and improved the colors and refined the
details. She would say, "Naturally I improved them aesthetically:"
Slowly the need to assimilate the inferior function became im-
perative, and she was told that she should speed up her painting
and take the colors exactly as they were, however crude, and just
put them on paper quickly. When I translated the contents of her
dreams in this way, she got into a panic and said she could not,
it was impossible. To have this put to her was like being knocked
out, she could not do it, and she continued to paint in her usual
way. Again and again she missed the coming up of the uncon-
scious intuition, for she could not put it down as it came.
    That is how the fight looks between the superior and inferior
functions in the introverted sensation type. If you try to force him
to assimilate intuition too quickly, he gets symptoms of giddiness
or seasickness. He feels carried away from the solid ground of

Page 36 of 177                                                      19%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



reality, and because he is so stuck there, he gets actual symptoms
of seasickness. I knew one introverted sensation type woman
who had to go to bed to do active imagination; otherwise she felt
exactly as if she were on a boat.
    Because the introverted sensation type's superior function is
introverted, his intuition is extroverted and therefore is generally
triggered off by outer events. Such a type might, while walking
down a street, see a crystal in a shop window, and his intuition
might suddenly grasp its symbolic meaning: the whole symbolic
meaning of the crystal would flood into his soul. But that would
have been triggered off by the outside event, since his inferior
intuition is essentially extroverted. Naturally, he has the same
bad characteristics as the extroverted sensation type; in both,
intuitions are very often of a sinister character, and if not worked
upon, therefore, the prophetic contents that break through will be
pessimistic and negative.
    Negative intuition sometimes does hit the target. It either
hits the mark exactly, or it goes wildly astray. In general, when
intuition is the main function and one of the other functions-
either thinking or feeling - has been developed, the person can
judge whether it might be the bull's eye or off in the woods, and
therefore he holds back. But inferior intuition is primitive, and
the sensation type either surprises you by hitting the bull's eye,
which you can only admire, or else he comes up with hunches in
which there is no truth -just pure invention!

     The Extroverted   Intuitive Type: Inferior Introverted Sensation

INTUITION is a function by which we conceive possibilities. A
sensation type would call this object a bell, but a child would im-
agine all sorts of things you could do with it. It could be a church


Page 36 of 177                                                          20%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



 tower, this book could be a village, etc. In everything there is a
 possibility of development. In mythology, intuition is very often
 represented by the nose. One says: "I smell a rat"; that is, my intu-
 ition tells me that there is something wrong; I don't know quite
what, butI can smell it! Then three weeks later the rat leaps out
of its hole, and one says: "Oh, I smelt it, I had a hunch there was
something in the air!" These are unborn possibilities, the germs
of the future. Intuition is therefore the capacity for intuiting that
which is not yet visible, future possibilities or potentialities in the
background of a situation.
     The extroverted intuitive type applies this to the outer world
and therefore will score very high in surmising the future outer
developments around him. Such types are very often found
among business people. They are enterprisers who have the cour-
age to manufacture and market new inventions. One finds them
among journalists and frequently among publishers; they know
what will be popular next year. They will bring out something
that is not yet the fashion but soon will be, and they are the first to
put it on the market. Stockbrokers, too, may have a certain knack,
which tells them that a particular stock will go up, that the mar-
ket will be bullish or bearish, and they will make money through
sensing the rise and fall of stocks. One finds them wherever there
is something new brewing, even in the more spiritual realms.
They will always be in the advance movement.
     It is generally the creative artist who creates the future. A
civilization that has no creative people is doomed. So the person
who is really in touch with the future, with the germs of the
future, is the creative personality. Now the extroverted intuitive,
because he is capable of sniffing the wind and knowing what the
weather will be tomorrow, will see that this perhaps completely
unknown painter or writer is the man of tomorrow, and therefore

Page 37 of 177                                                     20%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



he will be fascinated. His   intuition can recognize the value of such
a  creative person. Creative people themselves are introverted and
 are so occupied with their creations that they can not attend to
 the bringing out of their work. The work itself takes up so much
 of their energy that they cannot be bothered with how it should
be presented to the world, how to advertise it, or anything of
that kind. Moreover, any kind of purposiveness poisons creative
processes. Very often, then, the extroverted intuitive comes along
 and helps. But, naturally, if he does that all his life, he begins pro-
jecting a minor creative ability of his own on the artist, and so he
loses himself. Sooner or later such people have to pull themselves
out of their extroversion and say, "Now, even if it is on a minor
scale, what is my creativeness?" And then they will be forced
down into their inferior sensation, and instead of attending to
other people's creativeness, they will have to attend to their own
inferior sensation and to what might come out of it.
     Intuition needs to look at things from afar or vaguely in order
            ****
to  function,    so as to get a certain hunch from the unconscious,
to half shut the eyes and not look at facts too closely. If one looks
at things too precisely, the focus is on facts, and then the hunch
cannot come through. That is why intuitives tend to be unpunc-
tual and vague. A disadvantage of having this as a main function
is that the intuitive type sows but rarely reaps. For instance, if one
starts a new business, there are generally initial difficulties: the
thing does not work immediately; it is necessary to wait a certain
time for it to become profitable. The intuitive very often does not
wait long enough. He starts the business, but that is enough for
him; he sells out and loses on it, but the next owner makes a lot of
money out of the same business. The intuitive is always the one
who invernts but in the end gets nothing out of it. But if he is more
balanced and can wait a little, and if he does not dissociate com-

Page 38 of 177                                                      21%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 pletely by identifying with his main function, then he is a person
 who can store up new things in all the corners of the world.
      The extroverted intuitive tends not to attend to his body and
 his physical needs: he simply does not know when he is tired; he
 does not notice it. It takes a breakdown to show him. He also does
 not know when he is hungry. If he is an exaggerated one-sided
 type, he does not know that he has any endosomatic feelings.
     Inferior sensation, like all inferior functions, is in such people
 slow, heavy, and loaded with emotion. Because it is introverted, it
 is turned away from the outer world and its affairs. It has, like al1
 inferior functions, a mystical quality about it.
     I once analyzed such an extroverted intuitive type, a business
 man who had started a great many businesses in a foreign coun-
try and had also speculated a lot in gold mines and the like. He
 always knew where possibilities were and made a large fortune in
a very short time, absolutely honestly - quite decently simply be-
cause he knew where to invest. He knew what was coming, what
would happen in a few years, and he was aways on the spot first
and got the whole business in hand. His introverted sensation-
he was rather a split personality- came up first as a very dirty,
bad-tempered tramp who appeared in his dreams. The tramp sat
around in inns, wore dirty clothes, and we did not know what
this fellow wanted of the dreamer. I induced him to talk to the
tramp in active imagination. The tramp said that he had been re-
sponsible for the physical symptoms that had brought the man to
analysis, and that they had been sent because he (the tramp) did
not get enough attention. So, in active imagination, he asked what
he should do. The tramp said that he should, once a week, dress in
clothes such as the tramp wore, go for a walk in the country with
him, and pay attention to what he had to say.


Page 39 of 177                                                     21 %
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    I advised the dreamer to follow the advice precisely. The result
was that he took long walks through many parts of Switzerland,
staying in the most simple inns, unrecognized by anybody.
During this time he had a great number of overwhelming inner
experiences, which came through contact with nature: the sun-
rise, and small things like seeing a certain flower in a corner of a
rock, and so on. It struck right to the core of his personality and
revealed a tremendous number of things. I can only describe it
as experiencing, in a very primitive way, the Godhead in nature.
He came back very silent and quieted, and one had the feeling
that something had moved in him that had never moved before.
His compulsory symptoms disappeared completely during those
weekly walks.
    Then came the problem of how he could keep this experience
and avoid slipping back when he got home to his own country. So
we consulted the tramp again who said that he would let him off
the symptoms if he would take one afternoon each week, go alone
into nature, and continue his talks with him. The man then left.
From his letters I learned that he did this for a while, but then he
slipped back to his old habits: there was too much work, he was
starting three new businesses, and there were so many meetings.
So he postponed the tramp, always saying "Next week, next week
-sure I am coming, but next week." And then he promptly got his
symptoms back! That taught him; he switched back and walked
regularly and was all right again. It then crystallized into him
buying a little farm and having a horse. One afternoon a week
he attended to his horse with what one could only call religious
devotion. The horse was his friend, so to speak, and like a ritual he
went to visit it and ride it and look after it every week. From then
on he had peace. I am sure a lot is going on inwardly, but I haven't



Page 40 of 177                                                  22%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



heard much from him except for Christmas cards saying that he
was getting on all right. And, of course, photographs of the horse!
     There one sees how the inferior function is the door to experi-
encing the deeper layers of the unconscious. This intuitive type
got out of his ego and ego purposes via this contact with nature
and with the horse. One sees very clearly that even if the inferior
function appears outside - in a horse, for example- it obviously
carries a symbolic meaning. Attending to the horse was a first
personification of the impersonal collective unconscious for him.
It is important for an intuitive type to do this concretely and very
slowly, and not immediately exclaim: "Oh, the horse is a symbol
of the unconscious," etc. He must stick to the actual horse and at-
tend to it, even though he knows it is a symbol.

     The Introverted   Intuitive Type: Inferior Extroverted Sensation

THE introverted intuitive type has the same capacity as the
extroverted intuitive for smelling out the future, having the
right guess or the right hunch about the not-yet-seen future
possibilities of a situation. But his intuition is turned within, and
therefore he is primarily the type of the religious prophet, of the
seer. On a primitive level, he is the shaman who knows what the
gods and the ghosts and the ancestral spirits are planning, and
who conveys their messages to the tribe. In psychological lan-
guage we should say that he knows about the slow processes that
go on in the collective unconscious, the archetypal changes, and
he communicates them to society. The prophets of the Old Testa-
ment, for instance, were people who, while the children of Israel
were happily asleep-as the masses always are -from time to time
told them what Yahweh's real intentions were, what he was doing



Page 40 of 177                                                          22%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 now, and what he wanted his people to do. The people generally
 did not enjoy hearing these messages.
    Many introverted intuitives are to be found among artists and
 poets. They generally are artists who produce very archetypal
 and fantastic material, such as you find in Nietzsche's Thus Spoke
Zarathustra, Gustav Meyrinck's The Golem, or Alfred Kubin's The
 Other Side. This kind of visionary art is generally only understood
by later generations, as a representation of what was going on in
 the collective unconscious at that time.
    The inferior sensation of this type also has difficulties in
 noticing the needs of the body and controlling its appetites. Swe-
denborg had a vision in which God himself told him he should
 not eat so much! He ate naturally, without the slightest self-
 discipline and with complete unawareness. Swedenborg was a
typical introverted intuitive, the prophet or seer type, and he was
simply coarse and uninhibited about overeating. The introverted
intuitive also suffers, as the extroverted intuitive does, from a tre-
mendous vagueness where facts are concerned.
    As an illustration of the more ridiculous aspect of the inferior
sensation of an introverted intuitive, I offer the following story.
An introverted intuitive woman was present when I gave a lecture
on early Greek philosophy and was terribly moved and impressed
by it. Afterward, she asked me to give her private lessons on the
subject of pre-Socratic philosophy, as she wanted to get deeper
into this field. she invited me to tea and, as happens very often
when you have to give lessons to introverted intuitives, she
wasted the first hour in telling me how moved she was and what
she conceived to be at the back of my mind and what she believed
we could do together, and so on. The second hour also got wasted
in the same way, and, as I felt I should earn my money and get her
going somehow, I insisted we look at a book that I had brought

Page 41 of 177                                                    22%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  and proceed in a systematic way. She agreed, but added that I
  must leave her alone: she had to do it quite her own way. I noticed
  that she was getting nervous.
     When I came for the next hour, she said she had found the
 best way to get into the problem: namely, that she could naturally
 not study Greek philosophy without knowing about the Greeks,
 and she could not know about the Greeks before knowing quite
 concretely about their country. So she had started to draw a map
 of Greece, and she showed me the map. It had takena lot of time.
 With her inferior sensation she had first had to buy paper and
 pencils and ink. That excited her enormously; she was absolutely
 in heaven about her achievement! She said that she could not yet
 go on with philosophy; she had first to finish the map. So by the
 next time she had colored it! That went on for a few months, and
 then her intuition picked another theme, and we never got down
to Greek philosophy. She left Zurich and I did not see her again
until about fifteen years later; then she told me a long story of
how she was still impressed and moved by the lessons on Greek
philosophy that I had given her and all that she had gained from
them. She had just drawn a map. She was a very extreme case of
introverted intuition. But I must admit, in looking back, that I see
what a really numinous thing it was for that woman to draw this
map of Greece; for the first time she had got in touch with her in-
ferior sensation.
     The introverted intuitive is often so completely unaware of
outer facts that his reports have to be treated with the greatest
care. Though he does not lie consciously, he can tell the most ap-
palling untruths, simply because he does not notice what is right
under his nose. I very often distrust ghost reports, for instance,
and reports about parapsychological facts for those reasons.
Introverted intuitives are very much interested in such fields,

Page 42 of 177                                                   23 %
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 but because of their weakness in observing facts and their lack
 of concentration on the external situation, they can tell you the
 most appalling nonsense and swear it is true. They pass by an ab-
 solutely amazing number of outer facts and just do not take them
 in. I remember, for instance, driving with an introverted intuitive
type one autumn, and in the fields the potatoes were being dug
up and there were bonfires. I had noticed that for quite some time
 and was enjoying the sight. Suddenly the driver stopped the car in
horror, sniffed, and said, "Something is burning! Is it coming from
outside" We looked at the brakes, and everything was all right;
then we decided it was outside after all. It was the bonfires! The
bonfires were everywhere, and to me it was obvious that the smell
of burning came from them. But an introverted intuitive can drive
for an hour through the country with such phenomena all about
and not notice a thing. And then suddenly he will be struck by
the fact and make completely incorrect deductions. His inferior
sensation has the quality that all inferior functions have, namely,
that it comes up into consciousness in islands; sometimes it
functions, and then it disappears. Suddenly a smell is intensely
realized, whereas three-quarters of an hour before it was not real-
ized at all, but then suddenly it is taken in with great intensity.
     The inferior sensation of an introverted intuitive is extremely
intense, but it breaks through only here and there and then fades
again from the field of awareness. The introverted intuitive has
particular trouble in approaching sex because it involves his
inferior extroverted sensation. It is most tragically mirrored in
the works of Nietzsche, for instance, where, towards the end
of his career, shortly before he went insane, very coarse sexual
allusions penetrate his poems and also appear in Thus Spoke Zara-
thustra. When he went insane, he apparently produced material
of that kind, which was destroyed after his death because of its

Page 43 of 177                                                  23%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 absolutely distasteful character. Inferior extroverted sensation
 in his case was very much connected with women and sex, in a
 completely concrete way, and he didn't know how to deal with the
 problem at all.
     The positive aspect of inferior extroverted sensation in the
 case of an introverted intuitive is to be found in an interesting
 way in the illumination experience of Jakob Böhme, a German
 mystic and an introverted intuitive type. He had a wife and six
 children for whom he never earned any money. He was in con-
 stant trouble with them because his wife always said that instead
 of writing books about God and fantasizing about the inner devel-
 opment of the Godhead he would do better to see that his family
 had something to eat. He was absolutely crucified between these
 two poles of life. Now his greatest inner experience, a revelation
 of the Godhead upon which all his later writings are based, came
 from seeing a ray of light being reflected in a tin plate. That sen-
 sation experience snapped him into an inner ecstasy, and within
 a minute he saw, so to speak, the whole mystery of the Godhead.
 For years he did nothing except slowly translate into discursive
 language what he had seen inwardly in one minute, in one sec-
ond! His writing is so emotional and chaotic because he tried to
describe this one experience in so many amplifications. But the
actual vision was set in motion by seeing a ray of light striking a
tin plate on his table. This implies extroverted sensation: an outer
sensation fact started off the process of individuation in him.
Here one can see, besides the inferior aspect of extroverted sen-
sation, this strange character of wholeness, the mystical aspect,
which the inferior function often has. It is interesting that even
Swedenborg's overeating connected him with the Godhead. His
inferior sensation was connected with his deepest and greatest
Concern.

Page 44 of 177                                                   24%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     (A period of questions and answers follows.)

Question:I would like to ask whether the ecstatic state is usually
connected with the inferior function.
Von Franz: Yes, it is connected in that it is normally started off by
an experience of the inferior function.

Question: Would you say that the intuitive types tend to be more
sensitive to what we call subliminal stimuli?
Von Franz: Yes, in general I would say that both intuitive types are.
They have to be, for they have to keep their consciousness con-
stantly unfocused and dim in order to get those hunches. They
are sensitive to the atmosphere of a place. Probably intuition is a
kind of sense perception via the unconscious or a sort of sublim-
inal sense perception. It is a way of operating through subliminal
sense perception instead of through conscious perception.

Question: Both the extroverted intuitive and Jakob Böhme seemto
have distinctly introverted sensation. Shouldn't the introverted
intuitive have a more extroverted sensation?
Von Franz: Yes, but Böhme had! My "horse man" (to describe him
briefly) realized inner depth and became silent through his ex-
perience; he hasn't even told me much about it. He has only made
allusions that something deep was going on. Böhme, on the other
hand, exteriorized his insight constructed a system of outer real-
ity, of God and of evil in the world. He made a whole philosophy of
it, but turned outward, while personally he was very introverted.
He was a shy little shoemaker.
     Something else very interesting about Böhme is that as long
as he was crucified between his nagging wife, who said he had
better make good shoes and feed his six children, and speculating
about a Godhead, he was very productive. But after his first book


Page 45 of 177                                                    25%
                            LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



was published, a German baron felt so sorry for him, and felt so
strongly that he was a great seer, that he took all his outer troubles
away by paying for his family's support. From then on Böhme's
writing gets full of resentment and repetitions. It sterilized his
creativeness. As you know, on his tombstone is a stylized render-
ing of his dualistic Godhead symbol: }|(.


                 Die Philolophilche Nugel oder das
                      Funde:Auge der Cwigkeit.


                      asPrincipiun. as 2*Principium.

                                                           3ate




                  Tinetur                                 *******
                                                          Sdek




      Jacob Böhme, The Philosophical Globe or the Miracle Eye     of Eternity

This is really tragic, as it shows that he could not unite the light
and the dark sides; it remained an insoluble problem to him. In

Page 45 of 177                                                                  25%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



my experience, this is connected with the very simple fact that he
accepted money from this baron and by that escaped the torture
of his inferior function.
     To be crucified between the superior and the inferior func-
                        ****** ***
tions is vitally important. I can only warn you that if you ever
feel like saving such artists or prophets, for God's sake look at the
case first very circumspectly and see how much you can afford to
help them. If you buy them off reality, then they lose all sense of
it. You have not helped them in the least. This type will beg you to
help them out of their trouble; on their knees they will beg you to
save them from the torture of outer reality with which they can't
cope. But if you "save" them, the creative core of their personality
is destroyed. That does not mean that if they are starving you
cannot give them something to survive, or give them help from
time to time when the situation is bad, but don't let them off the
problem of reality because, strangely enough, that sterilizes the
inner process as well. That happened to Böhme, and because of it
he was not able to unite the opposites, neither in his system nor in
his life. What Baron von Merz did was really to destroy him by un-
wise charity.




Page 47 of 177
                                                                 25%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY




                                 3
                    The Four Rational 1ypes



     The Extroverted Thinking Type: Inferior Introverted Feeling

THIS type is to be found among organizers, people in high office
and government positions, in business, in law and among scien-
tists. They can compile useful encyclopedias. They dig up all the
dust in old libraries and do away with the inhibiting factors in sci-
ence that are caused by clumsiness or laziness or a lack of clarity
in language. The extroverted thinking type establishes order by
taking a definite stand and saying, "If we say so-and-so, we mean
so-and-so." They put clarifying order into the outer situation. At
a business meeting, such a man will say that one should get at
the basic facts and then see how to proceed. A lawyer who has to
listen to all the chaotic reports of contending parties is able, with
his superior thinking function, to see which are the real conflicts
and which the pseudo-contentions, and then to arrange a solution
satisfactory to all parties. The emphasis will always be upon the
object, not on the idea. Such a lawyer will not fight for the idea of
democracy or domestic peace; his whole mind will be absorbed
with and swallowed up by the outer objective situation.



Page 48 of 177                                                     25%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



      If one were to ask him about hissubjective attitude or ideas
on a certain subject, he would be at a loss, for he is not concerned
with that area of life and would be completely unconscious of
any personal motive. Generally, if you search for the unconscious
motivations, they will consist in a childlike naive belief in peace,
charity and justice. If pressed into saying what he understood by
 "justice," he would be quite bewildered and probably throw you
 out of his office because he was "too busy" The subjective element
 remains in the background of his personality. The premises of his
 high ideals remain within the realm of his inferior feeling func-
 tion. He will have a mystical feeling attachment to his ideals, but
 one would have to drive him into a corner to find out about them.
 Feeling attachments to certain ideals or to people are present, but
they never appear in daytime activities. Such a man might spend
his whole life settling problems, re-organizing firms, and stating
things clearly; only at the end of his life would he start to ask him-
self mournfully what he had really lived for. At such a moment he
would fall into his inferior function.
    I once talked to a man of this type who was terribly over
worked and needed a long holiday. He gave me a lot of good advice,
saying I should go on a holiday, and when I asked him why he
didn't, he replied: "My God, I should be alone too much and get
much too melancholy!" In solitude, such a person will ask himself
whether his work is really important. He will remember how he
saved someone from being robbed and so on, but has he improved
the world? Such feelings would have come up in this gentleman,
and he would have felt like falling into an abyss. He would have
had to recheck his whole evaluation of things. Naturally, there-
fore, he avoided taking any holidays - until he fell and broke his
hip and had to stay in bed six months. That is how nature imposes
the inferior function on such people!

Page 48 of 177                                                    26%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



       The extroverted thinking type has, as I said already, a kind of
 mystical feeling attachment for ideals and often also for people.
 But this deep, strong, warm feeling hardly ever comes out. I re-
 member an extroverted thinking type who, when he once came
 out with his feeling for his wife, really moved me. But when I
 talked to his wife it was deplorable to see how little she knew of
 it, because, as a mad extrovert, he would spend the whole day
 in his profession, milling around in life, and those deep feelings
 were never expressed. If his wife had been dying of consumption
 he would not have noticed it until he was at the funeral. And she
 did not realize the depth of his feeling for her and that, in a deep
 sense, he was loyal and faithful to her; that was hidden and not
 expressed in his life. It remained introverted and did not move
 towards the object. It took quite a few sessions to get a better
 understanding in the marriage and to make the wife realize that
 her husband really loved her. He was so terribly occupied with the
 outer world, and his feeling was so hidden and unexpressed in his
life, that his wife did not realize what a tremendous hidden role
these feelings played within him.
      Introverted feeling, even if it is the main function, is very
difficult to understand. A very good example of it is the Austrian
poet Rainer Maria Rilke. He once wrote: "Ich liebe dich, was geht's
dich an." (I love you, but it's none of your business.) That is love
for love's sake! Feeling is very strong, but it does not flow towards
the object. It is rather like being in a state of love with oneself.
Naturally, this kind of feeling is very much misunderstood, and
such people are considered very cold. But they are not at all; the
feeling is all within them. On the other hand, they have a very
strong hidden influence on the surrounding society, for they have
secret ways of establishing values. For example, such a feeling
type may never express his feeling but simply behave as though

Page 49 of 177                                                    26%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



he thought one thing was valuable and another not: this exerts a
certain impact on other people. When the feeling is inferior, it is
even more hidden and more absolute. The lawyer I described had
his idea ofjustice, and this would have very suggestive effects on
other people; that is, his hidden feeling for justice would uncon-
  sciously influence other people in the same direction without his
 ever noticing it. It would really dictate not only his own fate but
 also that of others, though invisibly.
     The hidden, introverted feeling of the extroverted thinking
 type establishes strong invisible loyalties. Such people are among
 the most faithful of all friends, even though they may only write
 at Christmas. They are absolutely faithful in their feeling, but one
 has to move towards it to get to know of its existence.
     Outwardly, the extroverted thinking type does not give the
 impression of having strong feeling. In a politician, the inferior
 feeling function might unconsciously manifest itself in a deep-
 rooted and steadfast loyalty to his country. But it might also
 induce him to drop an atom bomb or commit some other de-
 structive act. Unconscious and undeveloped feeling is barbaric
 and absolute, and therefore sometimes hidden destructive fan-
 aticism suddenly bursts out of the extroverted thinking type.
 These people are incapable of seeing that, from a feeling standard,
other people might have another value, for they do not question
the inner values they defend. Where they definitely feel that
something is right, they are incapable of showing their feeling
standpoint, but they never doubt their own inner values.
     These hidden introverted feelings of the extroverted thinking
type are sometimes very childish. After the death of such people,
one sometimes finds notebooks in which childish poems have
been written to a faraway woman whom they never met in their
lives, and in which a lot of sentimental, mystical feeling is poured

Page 50 of 177                                                   27%
                       LECTURESs ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




 out. They often ask to have these poems destroyed after death.
 The feeling is hidden; it is, in a way, the most valuable possession
 they have, but all the same it is sometimes strikingly infantile.
 Sometimes the feeling remains entirely with the mother and
 never comes out of the childhood realm; one may then find touch
ing documents about the attachment to her.
    Another way in which infantile feeling can manifest itself in
extroverted thinking types is instanced in the case of Voltaire,
the French philosopher. He, as you know, fought the Catholic
Church with all his might. He was the author of the famous slo-
gan "Ecrasez l'infâme" (Let us crush the infamous). He was an
intellectual and a typical representative of the age of enlighten-
ment. On his deathbed, however, he got jittery, asked for extreme
unction and took it with a great upwelling of pious feeling. There
he showed, at the end of his life, that he was completely split: his
mind had left an original religious experience, but his feeling had
stayed there. When it came to death - which one has to meet as
a whole person - his feeling came up and overwhelmed him ina
completely undifferentiated way. All sudden conversions have
this quality: they are due to the sudden eruption of the inferior
function.

     The Introverted Thinking Type:   Inferior Extroverted Feeling

THE main activity of this type is not so much trying to establish
order in outer objects; it is more concerned with ideas. Someone
who would say that one should not start with facts, but first clar-
ify one's ideas, would belong to the introverted thinking type. His
wish to bring order into life starts off with the idea that, if one is
muddle-headed from the very start, one will never get anywhere.
It is first necessary to know what ideas to follow and where they

Page 51 of 177                                                       27%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



 come from; one must clean up muddleheadedness by digging into
 the background of one's thoughts. All philosophy is concerned
 with the logical processes of the human mind, with the building
 up of ideas. This is the realm where introverted thinking is mostly
 at work. In science, these are the people who are perpetually try-
 ing to prevent their colleagues from getting lost in experiments
 and who, from time to time, try to get back to basic concepts and
 ask what we are really doing mentally. In physics, there is gener
 ally one professor for practical physics and another for theoretical
 physics: one lectures on the Wilson Chamber and the building
 up of experiments, the other on mathematical principles and
 the theory of science. In all the various sciences there are always
 those who try to clean out the basic theories of their scientific
 realm. The extroverted historian of art will try to find out about
 the facts and try to prove, for instance, that a certain type of Ma-
 donna was painted earlier or later than another type, and he will
 try to connect that with the history and background of the artist.
 The introvert might ask what right one had to judge a work of art?
 He would say that first we should understand what we mean by
 art; otherwise we shall get into a muddle. The introverted think-
ing type always goes back to the subjective idea, namely, to what
the subject is doing in the whole matter.
     The feeling of the introverted thinking type is extroverted. He
has the same kind of strong, loyal, and warm feeling described as
typical for the extroverted. thinking type, but with the difference
that the feeling of the introverted thinking type flows towards
definite objects. While the extroverted thinking type deeply loves
his wife but says with Rilke, "I love you, but it is none of your
business," the feeling of the introverted thinking type is tied
to external objects. He would therefore say, in the Rilke style, "I
love you, and it will be your business; l'll make it your business!"

Page 52 of 177                                                   28%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



Otherwise, the introverted thinking type's feeling has very much
the same characteristics as the inferior feeling of the extroverted
thinking type- very black and white judgments, either yes or
no, love or hate. His feeling can be very easily poisoned by other
people and by the collective atmosphere. The inferior feeling of
both types is sticky, and the extroverted thinking type has that
kind of invisible faithfulness that can last endlessly. The same is
true for the extroverted feeling of the introverted thinking type,
except that it will not be invisible. If you evaluate it positively, it
will be faithful; but in a negative evaluation, it is sticky. It resem-
bles the glue-like flow of feeling in an epileptic person; it has the
kind of sticky, dog-like attachment that, especially to the beloved,
is not always amusing. You could compare the inferior feeling of
an introverted thinking type to the flow of hot lava from a vol-
cano: it only moves about five meters an hour, but it devastates
everything in its way. But it also has all the advantages of a primi-
tive function, for it is tremendously genuine and warm. When
an introverted thinking type loves, there is no calculation in it. It
will be totally for the sake of the other, but it will be primitive. The
inferior feeling of this type is about as if a lioness would like to
play with a baby. It has no other intention than to play, but it rubs
itself, purring, against his leg, or eats him up, or gives him a great
blow so that he falls over, and then it licks his face. But there is
no calculation in it; it is just an expression of feeling, just as a dog
wags his tail! What touches people in the feeling of domestic ani-
mals is just this lack of calculation.
    In both thinking types, inferior feeling is without calculation
whereas people who have differentiated feeling are, ina hidden
way, calculating. They always put a little bit of ego into it. I once
met the bOSs of a typist and wondered how she stood such a
horror for a single day! But she was a feeling type. She only smiled

Page 52 of 177                                                      28%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 and said that he was her boss so she made the best of it; by looking
 at him closely, she could find that he had this and that positive
 quality. One could say that to see good possibilities and recognize
 them is admirable, but on the other hand there is a little calcula-
 tion in it: she wanted to keep her place with her boss, so she made
 that positive feeling effort. That would never happen to the infer-
 ior feeling of a thinking type! I could never have stood it: I would
 rather not eat. Such is the great difference between inferior and
 differentiated feeling. The feeling type had found a few positive
 qualities in that horrible man and put up with him. She did not
 deny all the negative things I saw in him, but she said he never
 worked overtime, and he gave merit to those who worked for him.
 She discovered a few positive factors in him and stayed there.
     In Psychological Types, Jung explains some of the misunder-
 standings between the types. If I had said that this office girl was
 calculating and acting out of opportunism, it would have been
 absolutely wrong; that was only a background motive in her case.
 Such a judgment would be the negative projection of the opposite
type. It is not that she is just an opportunist or is acting in a calcu-
lating way in having such positive feelings; she has differentiated
feeling. She therefore never has strong feeling reactions; she
knows that where there is value there is always something nega-
tive. Nothing is quite black or absolutely white, but everything
is grayish in reality. She has that kind of philosophical attitude.
I saw the calculation and opportunism because the introverted

thinking type generally sees the negative side and will say that
the feeling type always knows on which side his bread is buttered.
On the other hand, one can say that inferior feeling has the advan-
tage that there is really no calculation in it. The ego has nothing
to do with it. But naturally this can create unadapted situations.
Think, for instance, of The Blue Angel, where the professor falls

Page 53 of 177                                                      29%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



well say that he was a fool and that his inferior feeling had very
bad taste. The inferior feeling of a thinking type shows either very
good or very bad taste. A thinking type can sometimes choose
very valuable people for his friends, or he can pick absolutely the
wrong ones; the inferior function has both aspects, and it rarely
fits into conventional patterns.


     The Extroverted Feeling Type: Inferior Introverted Thinking

 THE extroverted feeling type is characterized by the fact that
 his main adaptation is carried by an adequate evaluation of
 outer objects and an appropriate relation to them. This type will
therefore make friends very easily, will have very few illusions
 about people, but will be capable of evaluating their positive
 and negative sides appropriately. These are well adjusted, very
reasonable people who roll along amiably through society, can
get what they want quite easily, and can somehow arrange it that
everybody is willing to give them what they want. They lubricate
their surroundings so marvelously that life goes along very easily.
You find them frequently among women, and they generally have
a very happy family life with a lot of friends. Only if they are in
some way neurotically dissociated do they become a bit theatrical
and a little mechanical and calculating. If one goes to a luncheon
party with an extroverted feeling type, she (or he) is capable of
saying little things like "What a nice day it is today, I am so glad to
see you again, I haven't seen you for a long time!" And they really
mean it! With that the car is lubricated, and the party goes. One
feels happy and warmed up. They spread a kind of atmosphere of
acceptance, and it is agreeable: "We appreciate each other, so we
are going to have a good day together" They make those in their
surroundings feel wonderful, and in the midst of that they swim
along happily and create a pleasant social atmosphere. Only if

Page 54 of 177                                                     29%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 they overdo it, or if their extroverted feeling is already worn out
 and they therefore should start to think, do you notice that this
 becomes a bit of a habit, that it becomes a phrase they say mech-
 anically. For instance, I once noticed an extroverted feeling type,
 on a dreadful day when there was a horrible fog outside, saying
 mechanically: "Isn't it a wonderful day!" Ithought, "Oh dear, your
 main function is rattling"
      Because people of the extroverted feeling type have such a
 tremendous capacity for objectively feeling the other person's
 situation, they are usually the ones who most genuinely sacrifice
 themselves for others. If one is alone at home with the flu, it is
 certainly an extroverted feeling type who will turn up first and
 ask who is doing the shopping and how he can help. Other types
 are not so quick and practical about feeling their way into a situ-
 ation. To the others, even though their affection might run as
 deeply, it would not occur that they could do this or that to help,
 either because they are introverts or because another function is
 dominant in their system. So you find the extroverted feeling type
 always jumping into the breach, for wherever something does not
function properly he realizes it at once. He sees the importance or
the value of what should be done, and he just does it. Naturally,
this can lead to resistance against the outer situation.
     In general, this type has very good taste in the choice of
partners and friends, but he is a little conventional about it. He
wouldn't risk choosing someone too much out of the ordinary;
he wants to remain in a socially acceptable framework. The
extroverted feeling type dislikes thinking, because that is his
inferior function, and what he dislikes most of all is introverted
thinking- thinking about philosophical principles or abstractions
or basic questions of life. Such deeper questions are carefully
avoided, and there is the reaction that thinking about such prob-


Page 55 of 177                                                  30%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  lems is melancholy. The unfortunate thing is that he does think
  of such things, but is not aware of it, and because his thinking
  is neglected, it tends to become negative and coarse. It consists
  of coarse, primitive thinking judgments, without the slightest
  differentiation and very often with a negative tinge. I have also
  seen in the extroverted feeling type very negative thoughts about
 the neighboring people, very critical- I would say overcritical-
 thinking judgments, which he never allows really to come out.
 Jung says that the extroverted feeling type can sometimes be the
  coldest person on earth. It may happen that, if you get lured into
 this well-lubricated car of his extroverted feeling and feel "we like
 each other and get along well together" suddenly one day he will
 say something to you that will feel like getting smacked on the
 head witha block of ice! One cannot guess what cynical, negative
 thoughts he might have. He is not aware of them, but they pop out
 when he begins to have the "flu" or when he is rushed- in such
 moments when the inferior function wells up and the control of
 the superior function fails.
      An extroverted feeling type once dreamed that she should
 establish a bird observation station. She saw in the dream a ce-
 ment building, a tower built high up in the air, and on the top was
 a kind of laboratory where one observed birds. We have such a
 Vogelbeobachtungsstation (Bird Observatory) at Sempach where
rings are put on birds to know how long they live, and where they
go, and so on; she was to do that. So we thought she should try
to be aware of autonomous thoughts, which would, as it were,
alight on her head and go again. That is how thoughts operate
in a feeling type; he has bird thoughts alighting on his head and
flying off again. Before he can say, "What am I thinking?" the
thought is gone again. This woman agreed, and I asked her how
it could be done technically. She said she would take a little note


Page 56 of 177                                                    30%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



book anda pencil and tarry them around with her, and when she
had a sudden thought she would just jot it down. We would see
afterward how they were connected. Next time she brought one
piece of paper, and on it was "If my son in-law died, my daughter
would come back home." She got such a shock from that thought
that she never put a ring on a second bird! That one bird was quite
enough for a long time. She then confessed something even more
interesting: she said that in a way she knew she sometimes had
such thoughts but always figured that if she didn't write them
down they would not be effective. If she did, they would act like
black magic and affect her surroundings. So, she avoided looking
 at them.
      Now that is exactly wrong. It is just the other way round: if the
 feeling type is aware of his negative thoughts, they don't act like
 black magic. They are depotentiated of any destructive effect. It
 is just when they are left alone and fly around his head without
being caught that they actually have a destructive influence on
 his surroundings. If one analyzes an extroverted feeling type and
 is somewhat sensitive to the atmosphere, one very often gets a
bit frozen or cooled down in spite of his amiability. One can sense
these negative thoughts swarming around in his head. Such
thoughts hit one in a disagreeable way. One some imes sees a
kind of cold flash in the eyes and knows that there is a very nega-
tive thought about, but the next minute it is gone. It gives one
the creeps. Such thoughts are generally based on a very cynical
outlook on life: the dark side of life, which is illness and death and
other such things. A kind of second philosophy of life, cynical and
negativistic, creeps around in the background. In the extroverted
feeling type, these thoughts are introverted, and therefore they
are very often turned against the subject himself. At bottom he al-
lows himself to think that he is a nobody, that his life is worthless,


Page 57 of 177                                                     31%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 and that everybody else might develop and get on the path of indi-
 viduation, but he is hopeless. These thoughts dwell in the back of
his mind. From time to time, when he is depressed, or not well off,
or especially when he introverts (that is when he is alone for half a
minute), this negative thing whispers at the back of his head: "You
are nothing, everything about you is wrong." These thoughts are
coarse and primitive and very undifferentiated, they are gener-
alized judgments and are like a cold draft that blows through the
room and makes you shiver. The effect is that the extroverted feel-
ing type naturally hates to be alone when such negative thoughts
could come up, so as soon as he has realized one or two of them he
quickly switches on the radio or rushes out to meet other people.
He never has time to think! But he carefully arranges his life in
that way.
    If this woman, who had the one little thought ("My only
daughter would come back home!"), had dug deeper, she would
have had to say to herself, "Okay, let's face that thought! What am

                 I
Iafter? If have such a thought what is the premise, and what
the conclusion to be drawn?" She could then have developed the
                                                                 is


following thought: the premise is something like a devouring
mother's attitude, and the conclusion is that she wants the son-
in-law removed. Why? For what purpose? She could, for example,
have said, "Assuming that my daughter does come home, what
then?" And then she would have seen how unpleasant it would
actually be to have a sour old maid of a daughter at home. In
continuing the thought, she would have probably dropped into a
deeper layer and said, "And what then? If my children have now
left home, what is the real purpose of my life?" She would have
had to philosophize about the future purpose of her life: "Has life
still a meaning once one has brought up the children and started
them into life? And, if so, what is it? What is the meaning of life


Page 57 of 177                                                   31%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



altogether?" She would have been confronted with the deep, but
generally human, philosophical questions she had never faced be-
fore, and that would have brought her into deep water. She natur-
ally could not have solved the problem, but she might have had a
dream to help the whole process along. With her inferior thinking
function she would have started on a quest for the meaning of
life. Because she was an extroverted feeling type, the quest would
have beena completely introverted, inner thing, like developing
an introverted philosophical view of life. That would have needed
being alone, being alone a long time in her room and slowly get-
ting aware of the dark underground of her thoughts
     The easy escape, which I have seen in several cases of extro-
verted feeling types, is that they get out of the difficulty by simply
selling their souls to some already established system. One case,
I remember, got converted to Catholicism and simply took over
scholastic philosophy; from then on she quoted only scholastic
authors. That was, in a way, taking up the thinking function, but
taking it up in an already established form. The same thing can be
done with Jungian psychology: it will become a matter of simply
repeating the concepts by heart in a mechanical way, but never
working out one's own standpoint. It is a kind of pupil-like, un-
creative attitude that just takes over the entire system unchecked
and never asks, "What do I think about it? Does this really con-
vince me? Does it coincide with the facts I have checked?" If such
people then meet others who themselves know how to think, they
get fanatical because they feel helpless. They fight for the system
they have chosen with a certain apostle-like fanaticism because
they feel uncertain about the basis of the thinking system: how
the system developed, its basic concepts, etc. They are uncertain
about it and have the feeling that it could be thrown over by a
good thinker, so they adopt an aggressive attitude.



Page 58 of 177                                                    32%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     Another danger is that if an extroverted feeling type once
 starts to think he gets completely caught up in it. Either he cannot
 cut off his relationships sufficiently to be alone and think, or, if he
 succeeds- which is already great progress-in cutting off these
 outer ties, he gets terribly caught by them and loses sight of life.
 He disappears into books, or into a library, where he gets covered
 with dust and is no longer able to switch to any other activity.
He gets swallowed by his task. Both developments are very well
represented in Goethe's Faust where, first, there is the scientist
absolutely cut off from life in the dusty study, and then, when
Faust frees himself and goes out into life, the inferior thinking of
the feeling type is represented by Wagner, the pupil-like servant
who just repeats the banal phrases he has picked up in books. A
famous example of the inferior thinking of an extroverted feeling
type is Goethe's Conversations with Eckermann. It is an amazing
collection of platitudes. There you see the Wagner side of Goethe
very visibly exposed to the world. He has also published a collec-
tion of maxims, which you might meet on the back leaf of every
calendar! They are very true, you can rarely object to them in any
way, but they are so banal that any sheep could have thought of
them. That is Wagner at work in the great poet.

     The Introverted Feeling Type: Inferior Extroverted Thinking

THE introverted feeling type also has the characteristic that he
adapts to life mainly by feeling, but in an introverted way. This
type is very difficult to understand. Jung says in Psychological
Types that the saying "still waters run deep" applies to this type.
They have a highly differentiated scale of values, but they do
not express them outwardly; they are affected by them within.
One often finds the introverted feeling type in the background
where important and valuable events are taking place, as if their

Page 59 of 177                                                      32%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



introverted feeling had told them "that is the real thing" With a
kind of silent loyalty, and without any explanation, they turn up
in places where important and valuable inner facts, archetypal
constellations, are to be found. They also generally exert a posi-
tive secret influence on their surroundings by setting standards.
The others observe them, and though they say nothing, for they
are too introverted to express themselves much, they set certain
standards. Introverted feeling types, for instance, very often form
the ethical backbone of a group: without irritating the others by
preaching moral or ethical precepts, they themselves have such
correct standards of ethical values that they secretly emanate a
positive influence on those around them. One has to behave cor-
rectly because they have the right kind of value standard, which
always suggestively forces one to be decent if they are present.
Their differentiated introverted feeling sees what is inwardly the
really important factor.
    The thinking of this type is extroverted. In striking contrast to
their silent and inconspicuous outer appearance, persons of the
introverted feeling type, are generally interested in an immense
number of outer facts. In their conscious personality they do not
move about much; they tend to sit in their badger's hole. But their
  xtroverted thinking roams about in an extraordinary range of
outer facts. If they want to use their extroverted thinking in a
creative way, they have the usual extrovert's difficulty of being
overwhelmed by too much material, too many references and too
many facts, so their inferior extroverted thinking sometimes just
gets lost in a morass of details through which they can no longer
find their way. The inferiority of their extroverted thinking very
often expresses itself in a certain monomania: they have actually
only one or two thoughts with which they race through a tremen-



Page 60 of 177                                                   33%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



dous amount of material. Jung always characterized the Freudian
system as a typical example of extroverted thinking
      Jung never said anything about Freud's type as a human being;
he only pointed out in his books that Freud's system represents
extroverted thinking. What I add now is my own personal convic-
tion, namely, that Freud himself was an introverted feeling type,
and therefore his writings bear the characteristics of his inferior
extroverted thinking. In all his works the basic ideas are few. With
them he has raced through an enormous amount of material, and
the whole system is completely oriented towards the outer object.
If one reads biographical notes about Freud, one sees that as a
person he had a most differentiated way of treating other people.
He was an excellent analyst. He had also a kind of hidden "gentle-
manliness," which had a positive influence upon his patients and
upon his surroundings. One must really in his case make a dis-
tinction between his theory and his personality as a human being.
I think, from what one hears about him, that he belonged to the
introverted feeling type.
      The advantage of inferior extroverted thinking is what I just
now characterized negatively as "racing with a few ideas through
a tremendous amount of material." (Freud himself complained
that his dream interpretations felt awfully monotonous; the same
interpretation of every dream was boring even to him.) If this
tendency is not overdone, and if the introverted feeling type is
aware of the danger of his inferior function and keeps a check on
it, it has the great advantage of being simple, clear and intelligible.
But this is not enough, and the introverted feeling type is obliged
to drill a bit deeper and try to specify and differentiate his extro-
verted thinking. Otherwise he will fall into the trap of intellectual
monomania. Therefore, he has to specify his thinking; that is, he
should make the hypothesis that each fact he quotes in proof of


Page 61 of 177                                                     33%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



his ideas illustrates them in a slightly different way, and with this
point in view, his ideas should be reformulated each time. In that
way he maintains the living process of contact between thought
and fact, instead of simply imposing his thought upon facts. In-
ferior extroverted thinking has just the same negative tendencies
of becoming tyrannical, stiff and unyielding, and in that way not
quite adapted to its object, that all other inferior functions have.

     (A period of questions and answers follows.)

Question: Are the attitudinal and function types equally distrib-
uted? Are there as many extravert's as introverts?
Von Franz: We don't know for the whole of mankind; we have no
studies of Chinese villages and such places. In general, we often
speak of different nations as types; we say, for example, that
the Swiss are, on the whole, introverted sensation types. This
would imply that in certain groups one type sometimes prevails.
Although there are many Swiss who are another type, there is a
statistically dominant prevalence of the introverted sensation
type. You can observe it, for instance, in the high standard in
Swiss crafts: the watchmaking industry needs an introverted
attitude with differentiated sensation to operate correctly. So in
the different countries and nations you could say that one type
is dominant and creates a prevalent attitude in groups. But when
you sum it all up - whether there are as many of each type - I do
not know. It would need investigation.

Question: Some of us are very much interested in trying to study
experimentally the problem of whether or not the hypothesis
concerning the four functions is tenable. We have a hypothesis
by which, theoretically, we should be able to do this and to see
whether or not people can be categorized into these four differ-


Page 62 of 177                                                   34%
                       LECTUREs ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  ent pigeonholes, so to speak. In America there have been many
  attempts to find out whether people can be thought of as extro-
 verts and introverts, and to the best of my knowledge there has
 never been any support for the idea, because most people are
 somewhere in between. What is your feeling about attempts at
 working on this hypothesis experimentally?
 Von Franz: I think you are absolutely right to go ahead with your
 experiment. Nobody tries simply to assert that this theory of
 types is true; we should have to test many millions of people stat-
istically -something that has not been done. As you can see from
 my explanations, however, the diagnosis of type is very difficult,
 for people are often in stages where they are sure they are of a cer-
 tain type, but you need the whole case history to know whether it
 is only a momentary stage of that person. For example, someone
 says that he is an extrovert, but that means nothing: you have
 carefully to take the whole biography of that person to make a
 relatively safe diagnosis. Up until now we have had no absolutely
 safe, scientific foundation for our theory and we do not pretend to
have.
    My attitude towards this is that the idea of the four functions
is an archetypal model for looking at things and that it has the
advantage-and disadvantage-of all scientific models. Professor
Pauli, the physicist, once said something that seems to me to be
very convincing, namely, that no new theory, or no new fruitful
invention in the field of science, has ever been put forth with-
out the working of an archetypal idea. For instance, the ideas of
three-dimensional or four-dimensional space are based on an
archetypal representation, which has always worked, to a cer-
tain degree, in a very productive way and has helped to explain
a lot of phenomena. But then comes what Pauli calls the self-

limitation of a theory, namely, that if one overexpands the idea


Page 62 of 177                                                    34 %
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 to phenomena where it does not work, that same fruitful idea
 becomes an inhibition for further scientific progress. The idea of
 three-dimensional space, for example, is still completely valid for
 ordinary mechanics, and every carpenter and mason uses it when
 he makes a drawing or a plan, but if you try to over expand it into
 microphysics you go off the rails. So it can be said that it was an
 archetypal idea that originated, as can be clearly proved, in the
 scientific mind of Westerners through the dogma of the Trinity.
 Kepler, when he made his planetary models, said that space has
three dimensions because of the Trinity! Or, take Descartes's idea
 of causality - saying that it was based on the fact that God never
 has whims but always proceeds in a logical manner and therefore
 everything must be causally connected.
     All basic ideas, even of natural science, are archetypal models,
but they work if one does not overexpand them. They work in a
fruitful way if one does not force into them facts that do not fit.
So I think the theory of the four functions has a kind of practical
value, but it is not a dogma. Jung, in his books, very clearly puts
it forward in this way, as a heuristic standpoint- a hypothesis by
which you can find out things. We know now that in all scientific
investigations we cannot do more than put forward thinking
models, make models and see how far the facts fit, and if the facts
do not coincide we have to correct the model. Sometimes we need
not revise the whole thinking model; we simply say that it only
applies ina certain area, and that as soon as one switches over
to another area of facts, it becomes a distortion. I personally am
convinced that we have not yet exhausted the fruitfulness of the
model, but that does not mean that there are no facts that do not
fit into it and might force us to revise it.

Question: Does an introverted feeling type experience introverted
thinking, or is it always extroverted inferior thinking?

Page 63 of 177                                                   35%
                           LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 Von Franz:      If you are an introverted feeling type, you can also
think introvertedly. You can naturally have all the functions all
ways, but it won't be such a great problem, and there will not be
much intensity of life in it. Jung has said that the hardest thing to
understand is not your opposite type - if you have an introverted
feeling it is very dificult to understand an extroverted thinking
type-but the same functional type with the other attitude! It
would be most difficult for an introverted feeling type to under
stand an extroverted feeling type. There one feels that one does
not know how the wheels go round in that person's head; one
cannot feel one's way into it. Such people remain to a great extent
a puzzle and are very difficult to understand spontaneously. Here

the theory of types is tremendously important practically, for it
is the only thing that can prevent one from completely misun-
derstanding certain people. It gives a clue to the understanding
of a person whose spontaneous reactions are a complete puzzle,
whom you would, if you reacted spontaneously, misunderstand
completely.

Question: What is the difference between inferior intuition and
 inferior feeling?
 Von Franz: Intuition is an irrational function that grasps facts,
future possibilities and possibilities of evolution, but it is not a
function of judgment. Inferior intuition might have presenti-
ments about a war, or illnesses of other people, or of archetypal
changes in the collective unconscious. Introverted in tuition has
sudden hunches about the slow transformation of the collective
unconscious in the flow of time. Intuition presents facts with no
valuation. Feeling is quite different. In Jungian terms, it is a ra-
tional function-ratio: order, calculation, reason- a function that
establishes order and judges, saying this is good and this is bad,
this agreeable and this disagreeable to me. The inferior feeling of

Page 64 of 177                                                          35%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



a   thinking type would judge values and not represent facts. For
 example, an extroverted sensation type who neglected his intu-
 ition to a great extent had a recurring dream of poor people and
 laborers of a disagreeable type who broke into his house at night.
 He was terrified by this ever-recurring dream and began to go
 around in his circle of friends and at dinner parties saying there
was absolutely nothing that could be done: he knew the Com-
munists would win out. As he was a very able politician, this had
a bad effect. This was a wrong kind of intuition, based on personal
projection. That is an instance of inferior intuition. Someone with
inferior feeling might suddenly start a lawsuit, convinced that he
was fighting for the right and the good, but if someone else could
shoot this conviction down, he would throw the whole thing over,
including the lawsuit that he had himself begun.
     The sudden change in his judgment would indicate the infer
ior feeling. People are very easily influenced when it is a question
of their inferior function. Since it is in the unconscious, they can
easily be made uncertain of their position, whereas in the realm
of their superior function they generally know how to act when
attacked; they have all their weapons ready and are broad-minded
and flexible and feel strong. As soon as you feel strong you are
quite willing to discuss things or to change your attitude, but
where you feel inferior you get fanatical and touchy and are easily
influenced. The expression on a friend's face can affect the feeling
of a thinking type because his feeling is in the unconscious and
therefore open to influence. Therefore, as I mentioned before, the
extroverted thinking type can make very loyal friends but can
suddenly turn against them. He may drop you one day like a hot
potato, and you don't know what happened! Somehow, some-
thing poisonous got into his system, someone said something,
or even just made a face when your name was mentioned! The


Page 65 of 177                                                  36%
                        LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



   feeling is unconscious. Such effects can only be cured when they
   are taken up consciously. If you objected, in thinking terms, about
   his policy in having the lawsuit, the extroverted thinking type
   would be willing to discuss it and to ask your reasons. He would
   be approachable and not influenced in a wrong way, while in the
   realm of feeling he would break off suddenly and without reason,
   and without himselfquite knowing why.




Page 66 of 177                                                     36%
                                       LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY




                                                             A
            The Role              of the Inferior Function in Psychic
                                                Development


THE inferior function is the door through which all the figures
                                             ***
 of the unconscious come into consciousness. Our conscious
realm is like a room with four doors, and it is the fourth door by
which the shadow, the animus or the anima, and the personi-
fication of the Self come in. They do not enter as often through
the other doors, which is in a way self-evident: the inferior
function is so close to the unconscious and remains so barbaric
and inferior and undeveloped that it is naturally the weak spot
in consciousness through which the figures of the unconscious
can break in. In consciousness it is experienced as a weak spot,
as that disagreeable thing that will never leave one in peace and
always causes trouble. Every time one feels he has acquireda cer-
tain inner balance, a firm standpoint, something happens from
within or without to throw it over again. This force always comes
through the fourth door, which cannot be shut. The other three
doors of the inner room can be closed. But on the fourth door the
lock does not work, and there, when one is least prepared for it,
the unexpected will come in again. Thank God, one might add, for
otherwise the whole life process would petrify and stagnate in a
wrong kind of consciousness. The inferior function is the ever-
bleeding wound of the conscious personality, but through it the
     *********************************************************************************************************************


Page 67 of 177                                                                                                               37%
                           LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 unconscious can always come in and so enlarge consciousness
 ***                               -----**------------*----*----------------- ---- ---
 and bring forth a new attitude.
      As long as one has not developed the other functions, the two
 auxiliary functions, they too will be open doors. In a person who
 has only developed one superior function, the two auxiliary fune-
tions will operate in the same way as the inferior function and
will appear in personifications of the shadow, the animus and the
 anima. When one has succeeded in developing three functions,
in locking three of the inner doors, the problem of the fourth door
 still remains, for that is the one that is apparently meant not to
be locked. There one has to succumb; one has to suffer defeat in
order to develop further.
     In dreams, the inferior function relates to the shadow, the
animus or the anima, and the Self, and it gives them a certain
characteristic quality. For instance, the shadow in an intuitive
type will often be personified by a sensation type. The inferior
function is contaminated by the shadow in each type: in a think-
ing type it will appear as a relatively inferior or primitive feeling
person, and so on. Thus, if in interpreting a dream one asks for a
description of this shadow figure, people will describe their own
inferior function. Then when one has become somewhat con-
scious of the shadow, the inferior function will give the animus or
the anima figure a special quality. For example, the anima figure,
if personified by a particular human being, will very often appear
as a person of the opposite function. Again, when personifications
of the Self appear, the same sort of thing will happen.
     Another kind of personification, but one that naturally has to
do with the shadow, occurs when the fourth function is contam-
inated by the lower levels of the social strata of the population
or by the famous underdeveloped countries. It is a marvel how
we in our superior arrogance look down on the "underdeveloped



Page 67 of 177                                                                   37%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



countries" and project our inferior functions upon them! The
underdeveloped countries are within ourselves! The inferior
function often appears as a wild Negro or Indian. It is also fre-
quently represented by exotic people of some kind: Chinese,
Russian, or whoever may possess something unknown to the con-
scious realm, as ifit wanted to say, "it is as unknown to you as the
Chinaman's psychology"
     This social representation of the inferior function is particu-
larly fitting in that this function tends to have, in its negative
aspect, a barbaric character. It can cause a state of possession:
if, for example, introverts fall into extroversion, they do so in a
possessed and barbaric way. I mean barbaric in the sense of being
unable to exert conscious control, being swept away, being unable
to put a brake on, unable to stop. This kind of exaggerated, driven
extroversion is rarely found in genuine extroverts, but in intro
verts it can be like a car without brakes that speeds on without the
slightest control. An introvert may be come highly disagreeable,
pushy, arrogant, and shout so loudly that the whole room has to
listen. Such inferior extroversion may suddenly pop out in this
way when an introvert is drunk.
     The introversion of the extrovert is just as barbaric and
possessed but not so visible to society. An extrovert, if possessed
by barbaric introversion, disappears right out of life. He goes mad
in his own room. Extroverts who fall into their primitive intro-
version walk about looking very important, assuring everybody
that they are having deep mystical experiences about which they
cannot talk. In a self-important way they indicate they are now
deeply steeped in active imagination and the process of individu-
ation. One gets a strange feeling of a barbaric possession. If this
happens in the form of Yoga or Anthroposophy there will be that
same display of something mystical going on, of an unfathom-



Page 68 of 177                                                 37%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



able depth into which they have now dived. Actually, they are
constantly tempted to switch back to their extroversion, which
 explains their overemphasis on lack of time for contact with any-
body. They would love to switch over to their extroversion and
go to every party and dinner in town. So, defensively they say:
 "No, this is absolutely forbidden; now I am in the depths of the
psyche." Very often in this phase people are sure that they are the
type they now have to live. Extroverts who are in the phase where
they should assimilate introversion will always swear that they
 are and always have been introverts and that it has always been
 an error to call them extroverts. In this way they try to help them-
 selves get into the other side. If they try to express their inner ex-
periences, they generally do so with overexcitement; they becomne
terribly emotional and want to take the floor and have everybody
listen. To them it is so tremendously unique and important.
     This barbaric quality of the inferior function constitutes the
great split of the human personality. One can thank God if one's
opposite function is only personified in dreams by so-called
primitives, for it is very often represented by Stone Age figures
or even by animals. In such a case, one can say that the inferior
function has not even reached a primitively human level. The
inferior function in that stage dwells, so to speak, in the body and
can manifest itself only in physical symptoms or activities. When
I see, for example, an introverted intuitive stretch himself in the
sunshine with such marvelous enjoyment of his inferior func-
tion, I have the feeling that he is like a cat enjoying the sun; his
sensation is still on the level of an animal.
    In a thinking type feeling very often does not go beyond the
dog level. It is more difficult to imagine that the feeling type
thinks like an animal, but even that is true; they have a habit of
making banal statements any cow could have made ifit could


Page 69 of 177                                                     38%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



speak. Dogs sometimes make helpless attempts to think. My own
dog made an attempt and drew some terribly wrong conclusions.
He always lay on my couch, and I used to chase him down; from
that he concluded that I did not like him to sit on anything above
the ground. So whenever I put him up on something, he became
bewildered and thought he would be punished. He could not
 understand that it was only the couch and not every raised piece
 of furniture that was forbidden him. He had simply drawn the
 Wrong conclusion! A dog has a halfway developed thinking func-
 tion that tends to draw the wrong conclusions. I have often been
 struck by the fact that feeling types think in exactly the same way,
 for when you try to explain something to them they draw a gen-
 eral conclusion, some sweeping generalization. that does not fit
the situation in any way. Primitive thinking started in their heads,
 and they drew an amazingly unadapted conclusion that led to
entirely wrong results. Thus one can often say that the thinking
level of the feeling type is about on the dog's level: it is so helpless
and stiff.
     In most normal societies, people cover up their inferior func-
tion with a persona. One of the main reasons why one develops a
persona is so as not to expose inferiorities, especially the inferior-
ities of the fourth function. It is contaminated with one's animal
nature, one's unadapted emotions and affects.
     When Jung founded the Psychological Club in Zurich, he
wanted to find out how a group would work in which the inferior
function would not be covered up, but where people would con-
tact each other by it. The result was absolutely amazing. People
who walked into this society from outside were shocked by the
rude behavior and the absolutely unending quarrels this group
displayed. I once visited the club many years ago. Until thenI
had never made a move towards becoming a member because


Page 70 of 177                                                      38%
                        LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 I felt too shy. One day Jung said to me, "Do you not want to join
 the Psychological Club, or do you not dare join it?" I said I did
 not dare join it, but I would love to. So he said: "Allright, I will be
 your godfather" - we need godfathers to get into the club-"but
 r'll wait first to see if you have a dream indicating the right mo-
 ment has come." And what did I dream? I dreamed that a natural
 scientist, an old man who looked very much like Jung, had made
 up an experimental group to find out how animals of different
 species got along with each other. I came into the place; and there
 were aquariums with fishes in them, enclosures with tortoises,
 newts and such creatures, cages with birds and dogs and cats;
 and the old man was sitting in the middle, taking notes of how
 the animals behaved socially with each other. I discovered then
 that I was a flying fish in an aquarium and could jump out. I told
 my dream to Jung, and he said with a grin: "I think now you are
 mature enough to join the Psychological Club; you have got the
 central idea, its purpose."
    In this rather humorous way the unconscious took up the idea:
namely, that it is really a great problem when human beings con-
tact each other, for in the inferior function one is a cat, another is
a tortoise, and a third a hare - there are all those animals! In such a
situation one must face the problem, for example, of maintaining
one's own terrain. Many animal species have a tendency to "own"
a few meters of homeland and to defend it against all intruders.
These complicated rituals of territorial defense build up again
as soon as human beings join together and put off the persona
and try really to contact each other. Then one feels as if he were
moving in the jungle: one must not step on this snake, or frighten
that bird by making a quick movement, and things become very
complicated. It has even led to the belief that psychology causes




Page 71 of 177                                                        39%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 people to deteriorate in their social behavior, which to some ex-
 tent is quite true.
      At the C.G. Jung Institute, too, we are in a way much nastier
  and more difficult to get along with than, say, a society for breed-
 ing dogs or hares ora club for fishermen. There the social contact
 is in general on a much more conventional level, and it appears to
 be more civilized. But the truth is simply that at the institute and
 in the Psychological Club we tend not to cover up what is going on
 underneath. In most other societies or groups the inferior func-
 tion is covered up and plays havoc under the table; underneath
 there are all these difficulties, but they are never brought up to the
 surface and discussed openly. The assimilation of the shadow and
 of the inferior function has the effect that people become socially
 more difficult and less conventional; this creates friction. On the
 other hand, it also creates a greater liveliness: it is never boring,
 there is always a tempest in the teacup, and the group is very
 much alive instead of having just a kind of dull, polite surface. In
the Psychological Club, for instance, the animal tendency to have
one's territory became so strong that people started reserving
seats. There was so-and-so's chair and you couldn't sit on it; that
would be a major insult because so-and-so always sat there. I have
noticed that there are also papers on certain chairs at the insti-
tute. There the dog or the cat so-and-so sits! That is a very good
sign. It is a restoration of an original and natural situation.
     It is amazing how deeply the inferior function can connect
one to the realm of animal nature within oneself. Apart from
the humorous way in which I have just described it, the inferior
function is actually the connection with one's deepest instincts,
with one's inner roots, and is, so to speak, that which connects us
with the whole past of mankind. Primitive societies have dances
with animal masks that are meant to connect the tribe with their


Page 71 of 177                                                    39%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 ancestral ghosts, with the whole past of the tribe. We have, for the
 most part, lost such masked dances, though there is still the carni-
 val as a remnant.
      Once a person has experienced the problem of the functions,
 the next step in the process of psychic development is to assimi-
 late the two auxiliary functions. One must not forget that the
 assimilation of these functions is such a difficult task that people
generally spend a very long time at it. Sometimes people actually
become a certain type, which was not their original type, for eight
 or ten years.
     To assimilate a function means to live with that one function
in the foreground. If one does a little cooking or sewing, it does
not mean that the sensation function has been assimilated. As-
 similation means that the whole adaptation of conscious life, for
 a while, lies on that one function. Switching over to an auxiliary
function takes place when one feels that the present way of living
has become lifeless, when one gets more or less constantly bored
with oneself and one's activities. Generally it happens that one
does not have to come to a theoretical conclusion about which
function to switch to. The best way to know how to switch is sim-
ply to say: "All right, all this is now completely boring; it does not
mean anything to me any more. Where in my past life is an activ-
ity that I feel I could still enjoy? An activity out of which I could
still get a kick?" If a person then genuinely picks up that activity,
he will see that he has switched over to another function.
     I want to take up now the problem of establishing what I called
in my first lecture the "middle realm." This becomes a crucial
issue when a person reaches the stage of dealing seriously with
his inferior function. The inferior function cannot be assimilated
within the structure of the conscious attitude; it is too deeply
implicated in and contaminated by the unconscious. It can be


Page 72 of 177                                                   40%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



"raised" somewhat, but in the process of raising it consciousness
is pulled down. In the process of this dynamic interplay the
middle realm is established.
    Touching the inferior function resembles an inner breakdown
at a certain crucial point of one's life. It has the advantage, how-
 ever, of overcoming the tyranny of the dominant function in the
 ego complex. If someone has really gone through this transform-
 ation he can use his thinking function, if that is the appropriate
 reaction, or he can let intuition or sensation come into operation,
 but he is no longer possessed by one dominant function. The ego
 can take up a particular function and put it down, like a tool, in an
 awareness of its own reality outside the system of the four func-
tions. This act of separation is achieved through encountering the
inferior function. The inferior function is an important bridge to
the experience of the deeper layers of the unconscious. Going to it
 and staying with it, not just taking a quick bath in it, effects a tre-
mendous change in the whole structure of the personality.
    Jung quotes again and again this old saying of the legendary
alchemist and author Maria Hebræa: "Two are one, three and
four are one, one will become two, two will become three, and
out of the third comes the one as the fourth." One becomes two:
that is, first comes the development of the main function, then
the assimilation of the first auxiliary. After that, consciousness
assimilates a third; now there are three. But the next step does
not consist of just adding another unit - one, two, three, and then
four. Out of the third comes not the fourth but the One. Jung once
told me ina private conversation that there is no fourth in the
upper layer; it is like this:




Page 73 of 177                                                     40%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                    Field of naive ego-consciousness
                      EGO
                                    with three functions

                                    Middle ficld where the ego-Self
                  ACTUALIZED        relationship no longer functions
                                    autonomously and is only instrumental

                                    Preconcious totality with pre-formed
                 LATENT SEL
                               is   four functions




One can illustrate it in another way: there are a mouse, a cat, a
dog, and a lion. The first three animals can be domesticated if one
treats them well, but then comes the lion. It refuses to be added
as the fourth but eats up the others, so in the end there is only one
animal left. The inferior function behaves like this: when it comes
up, it eats the rest of the personality. The fourth becomes the One,
for it is no longer the fourth; only one is left-ie., a total psychic
life phenomenon, no longer a function! Naturally, that is a simile
and only gives a kind of illustration.
     In Mysterium Coniunctionis (CW260), Jung quotes an alchem-
ical text that mirrors the problem of the fourth function and the
establishment of the middle ground. The text is called "Treatise of
the Alchemist Aristotle Addressed to Alexander the Great about
the Philosophical Stone." It is probably of Arabic origin, and it
appears translated into Latin in one of the early alchemical publi-
cations. The following recipe is given:

       Take the serpent, and place it in the chariot with four
       wheels, and let it be turned about on the earth until it is
       immersed in the depths of the sea, and nothing more is
       visible but the blackest dead sea. And there let the cha-
       riot with the wheels remain, until so many fumes rise


Page 74 of 177                                                              41%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



         up from the serpent that the whole surface (planities)
         becomes dry, and by desiccation sandy and black. All
         that is the earth which is no earth, but a stone lacking
         all weight... [And when the fumes are precipitated in
         the form of rain,] you should bring the chariot from
         the water to dry land, and then you have placed the
         four wheels upon the chariot, and will obtain the result
         if you will advance further to the Red Sea, running
         without running, moving without motion [currens sine
         cursu, movens sine motu].
 This is a very strange image. Take the wheels off the car and load
 them onto it! (It is interesting that one finds the same image in the
 I Ching. There it is sometimes said that one should take the wheels
 off the carriage. As far as I know, this Chinese image cannot have
 any direct connection with Western alchemy.) Jung then com-
 ments that the snake in alchemy is the symbol of Mercurius, the
 prima materia, the matter with which the process starts. Further
 on in the process Mercurius personifies a kind of nature spirit full
 of opposites. This snake is placed upon a carriage. The wheels are
 interpreted in the text as the wheels of the elements and the car
 is called a spheric tomb, a round tomb or sepulcher. The simile of
 the car in our text represents the alchemical vessel in which the
 spirit of the unconscious is contained. Jung says the symbolism in
 this passage describes the essential phases of the opus: the snake
of Hermes-the cold side of nature, the unconscious-is caught in
 a round vessel that is made of glass and represents the Cosmos as
 well as the soul. From a psychological standpoint, such an image
 represents consciousness of both the outer and the inner worlds.
 Putting the wheels onto the carriage indicates a cessation of all
 four functions: one draws them in, so to speak. The later trans-
 formation of these four wheels corresponds to the integration

 Page 75 of 177                                                     41%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



process through the transcendent function. The transcendent
function unites the opposites, and, as alchemy shows, they are
ordered in a quaternio.
      This alchemical symbol does not minimize the problem of the
 fourth function, but it points to a solution. The ego assimilates
 its first function and then is content for a while. After a time it
 assimilates a second function and lives contentedly once more. It
 has pulled up both from the unconscious. Then it pulls up a third
 to the plane of consciousness. Now three functions are assimi-
 lated on the upper, civilized level upon which we try normally
 to live. But one cannot bring the fourth function up to this same
 level. On the contrary, if one tries too hard, the fourth function
 will pull ego-consciousness down to a completely primitive level.
 One may identify with it and its impulses absolutely; then there
will occur those sudden switches in which people suddenly drop
down to an animal level.
     I have referred to the film The Blue Angel in which this problem
was represented: a college professor suddenly switches over to
his inferior feeling function and becomes a circus clown, being
caught by admiration for a vamp-like woman in a cabaret. But
that is certainly not the assimilation of the fourth function. One
can drop down to a low animal level, if one wants, and live out the
inferior function in a concrete form without having assimilated it
in any way. In such a case one simply loses the whole upper struc-
ture of the former personality. People who have a great primitive
courage for life can do this. When they touch the fourth function
they suddenly switch wholeheartedly over into it. Jung tells of the
case of a man who lived as a very respectable businessman until
he was sixty. He had a family, a good business, and everything
else, but then he became sleepless and restless and unhappy for a
few months. One night he sprang up in bed; shouting: "I have it!l"


Page 75 of 177                                                   42%
                                   LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 His wife woke up and asked: "What?" "I have it, I am a bum! That's
 what I am!" He immediately left his wife and family and his busi-
 ness, spent all his money and drank himself to death. That was
 certainly courageous, but rather a drastic solution of the problem!
 He suddenly fell into the inferior side of his personality and forgot
 everything else.
      The fourth function is always life's great problem: if I don't
 live it, I am frustrated and half-dead and everything is boring; if
 I live it, it is of such a low level that I cannot use it, unless I have
the pseudo-courage of this man. Most people do not have that
 courage; others would have it but they see that this is no solution
either. So what does one do? At that moment this alchemical re-
cipe comes into place: namely, the effort to deal with the fourth
function by putting it into a spherical vessel, by giving it a frame
of fantasy. One can get on not by living the fourth function in a
                                    *****

concrete outer or inner way, but by giving it the possibility of a
                 ---
fantasy expression,        whether in writing or painting or dancing or
in any other form of active imagination. Jung found that active
                    - ----
imagination was practically the only means for dealing with the
                             *********************************************************************************
fourth function.
      In the choice of the means of active imagination one can see
how the inferior function comes into effect. An intuitive type, for
instance, will generally have a strong desire to fix his active im-
agination in clay or in stone, making it materially visible in some
way. Otherwise it will not seem real, and the inferior function will
not come in Jung, being an intuitive, discovered it first by the need
to build little clay and stone castles, and from that experience he
discovered the problem that is constellated by the fourth func-

                                                  I
tion. The rare form of dancing have usually seen when feeling is
the fourth function. Sometimes thinking types, when they have
to assimilate their feeling function, have a genuine wish to ex-


Page 76 of 177                                                                                         42%%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 press it by dancing in certain primitive rhythms. Inferior feeling
 can also express itself in very colorful paintings, color in general
 expressing strong feeling moods. A sensation type will conceive
 weird fiction stories, such as I deseribed earlier, or wild fantastic
 novels into which intuition can run. When the problem comes up
 of choosing the means for assimilating the unconscious psycho-
 logical problem by fantasizing, the choice is generally connected
 with the inferior function.
      When one reaches the stage of dealing decisively with the
 fourth function, it becomes impossible to stay on the upper
 level, but one may also not wish to drop down to the lower. So
 the middle area becomes the only possible solution. This middle
 ground, which is neither on the upper nor the lower level, is
 established through fantasizing in the specific form of active
 imagination. At this moment one transmits, as it were, his feeling
 of life into an inner center, and the four functions remain only as
 instruments that can be used at will, taking them up and putting
them down again. The ego and its conscious activity are no longer
identical with any of the functions. This is what the alchemical
text represents by putting the four wheels upon the car. There is a
complete standstill in a kind of inner center, and the functions do
not act automatically any more. You can bring ther out at will, as
for instance an airplane can let down the wheels in order to land
and then draw them in again when it has to fly. At this stage the
problem of the functions is no longer relevant; the functions have
become instruments of a consciousness that is no longer rooted
in them or driven by them. It has its basis of operation in another
dimension, a dimension that can only be created by the world of
imagination. That is why Jung calls this the transcendent func-
tion. This right kind of imagination creates the uniting symbols.



Page 77 of 177                                                    43%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    This coincides with the alchemical symbolism that speaks of
the problem of the four elements - water, fire, air and earth. In our
text they are represented as the wheels that have to be integrated.
Then comes the fifth essence, which is not another additional
element, but is, so to speak, the essence of all four and yet none
of the four; it is the four in one. To the four comes a fifth thing
that is not the four, but is something beyond them and consists of
them all. That is what the alchemists called the fifth essence, the
quintessentia or the philosopher's stone. It means a consolidated
nucleus of the personality that is no longer identified with any of
the functions. This is a stepping out, so to speak, of identification
with one's own consciousness and with one's own unconscious,
and dwelling, or trying to dwell, on this middle plane. From then
on, as the text says, one moves without movement, runs without
running (currens sine cursu, movens sine motu.) After this stage is
reached, another kind of development begins. In alchemy, as well
as in the development of the personality, the solution to the prob-
lem of the functions is the first step, but it is enormously difficult
to get even as far as that.

     (A period of questions and answers follows.)

Question: What happens in a human life when this middle sphere
is attained?
Von Franz: What does someone look like when he has detached
his ego-awareness, or his ego-consciousness, from identification
with certain functions? I think the nearest and most convincing
example would be in some descriptions of the behavior of Zen
Buddhist Masters. It is said that the door of the inner house is
closed, but the Master meets everybody and every situation and
everything in the usual manner. He continues in everyday life,
participating in it in a normal way. If people come to be taught,

Page 78 of 177                                                   43%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



hewill teach them with feeling. Ifa difficult problem is put before
him, he can think about it. Ifit is the moment to eat, he will eat,
and if it is the moment to sleep, he will sleep; he uses his sensation
function in the right way. When it is a question of seeing through
the other person in a flash of intuition, or through the situation,
he will do that. He will not, however, be inwardly bound to the
ego functions he uses in meeting the particular situation. He
will have lost a certain kind of childish eagerness to meet things.
If you present people who are still identical with their thinking
with a thinking problem, they go right into it. This is necessary,
because if they do not learn to be right in it they will never learn
to think properly and appropriately. But after the transformation,
if you present them with a thinking problem they remain in-
wardly detached from it, though they can apply their thinking to
the problem: they can stop thinking from one minute to another
without having to continue it. It is difficult to bring examples
because there are very few people who have reached that stage,
but there are very good descriptions of being detached from one's
own conscious functions in these Zen Buddhist examples.

Question: Could you describe the difference between the kind of
discipline that one practices in Jungian analysis, as com pared,
say, with that of the Zen Buddhist monk?
Von Franz: There are analogies, but I would say that it is not the
same thing. I think that our way of trying to approach the prob-
lem of the inferior function imposes a kind of discipline on all
individuals, which has an analogy in the monastic life, not only
in the East but also in the West. For in stance, remaining with the
difficulty for a long time, givingup other occupations in order to
have enough time and energy for this main problem, practicing a
kind of asceticism. But the monastic life, whether in the East or in
the West, is a collectively organized affair. You have to get up at a


Page 79 of 177                                                    44%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 certain time, do a certain work, obey the abbot and so on; in con-
 trast to that, the discipline that comes upon an individual within
 the process of individuation is imposed purely from within. There
 are no outer rules, and therefore the thing is much more individ-
 ual. If you let it happen spontaneously instead of forcing it from
 out side by organized discipline, you will see that the discipline is
 completely different from person to person.
     For a while I analyzed two men who were friends; one was an
 introverted thinking type and the other an extroverted feeling
type. The extrovert's discipline was very severe, for even if he
 drank a glass of wine or stayed at a dinner party half an hour
too long, he had the most awful dreams. Sometimes both would
receive invitations, and the typical introvert would say he had no
time, but promptly dreamed that he had to go to the party. His
friend, on the other hand, who had received the same invitation,
had the dream (naturaly he had already decided on his costume
and knew which lady he would invite to come with him) telling
him he should not go! No party, stay at home! It was really amus-
ing to see how it was just as great an agony for the introvert to
go to a party as it was sad for the other poor chap to stay away.
Sometimes they would exchange notes and say, "Isn't it really
nasty! NowI would like to go and may not, and you hate going but
your dreams say 'Go!" So you see there is a kind of discipline, but
it is invisible and very precisely adjusted. That is the advantage
of our way of dealing with the problem; you get your very appro-
priate, private discipline - invisible to the outer world, but very
disagreeable.

Question: You have given several alternatives; one of which is the
achievement of the middle ground, which seems to be extremely
rare, so that in fact very few people get this far. Another alterna-



Page 80 of 177                                                    44%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



tive is where the roaring lion comes up, and, I assume, some de-
gree of illness follows. Is there an alternative between these two?
Von Franz: Yes. You have a great many people who from time to
time experience the problem of the inferior function - what I
have spoken of as getting into the hot bath and then jumping out
of it again. Afterward they more or less go on with their three
functions, constantly slightly uncomfortable on account of the
nonintegrated fourth. When things get too bad they dive in a bit,
but as soon as they feel better, they get out again. On principle,
they remain in their trinitarian world where the fourth is the
devil who remains in a corner of their life. People who stick in this
phase never quite understand what Jung means by the problem
of the fourth, and they never quite understand what individu-
ation really means. They remain in the conventional former
world of identifying with consciousness. Many people who have
undergone a Jungian analysis do not get further than those brief
visits into the fourth realm and then talking about it to others -
not really trying to stay in it - because it is hellishly difficult to
achieve.

Question: How does the inferior function connect with the collect-
ive evil?
Von Franz: As long as you do not really get into this stage there re-
mains what I call the devil in the corner. This is only the personal
devil, the personal inferiority of an individual, but with it collect-
ive evil comes in as well. The little open door of each individual's
inferior function is what contributes to the sum of collective evil
in the world. You could observe that very easily in Germany when
the devil slowly took over the situation in the Nazi movement.
Every German I knew at that time who fell for Nazism did so on
account of his inferior function. The feeling type got caught by
the stupid arguments of the party doctrine; the intuitive type


Page 80 of 177                                                    45%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 got caught by his dependence on money. He could not give up his
 job and did not see how he could deal with the money problem,
 so he had to stay in it despite the fact that he did not agree, and
 so on. The inferior function was in each personal realm the door
where some of this collective evil could accumulate. Or, you could
 say that each one who had not worked on his inferior function
contributed to this general disaster - in a small way -but the sum
of millions of inferior functions constitutes an enormous devil!
Propaganda against the Jews was very cleverly made up in that
respect. For example, the Jews were insulted as being destructive
intellectuals, which completely convinced all the feeling types-
a projection of inferior thinking. Or they were accused of being
reckless moneymakers; that completely convinced the intuitive,
for they were his inferior sensation, and now one knew where
the devil was. The propaganda used the ordinary suspicions that
people had against others on account of their inferior function. So
you can say that behind each individual the fourth function is not
just a little kind of deficiency; the sum of these is really respon-
sible for a tremendous amount of trouble.

Question:    there a moral issue involved in individuation? Is it a
                 1s

question of perfection in a strictly moral sense?
Von Franz: The process of individuation is an ethical problem, and
someone without any morality would get stuck right at the begin-
ning. But the word "perfection" is not appropriate. That is a Chris-
tian ideal that does not quite coincide with our experience of the
process of individuation. Jung says that the process seems not to
tend towards perfection but towards completeness. This means,
I think, that you cannot get the thing up to the upper level (of the

diagram), but you have to come down, and that means a relative
lowering of the level of the personality. If you are in the middle,
the one side is not as dark and the other not quite as bright, and

Page 81 of 177                                                  45%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 there is more   atendency to constitute a kind of completeness that
 is neither too light nor too dark. But one has to sacrifice a certain
 amount of striving for moral perfection in order to avoid building
 up too black a counterposition. It is ethical, but not idealistic. One
 has to give up the illusion that one can produce something perfect
 in the human realm.
 Question: Would you say that propaganda is mainly a field for the
inferior function?
Von Franz: Yes, if it is the type of propaganda that is built up with
the object of engendering emotion. Someone practicing such a
low type of propaganda would know that it is not by reasonable
 talk that one gets the masses but by arousing emotion. Emotion
 can be aroused in everyone at the same time if you bring up the
 inferior function, because as I said before, that is the emotional
 function. Therefore, if you speak to intellectuals you must arouse
 primitive feelings! If you speak to university professors, you must
 not use scientific language because in that field their minds are
clear and they will see through all the snares in your speech. If
you want to get a lie across, you must substantiate your lie with
a lot of feeling and emotion. Since university professors will on
the average have inferior feeling, they will fall for that at once.
Hitler had the art of doing this. His speeches show that he talked
quite differently to different groups, and he knew very well how
to wake up the inferior function. A man who had been present at
several of his speeches told me that he did it through his intuition,
by feeling his way into the situation. At times, Hitler would at
first be quite uncertain. He would try out his themes like a pianist,
mentioning a little of this and a little of that. He would be pale
and nervous, and his SS men would get all worked up because the
Führer did not seem to be in form. But he was just trying out the
ground. Then he would notice that if he brought up a particular

Page 82 of 177                                                     46%
                            LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



subject, it would arouse emotion, so then he would just go full tilt
for that! That's the demagogue. When he feels that inferior side,
he knows where the complexes are, and that is what he goes for.
One must argue in a primitive, emotional way, the way in which
the inferior function would argue. Hitler did not think that out. It
was the fact that he was caught in his own inferiority, which gave
him that talent.
Question: Are emotion and feeling connected?
Von Franz: The answer is, only when it is a case of inferior feeling.
Emotion and feeling are connected in a thinking type. I think
of the national differences between French and Germans. The
German language has many words for feeling that are con fused
with emotion, while the French word for feeling, sentiment, con-
veys nothing of emotion, not a shade of it. In general the French,
as a nation, have more differentiated feeling, so to them it is not
emotional. This is why the French always make fun of German
feelings. They say: "Oh, the Germans, with their heavy feeling
- beer and singing and 'Oh Heimatland' - all that sentimental
stuff." A Frenchman has sentiment, a clear-cut thing with no
wishy-washiness about it. There you have an example of the
feeling type condemning the inferior feeling of a nation whose
superiority is not in feeling. The Germans think much better, but
their feeling is rather primitive, warm and full of the atmosphere
of the stable, but also full of explosives!

Question: Would you equate the transcendent function with
gestalten?
Von Franz:       It is different from what generally is used in gestalten
or what is used when you let people just fantasize freely. Here it
is fantasizing with ego-consciousness taking its standpoint. This
activity is driven by the urge towards individuation. When this


Page 83 of 177                                                         46%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



urge is still unconscious, it is simply that element of constant dis-
satisfaction and restlessness that nags people until they reach a
higher level again and again in life. The principium individuationis
is naturally this transcendent function, but in Jungian psych-
ology one does not let it just bite one until one has to take the
next step; one turns towards it directly and tries to give it form
by expressing it through active imagination. And that, in a way,
then leads to an evolution that transcends the problem of the four
functions; the constant battle of the four functions then comes to
rest.

Question: Is this stage, then, a permanent condition of active
imagination?
Von Franz: Yes, this is the plane on which active imagination takes
control. With the inner nucleus of consciousness you stay in the
middle place; you no longer identify with what goes on in the
upper or lower planes. You stay within your active imagination,
so to speak, and you have the feeling that this is where your life
process goes on. For instance, on the one plane you very often
notice synchronistic events happening, and on the other are the
dreams, but you keep your consciousness turned toward the events
that happen on the middle plane, on the events that evolve within
your active imagination. This becomes the function with which
you move along through life. The other planes still exist for you,
but you are not centered in them. The center of gravity shifts
away from the ego and its functions into an interim position, into
attending to the hints of the Self. For instance, a Chinese text that
describes the process says consciousness is then in a position like
a cat watching a mouse hole - not too dull and not too tense. Ifa
cat is too tense, it gets cramps and misses the mouse; if it is too
dull, the mouse will walk out and the cat will miss it. This kind of



Page 84 of 177                                                   47%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



(half-dimmed) conscious attention is turned towards the inner
process.

Question: Has Jung applied this theory of functions to his ideas
about the Trinity and quaternity in his studies on religion?
Von Franz: Put briefly, I would answer in the affirmative. That is,
the problem of the third and the fourth in religious symbolism
connects with the problem of the four functions. It connects as
the archetypal model connects with the single case. To refer to
the drawing I gave you in the first lecture, the archetypal constel-
lation would be at the base of the psyche; this is the structural
tendency to develop four functions. You can find this archetype
in mythologies of four persons, in the four directions of the com-
pass, in the four winds, in the four angels at the four corners of
the world. It is in Christian symbolism also. For instance, there are
the four evangelists, where three are animals and one a human
being. There are also the four sons of Horus, three of whom have
animal heads and one a human head. Those are manifestations
of a basic structural archetype in the human psyche, of the dis-
position in a human being that, as soon as he tries to cast a model
of a total existence - a model of the total cosmic world or of total
human life - tends to use a fourfold model. The choice just natur-
ally falls upon a fourfold model more often than on any other. In
China, it is to be found everywhere. The fourfold mandalas always
arise from an impulse to cast a model of total existence, where
people do not want to face a single fact but want a mapping out
of general phenomena. It would therefore be an inherent, inborn,
structural disposition in the human psyche to use such fourfold
models for totalities.
    The problem of the four functions in the consciousness of
an individual would be a secondary product of this more basic
model. It is not advisable to project the factors of the unconscious


Page 85 of 177                                                   47%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 structure upon the field of consciousness or to use the factors of
the conscious functions to explain the archetypal structure. The
problem of the four functions in the consciousness of an individ-
ual is one of the manifestations of these more general archetypal
 dispositions. If, for instance, you try to explain the model of the
four mountains in the four directions of the world in China, or
the four winds in the four corners of the world, by saying that one
 must be thinking and the other must be another function, you
never get anywhere. It simply does not click! The archetype of the
quaternio as a model of the total situation is more general than
the four functions. It would therefore be wrong-headed to reduce
the dogma of the Trinity and the problem of the fourth person of
the Trinity, whether the virgin Mary or the devil, to the problem
of functions. Rather turn it the other way round; it is a general
archetypal problem, but in the individual it assumes the form
of the four functions. For example, in the Christian religion the
devil is the symbol of absolute evil in the Godhead, but it would
be very presumptuous if you accorded your inferior thinking or
inferior feeling sucha great honor as to call it the devil in person!
That would be rather an inflated explanation of your inferiorities.
Just as you could not say that your three relatively developed
functions were identical with the Trinity. As soon as you put it as
bluntly as that, you see how ridiculous the idea would be. Never-
theless, you can say that there is a connection, since evil, negativ-
ism and destructiveness do connect with the inferior function in
the individual.
    I can give you an instance of how this connection operates. An
intuitive person had to send me a letter with some very agreeable
news for me, but she was very jealous and mislaid the letter. Now
did her inferior function make her mislay the letter with the good
news for me, or was it her intriguing jealous shadow? It was both!


Page 85 of 177                                                   48%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 The intriguing jealous shadow got her via the inferior function.
 You can never pin down such a person; you can only say: "Oh,
 that's your inferior sensation, don't let's mention it again." But it
 is typical enough that the shadow, the negative impulse, sneaks
 into the inferior function. I remember the case of a man, a feeling
 type, who was terribly jealous be cause a woman in whom he
 was interested had a tremendous transference to Jung. So this
 gentleman felt snubbed by her. She just wouldn't look at him,
 and that cut him to the heart. He could not get over it for a long
 time. Finally he wrote a book against Jungian psychology, full of
 errors and misquotations, in which he put forth a "better new
 philosophy" Now you can see, on the feeling level - his superior
 function-this man could not do such a nasty thing: he could
 not attack Jung directly as a person because his feeling was too
 differentiated. He saw clearly that Jung, who could not help this
woman's transference, had nothing to do with the business. So
his feeling remained decent. But his inferior thinking picked the
motivation - which was rotten jealousy and nothing else - and
produced the most amazing junk. He was not even able to copy
out the quotations properly because he had been blinded and
swept away by a shadow impulse. Shadow impulses, destructive
impulses, jealousy, hatred, and so on generally get one via the
inferior function, because that is a weak spot; that is where we are
not in control of ourselves, not constantly aware of the operations
of our actions. In this corner, therefore, any destructive or nega-
tive tendencies attack, and there you could say that the devil has
to do with the fourth function because he gets people through it.
If you speak medieval language, you can say that the devil wants
to destroy people and will always try to get you by your inferior
function. The fourth door of your room is where angels can come
in, but also devils!


Page 86 of 177                                                    48%
                 LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                                 Part Two

                                           JAMES HILLMAN

                                       The Feeling Function




Page 88 of 177


                                                        49%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                 5

                    Historical Introduction

A FUNCTION is something that performs, operates, acts. It is
a process going on through a certain period of time. The word
"function" comes fromfungi, fungor, to perform, and its Sanskrit
root bhunj) refers to "enjoy:" Enjoying is still associated with func-
tus in Latin The exercise and performance of a function is some-
thing to enjoy, as a pleasant or healthy activity, as the operation of
one's powers in any sphere of action.
    Jung uses the terms "function" and "organ" rather as one does
in physiology: an organ performs the functions specific to it. But
Jung also insists that a function precedes its organ or, as Aristotle
said in his Ethics, we become good by doing good; we develop a
characteristic structure through habitual performance. I mention
this view of a function so that as we proceed we may have in mind
a relatively unified, relatively consistent and habitual pattern of
performance that enjoys itself in its activity, a pattern that likes to
be exercised.
   Because functions can be conceived in this developmental
way, they are appropriately conceived in Jung's psychology as the
functions of consciousness. They belong to the development of
the conscious personality, forming part of the ego, its consistency,
its habits, unity and memory, its characteristic way of perform-
ing. Functions are part of the intentionality of consciousness,

Page 89 of 177                                                     49%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



showing how it operates in regard to itself and others, how it im-
poses its intentions and meanings and expresses its character.
     Functions are therefore later phenomena than complexes in
the growth of the individual. Complexes also function and have
reactions and habits-push the same button, get the same re-
sponse. Functions, however, are classically conceived in Jungian
thought as aspects of the ego complex, even if thinking or feeling
may be associated with anima or animus, shadow or mother
complex, etc. Even the inferior function, which may reach to the
depths of the archaic unconscious soul, is yet conceived from
the viewpoint of ego consciousness as potentially a function of
the ego. This is evidently not true for the complexes and their
archetypal cores. They are never conceived as operations of the
ego. Complexes form the theoretical substrate of the psyche, and
they can, of course, dominate the four psychological functions.
For instance, one's feeling function may be highly determined by
the mother complex so that all one's feeling responses, values and
judgments reflect the personal mother or are in contradiction to
her. Or, one's intuitions may be mother-dominated, a nose for the
nasty; or everything that one smells, eats, notices, touches may
have a sexual-erotic thrill.
    Functions as ways of operating differ, too, from contents. One
may have feelings, thoughts, perceptions, but only a conscious or-
ganization can perform with them. A thought may come through
the mind, but this is not thinking; one may sit under sad feelings
all day but this is not feeling.
    Let us conceive these functions as four modes of organizing
and suffering life. Let us follow Jung further in assuming that
these four modes are basic to the psyche and that there are no
more than four. They would then be archetypally given with
psychic structure, necessary and sufficient. Here, Jung would


Page 89 of 177                                                49%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



seem to be re-expressing an ancient metaphor of the fourfold
root. This idea has often been brought forward as a basic principle
in accounting for human nature. Man was said to be composed
of four basic elements (earth, air, water and fire), humors and
 temperaments (melancholic, choleric, sanguine and phlegmatic).
 Attempts to equate the functions with these older principles do
 not quite work - feeling with water or with phlegm- since each
 age has its appropriate ciphers for expressing this archetypal
 metaphor, and translations ofit violate the context of the sym-
 bol. Nor should we elaborate the metaphor into an all-inclusive
 metapsychological system where all sorts of images can be fitted:
 e.g., feeling is represented by red colors and by the chest region
 of the body, or by one of the four seasons, directions, times of day
 and Gospel writers, etc. Four is a necessary symbol for a complete
 picture of the psyche, but each set of fours is different and they
 are not interchangeable.
     Cultural history shows heights in the appreciation of feeling in
 Greece and Rome, even if social historians often point to slavery,
 cruelty and the oppression of foreigners and of women in ancient
 civilization in order to drive home the message that Christianity
 brought in new and higher feeling values. Nevertheless, Greek
 and Roman thought shows concern with feeling matters, whether
in the conduct of life and the city, in matters of human relation-
ships, or in aesthetics. Above all, their differentiated pantheon of
divine figures offered an archetypal background to many forms
of feeling expression. Because the gods were many, the relation to
them could not be encompassed in only one ritual or through one
creed. Polytheism gave the multiplicity of complexes in the psy-
che a background for finding values and relating to many aspects
of life, which we now more narrowly condemn as perverse, irre-
ligious, obscene and inhuman. One simply had to appreciate the


Page 90 of 177                                                    50%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 feeling claims of the different gods and find ways to relate to this
  archetypal background of existence, whereas in a book religion
 with a code and a catechism and a credo many feeling problems
 are taken care of without reflection.
      Later, in the late middle ages, for example, a great deal was
 understood about courtly love and mystical love. Catholic
 doctrine and monastic life encouraged deep-going self-reflection
 of feeling life but, unfortunately, too often in the context of good-
 ness and sin. Then, in the Renaissance, other aspects of feeling
 came to the fore. The presentation of passions and emotions oc-
 curred through painting and sculpture, and the analysis of feeling
 was a dominant 'theme of the writers. Love was a favorite theme
 during the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries, and, as the fine
 arts, music and literature developed into the fornms we are now
 familiar with, a differentiation of feeling took place, casting this
 function into the accepted modes we now consider to be ethically
 correct, aesthetically pleasing and politically decent. In other
words, our notion of "good feeling" in taste or conduct, or of deep
 "religious feeling," is very much the result ofa historical process.
     During the eighteenth century novelists and poets began their
subtle and exhaustive descriptions of feeling states, and during
the Romantic period, which immediately followed, appeared such
statements as "feeling is all" and "beauty is truth." There is little
of this emphasis today in either philosophy or psychology, while
literature concerns itself more with the coarser passions in a nar-
rower style, or with the apathetic absence of feeling in an art of
depersonalization. Psychotherapy and some new theology seem
to be the areas where feeling today is given theoretical place and
even worshiped as the goal of life.
     For a history of the feeling function as a concept we must turn
to the philosophers. The background of psychology is philosophy;


Page 91 of 177                                                    50%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the two fields have only recently been separated. Plato, Aristotle,
 the Scholastics, Descartes, Spinoza, Hume, Kant - all take up the
 affective Iife and make it an important part of their philosophies.
 In fact, the old humanistic tradition concerns itself with an
 understanding of feeling, and the modern academic split between
 science and the humanities turns principally on the feeling func-
 tion, which is not appropriate to science as it is today defined.
 Academic and clinical psychology run the danger, in their urge to
 be scientific and objective, of losing their connection to human
 feeling when they neglect their historical roots in philosophy
 and theology. The background of clinical psychology is only sec-
 ondarily the psychopathology of illnesses, only secondarily the
 scientific or medical approach of clinical work. To understand the
feeling function we must begin long before modern psychiatry's
descriptions of its peculiar vicissitudes; we must begin with the
humanism of the moral philosophers and essayists, the novelists
and dramatists, the theologians and mystics, rather than with
contemporary psychologists.
     The concept of feeling as a separate faculty of the psyche
appears in modern thought in the faculty psychology of the
eighteenth century. At that time, the psyche was divided into
three faculties: thinking, willing and feeling. Perhaps historians
of ideas will one day tell us more about the birth of feeling in the
eighteenth century, for it was in the air of the time: introspective
Pietism, Rousseau, the Sentimental Novels and the word "senti-
mental," the culture and manners of courts, of cities, of salons and
coffeehouses, the refinement of written language and interest in
accents and tones of speech, the development of music, the ori-
gins of Romanticism, the enthusiasm of political revolutionaries
and religious reformers. During this same period, the concept
of feeling as a separate faculty of the psyche enters psychology


Page 92 of 177                                                    51%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



as an equal in the trinity of thinking, willing and feeling, a tri-
partite division that still provides the framework for university
courses in psychology on the European continent today. The term
"feeling," to describe a separate faculty, was first introduced by
Moses Mendelssohn in 1766. Already in 1755 he had written:
"Wir fühlen nicht mehr sobald wir denken" ("We no longer feel
as soon as we think" Philosophische Schriften, 1, 9). We shall see in
Jung's description of the feeling function an essentially identical
statement.
   "Feelings     asthe word for emotions, sympathies and suscep-
tibilities enters English in 1771. This was a time when feelings
were of huge importance, somewhat as today. Everyone spoke
of his states of soul as feelings. New words were preempted
by the feeling function. "Interesting" and "bored" joined the
language, the former via Sterne's Sentimental Journey in 1768.
Other eighteenth-century contributions to feeling vocabulary are
"ennui, chagrin, home-sickness, difidence, apathy, while the older
words, excitement, agitation, constraint, embarrassment, disap-
pointment, come to be applied to inner experiences" (Smith, The
English Language). As Smith points out, it is not that people before
the eighteenth century had no homesickness or apathy, had no
feeling and emotions and sentiments, but this was the time in
psychological history when consciousness began to reflect upon
feeling as such. This is also the time, the end of the eighteenth
century, that the first textbooks were written with "psychology"
in their titles. The difference between the older vocabulary of feel-
ing and that of the modern period (out of which psychology was
born) consists in the transfer of feeling descriptions from outer
events (as "baleful," "sinister," "benign") to inner events. When we
say an event is amusing or interesting today, we generally refer
to feelings that take place within ourselves. (See Barfield's History


Page 93 of 177                                                    51%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



in English Words.) The origins of modern academic psychology
are quite closely bound with introspection and the transfer of
feeling from an outer to an inner world. Gestalt psychology has
tried during the last fifty years to place feelings again "outside" in
the landscape as objective qualities of the scene, arising from the
"feel" of the lines and colors and forms.
    The separation of affective experience and the attempts to or-
ganize and classify it, mainly through the introspective method,
are a great contribution of German and, to a lesser extent,
French and British-Scottish psychology. The tripartite division
suggested by Mendelssohn took on authority as worked out by
in the eighteenth century by Johannes Nikolaus Tetens, and then
by Immanuel Kant in his Anthropology. Once the idea had been
presented by Kant, it became official and orthodox, to last the cen-
turies. This third division included all sorts of affectivity-emo-
tion, sensation, pleasure and pain, sensing ofthe good, moral and
aesthetic values, sentiments, passions: whatever did not belong
either to thinking or willing.
    Unfortunately, this division became absorbed by an older
model still dreaming in the psyche, the tripartite division in
Plato's Republic; or, we might say that a trinitarian model for the
hierarchical description of consciousness is a Western arche-
type that appears in different forms in different centuries. The
influence of the Platonic division (Head and Gold, Heart and
Silver, Liver and Bronze) was distinctly negative for the faculty
of feeling. Affectivity became the lowest, blurring its edges and
confusing its realm with that of the dark passions and the lowest
strata of sex, sin, the irrational and feminine and materialistic.
Feeling, which is not all the same as passion or emotion, can and
does become passionate and emotional owing to the collective re-
pression and consequent lack of differentiation.


Page 93 of 177                                                    52%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    The collective repression of the affective side of the psyche
in our history and the return of the repressed- today waving
the banners of "feeling" in the church, in teach-ins, in groups, in
advertising, wherever - have left us with a sense of loss. Loss is
the main characteristic of feeling just now; we are at a loss, not
knowing how to feel, where to feel, why to feel, or even if we feel.
There is loss of individual feeling style and form, as if an ability
has got crippled. We are left with what T.s. Elliot calls in his Four
Quartets "the general mess of imprecision of feeling,/Undiscip-
lined squads of emotion," so that our task may also be described
by another passage from the same work of Eliot's:
        Only the fight to recover what has been lost
        And found and lost again and again: and now under conditions
        That seem unpropitious.

So much is feeling the problem      of the times that one could pre-
posterously assert that the whole field of psychotherapy resulted
from inadequacies of the feeling function. Our personal feeling
problems are partly a collective result of the ages of repression,
which have by no means been lifted by the confused enthusiasms
of the eighteenth century nor by the pornographic delights of the
mid-twentieth. Our feeling problems are collective problems, and
we need new fantasies for them. To deal with them only directly,
with a new doctrine of feeling and a revolution in its name, is not
enough. The shibboleths of the age are connect, relate, be human,
be sincere, feel - but how? And what do these slogans mean?
    Academic psychologists, with a few outstanding exceptions,
have preferred to let feeling alone, justifying their neglect with
arguments that feeling cannot be analyzed. Feeling, they say
(and this is particularly true of the German schools, who in spite
of their arguments keep on writing about feeling), is a flow that
cannot be cut up and looked at. Even asking questions, the first

Page 94 of 177                                                         52%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 step in arty inquiry, stops feeling. They point to common life
 where if one is asked, "How does it feel?" the answer in words is
 already different from the feeling phenomenon. The application
 of analytical intellect to feeling destroys the very thing under
 examination; it melts before one's eyes. So-this argument runs -
 feeling is better left in the dark as an underground force, to be felt
 and not formulated.
     Because there is little objective evidence to consider, the
 study of feeling seems such a personal matter. Psychologists are
 aware of this, and three times in this century there have been
 extraordinary symposia on Feelings and Emotions. The first, the
 Wittenberg symposium, was held in 1927, and many illustrious
 psychologists- Alfred Adler, Vladimir Bekhterev, Pierre Janet,
 Henri Piéron, Karl Bühler - took part, each giving his view of feel-
 ing and of emotion. Again, in 1948, there was a similar sympo-
 sium on Feelings and Emotions, organized through the University
 of Chicago. Margaret Mead, Carl Rogers, David Katz, Arnold Gesell,
 Frederik Jakob Buytendijk, Gardner Murphy, and a score of others,
 each presenting a theory of feeling and of emotion, and research
 on every p0ssible aspect. Now, twenty years have passed, and
 the third such symposium took place at Loyola in the autumn of
 1968.It included a synopsis and the implications of Jung's views,
 which I presented. For anyone wanting to examine this field more
 academically, the three volumes representing these symposia are
basic.
    But the study of feeling leads outside psychology and into so-
cial history and biography, family life and friendships, literature,
poetry, politics and diplomacy- all places where the psychologist
usually feels nervous. I have collected the academic books in this
field for years - my indirect way to feeling -and I can report that
there is little fantasy in this stuff, and it is leadenly dull reading.


Page 95 of 177                                                     53%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    Jung has given us one clue to feeling that is far from dull
because it pertains to our actual psychic life and to its basis in
the complexes. If the complexes are defined as groups of feeling-
toned ideas, then on component of every complex is feeling and
one way into every complex is via its feelings. We can discover
the complex through dream imagery, through sensations and
memories, through projections, through ideas and their analysis
- but also through feelings. The approach through feeling applies
as well to dreams, which are expressions of the complexes. The
selecting and appreciating of dream values, as well as the feelings
released through dreams, are ways of elaborating the complexes;
feeling is a via regia to the unconscious, not only in our personal
lives, but to the larger archetypal dominants that make their im-
personal claims upon us through feelings. This implies that our
feelings, seemingly so closely intimate and personally "ours," also
have their archetypal impersonal aspect, deserving recognition
on that level.
    Let me stress this again: feelings are not only personal; they
reflect historical and universal phenomena. They are common
and collective. A need that seems so personal may express the
need common to our relationship, common to the family as a
group, common to a group of society, and even common to the
age. Our feelings are not "ours" only. We partake in them, as for
instance national feelings and religious feelings. In this sense
they are not only something "in" us, but also something we are
"in" and which the feeling function can help us sort through. The
belief that feelings are "mine," personal and revelatory of who I
am and where I stand and what I want, is very much an illusion of
the feeling ego. Just as the sensations of taste and smell vary little
between people, or the thoughts in the minds and the processes
of thinking vary little among members in the collective society,


Page 96 of 177                                                    53%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



so too with feelings. The differentiation of individualized feeling
into an original style is as rare as originality in any function. Be-
cause therapists sometimes neglect the impersonal collectivity of
 feelings, analysands are led to believe that if they can only express
their feelings fully they can find honesty and become centered.
 The feeling function is the instrument with which we sort out the
genuine and the spurious - no easy task, maybe not even possible.
In any event, we should not burden this function with the entire
weight of self-discovery and expect that feeling alone will make
us genuine and authentic persons.
    There are other ways to depth besides "deep" feelings. Because
feeling has been so blown up recently, people have come to take it
as the panacea for therapy. ButI shall be proceeding in a different
way: not a therapy through feeling but a therapy of feeling, an at-
tempt to bring awareness to the ways that feeling functions.
    Ideally, one should have a feeling type who would enjoy telling
you how he functions. But usually this sort of lecture does not
catch the fantasy of a feeling type. He has no problem with feeling
and therefore no rich fantasies about it. Whereas I would be in
the same fix had I to expand upon the nature of intuitive thinking
that for me is automatic and unreflected.
    So, I make the personal premise clear from the start. Learning
through lectures is always a kind of distortion. Only certain sorts
of people have the gift for words, so that one learns things as fil-
tered through that sort of word consciousness. But learning about
feeling does not come primarily through reading and lectures, or
even words, so these chapters are a paradox in many ways: I am
not the one to teach it; it is not the best way to learn; the subject it-
self is perhaps beyond this sort of formulation. Still, I feel it worth
trying.



Page 97 of 177                                                       54%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                    6
                 Jungian Descriptions and Distinctions

I WOULD claim for Jung that he did much for resurrecting feeling
and separating it from the collective prejudices. Neither Bleuler
nor Freud, the two psychological masters with whom Jung was
most closely associated, clearly separated feeling from emotion,
from passion, from affectivity. In psychiatric and psychoanalytic
literature today the feeling function is still buried in the general
category of affectivity, whereas Jung differentiated feeling as a
function of consciousness equal to thinking, sensing and intuit-
ing already in 1921 in his Psychological Types.
    By conceptually differentiating feeling and considering it a
function of consciousness, Jung made a major contribution to the
history or the concept of feeling. In evaluations of Jung's typo-
logical work this achievement is often overlooked, and thereby an
essential aspect of Jungian psychology is often neglected, leading
to many unnecessary arguments. It is crucial to the understand-
ing of Jungian psychology that feeling be brought to bear upon it.
We cannot read Jung by intellect alone. Conscious comprehension
in Jungian psychology means as well feeling comprehension.
All the principal conceptual symbols (e.g., introversion, shadow,
archetype, self, synchronicity) are as well experiences of feeling.
    The complex may be defined most simply as a group of feeling-
toned ideas; the symbol is recognized by its effect on feeling as

Page 99 of 177                                                  54%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



well as by its sensuous impression, its intuitional meanings and
its ideational content. Even that general goal of a Jungian analysis
- the cooperative relationship between ego consciousness and the
unconscious dominants - is, as a relationship, largely a function
of feeling. Jungian therapy is not, as it is sometimes mistaken to
be, mainly a matter of self-knowledge. Self-realization is a process
of feeling realization, realizing what we feel, feeling what we
are; and this process begins with the first therapeutic session, to
which the person comes often owing to his disturbed feelings and
which opens often with that question "How do you feel?
     The assumption of feeling had its effect also on the later devel-
opments in Jung's work, especially upon the anima concept and
his explorations in many dimensions of the "feminine" pole of the
psyche. The recognition of feeling can also be found in his rather
free and open way of doing therapy unburdened by the rigidities
 of technique devised by intellect. His psychology therefore soon
found ear among women and among artists, just as it soon met re-
jection-with notable exceptions- in those places where feeling is
undervalued: contemporary scientific medicine and psychology
and the academies of learning.
     Jung came upon the role of feeling experimentally; his earliest
descriptions of feeling stem from his association experiments;
where he found pure affective reasons ("yes," "bad" "like" etc.)
to stimulus words, rather than associations in the stricter sense.
Already in this early work during the first decade of the century,
we can trace two aspects of the concept of feeling: on the one
hand, feeling as afunction that "likes," relates, makes judgments,
connects, denies, evaluates; on the other hand, feelings as con-
tents (hopes, longing, angers) that act in the association experi-
ment as factors facilitating or disturbing associations. In his first
attempts (1913, 1916-17) to work out the theory of types and


Page 99 of 177                                                    55%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



  the concept of functions, Jung did not differentiate introversion
  from thinking (with its psychopathology of dementia praecox) or
 extroversion from feeling (with its psychopathology of hysteria).
 These early confusions may have been in part due to his own
 psychological quotient.
     Before we turn to Jung's description of the feeling function, we
 are obliged for the sake of clarity to differentiate some of the com-
 mon misconceptions about the word "feeling" itself.
     First, we usually confuse feeling with sensing. Pain and
 pleasure are primarily sensations (feeling comfortable, feeling
 itchy, feeling exhausted). However, pain has a feeling dimension
in addition to the pure sensation, inasmuch as it is bound with
 suffering or displeasure (Unlust, in the language of the German
psychologists). Pleasure, too, has a feeling dimension (joy, for in-
stance), so that we can feel disappointed or unhappy from a pain-
ful punishment or glad through a delicious dinner. Often we use
the expression "I feel" when we mean more accurately "I sense."
For instance, feeling cold, feeling well, feeling the satiny surface
of a cloth are all primarily sensations, either sensing the internal
milieu, proprioceptively, or sensing an external object. Academic
psychology has tried conceptually to separate feeling and sensing
in tern of internal and external. We feel subjective states and
sense external objects. But Jung's use of sensation and feeling is
more sophisticated: we can feel events as objective values outside
in ethical actions and art objects, and so, too, we can sense inside
our own subjective processes.
     We also use sensing and feeling confusedly when we speak of
someone as "sensitive" where we are really referring to a refine-
ment of feeling, a touchiness, a quality of heightened sensibility.
"Sensitives" in parapsychology refer to those with an amazing
intuitive function. So, curiously, we find this mixture of terms


Page 100 of 177                                                   55%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



where feeling, sensing, and intuiting are indistinct. These differ-
ences cannot be made clear as the mind would like, because
language follows not logical but psychological truth. Evidently
the separation of furnctions is not sharply defined. In French, for
instance, the word sentir (connected with our word "sentiment")
means "to feel" "to sense" and also "to foresee" (intuit). Metaphors
of feeling use the language of sensation; we say "tender," "sweet,"
"bitter" for feelings, identifying the sensuous content of feeling
with the function.
     There is much justification in language for the closeness of
feeling and sensing. Etymologically, the root of the word "feeling"
is fol (Teutonic), a cognate of fol-m (Anglo-Saxon), meaning palm
of the hand. The same root is in the Icelandic fal-ma = to grope.
Walter William Skeat's Etymological Dictionary of the English
Language, in fact, defines "feel" simply as "to perceive by touch."
From another direction there is a connection between feeling (in
a broader sense) and the hand: the Greek term orexis, which we
translate as appetite, desire and longing, means also to reach for
or stretch out for, as one does with the hand. It is risky to draw big
conclusions from etymology, but clearly feeling once had a tac-
tual connotation.
     Second, feeling is often confused with intuiting. Feeling
certain, feeling right, feeling something is rotten or fishy are all
expressions of intuition. We tend to say "I feel," rather than "I see"
or "I find" or "It seems to me," which would be more appropriate
language for stating intuitions. The statement "He has a good
'feel' for paintings" or "He can 'feel' into the background of people"
more likely describes intuition than feeling.
    Third, feeling is often undifferentiated from emotion, affect,
and passion (feeling furious, excited, in love, grief). The demarca-
tion of the borderlines here is a major problem in psychology as I


Page 101 of 177                                                   56%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 have worked out to some extent in my book Emotion: A Compre-
 hensive Phenomenology of Theories and their Meanings for Therapy.
 Jung does not generally distinguish between affect and emotion
 (cf. Psychological Types, CW6:681, 706). His distinction between
 feeling and emotion/affect is mainly quantitative (ibid., 681):
 feelings become affects when they release physical innervations.
 However, he does not go far enough, and an examination of the
 academic literature (see Emotion) gives some ground for consider-
 ing affects as rather primordial, partial, one-sided release dyna-
 misms, rather close to what animal behaviorist speak of with
 the term"inborn (instinctual) reactions," or psychiatrists with
 "primitive reactions" Affect lowers the mental level to what Janet
 has called the inferior part of a function. Emotion, on the other
hand, is a total event of the personality, based perhaps in affect or
having an affective component, and containing a feeling dimen-
 sion. Many levels are activated, and consciousness becomes trans-
formed through an emotion to a symbolic kind of consciousness.
Emotions are highly significant states. They provide depth. They
give and bring meaning; they disorder and create at the same
time, and they present the experience of body consciousness. In
a nutshell: emotion embraces both affect and feeling and more as
well; feeling is a partial activity associated with consciousness,
mainly; affect is largely a physiological expression.
     Fourth, feeling as a function differs from feelings. One can
have feelings without being able to do much with them, without
being able to function feelingly. (Similarly, one can have intu-
itions or thoughts without functioning mainly through intuition
or mainly by thinking; i.e., one can have thoughts without being
able to think them further to conclusions.) The feeling function
may evaluate thoughts, sense objects and psychic contents of
any kind. It is not restricted to feelings. The feeling function feels


Page 102 of 177                                                   56%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



(appreciates and relates to) not only feelings. We may feel our
thoughts, discover their value and importance. We may feel that
even the most intense sensations or grandest intuitions have little
 value or cannot be related to. So too, we may think feeling and
 about feelings - as we are doing right now in this lecture. Feelings
 themselves -irritation, enjoyment, boredom -may be handled
 adequately or inadequately, valued positively or negatively by
 the feeling function. We shall return to this at length in regard to
 "inferior functioning" So, the person who seems to have so much
 feeling and be so full of feelings may not be a "feeling type" at
 all, whereas a feeling type, because he disposes of feelings quite
 equanimously, may seem utterly devoid of feelings, distant and
 disinterested. Having feelings and using feeling is the difference
between the contents and the process that organizes and ex-
presses the contents. However, once this distinction is made we
must not put too much weight on it. Practically, the continual
subjective process of experiencing feelings is the passive back-
ground of the feeling function.
      Fifth, feeling is often carelessly merged with the conceptual
symbols "anima" and "eros." Eros refers to the principle of union,
attraction towards and attachment to, connection, relation,
involvement that binds together. It has roots in desire and specific
affects such as longing, burning, ascending, dying, and specific
symbols such as wings, arrows, child, fire, ladder. As an arche
typal dominant, eros differs both from the anima as a psycho-
logical complex and from feeling as a psychological function,
even if both may take on shades of eros and come under its sway
in that eros is metapsychological, a god or daimon, and a wider
category than either anima or feeling.
     Anima by definition is the feminine aspect of the masculine
psyche and is always feminine. Eros, however, is masculine. Its


Page 103 of 177                                                   57%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 imagery in various cultures confirms this. Kama, Eros, Cupid,
 Frey, Adonis, Tammuz- all are male; and the incarnations of
 enlightened love, Krishna, Buddha, Jesus -for all their gentleness
 and forbearance in regard to sexual fertility - are masculine. The
 eros principle is active and aimed; preaching, teaching, traveling,
leading souls to redemption: or heroes and men to the fateful em-
brace, or shooting its darts into flesh love is male deed and power.
It makes effects in the world and the psyche. Whether the move-
ment be the homing of grace downward or the yearning upward
from the imperfect to the perfect, eros remains in every context,
Christian or not, a spiritual creative dynamus, a prime mover.
    Although feeling can be considered to be a manifestation of
eros within consciousness and the feeling function to be rooted
archetypally in eros, the principle yet differs distinctly from
feeling in the essential respect that feeling is human. Feeling is
an individual attribute of consciousness, limited by a spatial and
temporal situation. Eros is, as the writings tell us, always univer-
sal and impersonal - even inhuman and demonic. Whether as
sexual compulsion or as cosmogonic eros holding the universe to-
gether, it remains impersonal, a force, not a feeling function.
    Therefore, it is quite legitimate to speak of people with much
eros and little feeling, or differentiated feeling and little eros. If
we remember eros as a vital force that throws us into life and
turmoil, messing things up, involving the psyche in matters be-
yond its comprehension, then we can grasp how little it has to do
with a differentiated feeling function. Lovers can unite without
any feeling; eros is enough to spawn all sorts of progeny, bring
together all sorts of opposites into symbolic unities. On the other
hand; the charming "feeler," or the introverted "deep feeler" may
be far from being moved by the archetype of eros. When con-
sidering hysteria, sociopathy, and schizoid withdrawal, it might


Page 103 of 177                                                   57%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



be well to differentiate eros and feeling. Feeling may function
 quite adaptedly in the psychopathic aspect of the complex, with
 charm and all the manifestations of interested relatedness, yet
 underneath is power and selfgain, not eros. Many sins of the lack
 of eros are covered over by the words "introversion" or "feeling
 type" so that the introverted deep-feeler may live a life where the
 heated confusions of eros and its aspiring dynamics never move
 the personality at all.
     In his senminars, Jung makes some distinctions among the
 feeling function, love and eros. He points out that any of the func-
 tions can be under the influence of eros and not only the feeling
 function. Yet he does tend to consider the highest development
 of the feeling function to be manifested by a quality of loving.
 The difficulty in the distinction of these terms reflects prior
 difficulties within our feeling, loving and eros. Eros is a god, and
having lost touch with him, we are in a mess, and we quarrel over
agape and philia and caritas and amicus. No wonder: after all, who
knows what love is?
     The oppositions between logos and eros, between masculine
and feminine, between love and power - and so many more
with which we are familiar - need to be understood first of all
within the fantasy of opposites. These are ways of making things
separated, opposed and distinct; these oppositions are useful for
grasping things with the mind that always needs these simplifi-
cations since it is never altogether up to the complicated nature
of psychic reality, which is always complex. Thus, let us not insist
so much on opposing principles, logos versus eros. There is a logos
in eros as there is an eros in the spirit. These ideational principles
are symbolic ideas and need to be under stood each for itself in its
own way and not merely as counters in a game of opposites.




Page 104 of 177                                                   58%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    The masculinity of eros must always be kept quite distinct
from its feminine counterpart, with which it is usually in close as-
sociation. Hence, the mythological images of Mother and Son, as
aspects of each other, the son embodying and carrying into action
the qualities of the mother. The Great Goddess and all her con-
figurations as Kuan-Yin, Devi, Ishtar, Cybele, Aphrodite, Venus,
Freya, or Maria show another quality. The essence of her love is
more passive, more accepting, less differentiated. This essence,
expressed negatively, is her notorious promiscuity; expressed
positively, it is endless fecundity and all enmbracing merciful
compassion.
    We cannot lose sight of the fact that any contemporary discus-
sion of the feeling function and what it feels like will always bear
the confusions of our language and our culture, where imprecise
feeling and undisciplined emotion reign. Repression always has
the effect of amalgamating the repressed through heat and pres-
sure into a sticky mixture. Where the female principle, as well as
feeling and eros, are repressed, women tend to be the representa-
tives of all these virtues. But for us it is not possible to distinguish
without careful analysis just what are the various properties of
the amalgam. Individual analysis in psychotherapy optimistically
might lead to the separation of these various virtues. Eros
then be freed from its identification with the passively feminine
and indiscriminate Great Goddess; the anima complex can be
freed from its domination by eroticism; women can be relieved
from the burden of carrying men's own unconscious feminine
side as well as having to carry men's feeling function and their au-
thentic and necessary commitment of eros.

Jung's definition of feeling should be read in its entirety. But we
can condense from it these formulations. See his Psychological
Types, CW6:


Page 105 of 177                                                     58%
                           LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



        Feeling is primarily a process that takes place between the ego
        and a given content, a process, moreover, that imparts to the
        content a definite value in the sense of acceptance or rejection
        ("like" or "dislike"). The process can also appear isolated, as it
        were, in the form of"mood," regardless of the momentary con-
        tents of consciousness or momentary sensations. (724)

        ... feeling is a kind of judgment, differing from intellectual
        judgment in that its aim is not to establish conceptual
        relations but to set up a subjective criterion of acceptance or
        rejection. Valuation by feeling extends to every content of con-
        sciousness, of whatever kind it may be. When the intensity of
        feeling increases, it turns into an afect, ie., a feeling state ac-
        companied by marked physical innervations. (725)

        Feeling, like thinking, is a rational function, since values in
        general are assigned according to the laws of reason, just as
        concepts in general are formed according to these laws.
          Naturally the above definitions do not give the essence
       of feeling- they only describe it from outside. The intellect
        proves incapable of formulating the real nature of feeling in
        conceptual terms, since thinking belongs toa category incom-
        mensurable with feeling... (727-28)

        When the subject's attitude as a whole is oriented by the feel-
        ing function, we speak of afeeling type. (729)

The feeling function is that psychological process in us that
evaluates. Through the feeling function we appreciate a situation,
a person, an object, a moment in terms of value. A prerequisite for
feeling is therefore a structure of feeling memory, a set of values,
to which the event can be related. (We can see at once the import-
ance of childhood analysis for uncovering parental influences on
the structure of feeling memory and the development of values.)
Some writers have stressed especially this structure of feeling
memory built upon the past, and the preference of the feeling


Page 106 of 177                                                               59%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



type for past time. This rather schematic way of organizing the
types according to time does have the advantage of stressing the
importance of time in regard to the functions, and especially the
importance of an accumulation of feeling experiences as a basis
of the feeling function. (See H. Mann, M. Siegler, H. Osmond, "The
Many Worlds of Time," 36f.)
    As a process that is always going on and that gives or receives
feeling tones - even the feeling tone of indifference - this function
connects both the subject to the object (by imparting value) and
the object to the subject (by receiving it within the subjective
value system). It therefore functions as a relation and is often
called "the function of relationship." When a black cat crosses my
path andI slow up, frown and sense a squirt of fear, I am relating
to the event not only physiologically. The event, and the cat too,
has become evaluated in terms of my subjective value system that
has established positions for this situation. The feeling function
has related me to this event in terms of worry and negative judg-
ments. Events that are not evaluated but are merely perceptually
recorded or entertained in the mind as fanciful intuitions have
not been felt, and soI cannot be said to have any relationship with
them nor they to me. I may have vivid dreams and devastating
fights without feeling their value one way or another, and so they
are not related to my consciousness. So, in sum, feeling relates
subject to object, to the contents of one's psyche as values, and to
one's subjectivity as general feeling tone and mood.
    As a process, feeling requires time, more time than is needed
for perception. Like thinking, it must rationally organize percep-
tions and judge them; unlike thinking it judges by values. The
more differentiated and rich this set of values, the slower may be
the process of feeling. (Similarly with thinking, the more differ-
entiated the ideational world, the slower may be the final placing


Page 107 of 177                                                  59%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



of a new thought.) In making judgments the feeling function bal-
ances values, compares tones and qualities, weighs importance
and decides upon the values it discovers. The feeling function on
a more   primitive level is mainly a reaction of yes and no, like and
dislike, acceptance and rejection. As it develops, there forms in
us a subtle appreciation of values, and even of value systems, and
our judgments of feeling then rest more and more on a rational
hierarchy, whether it be in the realm of aesthetic taste, ethical
goods, or social forms and human relationships. Although these
systems of values and the judgments coming from them are not
logical, they are rational. The developed feeling function is the
reason of the heart, which the reason of the mind does not quite
understand.
    The difference between logical and rational in regard to feeling
deserves perhaps more description. Although feeling does not
operate in syllogisms, there is an exactitude and demonstrable
reason in its operations. For example; one develops taste, which
cannot be logically explained or experimentally proved but
which is yet coherent and systematic. The ability to handle a
problem or talk witha person in the right way shows a rational
discrimination and an adjustment to what is needed. Yet, the
entire operation may not be intellectual. One says different things
to different people according to the values of the situation and
according to the requirements of the other person. These answers
to questions may not be either truthful or correct in the logical
sense, but from the point of view of feeling they may be exactly
right. When a child asks for an explanation, an answer may be
given from thinking or from feeling; at times, a story that answers
to the anxiety in the child may be "truer" than an intellectual
explanation of causes. To hit the mark truly does not mean always
to tell the factual or logical truth. In therapy, a problem may often


Page 108 of 177                                                   60%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



be relieved by absurdities of anecdote or parable,  in the manner
of the masters, rather than by relentless logical reductions. In
resolvinga conflict often the whole picture of harmony is more
important than either logic or facts. The function of feeling then
creates a situation in which viewpoints may rationally blend even
 though the opposing logical and factual issues have not been set-
 tled and may even have been compromised. One may be irration-
 ally at odds with an appointment or an outer obligation, yet in
 tune with one's own values and mood. On waking in the morning,
 feeling tells us how we feel regardless of the outer rationality of
 weather, time on the clock, duties of the day, state of the body.
 And above all, feeling provides the order and logic for love.
     There is a time sense connected with the feeling function,
 which is not mentioned in the literature, yet which is part of the
 ratio of the feeling function. The sense of timing and tact is a
function of feeling often incompatible with the reason of think-
ing. This division gives occasion to doing the right thing at the
wrong time. There is a "feel" to each discrete moment and each
chain of moments. Each life has its "feel" to it, the way its time
courses, which turns a case history into a soul history, a chain of
events into a patterned rhythm. A biography is the exposition of
feeling running through time, the feeling of a person and a period.
     Although feeling is a process of evaluation, although Jung
discovered facts leading to his description of the function from
evaluative statements in the association experiment, and al-
though values are generally organized by scales, feeling cannot
be simplified to fit a pain-pleasure or like-dislike system. Some
theorists attempt with their logic to reduce feeling to an ultimate
pair of hedonic coordinates. But the differentiation of aesthetic
feeling (beautiful-ugly), of moral feeling (good-bad), of human
feeling (love-hatred, elated-depressed), of biological feeling


Page 108 of 177                                                 60%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  (attraction-repulsion, receding-expanding)-all point beyond
  mere hedonic preferences of like-dislike. Reduction of feeling to
  hedonic tone inevitably leads to a hedonistic philosophy in which
 the hierarchy of feeling values and judgments is forced into a
  framework of pleasure and pain. Then quantitative measures are
 brought in, and feeling gives way before the technical organiza-
 tion of thinking.
      The nature of the feeling function is more complex. It does
 not start with simples. Like music, it starts as a Gestalt of melody
 rather than a string of primary tones. Feeling plays its tune, anda
 different tune in accord with each situation and with the values
 implicit in the situation itself. As they say in aesthetics: we judge
 each work of art according to the conditions it presents, the aims
 it itself sets out to achieve.
      Even in analysis or counseling it is neither correct nor useful
 to attempt to discover feeling by asking, "Do you like him?" "Do
you like that?" If the answer is a flat "Yes" or "No" it is usually
not truly an individual feeling statement, but rather something
more childish and mechanical, perhaps a family view in the
sense that it is an affective reaction from the complex and not a
conscious feeling judgment. Like and dislike are intricate matters,
requiring weighing. The feeling answer to "Do you like him?" is "It
depends." It depends: on the situation, on what I mean by "like"
on what aspects of him I am asked about, and so on. The feeling
function sorts all this out; it is a process, as Jung says. To reduce
feeling to mere like-dislike is an intellectual devaluation; it would
be similarly unjustified to reduce all thought processes to the
true-false dichotomy. Reduction is anyhow a pinched way of pro-
ceeding in the psychological analysis of anything. We may separ
ate, analyze; examine, describe; but reduction belittles because it
cuts down the wholeness of an event, the existential reality of just


Page 109 of 177                                                   61%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



now, what it feels like, which is always complex. This complexity
is given by feeling. Feeling records the specific quality and value.
Andjust this exploration and amplification of shadings and
tones, this reversal of reduction, is a function of feeling

 WE have dwelt upon these differentiations of the concept of
 feeling in order to demonstrate that we are not talking of feelings
 merely in a vague, sentimental and popular tone. It is not enough
 to speak of guilty feelings and hurt feelings and inadequate
 feelings. It is not enough to encourage people to express their
 feelings. Some sort of theoretical basis is also required for this
 word "feeling" The occupation in this chapter with the notion of
feeling is part of making feeling itself more precise. It is also a way
 of becoming conscious of feeling, of a feeling consciousness.
     The feeling function has lain like a buried continent in the
collective psyche, and it seems to be moving and causing tremors,
 shaking the foundations of our beliefs and values-and of course
styles. All the concerns with eroticism and loneliness, with aging
and delinquency, with violence and communication reflect a
moment of feeling within the collective psyche. No one can escape
it; everything seems so uncertain when feeling is shaken, when
we can't count upon values and styles, and upon the processes of
relationship that knit together the social patterns. Psychotherapy
seems to have recognized this movement in the buried continent,
laying its contemporary emphasis upon sensitivity, relatedness
and expression of feeling. That this is a one-sided approach to the
psyche, too personal and too sentimental, goes without saying. It
seems that psychotherapy is rather unreflecting about the collect-
ive movements of the psyche that affect its dogmas: when sex was
the great repressed, we had the Viennese influence; then it was
the mother complex everywhere, nourishing and breasts; now, it



Page 110 of 177                                                    61%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



is a matter of the feeling function; soon, aggression, violence and
enmity will be the theme.
     At the moment (1970), as I revise these lectures, feeling
 has become the content and procedure of therapy. We are in a
 new Romantic age where feeling is all; we have become feeling
 addicts-"How does it feel?" "Express your feelings!" "What do
you feel about it?" Communication has become centered upon
the description of feelings, replacing the communication of
ideas and insights. Moreover, the intellectual spirit of the psyche
 and the communication of thought are regarded as a betrayal
of the "movement" and of what is "human" and being a "real
person." Again we see how thinking and feeling fall into archaic
oppositions. And these feelings, expressed and shared in thera-
peutic groups and the new sorts of communities, are so incredibly
personal and boring! We are so fond of believing that what is most
personal is also most individual, but the personal, including the
ego, reflects commonplaces and generalities. The intimate ad-
ventures of one's feeling "trips,"like the home movies of the trip
through the national parks, are boring because the psyche gets
no food from only the personal. Experience must be turned into
something fantastic to hit the psyche; that is, it needs to take on
a poetic, metaphoric, mythic aspect that goes beyond what one
personally felt. There is a false assumption in the new therapy
cults that emphasize personal feeling. An opposition is made be-
tween personal experience and general or impersonal or abstract
experience. But the personal is only one level of general, common
experience. Everyone feels afraid under attack, longs for what he
doesn't quite know, quarrels, hates, and backbites. The personal
might better be viewed as feeling on the banal level of the ego, my-
self the sincere adolescent as sensitive center of the universe.




Page 111 of 177                                                 62%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     It is indeed pathetic to realize how estranged from feeling and
its forms we have become so that we must play in sand boxes,
crawl on the floor, run naked in the woods, have strangers put
their hands on us, or have professional practitioners read cheap
poetry so that we might "feel something." Yet, always behind all
immediate trends is the psyche itself struggling with soul-mak-
ing, now in terms of feeling. This lost and degenerated function
shows itself in awkward tenderness and sensitivity, in attempts
to touch, to reach out, to encounter only to be systematized by
the therapists into profitable professional schemes for teaching
how to be sensitive, to touch and to encounter. Maybe these new
programs have more value than my feeling credits them with. But
there are other ways of feeling, as these lectures hope to show.




                                                                62%
Page 112 of 177
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                1
                          Feeling Types


 IN actuality, the types are not easily recognized. The functional
type is rarely evident, for as Anaximander said, and the Buddha
too: whatever exists is a mixture of many elements; whatever
exists is impure. There are no pure types; there are no people in
whom only one function operates and nothing else. But there are
those in whom the overall "attitude of the individual is oriented
by the function of feeling," and, following Jung, these we call feel-
ing types.
    Jung's description covers thoroughly what he meant by
introverted and extroverted feeling types; these descriptions have
been expanded by many Jungian writers since. Rather than go
over the ground again, it might be useful to expose some clichés
about feeling types because these notions, conceived in jargon,
work to the detriment of feeling and maintain its undervalu-
ation. Some of these clichés, for instance, hold that musicians are
"feelers" or that people who have "good eros" are feeling types, or
that women, just because they are women, have better access to
feeling.
    Let us take these notions one by one. The relationship of music
and feeling has never been carefully worked out. Whether in
composition or execution, its range is not limited by one type of
person. That it is not verbal does not necessarily mean that music

Page 113 of 177                                                  62%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



does not have intellectual content or require thinking. Like any
art form, music unites opposites in itself and is not the privilege
of a special psychological function, unless that function be called
"musical talent." Music hath charms to tame the savage beast, and
Orpheus enchanted all the animals with his lyre. So, when we lis-
ten feelings are stirred, but this again does not mean that we use
especially the feeling function to listen to music nor that the feel-
ing type listens most accurately.
    Furthermore, there is a curious Apollonic aspect of music that
can lead consciousness into inhuman strata, cold, distant, cruel
even. The relationship of music and the military deserves much
more examination: Achilles, the greatest slayer in the Iliad, had
a special relation to music; Apollo committed his worst crime
(against Marsyas) for music; and Nazi generals and concentration
camp commanders enjoyed beautiful concerts. We tend to senti-
mentalize both music and the feeling function, missing that each
can have a psychopathic aspect.
   Next, let us stress again the difference between eros as an
archetypal principle and feeling as a function. They are quite
distinct. For example: some people may have taste, sensitive
differentiated feeling with cultural depth, yet be crooks; or be
wholly autoerotic, without a touch of eros in the sense of burning
involvement, care and love. Or the reverse: one may be all eros,
almost a mythical lover, outpouring and compassionate arid
yet be wholly out of touch with one's subjective sense of feeling
values and the outer objects, causes and people to whom one is
devoting one's life. A woman may love and wait for a worthless
drunkard who is in prison for crimes. Her feeling may have no dis-
crimination and be in a mess, but her eros is there. Or, take a look
at people in love: they are swimming in eros, and at the same time
they may be lying and cheating and cruelly hurting each other


Page 113 of 177                                                  63%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



and society. But then people in love may not be a good example for
either eros or for feeling!
    Another source of clichés about feeling concerns the role of
women. Women have been burdened with the distaff side of the
masculine psyche. Men presume that what they have not got,
women have. Where men have failed to become conscious of
their own feeling function, they take over from women feeling
judgments and values and establish patterns of relationship
that are not their own. This illusion is perpetuated every time a
woman takes her husband by the hand to a concert, a cathedral,
or a clothing store. Here, her feeling function is supposed to be
educating her husband's culture and taste. Masculine patterns
of relationship - as, for instance, between friends and enemies,
military, laboratory, business organizations, the conduct of the
law, parliament and clubs and unions - are activities and places of
the feeling function of men, so that the feeling function need not
be identified with women and pushed on to them. When Jung in
his description of the types declares that feeling types are found
more often among women, his statement may be taken as an
observation of our society, but not as a psychological law. It is in
fact one ofthe insidious clichés of our time (and one that Jungian
psychology has not done enough to dispel) that eros and feeling
have an affinity with women. In this model the feeling of men can
never be rightly understood, so that friendship feelings get called
latent homosexuality or transference. In a society where men
must look to women for their feeling education (moral and aes-
thetic values, organization of relationships, manners and style,
expression of feelings), the male feeling type will go around in
disguise and will not even be recognized by his own psychological
kin, who also wear masks of "good feeling" designed by women.
Often a man comes into his own feeling function when with


Page 114 of 177                                                 63%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



other men (e.g., military service, at the office, or in an adulterous
love affair where its course and rhythm depend upon his feeling
lead).
     Another usual view is that warmth, gaiety and enthusiasm
 are the same as feeling, and that feeling types can be recognized
by their outgoing relatedness. However, an intuitive person, or
 somebody who has not quite grown up, or a hysterical person can
 also display these same, sometimes charming, virtues and yet
have misplaced and inappropriate feeling. The uninhibited bring
to a situation a free flow of feelings; this is not to say that they
bring as well a differentiated feeling function. It is also claimed
that people who are cold are not feeling types. Nevertheless,
feeling can be expressed in cold, exact, remote manners, as in dip-
lomatic language and in realms of aesthetic taste where classical
formulations and accuracy can be compared with the exquisite-
ness of mathematical formulae.
    Sometimes we forget that the application of law by ajudge is
an operation of feeling, and that laws were invented not merely
to protect property or assure the priesthood and ruling class of
their power, but also to evaluate difficult human problems and
to do justice in human affairs. Judging is a matter of feeling, just
as in the temples of Saturn a balance was displayed, or as Saturn
in a horoscope is said to be well-placed when in the sign of Libra.
A Solomonic decision is not one brilliant stroke through the Gor-
dian knot of complexities, but rather a judgment made by feeling.
Law concerns "cases," considers "claims" and "obligations" and
by means of it one can make "appeals." The Bill of Rights is a
document of the feeling function at its abstract best. We errone-
ously believe that feeling must always be personal and that law is
always cut and dried, forgetting the impersonal feeling values of
law, of its ideals and its general application.


Page 115 of 177                                                   64%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    In his Education through Art, Herbert Read develops the eight
types into connections with styles of painting. He believes that
extroverted feeling tends towards decorative art and introverted
feeling towards imaginative art. Here again is the beginning of
a cliché about feeling: extroverted feeling is "only" descriptive,
 superficial, a play of color and forms, without deep content, as
 compared with introverted feeling with its access to the creative
 imagination. Here, we tend to miss that imagination, because it is
 archetypally governed, can produce stereotypes, and, on the other
 hand, decoration can elaborate marvelous patterns from the most
 archaic basket and pottery designs to the intricacies of Islamic
 stonecarving. Subtlety and intricacy can be virtues of extroverted
 feeling that have no less value because they do not come on "deep"
 and "strong."
     Another pet notion about feeling types is that wherever they
 are present an atmosphere of good feeling prevails. Feeling types,
 however, by their insistence upon values, and the structures in
 which these values are embedded, may often be highly intolerant
 of deviations or of values that are new. Feeling types take time,
 so that often they inhibit movement with their slowness because
they tune into an atmosphere. Ifit is not to their suiting, they
subtly impose their feeling world or disturb the one taking place
by undercutting it. If they do not like the atmosphere and cannot
change it, they may spend the evening in silence, unable to take
part at all, meanwhile passing silent judgments, or attempting,
if extroverted, to turn things into adapted sociable channels. The
importance of ideas, the beauty of wild intuitions, or sensations
just as they are, are not enough. Things must be evaluated and re-
lated to.
     Then, too, they have difficulty with the irrational, since feeling
is a rational function, perhaps not logical yet always reasonable.



Page 116 of 177                                                    64%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



The irrational types find themselves hamstrung and irritated by
the feeling types' disinterest with, and even sabotage of, "crazy"
things, people, events. They have a good hand that smooths and
straightens - and also smothers. They do not like conflict, prefer-
ring to balance extremes, not by taking the opposite extreme, but
through deflating extremity as such, making it seem ridiculous,
disproportionate. They say "don't get so worked up" or "it's not
all that important"or "wait until tomorrow." Or, where things are
"crazy" and out of hand, they find ways again to make it palatable,
either with a little joke that takes the edge off, or by evaluating
it with a positive judgment, like "it's probably better this way"
or "it seems mad, but it's really a good thing" These oiling and
diplomatic methods help civilize life, but for the sake of this "good
feeling" change is often blocked. Even in close relationships, feel-
ing types seem to have an eye for the soft spot in the other and can
put the needle in. They can masterfully handle those places in a
relationship that the nonfeeling type painfully tries to cover and
does not wish exposed. Sometimes in discussions they put in the
needle not personally, but by making the theme of the discussion
banal or by killing it with an archaic and collective doubt from
their inferior thinking.
    In relationships, feelers need to be in touch with the other per-
son's feelings. Other types can carry on for hours without aware-
ness that the person with whom they are talking is not there
with his feelings, or is even hostile. Sometimes other types do not
know even to whom they are pouring out their hearts and dearest
ideas. But feelers must have this contact, or they lose "touch" and
go "off." They have a bad evening or a bad hour of analysis. The
analyst who is not a feeler warms to his theme, gets interested in
the "material," and never notices that the feeling type analysand
is only interested in the feeling thing going on between them. For



Page 117 of 177                                                  65%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the analyst (a nonfeeler, in this example) all his feeling is in the
 work; but the analysand feels cut off from himself by being cut off
 from the feeling. By losing touch with his first function he feels
 rejected, and then he concludes erroneously about himself and
the situation, because the complexes have taken over or he be-
 comes a victim of inferior thinking, delusions and negative ideas.
     This penchant of the feeling type for maintaining touch with
the other's feeling function is not merely making everything "per-
sonal" as he is often accused of; it is truly of importance for the
feeling function itself to keep a stream of relating between subject
and events. This is how it functions, its raison d'être. A feeler usu-
ally does not follow the flow of thought in a discussion, although
he may be attentively evaluating the thought. At the films he does
not have to follow the plot in order to "get" the picture, since he
learns as much from the actors, the aesthetic values or ethical
content, or the import of the content for his own life. For an event
not to be a waste, it must provide the feeler with opportunity for
the function to exercise itself; otherwise he is deprived of his way
of being-in-the-world and feels out of sorts.
     The necessity to evaluate can be quite a bore for nonfeeling
types. A feeler never seems able to just perceive and observe; he
must pass judgments and thereby bring himself into relationsship
with the events he has evaluated. A feeling type must describe
the tenant upstairs as "that nice lady on the fifth floor," or "the
nasty little night watchman," "that peculiar analyst," etc. His de-
scriptions are loaded with adjectival commentary that says "like"
or "dislike," "good" or "bad." But that tenant on the fifth floor is
neither horrid nor ugly, nor nice, nor officious       rather, she is
                                                    or,
all of these things and much more. By passing judgment, feeling
puts things into place, and then they do not need to be looked at
again. In this way feeling types put a stop to discussion, because


Page 117 of 177                                                  65%%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



they stop further psychological observation. Once they are done
with the evaluative process, the issue is rather closed. Sometimes,
because of their fixed positions, feeling types seem unintelligent,
whereas it is actually their in flexibility about the values assigned.
The feeling type is loyal to his feeling process and to its results in
judgments and to the relationships made. But, by passing judg-
ment and making relations, he brings to a halt the flow of obser
vations and perceptions of the irrational functions. Feeling types
do not change their views; they make loyal friends and put up
with all sorts of faults, for they have already taken their stand, so
that the person to whom they have given friendship is no longer
in question. Thus, they do indeed tend towards conservatism, as
has been brought out in the paper by Mann, Siegler, and Osmond
mentioned above.
    Another cliché concerns the sincerity and straightness of
feeling types. People without good feeling, it is said, cannot be
trusted; their values are off; they betray; they waver. Feeling
types, it is believed on the other hand, are expert at relationship
and can lead feeling into positive channels in others. However,
differentiated feeling of the feeling type can get away with any-
thing and can be just the reverse of honesty and straightforward-
ness. Moreover, feeling types do not necessarily lead anything
out of others. By aiming to keep an aura of good feeling, they may
encourage everything and dampen everything, indiscriminately
soothing away worry, making spiritual concerns "not really so
important," flattening panics and hysterics, all of which nips in
the bud the libidinal content that is trying to emerge by means of
the excitement.
    We must recognize that "being human" is not only a matter of
human feeling, but of human ideas and spirit. When feeling types
are threatened by ideas, unable to relate to them or see their sig-



Page 118 of 177                                                   66%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 nificance as ideas, they act as antispirits, as Ungeist, and put down
 an essence of what is human in the name of feeling. For it is just
 as important to think and reflect and intuit and perceive as it is to
 feel; not only feeling makes for what is "human."
      One further idea about feeling we might well question. We are
 used to conceiving the types as either extroverted or introverted.
 We place the function within the fantasy of opposites
      But suppose prior to these opposites, there is the single func-
 tion of feeling not divided into two kinds of feeling. Suppose there
 is always some introverted and some extroverted feeling going
 on whenever the function is in use. In other words, perhaps the
 function is never altogether moving one way, but has a certain
 ambivalence about it.
     At a party or when having to perform in public we very often
 experience feeling on two levels at once: engagement and reserve,
for instance. To call one aspect of this ambivalence "schizoid"
or mark it off to a shadow or an anima/animus does not do the
actual experience justice. Why should we be "wholehearted" any
more than "singleminded"? In highly charged situations, two
sides of feeling often appear together showing an archetypal level
of the feeling function: grief and laughter, desire and disgust, love
and aggression often combine within the same intense relatior
ship at the very same moment. Why not the introverted and ex-
troverted aspects too? Cannota function introvert and extrovert
at the same time? Can I not observe and reflect simultaneously?
     In a differentiated feeling type the two sides of his function
work harmoniously. I believe that the supposed "coldness" of the
feeling type may be accounted for by this harmony between his
outer related rapport with the objective situation and his inner
subjective values. The coldness is merely the mastery of a tension
that would make most of us hot under the collar. We would have


Page 119 of 177                                                   66%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



to sacrifice adaptation to be "true" to what we feel or compromise
 our values to conform. But not the differentiated feeling type!
 He can "get away with murder" through excellent adaptation,
yet not lie to himself since the introverted aspect of the function
maintains him in rapport with his values. Another type where
the function is only one-sided (introverted or extroverted) would
have a moral crisis and play the matter up into existential dimen-
 sions of honor, sincerity, truth, and so on. The feeler simply di-
gests inwardly the outer aspect of his actions, their necessity and
appropriateness within the context, and according to his main
value: maintenance of flowing connections.
     Extroverted feeling ought not be confused with the persona.
Although in Jung both refer to the process of adaptation, ex-
troverted feeling is a function of personality. It is a manner of
performing and can be an expression of an individual style. By
means of it a person gives values and adapts to values in ways
that can be highly differentiated, uncollective and original. The
persona, on the other hand, is a fundamental archetype of the
psyche referring to the manner in which consciousness reflects
with society. The persona in Jung's stricter usage of the term,
therefore, does not refer to something individual. A developed
persona would mean a developed reflection of the collective con-
sensus. If one is a prisoner, or an addict, or a hermit, or a general,
one can have a developed persona by behaving in the styles and
forms collectively belonging to these patterns of existence. They
are archetypal patterns. Feeling may have little or nothing to do
with this adaptation, for one can be connected very well to the
collective through thinking, intuition, and sensation. In a nut-
shell: classically, the persona is a collective way of playing a role in
the world; the feeling function is an individual instrument of self-
affirmation.


Page 120 of 177                                                     67%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



    In all, the feeling type is generally oriented by the feeling
function, which means that he steers his life according to feeling
values and the processes in relationship. To go beyond this simple
statement would be to fall again under the influence of the clichés
that feeling types (a) have more feelings or (b) have special kinds
of feelings or (c) have only good or superior feelings.
    A convenient, rule-of-thumb way of distinguishing the feeling
type is through its opposite. Recalling with Moses Mendelssohn
that we cannot feel and think at the same time and with Jung that
feeling and thinking are incompatible, we would expect people
who habitually feel themselves through life to have difficulties
with thinking and with thoughts. If to feel competently means to
think poorly, then we would expect to find feeling types nervous
 about ideas.
    Feeling types tend to become fantastic and emotional in
 thought, but the thought itself, so overwhelmingly important,
 cannot be thought further, cannot be carefully worked out. It
remains doctrinaire. Rather than their having ideas, ideas seem to
 have them. Frequently, they read too much and indiscriminately
or they do not read at all. The all-or-none reaction is common in
either realms where thinking shows itself; for instance, thought
ful planning becomes either overexact or carelessly magical.
Feeling types may well devote themselves to an idea, but this
ideational program will often turn out to be strange, archaic,
crackpot. Sometimes the thoughts they think at sixty have all the
pristine splendor they had when they first entered their minds in
college. So they find themselves imprisoned by old narrow views
and become rigid in their thinking rather than either serious or
playful. Even the ideas they have about them selves may suffer
in this manner, so that what they are and what they think they
are in no way tally. The inferior thinking only perpetuates condi-



Page 121 of 177                                                67%
                    LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



tions that no longer exist and furthers a neurosis by keeping an
inflexible frame on a personality that has long since outgrown it.
They may be prey to weird speculative worries about logical and
metaphysical problems such as the nature of truth and the end of
the world. The attic of their minds stored with antique furniture
may nevertheless become a lumber room for creative work, in
that the unknown inferior parts of the psyche contain the stuff of
originality.




                                                             68%
 Page 121 of 177
                          LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                     8
                  Inferior Feeling and Negative Feelings

THE inferior thinking function of the feeling type allows char-
acterization, even caricature, whereas the description of inferior
feeling, because it is a general cultural problem and therefore has
historical and collective aspects, leads into deeper waters. Inferior
feeling embraces the problems of our day, and the rest of this
chapter- even the rest of these lectures- will be attempts to come
to terms with this inferiority we all share.
    One or two distinctions are necessary before proceeding fur-
ther. First, having feelings and using the feeling function are not
the same thing; therefore, having inferior feelings and using the
feeling function in an inferior way are also not to be identified.
This leads to a second distinction: positive and negative feelings
as contents differ from superior and inferior use of the feeling
function. I may well have positive feelings of love and awe for you
and be so inferior in my feeling function that I have no way of
expressing these feelings except through some blurted gaucherie,
embarrassing to us both. On the other hand, I may feel hurt and
resentful and be able to handle these feelings directly with you so
adequately that they can be brought into our relationship and aid
its continuity. Feelings as contents of the psyche may carry plus
or minus signs. They may be negatively inferior in various senses
of negative, i.e., regressive remnants from childhood, socially con-

Page 123 of 177                                                  68%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 demned, morally evil, or perhaps humanly destructive. But these
 feelings are not the feeling function, which can only be said to be
 inferior when it functions in a distorted, inappropriate and inad-
 equate way. A mark of a superior feeling function, on the other
 hand, is the adequate handling of negative and inferior feelings.
 To keep these distinctions better in mind let us refer to feelings
 as either positive or negative (even if the plus or minus sign be
 usually a cultural variable) and to the use of the feeling function
 as either superior or inferior.
     The distinetion between inferior and negative comes out
 clearly in our relationship to children. Distorted, inadequate ex-
pression ofthe inferior feeling function-sexualized taste, sugary
hypocrisy, faint praise, loud uncertainty, cruel correction-from
the side of the parents does more damage than the direct expres-
sion of negative feelings: ange, dislike, panic, etc.
    To make the difference yet clearer, let us keep trying to separ
ate once again feelings from the feeling function. Feelings may be
pleasant and unpleasant, constructive and destructive, outgoing
and withholding. All of these feelings, tones and moods belong
to the human gamut. They may be cruel and vicious and socially
unacceptable, but their existence within the psyche is part of our
nature. They are potentialities of the personality; human history
shows an unbelievable range of possible feelings. Their justifi-
cation is simply their existence as part of the flora and fauna of
the psychic world. Our difficulties concern those feelings in this
jungle to which we attach a negative sign. These are the feelings
we wish to "get rid of" or "find some place for," and which usually
appear unwantedly in moments when the ego loses its suppres-
sive ability.
    Depression is one such example of negative feeling, that is, a
feeling judged negative by the feeling function, either because we


Page 123 of 177                                                 68%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



do not like its tone, or because we do not feel its value, or because
it is not approved by the value system of the culture. But is depres-
sion "negative"? Psychotherapy has surely taught us all the signal
importance of going down through depressions so that they
become revalued. When we speak of the development of feeling
two things are meant. First, the admission into consciousness
of whatever feelings actually are happening even if they carry
a minus sign-so that they are no longer repressed. Admission

 into the light of consciousness provides them with a modicum of
 awareness and control. They are then known, even accepted as
part of its tone and content. They then begin to qualify conscious-
ness. In this way an integration takes place by means of the feel-
ing function between the conscious personality and the negative
feeling. The ego gives its personal stamp to the feelings while the
feelings alter the ego's conventional stand.
     Second, the development of feeling means an evolution of the
function away from its narrowly subjective base towards a freer
adaptation. It is the oversubjectivity that leads to the intensity of
feeling life and the inadequacy of expression. Even feelings with
a positive sign, such as love and joy, can be handled inferiorly,
expressed in the wrong way at the wrong time. An inferior func-
tion therefore helps to maintain a deposit of "negative" feelings
or even to create them with its misjudgments. Let us bear in mind
that any feeling can become negative when it is mishandled.
Even the most pleasant and approved ones of altruistic love and
religious worship can be loaded with delusional intensity and
oversubjectivity. So, too, any feeling-even the most peculiar and
condemned, like betrayal and sadism - can become sources of
insight and appropriate behavior in the hands of a superior feel-
ing function.



Page 124 of 177                                                  69%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    When we give inadequate feeling to our feeling contents, they
take on distorted value, and then this distortion is what we offer
the world and its situations. We pass on judgments and values
we have not digested. Not the feelings, but the inferiority of our
functioning makes us spoil our joys and hurt the ones we love. In
keeping distinct "negative" and "inferior" we do well to observe:
(a) that every feeling has the right to exist and its appropriate
place; and (b) that the feeling function can be trusted to find even-
tually this appropriate place and adequate form.
    For example, nostalgic longings return again and again when-
ever the ego lets down its guard, in drowsiness, in drink, when
assailed by a smell. Once we accept them, we discover that these
longings refer not only to what one once had and wants to have
again. They tell us that at this moment we are incomplete. This
lack of fullness is inadequately expressed, not by the longings
themselves, without which we would feel no lack, but by the
memory images to which the longings have grown attached
Owing to their suppression. When I begin to feel that I long, I
can begin to discover for what I actually long, and then some
movement towards reflection and, even perhaps, fulfillment can
be initiated. Or, as another example, musical sentimentality of
trashy tunes and kitschy words is not only vulgar feeling. When
stood for as what and where one actually feels, this sentimental-
ity spread the world over by a million violins or boys' voices and
guitars becomes my personal taste rather than just the world's
lament wailing through me. Through affirmations of this sort we
encourage the feeling function to trust its values and judgments.
It can then move on from its simpler preferences and obsessive
moods. As with thinking: a child does not spend all its years doing
sums; soon it wants more complicated operations than addition.
By giving negative feelings a chance to have their say, they either


Page 125 of 177                                                  69%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



develop into appropriate hatreds and uglinesses, discriminating
real values where hatred and ugliness belong, or they become bor-
ing and fall away.
    Especially important for the development of feeling are just
these negative feelings, these with the minus sign: envy, hatred,
arrogance, complaint, etc. They in particular demand courage
and honesty, requiring patience in their handling. Relating them
appropriately to the contents of consciousness and relating with
them adequately in situations that call for them are certainly
signs of superior feeling. For this reason the enemy is important,
and for this reason the negative aspects of relation ships are such
an essential part of life. Deeper connections offer an opportunity
for negative feelings, whereas the usual place- the family- in
which they are usually just spilled out is only poisoned by them.
However, the negative feelings of someone with an inferior feel-
ing function are usually so repressed and therefore so charged
that they are no longer feelings but affects. It is enough here to
emphasize that the education of negative feeling does not mean
the education of it away from negativity towards its opposite,
by turning all dislikes into likes, by converting all enemies into
friends.
    An early sign of inferior feeling is loss of contact with what
one feels. The stuff and substance of the feeling function are usu-
ally feelings (not that the feeling function does not also evaluate
thoughts and sensations as wel1). But when the feeling function is
inferior and goes underground, as it were, with it goes an orient-
ing awareness of how I feel, what I want, whom I like, etc., all of
which is replaced by a general dryness in regard to myself and
others, followed by indiscriminate complex reactions: all sorts of
displaced feelings, tears at the wrong time, wry jokes, peculiar at-
tachments and enthusiasms, value judgments creeping in where


Page 126 of 177                                                 70%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  irrelevant, or general undifferentiated mood swings of general
  elation or general depression.
      The effort of maintaining consciousness with a function that
 is not primary is often too demanding. The function seems to
 come and go, not a useful tool at the regular disposal of my needs
 and intentions. An inferior function requires a disproportionate
 amount of energy: it is quite extraordinary, for instance, how
 much time an introverted sensation type can spend upon fanta-
 sies of the future, upon negative paranoid intuitions. Or, watch
 how much energy a relationship consumes when either of the
 people insists upon the personal feeling level and at the same time
 either or both of the partners have inferior feeling. Marriage often
 reflects this state: endless discussions, endless investment in feel-
 ing, because the function does not just function by itself. Then,
instead of feeling, there are feelings: resentments, needs, desires,
complaints.
      One can notice the feeling function slip away from conscious
ness. Suddenly, one feels nothing or a wave of negative feelings
surges that cannot be handled adequately, resulting in anxiety
and guilt.One is talking, and suddenly one's own voice begins
to sound back in one's ears: the other person has become bored,
the relationship loses interest, the words spoken are no longer
carrying importance. Alfred North Whitehead (Modes of Thought)
made a great deal of the word "importance" in his philosophy: it
refers to the feeling aspect. The feeling function can give import-
ance to matters beyond their matter-of-fact significance, and in-
ferior feeling can deprive significant matters of their importance
or blow up matters of in significance into grand dimensions of
importance. Demagogues have this ability of giving importance
to insignificant issues through the use of feeling.




Page 127 of 177                                                   70%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



    Inferior feeling puts the wrong values on things; its main
disaster is in its introverted aspect when it gives the wrong feel-
ing to oneself. Then one's judgment about oneself is distorted and
inadequate. One feels inferior owing entirely to an inferior feeling
function. Re-establishing the connection to oneself often requires
renewed contact with the complexes through dreams or with the
immediate circle of friends, family and colleagues where feeling is
usually less taxingly expressed. But when the function is inferior,
one feels cut off. Dreams are felt as enemies; the immediate circle
is experienced only as a demand. The lost feeling function gets
projected: "everyone expects feeling from me."
     To feel one's worth is no easy matter. Patients expect as-
surance from their analysts; analysts expect confirmation
from their patients. We lose touch with the importance of
ourselves, alternating between depressive worthlessness and
delusions of grandeur. We demand too much on the one hand
and sell ourselves cheap on the other; self-confidence is shaky.
When we meet with defeat, inferior feeling cannot discriminate
and particularize the specific area of inferiority, but generalizes
it into a devastating sense of worthlessness. We don't miss just
one step but fall down the entire flight. One faux pas, one failure,
one messed-up encounter is just what it is. It is not an existen-
tial debacle that means one has lost everything or that one is
no good at all. The task is to learn the algebra or to apologize for
the insult, not to go off somberly and walk the streets all night
examining one's character and destiny. Feeling can function as a
guard or filter to prevent these archetypal levels of disaster from
shattering the whole personality. Feeling is classically spoken of
as the "humanizing" function, as if through feeling one became
"human." This is of course a con fused and sentimental notion,
but it does state in its own way that feeling can differentiate be-


Page 127 of 177                                                   71%%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



tween that which is authentically a fault and personal blame, and
the archetypal level of despair with its profound sense of sin, mis-
ery and emptiness.
    This brings us to guilt. When there are more feelings than
the function can manage, there is an internal guilt towards one's
feelings. We owe something; they have not been sorted out,
made aware, declared. Here againa cultural attitude interferes
because we are not "supposed" to present some "negative" feelings
(how envious and ambitious we feel, how rude we might like to
be, how fallen and despairing it seems). In the new encounter
groups where the presentation of negative feelings is de rigueur,
again guilt constellates, now for other reasons. Guilty feelings
can't be shed over a weekend. Communication and expression
are only one-half of feeling. There are secrets that must be kept
for the sake of individuality; there are sacrednesses. Moreover,
an attempt to do away with guilt neglects its reality, that it is a
fundamental and existential component of our Western human
nature. The guilt we have got rid of only returns as a guilt towards
the guilt. Freud understood its reality and en shrined guilt as the
super ego. Curiously, though, guilt supports the ego, it makes us
feel that what has happened is "mine," my fault to be set right by
"me." Things that go wrong are not allowed by guilt to be left on
that level of bad or unfortuitous happenings; they become prob-
lems for the ego to amend. In this way guilt serves the ego and
strengthens its hold, even allowing the ego to extend its range
over happenings by feeling itself "responsible." But the gods are
responsible, and we are responsible to them, not to and for events.
The actual fault for which one "feels guilty" may lie in the infer-
iority of the feeling function, so that guilty feelings are signals
of inadequacy and inappropriateness. Again the guilt is partly
towards the function, not giving it its exercise, rather than only


Page 128 of 177                                                 71%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 to the events that seem to cause the guilt. Ultimately, our guilt is
 towards the gods, and it is this archetypal perspective that could
 be seen as the true purpose of guilt: to remind us through the feel-
 ing function of our neglect of the gods.
     Family guilt towards one's children - that one did not do right
by them and love them- or towards the parents for the same
 reasons are a guilt imposed by feeling. This guilt says that there
are feeling laws to be observed, that relationships are not merely
human and personal, that there are archetypal principles of
feeling that require obeisance. Feeling itselfis owed something.
We may well feel guilt, we believe, because of the complexes, for
the faults they produce in our behavior; yet there is also a guilt
 if
- not the very same one -to the complexes. Our responsibility
is primarily to them. Guilty feelings can be turned back upon
themselves by insighting them for what is owed to the complex,
the care and awareness of one's specific kinds of inadequacy.
Because guilt makes everything so personal, we lose the sense of
impersonal guilt I owe not only my personal feelings something,
but there is an impersonal guilt towards feeling and values in
general as well. The less this is recognized, the more it presses into
personal affairs: so the accumulated guilts towards the body and
the Dionysian and the feminine and the dark and their associated
depressive feelings become personal guilt towards the oppressed
people and the weak, and this guilt then appears in personal re-
lationships with the underprivileged, the black and the physical.
The guilty party is the function itself, guilty for not performing
its function, since an activity not used is guilty of its inactivity.
The load of guilty feelings we carry in our culture is not merely a
super ego of a Protestant ethic; there is a profound guilt towards
feeling, of feeling, within feeling.




Page 129 of 177                                                   72%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     Another habit of inferior feeling is its parapsychological
 appearance. Where feeling has an intuitive admixture and is
 radically dissociated from consciousness, which is often the case
 in mediums and others with a parapsychological gift, connec-
 tions may be maintained, not via conscious relating and human
 interest in the other, but via the unconscious in uncanny syn-
 chronistic events, or through dreams and prayers. These events
 call up the strong emotions of mystical belief. One believes in
 a fateful connection, in a relationship transcending space and
 time, in two hearts that beat as one. Despite this occult beauty,
 the simple human communication is failing and is replaced
 with wonders and witchery. Sometimes a telephone call is more
 human and effective than intercessory prayer. Telepathic com-
 munication means simply feeling (pathos) at a long distance (tele).
 ESP can be seen as an activity of the feeling function when that
function has let go the threads of direct communication. When
the psychological distance between people is too great, when they
are humanly remote from each other, then as a substitute for this
distorted relationship inferior feeling operates autonomously
through ESP events. Synchronicity, dreaming of each other, queer
occurrences may become dodges, covering up the painful chal-
lenges of human decency.
     Should intuition be an inferior function and be blurred with
feeling, then perceptions about people become hyperpersonal and
evaluative. Intuition alone, like sensation, simply reports discrete
observations, enjoying the faculty of perception, noting events
and playing with their possibilities and meanings. But feeling
does not let perceptions alone; what are simply facts and observa-
tions to the perceptive functions - which neither judge, nor value,
nor even link perceptions into an order - inferior feeling must
organize into vices and virtues. Feeling intuition is never satisfied


Page 130 of 177                                                  72%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



to see only; it must connect as well. When these functions are
inferior, one sees in the light of wrong values and relates from the
standpoint of false perceptions. A good deal of what we call para-
noid happens in this way. We attribute nasty motives and bad
values very personally to others, having gathered these feelings
only from suspicions and hunches. Such wrong perceptions and
evaluations are not only projections "to be taken back," but are
manifestations of feeling, attempting to comprehend and evalu-
ate a world where it is partly blind and halt.
    Inferior feeling has trouble standing for its feelings. It has
 trouble supporting its own principles and values, especially if it
 has to take on an unpleasant task or hurt someone. A man may
rule an organization yet be unable to fire an inefficient or disloyal
 secretary; the parent in the family who takes over the punishing
of the children will usually be the one with the better feeling
function; an analyst with inferior feeling will be unable to cope
with his and the analysand's aggression.
    When it does have a principle to defend, inferior feeling
may of course overdo it. In women the animus comes in to help
overdo things. A woman breaks with her lover and makes the
cut surgically or like an architect according to plan. Her values
are ironclad, and she finds a lawyer to support them! Should the
man or husband want to see her again, she will be unyielding in
finding "no reason" for meeting. It just drags things out; it's only
his anima pathos. The reason to see him may be feeling itself,
but inferior feeling does not evaluate itself; its energy is on its
evaluations, formulations of feeling, affects, and the all-or-none
reaction of "in love" or "cut of."
    When there are ingredients of sensation in the inferior feeling,
then the sensuous content of feeling, its physical component,
becomes confused with the evaluative process. Then we simply



Page 131 of 177                                                  73%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 cannot distinguish feeling sad and low from physical ill health,
 or we confirm a happy marriage in terms of sexual inter course,
 although marriages and love relationships often exist with little
 sensuous content, where sensation does not have to carry feeling.
 Feeling can be expressed in highly abstract forms, and relation-
 ships can proceed during separations.
     Inferior feeling, to sum it up, may be characterized by con-
 tamination with the repressed, which tends to manifest, as the
 Scholastic would have said, in ira and cupiditas. Inferior feeling is
 loaded with anger and rage and ambition and aggression as well
 as with greed and desire. Here we find ourselves with huge claims
 for love, with massive needs for recognition, and dis cover our
 feeling connection to life to be one vast expectation composed of
thousands of tiny angry resentments. This expectation has been
 called an omnipotence fantasy, the expression of the abandoned
child with his leftover feelings that nobody wants to take care of-
but is this enough? Omnipotence is more than a content; rather it
expresses, as does the child, an impoverished functioning that in-
sists upon more sway and exercise. Without this exercise, feeling
turns upon itself, morbidly; we are envious, jealous, depressed,
feeding on needs and their immediate gratification, then rushing
out intermittently to meet someone to help or for help. The cat
neglected becomes the unconscious tiger.
     Differentiated feeling is the cat, moving in small ways. Per-
haps, feeling can be defined as the art of the small - the shade of
difference, the subtle emphasis, the little touch. It can watch a re-
lationship unfold, gardening it along, husbanding the forces. One
can separate between needing and demanding, between what one
likes and what one wants; one can shop without buying. Or the
reverse: one can at last buy without shopping because one knows
what one feels. One can appreciate and act without the personal


Page 131 of 177                                                   73%
                    LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



erotic connection upon which so much feeling falsely and labori-
ously depends, with its chant: "Make it mine, make it mine"




                                                             74%
Page 132 of 177
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                  9
                  Feeling and the Mother Complex


THE difficulty we have in recognizing the feeling type can partly
be blamed on the fact that all that passes for feeling is not an
expression of the feeling function. These feeling substitutes and
feeling distortions arise in general from the "feminine" side of the
psyche. Femininity and feeling are believed to belong together.
Sometimes we say that feeling is "feminine" and to be "feminine"
is to feel. Without subscribing to this, one must still recognize
that in our civilization, whatever the account, feeling is placed in
the hands of the feminine to mold, so that it is over determined
by women. First of all mothers, and next sisters and aunts, grand-
mothers and teachers, and then childhood lovers exert their in-
fluence over the development of the feeling function in men and
women. The values of social behavior and the judgments formed,
from etiquette to evil, all the "whats" and "hows" we should feel
are given by women, from the dancing coach and decorator to the
waitress and salesgirl. The feeling function has become Whistler's
"Mother," a little old lady of sweet admonitions, and we have got
these kindly counsels of hers mixed with the voice of nature so
that the Little Old Lady sometimes substitutes for the Wise Old.
Man. Comforting clichés about "life" and "how it goes" replace
perceptive wisdom. The psychotherapist, rough and tweedy,
bearded and pipe-smoking, may then have nothing more to say


Page 133 of 177                                                 74%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 than a proverb froma Christmas calendar because his warmth
 and good gray "wisdom" are collective enactments of the "good
 feeling" the mother complex expects from every good Dad. It is
 not therefore astonishing to find the mother complex and the
 anima complex responsible throughout life for many disorders in
 the feeling function.
      The mother complex is basic to our most permanent and
 intractable feelings. In this sense the mother is, as Jung said, fate.
 This complex is the permanent trap of one's reactions and values
 from earliest infancy, the box and walls in every situation which-
 ever way one turns. One faces the mother, as fate, ever again and
 anew. Not only the contents of feelings, but the function itself
takes patterns from the reactions and values that come to life in
the mother-child relationship. The way we feel about our bodily
 life, our physical self-regard and confidence, the subjective tone
with which we take in or go out into the world, the basic fears
and guilts, how we enter into love and behave in closeness and
nearness, our psychological temperature of coldness and warmth,
how we feel when we are ill, our manners, taste, and style of
eating and living, habitual structures of relating, patterns of
gesture and tone of voice - all bear the marks of mother; and for
a woman the mother complex comes particularly into play in her
self-identity feelings and her sexual feelings. These influences
upon the feeling function do not have to be copied after the per-
sonal mother nor even be contradictory to her in order for the
mother complex to show its effect. The mother complex is not my
mother; it is my complex. It is the way in which my psyche has
taken up my mother. Behind is the Magna Mater.
     Our civilization does not provide adequate vehicles for the
Magna Mater. The positive, nourishing mother does not come
through; we cannot draw sustenance from her in a supermarket,


Page 133 of 177                                                    74%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 a modern kitchen, a pornographic book. The cities drain us; what
  supports feeling in a day of shopping? What this archetype could
 offer as shelter, trust and depth of perspective to the natural daily
 round is missing. Where does a woman turn for a model for her
 feeling function? So, the mother passes on fear and uncertainties
 to her daughters, since the archetypal mother-daughter mystery
 and the right kind of awe and ambivalences have no appropriate
 place. When Demeter and Persephone are missing, Hecate comes
 up alone, and there is general fear of the negative feelings: fear
 of realizing her hatred for her children, the death aspect in her
 loving, the witchery in her intelligence. How can she trust her
 feelings when they are so full of "negative" qualities? Where to
 place her destruction? Without the archetypal perspective, nature
 receives a one-sided, only-good definition, and everything that
 does not accord is called "unnatural" and negative.
     To study thoroughly the development of feeling under the
influence of the mother complex we would have to move into
mythology. That, however, is not the aim of these lectures, which
are confined to the level of the feeling function within the psych-
ology of consciousness as Jung describes it in his Psychological
Types. But Magna Mater is there nevertheless in those in tense
reactions of many women in regard especially to those feelings
having to do with mothering. "I'm not your mother," they enjoy
announcing to their man who is down. They deny their children,
hate them, refuse to have them, turn to lesbian or manic defenses
-anything to prevent becoming "the mother" and experiencing
those feelings.
     When the intensity of feeling connected to or, better, bound
by the mother complex reaches the proportions of affect, we find
the deepest source of feeling. Then the feeling function is not free
to operate as an instrument of consciousness, but brings with it


Page 134 of 177                                                   75%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 violent rages and passionate exaggerations of every sort. These
 overwhelming affects that swamp the vessel of the feeling func-
 tion can cause such suffering, such utter helplessness, that we
 find ourselves pref erring not to feel at all rather than run the risk,
 each time we attempt to use the feeling function, of the tidal wave
 on which it is borne. Lest feeling be carried away by reaction, we
 prefer not to react. So does the mother complex work towards
 keeping feeling under the domination of affect and cutting us off
 from its use.
     This situation produces that peculiar laming or crippling of
 men with a strong mother complex. (Dreams show wounded ani-
mals, bleeding, surgical repair on the heart, etc.) All too familiar
is that lack of response, not being able to get started, to get going,
that vague indifference and detachment under which one intuits
a seething tempest. The feeling function then is often substituted
by a feeling mask (persona) of politeness and mannered con-
sideration that can reach hyperacuity in surface sensitivity and
aestheticism. Involvement with a man who is bound in this way
leaves the impression that he is "not really there." What is not
there is a consciousness of his feelings. He is unable to bring them
into the scene. He and the relationship are always a victim of their
whims. Everything is unpredictable, which is not-though some
men may like to believe it - the same as creatively spontaneous.
The question that comes to the other so naturally at these mo-
ments-"How do you feel?" - if the mother complex man is able
to answer at all, releases a wave of chaos teeming with every sort
of fish: self-pity, sad longings, sexual desire, inflated ambitions,
bitter resentments, kitsch, and then apathy, which swallows them
all.
     Because the expression of feeling is accompanied by a feeling
of loyalty to what has been expressed, the inhibition of expres-


Page 135 of 177                                                     75%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  sion particularly damages the feeling function. The explosion of
 affect has no such accompaniment; we can explode and forget
 all about it, no responsibility. But feeling gets us involved and
 committed in a curious way to what has been expressed, a
 phenomenon that tells much about the way in which the feel-
 ing function develops mainly through expressing feeling. The
 mother complex inhibits the expression, as if "she" intended to
 prevent any feeling from being used apart from her demands for
 affects (or indifference). Feeling must have its source and goal
 in "her" (We can judge whether our feeling function is serving
 the mother complex by noting how like or unlike the forms of
 our feeling evaluations and reactions are to those of our actual
 mother or her substitutes in peer group, class, club, church, etc.)
 We can hardly have the feeling function in our own hands as an
 instrument of consciousness until we can get it out of "her" hands
 as the archetypal dominant of the unconscious, ruling over the
 past, the flesh and our inmost intimacy. Hand-to-hand wrestling
 with the sword of logos and the manly girdle of action is less suc-
 cessful than the incestuous return.
     When therapy speaks of the "incestuous return to the
mother" it means going to the emotional depths where the feel-
ing function lies bound. In this union with our emotionality we
are at our most intimate and weakest place, but often just here
the feeling function has its roots. The incestuous return alone
can free feeling to function for me; my feelings here seem to be
my own personal belongings, my treasure, as the myths would
tell us, that is guarded by the mother-dragon of reptilian coldness
and fiery passion, or by the witch herself who can turn us all back
into dwarf tree stumps, little birds a-twitter, or just dumb stones.
Incest, at this moment in the development of feeling, means
allowing oneself to join with the darkest, bloodiest passions, the


Page 136 of 177                                                 76%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



 actual longings to be held and carried and caressed, the uninhib-
 ited rages and furies. It is a Tantric way, if we see it through Hindu
 eyes. One immerses oneself in the kleshas, the attachments to the
Mother Goddess. It means going where the heart really is, where
we actually feel, even if in the fists, guts and genitals, rather than
where the heart should be and how we ought to feel.
     Many dark things occur in this incestuous return- again the
realm of the "mothers" where the feeling function meets with
 suicidal impulses, despair, dismemberment, a sense of horror
and rot (putrefaction), hungry oral needs in the form of desperate
cravings and compulsions. Through the return to this level, the
feeling function can sort out the values of these experiences and
work out a relationship with the psyche's so-called dark side.
When this has not been done, when introverted feeling does not
function by recognizing the worth of these experiences, then we
are victims of the incest. Of signal importance in any crisis or
breakdown is the discovery of its value, which precedes its mean-
ing. By not valuing our neurotic and psychopathic messes we
perpetuate the mess and miss the chance for freeing feeling from
the mother.
     In the practical situation of a human relationship where
one person wants to help another with his feelings, the mother
who binds the feelings can be met with the same constellation
of mothering. (As Jung says: "For 'what has been spoiled by
the father can only be made good by a father, just as 'what has
been spoiled by the mother' can only be repaired by a mother,"
Mysterium Coniunctionis, CW14: 232; cf. I-Ching, Hexagram 18).
Constellating the good mother in a relationship means simply
to mother, to care for, to take up and nourish and be kind to
this weakness, lostness, boyishness, or girlishness in the other
without oneself feeling threatened and confused, put upon, or


Page 137 of 177                                                    76%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



be coming hyperactive and therapeutic. Regardless how deep a
person may go in chaos and despair, the incestuous return may
have a valuable outcome if the partner in the relationship encour-
ages one to go yet deeper. (As with every rule or counsel there are
exceptions and definite contraindications, especially in regard to
the mother complex, since its ultimate depths are archetypally
beyond life.) The main point in constellating the good mother is
standing below, cradling the fall, so that the fear of disintegration
and helplessness is met with support. The support of the posi-
tive mother is indiscriminate nourishing. It puts a positive sign
on every emotion and every feeling in order to redeem it from
exile in guilt and shame. Where a person is reduced to childlike
helplessness by the chaos of his emotionality and by the fact that
the feeling function, under the stern control of the harsh and crit-
ical mother or the subtle poison of the kind Little Old Lady, only
admonishes and upbraids, it is the vivid interest on the part of the
other that acts like a midwife bringing to birth the new function.
The mark of the good mother is not sweet-smelling milk-kind-
ness and the bland diet of acceptance, but active spirited interest in
whatever is stirring, thereby furthering growth by postponing all
discrimination of weed from flower until a later time. She broods
all eggs together. It is a subtle trick of the critical mother to choose
among nascent feelings, which develops onlya susceptibility to
premature criticism, crippling the feeling function, nipping in the
bud by deciding too soon what is good and bad.
    Return to the mother for the sake of feeling cannot help but
turn us back into the boy and girl again with that rawness and
naiveté of feeling of the boy and girl, quite inadequate yet also
authentic. Or, if the return is indicated by explosions or whiny
complaints, nourishing here does not mean catering to the neur
osis as much as it means connecting with it. By giving value to the



Page 137 of 177                                                     77%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 anger or the complaint and encouraging its expression by feeling,
it moves towards consciousness.
     Hero myths show that the development of masculinity seems
to be a movement against the mother complex. But this develop-
ment takes place not only by means of conquering her through
the man's world, overcoming inertia, making decisions and tak-
ing a stand. To read and know more, to decide and act more, to
build muscle and gain competence in the world of manly men
does not make a full man. Ifthe feeling function is not freed, we
can be called back home any time. Freedom is shown by access to
one's feelings and the use of one's feeling function.
     "Manly" men, to show the strength of their feeling, come on
brutish, coarse, callous or fakely fatherly. They compensate the
lability and sensitivity with thick-skinned nastiness, no weak-
ness showing - until the heart attack or breakdown. Here, the
feeling function has been stylized into a stereotype of a burst
of laughter, overt warmth, patronizing pats, or any of the other
"manly" ways. But stereotypes are mechanisms; the function is
still servant to the mother; it has not come into its own. Thus, the
manly man has supporters and attendants who carry his feeling
for him, giving him accolades, and power manipulation affect all
his relationships that are based on giving and getting. When the
mother complex governs feelings through this manly compensa-
tion, the connection to others has more than a usual amount of
bargaining. Within it all is the anxiety of collapse and the need for
support.
   Since the mother complex protects one from life, it keeps one
from feeling what one feels. Feelings get one involved, so the
mother has to keep us from feeling. Life then doesn't quite reach
us, and we become untouched and untouchable, partly because
we do not feel, partly because we feel so much, every pore a



Page 138 of 177                                                  77%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 wound. Or, the mother can inflate us, protecting by keeping us up
 and above, where we lose the human touch.
     Such men say, "Don't touch me"; they cannot bear to be held.
Being touched, either physically or psychologically, only reminds
them of their own inadequate responses, their own inferior
feeling. The hardest stand of all for the man struggling with this
problem is in favor of his negative feelings, for it is just these
that the mother complex condemns. Just these, therefore, are the
ones that give that experience of freedom when admitted and
expressed. How free we feel when we can deny a request, explain
a dislike, put a long-harbored resentment or irritation into words.
The expression of negative feelings through the feeling function
brings with it new energy anda sense of liberation. Also, one has
been able by feeling what one feels to laugh in the face of the Gor-
gon and her critical repressive moralisms about feeling.
    The paralysis constellated by the mother complex in all mat-
ters where feeling is required is therefore worked at best by dis-
covering one's feelings about people, places, things. The "manly"
man lets his wife decide these lesser matters; it is of no concern
to him how he feels, and in fact he often doesn't know whether
he is happy or sad until some member of the family tells him. The
mother within has so long ruled the stereotypes of his feeling in
regard to himself and his world that he has no awareness at all of
his value as a person, his values, nor of the ethical, aesthetic and
relational aspects of his style of life.
    Mother-complex interference with the feeling function can be
countered by other kinds of manly virtues than the tough ones
we have mentioned. For instance: it is important for a person
to find feeling values in his actions, not merely giving value to
action for its own sake. It is important to feel why and for what
purpose, to feet what one wants, whom one likes, and what values


Page 139 of 177                                                 78%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



are expressed through what one does. It is important to enter
situations where there is a conflict of interests to whose solutions
 the feeling function contributes
     Of most importance is friendship. The ambivalence of the
 mother complex is countered by permanency, by loyalty and
 fidelity. These are virtues of friendship that have always oc-
 cupied moral philosophers. Aristotle devoted several books to
 friendship in his Nichomachean Ethics; Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch
 each wrote upon it, and this tradition continues, for example, in
 Gabriel Marcel's Creative Fidelity. No matter how freed a man is,
 supposedly, of the mother complex, if he has no friends, merely a
 superficial multitude of acquaintances, something still interferes
 with the feeling function. The mother complex inhibits loyalties
 and attachments; it puts questions of trust into the formulas of
 dependency and betrayal. In order to keep safe and sure, not to
hurt or be hurt, one has many ever-changing friends and no last-
ing friendships. Friendship in the classical writers was said to be
reserved for maturity; it represented the ideal relationship of free
and equal men. Because it indicates a redemption of the feeling
function from the mother complex, an analysis so often wants
to turn into a friendship. Analysis, because it is therapeutic and
supportive, constellates the mother; it is not free as friendship is,
so that the urge to become friends reflects, in part, the need of the
feeling function to move the analytical relationship into a new
place. Sometimes it works, sometimes not.

FROM the foregoing, we can conclude that emotional chaos is
not to be got rid of or even got through. We may fall into it again
and again as new feeling values appear or as the feeling function
increases its range. The ages of man or stages of life imply con-
tinual transitions and new uses of the feeling function. Because
the mother complex as our fundamental unconsciousness always


Page 140 of 177                                                  78%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'sS TYPOLOGY



constellates the ego into its childishness, it is painful to revert
to infantilisms. We fear these falls. One would almost rather not
have feelings at all ifthey must be gained only in this way. It is
humiliating. Although religions talk much of humility, they do
not tell us what it actually feels like except as a virtue, which is
then no longer humility at all, but a new form of pride. To be weak
and helpless in one's feelings, to stand loyal with one's negative
feelings, to be delivered over to one's childishness-and this in
front of another person -is indeed humiliating. There, perhaps,
humility begins: in that inadequacy of inferior feeling; for the hu-
miliation of inferior feeling is the feeling inferior ofhumility. In
this sense the mother complex and its eternal recurrence as fate
offer the humility of amorfati, feeling flowing into fate, its limita-
tions and our smallness. With this idea we come again to the idea
that feeling is the art of the smal.




Page 141 of 177
                                                                  79%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                               10
                   Feeling and the Anima


WHILE we may be clear that the anima complex is not the feeling
function of a man, at the same time we must keep in mind that it,
like the mother complex, has a special relationship with feeling
and has responsibility in its disorders. This is a puzzling area
for both men and women: men often cannot tell when they are
feeling and when they are in the anima; women find themselves
drawn by a man's anima feeling only to find themselves involved
in something peculiar. Since the anima by definition refers to the
archetypal background of a man's femininity, anima feeling has
characteristics that are strikingly "feminine." They are exagger-
ations of what we commonly believe to be feminine. If the mother
complex is the chord played by the left hand, setting a fundamen-
tal rhythm and key to feeling that the right hand may vary upon
but never depart from, the anima complex is the melody played
out of tune, too sharp or too flat, the timing just off.
    The femininity of a man is generally personified by images of
women or symbols referring to women who act as constellating
(fascinating, attracting) dynamisms drawing a man into involve-
ments through which he may discover more about himself and
this archetypal reality. These involvements may come as inner
moods and fantasies or as projections and projects. However
they appear, it is through these compelling interests that a man

Page 142 of 177                                                79%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



is led into hitherto unknown, i.e., unconscious, aspects of life.
The anima complex is classically called the mediatrix to the un-
conscious and is thus a function of relationship, like the feeling
 function.
     In its mediatrix function, the anima complex also performs
 in a feminine way by receiving and containing the new, relatively
 unconscious events that are activated. The ability to connect to
the unconscious depends altogether upon the capacity to receive
and contain what it presents, either inner moods and fantasies
or outer projections and projects. The reverse is as well true: the
capacity to open and be receptive increases the ability to connect.
Inasmuch as a man's feelings are repressed or his feeling function
is relatively undeveloped, the anima complex will compensatorily
have that much more feeling tone and represent that much more
of the feeling function. Also, insofar as the anima complex gives
the feeling to a man of his own subjectivity and intimacy, it will
be experienced not only in images and projections but also in feel-
ings. This is all the more true in our extroverted and masculine-
oriented culture with its collective repression of feeling.
     R.B. Onians examines the earliest meanings of the term
"anima" (and "animus") in his The Origins ofEuropean Thought. He
says that there is much confusion about the term "anima": "Ani-
mus is concerned with consciousness and anima has nothing to
do with consciousness" (169). Anima seems to have been a more
generic word applied to anything of the nature of vapor, air, wind,
to breezes, exhalations, as well as to the human breath (pneuma,
psyche). Above all, anima refers to the vital principle, or the prin-
ciple of life, as Jung has often emphasized. Despite its vapory
insubstantiality, the anima comes as a driving force as important
as the breath we breathe. Some of its archetypal imagery has been
presented by Emma Jung. Other highly elaborated forms of this


Page 142 of 177                                                     79%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



Goddess of life are represented by feminine figures in Greek myth,
especially the Kore figures, and Ariadne, Persephone, Aphrodite,
 Artemis. Many other divine and half-divine or legendary women
 could be mentioned, but the main point in our context is their
 constellating effect upon the feeling function. The anima involves
 the feeling function into the turmoil of life, but it is not the same
 as feeling.
      Returning to our distortions of feeling occasioned by the
 anima complex, we find that anima feeling tends to be too sensi-
 tive. Virginal, reclusive, cautious, it fears being hurt or hurting the
 other person. For fear of someone's being hurt, feeling matters are
 shyly veiled and not aired. "Things are better left undiscussed."
Much time passes in quiet discretion. Anima feeling is too sincere;
feeling becomes heavy, and every feeling tone given to any experi-
ence or idea takes on importance in the grand romantic manner.
Then secrets are kept about the wrong things, and issues swell
into significance owing to wrong value judgments. (A man, for
instance, has an ordinary skiing hut in the Alps, but because of
his anima feelings for it, he invests it with mysterious importance
and it becomes a Shangri-La very close to heaven's door.) When a
man's own feeling evaluations are lacking, they are easily replaced
by anima overvaluations and enthusiasms. Everything is so full
of meaning, of religious import, of pompous wisdom. Feeling be-
comes sincere confessions, sincere goodness of aspiration. Corres-
ponding with a young anima image in a man's dreams, the quality
of the sincerity will take on the tones of the college coed.
     In this phenomenology also belong the too polite feelings. In
an exaggeration of harmony and the feminine knack for smooth-
ing things over, polite feeling yields to the other, giving in before
tensions mount. It is always adjustedly right. By being always
right, it is of course not right, because life is not always right. The


Page 143 of 177                                                     80%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



conscious feeling function can manage negativity and give dis-
cord its due; but anima feeling wants to avoid trouble since it has
not the differentiation to handle feeling complexities. (We must
remember: complexes are self-perpetuating in their intention.
As energetic nuclei they attract events towards them and tend to
bind whatever is not already in some order. Therefore, they tend
towards aggrandizement at the expense of differentiation. They
tend to lump together and to react all-or-nothing. The anima, as a
 complex, thus works against differentiated feeling)
     Anima feeling is oftern too light and chaming. There is always
 a laugh and the right remark that cuts the deeper feeling, as if
feeling were a tap dance on twinkle-toes that skirts the edges of
involvement. So, too, anima feeling shows vacillation, not out of
fundamental ambivalence as with the mother complex but rather
owing to a flirtatiousness with values. Half-values with half-
smiles are proffered. A man wriggles away, flirts with main issues,
lies, and perverts the truth of things for the sake of vanity. Judg-
ments go this way, then that, especially in regard to feelings about
life actions, morals, people. The vacillation, the indecisiveness
can be ended only by the logos sword, which the anima keeps him
from using by appealing to his fear of error, possible loss of pres-
tige, nd "hurting someone."
     It shows itself too in autoeroticism. Then a man is in love with
his love, feels only his feelings, finds it marvelous that he feels
something at all, which leads to the worship of feeling for its own
sake. Autoeroticism here refers simply to the anima feelings a
man has towards himself, his self-love, in which the anima, as if
it were a real woman, continually gushes over him admiration
and fantasies of inflated value about his looks, achievements and
potentialities. Without his own feeling as a counterjudgment, a
man can thus be led to overextension, disaster and collapse. The


Page 144 of 177                                                  80%
                     LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



same autoeroticism brought on by the anima can also lead to an
indolent partial paralysis. There will be fantasies of feeling moves
(clearing up a negative situation, entering a relationship, divor-
cing, getting married, making a feeling choice) and preparations
rather than actual performance. Or, the performance may be no
 more than that, a performance staged for oneself, to gain the love
 of the anima, her divinely flattering attention.
     This autoeroticism comes out in curious ways. A man invites
 a woman over for supper. He has fixed up the room, candles, a
record he likes softly playing, "just the right mood" She comes in
 and within ten minutes a fight has started- probably by her. The
anima atmosphere in the room, which he believes righteously
is feeling, has oppressed her and blocked her feeling to such an
extent that she comes out with an animus attackto cut the shit.
Then they argue about feeling and what it is and who has it and
so on. Surely, the man made an effort, but just as surely the anima
mood had nothing to do with the feeling function except in terms
of his private (autoerotic) feelings.
     Feeling can also become too aesthetic, love only for the beau-
tiful, or love only for beautiful women, or the inability to enter
into that aspect of feeling where it is harsh and savage. Anima
aestheticism cannot shout, yet shouting can belong to appro-
priate feeling. In Stendhal's De l'Amour there is a chapter where
he speaks of Beauty being dethroned by Love. He refers to that
step in the development of the feeling function where the anima
complex, as the worship of Beauty, is replaced by the appropriate
feelings of love fora woman. From one point of view, the more im-
portant a woman's beauty is toa man, the less individual and per-
sonal is the relationship. Overfondness for usual beauty, from this
point of view, is a sign of anima love rather than an expression of
the feeling function. Hence the difficultya beautiful woman has


Page 145 of 177                                                 81%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



in finding an individual relationship with a man. She is doomed
to catching his anima feeling, and she may be driven to sacrifice
her beauty to gain his love. The aesthetic distortion also serves to
suppress negative feelings and leaves a man incapable of coping
with the tough situations of life where ugliness and plain dirt
belong. The aesthetic anima does not like swearing and cursing,
suffering dumb animals, the smell of gunpowder, the oppressed
poor, the noise of cities and pollution, whereas "her" feelings do
go to the beauties of nature, cultured art and religions of incense
and song.
    Another aspect of anima feeling is materialism. Caught by
"her" without a sense of values, we hang on to objects sentimen-
tally. They take on magic through association to the anima com-
plex. We keep a drawer of mementos, identifying feelings with
material things and giving them mana. Anima feeling is quickly
fascinated by wealth and power, so that the judgments one makes
about people have a materialistic aspect, and the people one likes
tend to be the "right sort." In this way, anima values tend to favor
the persona, the adaptation to collectively approved criteria. The
feeling function ascertains values according to the feeling values
objectively given to the psyche; but anima feeling confuses what
is objective with objects, with what is evident, concrete, collective.
Therefore, the expression of feeling also becomes materialistic;
one has to make a fuss and show, or say it with "things." Giving
replaces feeling. We get more occupied with ourselves and our
gift than with the other person who finds the gift a claim on his
feeling.
   The anima complex has historical associations. Jung often
speaks of it in terms of its reaches downward and backward into
historical and mythical levels of the psyche. This aspect can also
be materialized, so that aesthetic feeling values become distorted



Page 146 of 177                                                   81%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 into a worship of the past, of antiquity, of classic taste. One ex-
 presses one's feeling in collections of pewter or silver, paintings
 and archaeological remnants.
     The anima complex can also distort feeling by making it too
 personal. Where men's interests tend to be impersonal (ideas,
 plans, facts, things) and where not enough attention is given
 to the personal and intimate, the anima surreptitiously takes
 over this part of life. Men fall prey to every sort of petty plotting
 in personal affairs. They gossip, they politic with values, they
 watch over their children's personal lives - especially their daugh-
 ters'-like frightened spinsters with lecherous shadows, ready
 at any moment to explode with rage or fall into a fit of pique at
 table. Men cannot get above the personal by simply ignoring
 it or turning it over to women. Part of the integration of the
 feeling function is the right connection with the personal, the
 "just mine." Because standing for this aspect of one's personality
 (which always has this "just mine," this personal quality) as an
 affirmation of identity is a risk and an exposure, it is usually
 more comfortable fora man to let someone else do it for him (a
 secretary, a wife, a mistress). Unfortunately, the someone else is
frequently the anima complex, and "his" can no longer be separ-
ated from "hers." Everything then takes o a monogram andis
stamped with a personal idiosyncrasy.
     We can partly agree with the classical jungian position that
anima feeling also shows in distortions of sexuality: too much or
too little sexuality in the feeling. For some, it seems the feeling
function is located in the genitals, and a man only feels where he
is attracted, so that when desire departs feeling does too. Closer
analysis of this condition shows, however, an alliance between
the shadow side of masculinity and the anima. (Anima sexuality
is usually not this "low" this "instinctual" but has all sorts of



Page 146 of 177                                                   82%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



  sentimental, hyperaesthetic, mental ideas about sex, sex on the
 mind, or full of "heart," rather than a direct expression of the
 genitals.)
     Sexualized feeling is represented in the dreams by shadow
 figures and by the anima complex who favors them. She goes off
 with the dark man in the dream, or constellates rape, or calls up
 longings that combine holy heights with sexual titillation. The
 anima seems particularly to like the antinomian and pseudo guru
 mixtures of sexuality and spirituality, where the priapic shadow
 is disguised under the robes of the holy man and where feeling
 makes a metaphysical virtue of socially disruptive behavior.
 People no longer then merely love and are jealous, enter triangles
 and have affairs, as people have always done; instead they justify
 what goes on with a "new morality" "Tantric experiences," "free
love," "individuation," and other doctrines derived by the feeling
function and supported by the anima.
     The pseudo-feeling of these doctrines can easily be detected
because negative feelings have been suppressed. Jealousy is "over-
come" power and petty fussing and the narrowing that occurs
within intense relationships are all coated over with higher
ideals. While encouraging the shadow of desire, the anima leads a
man into a less obvious shadow. People used to call this "turning
one's head"; the anima turns a man's attention-for better and for
worse-through the manipulation of feeling so that he may be in
the "worse" yet sees only the "better" The honesty of his desire
is replaced by the dishonesty of his philosophical justifications
about it. Here, jealousy can be the saving grace, for jealousy has
the one great virtue of producing a kind of psychological honesty.
It keeps a triangle authentically difficult, down to basic passions
of the psyche, hatred, murder and fear. The shadow is right there,
without Sugar's sugarcoating. Aphrodite never came without


Page 147 of 177                                                82 %
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 troubles in the tales; she had dark sisters, the Furies, and she was
 served by Custom, Grief, and Anxiety.
     We agree only partly with the classical position that the
 anima sexualizes feeling, because sometimes the Jungian position
 neglects the importance of sexuality in feeling. If feeling is arche-
typally connected with Eros, it will have echoes at the psychoid
level. For feeling to reach the complexes and represent them, it
must also have a body component, even if not molar and mas-
sive in the sense of affect and emotion. I do not mean to confuse
body with sexuality, for body consciousness is not always sexual
and sexuality can be very mental, yet we ought not go too far in
making separations between feeling and sexuality. Too easily one
falls for the notion that "good feeling" is purged of sexuality and
desire.
    Quite possibly sexuality has its own feeling aspect, which
is more than the feelings that are awakened through sexuality.
This feeling function works as an inhibitor or guide within any
instinctual force, providing it with its own laws. These laws
may differ from the moral laws imposed upon sexuality - how it
"should" perform and what feelings one "should" have. Feeling
may direct and elaborate sexuality as in the mating games -of ani-
mals or in our complicated courting patterns, love letters and di-
vorce procedures. At what moment two people go to bed, or cease
going to bed, is determined by feeling as much as by sexuality,
and here feeling acts as a spiritus rector of the instinct, just as the
instinct acts through feeling.
    I have tried to discuss the natural and inherent self-inhibition
of compulsion in two papers: "Towards the Archetypal Model for
the Masturbation Inhibition" and "On Psychological Creativity"
This offers another way of regarding feeling: it can be conceived
as a reflective component of instinct, just as each god has his



Page 148 of 177                                                    83%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



ritual requirements and feeling "laws" for observing his cult.
These thoughts move the theme of these chapters beyond the
notion of feeling as a function of consciousness. Here, we are
suggesting a metapsychological emphasis, feeling as an arche-
typal phenomenon per se, akin to conscience and self regulation.
As Jung wrote (CW8: 411), the archetype has a feeling aspect or
always has an effect upon feeling. We can make this precise by
suggesting that each archetype delivers to consciousness a load of
feelings of different kinds and also works upon the feeling func-
tion in general by both compelling it and inhibiting it with awe of
the numinous, a holy fear, a reflective moment of carefulness.
    Certain consequences follow from this: if feeling might be a
component of instinct as represented in the reflective ritualiza-
tion of instinct, then ritualization of sexuality would be a way of
reinforcing the feeling aspect. The sexual anima who so likes the
shadow man, demanding ever more sexuality in the feeling, can
go through a process of sexual ritualization in order to release
the feeling reflection and inhibition. Many of the most perverse
forms of sexuality, including the descriptions of de Sade, can be
seen as attempts to draw out the feeling level of sexuality, to make
sexuality a reflection of the psyche rather than only an activity of
instinct.
    I do believe that common language gives a psychoid level
to feeling; that is, it emphasizes the relation between the feel-
ing function and body consciousness. When people describe
where they feel, they put a hand on the chest or gut, clench a fist,
or droop their shoulders in depression. Feeling can be abstract,
ethical, aesthetic, diplomatic, political - all the areas we have
mentioned. It can be as cold and dear and precise as thought;
nevertheless, there is this peculiar body component to feeling, so
that any feeling reaction that is not in tune with the body serves


Page 149 of 177                                                  83%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



to sever us from the body. Unfortunately, a great deal of what
passes for feeling is "made up" niceness, without body conscious-
ness in it, and acts schizogenically upon its recipients and its
donors.
    The same sort of psychology holds true for the animus. It
can manipulate feeling and ally itself with the woman's shadow
desires for power-through-sex. How often women are abused by
those men who come at them with gentle, fatherly, tender, con-
siderate feelings, taking the elbow as they cross the street, light-
ing their cigarettes first, the intimate word in the ear. These men
are supposed to be lovers; they make a woman "feel good." When
feeling is functioning, this sort of thing is laughed off the stage.
But too often it flatters an inferior function to be given these gross
demonstrations of "good feeling," by means of which the animus
and shadow are manipulating towards a scene that may well end
in crushing betrayal or a furious fight over money.
    As we too often insist the anima has to do with eros and feel-
ing, so we mistakenly identify the animus with logos and ideas.
But the animus, especially in therapy where so much is made of
feeling, can well manifest as a feeler, and again, like anima feeling,
it will be just off. All the values and all the heart will be peculiarly
half-values and half-hearted. This pseudo-feeling of the animus
creeps into many analytical sessions as soon as the people try to
"express their feelings." Key words for detecting the animus are
"really," "my own" "good," "positive," "related" - and the word
"feeling" itself.
    Lastly - and not because we have come to an end but only to
decide fora stop- anima feeling, lacking the individuality of ego
expression, is frequently undirected. Then a man suffers from
Weltschmerz, vague cosmic feelings, poetry in insubstantial im-
ages, a fondness for flowers and stars, clichés that could have been



Page 150 of 177                                                     84%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



written by anyone, anywhere to anyone, anywhere. Feeling leaves
the immediate reality altogether and no longer connects with the
moment and the matter at hand. Undirected feeling, although it
feels for groups and problems of groups and the larger ideas that
disturb the world, wanders from the point at issue. It is irrelevant
- perhaps because it has no body in it, and so nobody is there.
    An example of this irrelevance. A man anda woman go out
for dinner. He is correct and polite with her yet excessively enter-
taining with the waitress whom he has never seen before nor will
ever see again. Underneath he is angry with his companion, but
it appears only indirectly through the charm he puts on for the
waitress. The woman then expresses the anger for him as a result
of the anima manipulation that lets him off scot-free, still a polite
gentleman. This example also shows how the anima can make use
of feelings that are not expressed, distorting them into devious
channels for troublesome ends.
    All these distortions from which a man suffers, and from
which the women in his life are forced to suffer even more, are
used for feeling and pass for feeling, but cannot be attributed to
the feeling function. By definition it is a function of conscious-
ness: it is more or less available to consciousness depending upon
the type orientation of the personality. But theoretically it is
available as a conscious instrument to each, regardless of type. Its
weakness and delay in appearing can be charged against the mother
complex, while substitutions for it are the result of the anima com-
plex. The former distortions we bring with us from childhood
and are part of its curse and our pain. But we have no personal
blame. The latter distortions, however, are more serious because
they reveal not what we could not do in our helplessness, but that
which we would not do in our cowardice. Where the conscious
personality does not have the courage to risk with feeling, the


Page 150 of 177                                                  84%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 anima intervenes with its falsifications. These falsifications as
 sketched above have one essence in common: they are selfish,
 self-reflecting, self-satisfying. This is little wonder, since it is the
 function of the anima to give the experience to a man of being
 connected to his center, related to himself; or, as it is phrased in
 classical Jungian language, the anima relates the ego to the Self.
 In anima feeling, this is done in a devious way, leading neither to
 consciousness nor to relatedness, but rather to an inflated sense
 of self. Where the anima does help the feeling function, however,
 is precisely through these difficulties, for the anima bring con-
 flict, disorder and falsification, providing the feeling function a
place to exercise its main activity: the discrimination of values
 and the elaboration of relationship.
     The aid another can give to releasing feeling from anima dis-
tortion is to step in naturally, replacing the complex. This means
the other must recognize and give importance to that experience
of my most central value. For the anima always feels like "me" in
a man. She points to my mystery. Hence through that complex
we are so touchy, so ready to be led into inflations, ambitions, and
the satisfaction of strong desires. If no one else can truly see me
with the vision I need in order to find myself, or connect with
interest to a Self too mysterious for me to recognize, then I fall for
the anima's feelings and am led astray - which too, as Oscar Wilde
observed, has its advantages. ("The advantage of the emotions is
that they lead us astray")




Page 151 of 177                                                      85%
                        LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                  11
                  Education of the Feeling Function

SCHOOLING tends mainly to develop the functions of thinking
and sensation, although intelligence tests with their emphasis on
quickness and guessing favor intuition. Feeling education, in the
sense of taste, values, relationships, is not the core of schooling.
Music, art, sports, social clubs, religion, politics, drama, reading
for pleasure - these are elective and extracurricular. Where can
the heart go to school? Perhaps it was not so preposterous to
claim that the profession of psychotherapy owes its existence to
the inadequate and undeveloped state of the feeling function in
general.
    The development of the feeling function through psychother
apy would not be so necessary had our usual education included
feeling more in its aims. Rousseau said: "He among us who can
best carry the joys and sorrows of life in my opinion is the best
educated." The education of the rational mind, much as we have
been led to believe by the indoctrination of schooling, little makes
us capable of coping with joys and sorrows. Rather the contrary is
true: the education of the rational mind makes us less able with
feeling, since feeling and thinking would seem, for the most part,
to develop at the expense of each other. The Romantics knew
this and said: "Feeling may err but it can only be corrected by
feeling" (Herder). This statement denies the superiority of the

Page 153 of 177                                                  85%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 reason of the mind over the reason of the heart and presents the
 Romantic threat to Classical order. Inferior feeling cannot be cor-
 rected from above by superior thinking. The beginning of feeling
 education is turninga deaf ear to one's superior functions, whose
 disapproval - even if tolerantly educative -of whatever is less acts
mainly repressively. Feeling requires an education through faith;
it begins to function only when we can trust it to function and
allow it its errors.
     The psyche works at its own errors by means of its self steer-
ing, self-correcting tendency. It leads us, in dreams especially,
back to adolescence where the problems of feeling become acute
 and where the educational system in which we have passed all
those long days fails these problems totally. Until adolescence,
feeling development is given more attention in that the child is
both allowed more and directed more. But at adolescence, with-
out initiations and taboos, without instruction or forms, we are
turned loose into the secular turmoil of the world, bringing to it
our own contribution of chaotic feelings.
     Accordingly, the return to adolescence in the dreams of adults
often points to gaps of forgotten feelings, where the affective
life was beginning to open and the feeling function beginning to
make differentiations, only to have its values twisted by ignor-
ance and repressed by fear. Dreams take one back again to where
it went wrong, back to school - but this time for the education of
feelings.
     So wefind the homosexual and lesbian connections and
fantasies, the repetitive appearances of certain teachers, the high
school loves, and the recollections of people so trivial and remote
in memory but who insist on returning through dreams mainly
for the feeling characteristics that they embody. Rather than
growing out of the adolescence- as we might like to believe is the


Page 153 of 177                                                  86%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 intention of the analytical process - we find our selves growing
backward through an adolescence relived again: songs, scenes,
faces that touch the heart with an extraordinarily vital, even if
 sentimental, pull.
    A first step in the education of feeling is lifting the repression
of fear. The feelings must first be caught and held in conscious
ness and recognized as feelings. Since it is the feeling function
that feels feelings, it must be allowed to feel what it actually
does feel as it happens, admitting and accepting, without the
intervention of superior functions. Not only the superior fune-
tions interfere. Feeling itself judges the psyche's contents with
narrow evaluations. Our own stale moralisms, cheap tastes and
intolerances work against us. It is as if feeling develops through
suspension of itself, holding in abeyance so that we can newly re-
flect rather than habitually judge what we feel.
    The education begins when I begin to trust my own spontan-
eous first feeling-"I don't like his fate," "I feel mixed up," "I don't
feel anything," "1 just feel angry but at nothing in particular" - re-
gardless of whether or not this first feeling is generally admissible
and acceptable in the collective system of values. When I repress
the simplest feeling reactions, I prevent the feeling function from
developing these contents into discriminated evaluations. For
example, ifI repress for moral reasons ("I am married and I ought
not feel such desires," "It's wrong of me to hate him for no reason
at all"), nothing further can come of my feelings; they remain
nipped and stunted. Or, for example, depressive feelings get me
and I say: "We all feel like this sometimes," which is another one
of those habitual clichés that prevents the specific movement of
that specific depression from showing what it wants.
    These little mechanical defenses against feeling keep it
attached to its affective roots, for anything newly coming into


Page 154 of 177                                                    86%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



consciousness comes with a potential that is more affectively
charged than the ego system itself, else it would not make itself
felt, could not get in. Before the animal can be tamed, it must be
caught. Before education can proceed, there must be something to
educate. This implies a responsibility towards one's feeling, what-
ever it feels like, and not only a responsibility to the ideals of how
one should feel. This responsibility in fact puts to the test one's
ideals, for it requires courage and honesty to give place to all that a
feeling would say once it is let in.
   It is not what contents a person carries in his unconscious
that reveal his character, for we have our statistical share of the
bomber, murderer and pervert, but how one meets these con-
tents. The criminal twist that each complex has as part of its
 potential is a shock to feeling. I may ignore this shock and simply
 not feel that shadow of my nature. Or I may play social worker
towards my criminality, trying to help and understand; or the ego
 may play high-court judge or policeman. As the bomber is within,
 so is the "pig" who violently represses every sign of violence,
 never allowing an explosion, clubbing into in sensate stupidity
with pills, drink and distractions every exaggerated confronta-
tion that the complexes would constellate. How one connects to
the antisocial and criminal contents demonstrates one's facility
with the feeling function.
     Feeling thus requires psychological courage. There is civil,
moral, physical and intellectual courage - so, too, a courage of the
soul to encounter itself. To meet the contents one carries, to rec-
ognize the destruction in one's complexes, and to undergo, which
means as well to go under - the disintegration and absent places
of one's inferiority call for courage of no small degree.
     Psychological courage is a courage of the heart, for we may
regard courage as a phenomenon of eros that stands in defense of


Page 155 of 177                                                    87%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



the heart, both its generosity and its folly. The courage of feeling
towards the phenomena of the soul, regardless of what they are, is
an enactment of the Eros and Psyche tale, because eros gives love
and encouragement to all the contents of the soul that it feels in-
ferior about. The more we stand for eros, the more psychological
strength we seem to gain, demonstrating that eros i indeed a
dynamus, not only in its desirous portion but altogether as a life-
embracing impetus. Courage shows in the feeling function's will-
ingness to take on whatever comes up.
    This education through faith and courage can be sabotaged
by analytical cleverness. Then we analyze what we feel, too soon
trying to figure it out: why, where it came from, what it "means."
Then, instead of feeling, we call what we feel a projection and
try to "take it back," or take it to the other person to "discuss."
Everything, anything but the courage to live the feeling function's
inferiority.
     Because feeling has both plus and minus sides, acceptance
means as well those with the negative sign: deception, dislike,
coldness, hatred, sorrow. Negative feelings and their expressions
belong equally to the function. As Rousseau said, "the joys and
sorrows of life" - not the joys alone. The marriage vows, which
clearly state feeling values, acknowledge the place of negative
feeling: "for better and for worse."
    Marriage provides a vessel for negative feelings of every sort,
even about marriage itself. Although we may delusionally go
into a mariage propelled by thrusts of hope, desire and joy, the
elaboration of marriage means bad temper, sarcasm, wheedling,
meanness, boredom, and so m any complexities of negative feel-
ings that marriage offers a superb vehicle for the feeling function.
There are few places where we have the opportunity for a forced,
prolonged relationship:jobs we quit, neighborhoods we move


Page 156 of 177                                                  87%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 from, loves often fade when the wind blows cold. But marriage
 seems ideally made for the expression of every sort of negative
 feeling and thus for the differentiation of the feeling function.
 The fact that marriage seems the only place that these feelings
 are permitted, even expected, raises the question whether mar-
 riage might not be today forced to carry more than its share of
both negative feelings (which have no other sanctified place) and
 inferior functioning (which may not be shown outside). It is a
 standard joke of feeling that a man keeps up the front all day long
only to come home to disintegrate in self-pity and vicious attacks
on the family. Of course marriage cannot be a "success" in the old-
fashioned sense of a beautiful, loving, growing thing like a tree,
just because of these negative feelings that thrive in the relation-
ship of the couple. Yet, marriage is a success when it can live from
these negativities and offer to the feeling function a chance for
daily exercise. Marriage offers a chance for developing the feeling
function because as an archetypal vessel it stands impersonally
outside and implacably above whatever takes place within the
relationship. The vessel may feel like a trap or cage in which the
woman "can't breathe" and the man wants "out," but these ex-
periences testify to the solidity of the impersonal structure. The
vows of faithfulness and dedication do not mean the exclusion
of the inferior person with his renegade, destructive feelings; the
vows mean rather that the inferior person be "married" too, that
is, brought into the home and the bed, met with credit rather than
suspicion, given an opportunity within marriage to feel just what
he or she feels (see Guggenbühl-Craig, Marriage Is Dead: Long Live
Marriage).
   The education of the feeling function for the feeling type
may even be more difficult than those with another superior
function. After all, the superior function does not age well; it is


Page 157 of 177                                                   88%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 the adaptedly smooth system that copes, whereas personality
 development usually takes new steps through its breakdowns
 of habit where the inferior parts have a chance to come forward.
 Feeling may extend its range to ever new areas of life, new people,
 new interests and activities, but unless there is a further differ-
 entiation of values, where they advance in subtlety and human
 comprehension, the function itself does not move, only the focus
 of its attention. Therefore, the feeling type often must suspend
 his superior function and its values in order to extend the func-
 tion. A woman feds her son's mistake in marrying a Negress; a
 wife sees the destructive aspect of her husband's best friend;a
 husband finds waste in his wife's social life. Each of these judg-
 ments has much going for it. Yet, by including the position of the
 son the mother has a chance to discover new values. By judging
the husband's friend the wife misses her opportunity to be led by
her husband's "inferior" feeling for his "inferior" friend into an
area of life that also has values.
     The function may have to develop "against its better judg-
ment." Here, perversity can be a way: Swift, Baudelaire, Proust
show the potential for the development of feeling through
peculiarities and sophistications of what convention says is "good
feeling." In a predominantly Protestant culture where         ncerity,
simplicity and naiveté are given high place, the sophistication of
feeling through perversity, aestheticism, irony, exuberance, cun-
ning, and other such ways seems to be "bad" feeling. But we must
continually recall that we have a rather impoverished and senti-
mental notion of an educated feeling function.
     In this respect, feeling may require education through the
reverse of the usual values - through lying, for instance. Truth is
not an abstract principle only; it is also the reality of a concrete
situation in which various values are operative. What may be the


Page 157 of 177                                                   88%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



truth in a factual thinking sense may be a lie in order to protect
 higher values or to be true to the concrete situation. Parents con-
 ceal from their children and lie to them, yet expect their children
 always to tell the truth. Let us say there is a feeling truth and
 a thinking truth, and sometimes they clash. Then we have the
 classical conflicts between Mercy and Justice or be tween Love and
Truth. Psychological truth is usually duplex if not complex; that
is, it has many sides and therefore many truths. Hermes, who is
the leader of souls, the one who points the way for psychological
development, begins his life as a newborn child by stealing and
lying. Sometimes the individual finds his initiation into psychic
reality and its manifold truth to be via a peculiar situation where
he is obliged to lie and where his feeling function suddenly is
faced with conflicts between the principles of conscience and the
necessities of psychological truth.
     This problem can be difficult for the feeling function if it has
not developed a sophistication and found a connection between
the values of the soul and the values of society. The feeling type
usually reflects the established values of a civilization, incorpor-
ating them into principles of conscience. He feels him self part
of the law and supports the doctrine of truth that has resulted
from a historical process. The relation to the values of society is
another manner in which feeling can develop. Comfortable ac-
ceptance or absolute rejection shows the all-or-none reaction of
inferiority.
     Where only a few years ago a good deal of psychotherapy
had as its goal the extroverted feeling aims of adjustment to the
values of external reality, now it has turned to the introverted
goals of adjustment to internal values. There has been a sharp
conversion from extroverted to introverted feeling. Before we ad-
justed the inner man with his symptoms and emotional demands


Page 158 of 177                                                  89%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 for the sake of harmony with job, marriage, school, and society.
 Now, we dismiss the claims of squaring with society for the sake
 of adjusting to subjective images, affects and ideas.
     But adjustment of one's subjectivity may prove as difficult
 as getting on with society. My affects and ideas can give me as
 much trouble as do other people. So, developrment of the feeling
 function refers as well to this relationship with the "inner" or
 psychic, world through feeling fantasies. The "others" with whom
 one has to get along are also the little people of the complexes, and
 how much does feeling give to their needs? The introverted feeler
 does place value here; he puts time in on him self, developing his
 reactions and judgments and connecting with his relationship
 fantasies. He connects to his fantasies of other people before other
people. This takes time, and feelers are often silent; but in the
time and silence they develop security and power.
     On the other hand, the nonfeeling types undermine them
selves by neglecting the value of what takes place in their psychic
world-dreams, symptoms, fantasies, depressions -or by tending
to put there only negative values. They use their introverted feel
ing to sabotage themselves. They feel guilty about their dreams or
regard as trivial and wasteful the moods and fantasies that come
spontaneously. They put down moods altogether, ignoring that
moods, as emotions, carry body with them. They do not give high
value to their own soul stuff. But these feeling fantasies image my
nature, and when I give value to them, they give me value, secur-
ity and strength. Without this ad justed introverted feeling, I tend
to dislike myself-or will be sustained by an indiscriminate self-
love called inflation.
    Very often dreams show figures that evoke feeling. These poor,
unwanted, ill, and outcast fantasy personalities reflect a condi-
tion of the personality and the kind of attention required from


Page 159 of 177                                                   89%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



the feeling function. In a first conversation with an anima figure,
a man, who had already been in analysis nearly three years, found
that the figure demanded only from him that he recognize her
with feeling, e.g., that he appreciate her, do things for her, take her
into account (be connected with her) in all his activities. A woman
analysand was ever and again battling with a "man in dark
glasses" who saw everything darkly. This dream image was the
personification of her anxieties and depressions. She viewed him
and these moods through his own dark glasses, seeing the nega-
tive states only negatively. But one day she asked him in fantasy
what was wrong with his eyes, why he was blind, why he suffered
and what she could do for him (rather than expecting the figure to
serve her will). A change began to take place. The crippled animus,
weak anima, sick hero, hurt child ask not only for amplification
through intuition, or interpretation by thinking, but especially
for appreciation by feeling
    In the analytical emphasis upon negativity and inferiority,
the general notion is that one brings to the hour the darkest
perversions, incest longings, violences and anxieties, and so
we tend to lose the importance of heights. Sometimes, in close
relationships, as between married partners or fathers and sons,
what touches most deeply and inspires most highly is left out.
Not only is the dark kept out of the family circle but also the light.
The refinement of the function cannot take place without testing
the function in regard to the exquisite, the tender, the ecstatic,
the grieving. The sparks that really move me as feeling convic-
tions, which keep me alive and on which my life as a man hangs
- do they not belong within a relationship? Are they not also to
be expressed as well as my rage and morbid depressions? Does
tenderness only belong when the shades are drawn, fury when
drunk, tears in a man only at a graveside? Often in an analysis the


Page 160 of 177                                                   90%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



deeper or higher feelings of love, or belief in oneself, or longing for
salvation or the ability truly to love others are the prime movers.
We are as much victims of inferior feeling in regard to exuberance
as to aggression. We cannot take too much excitement       without
feeling guilt and anxiety.
     In other times, the grand, positive feelings of joy also were
ritualized: a time for celebration, for carnival; collective forms for
feeling were provided in terms of a divinity. How hard we have
it to give exorbitant praise, to pull the magnanimous gesture, or
to bask in what wholly makes us happy. We do not let ourselves
sing, not merely because of a puritan morality or a super ego, but
because the function cannot sing, and in the bourgeois, secular
language of factional psychology, to let go is a sign of immaturity
and inflation. The gods must keep their distance and not enter the
living room.
THE creation of atmosphere also belongs to our topic. The feeling
function gives value to a situation. It appraises, judges, and rec-
ognizes what values are inherent in the situation and can lead us
then to function according to these values. Often the atmosphere
is ruined by overvaluing with great expectations or undervaluing
with recollective associations that only distract from what is
immediately present. Then we feel that whatever is going on in
this room with these people is not "it"; "it" is with someone else,
at another time, in another place. Thesefeelingfantasies sabotage
the moment by not giving due value to it. The recognition of value
in a situation creates the atmosphere of importance without sec-
ondary efforts of decoration, dinner, or dress. Attentive listening
alone gives intensity. Feeling in this context is an awareness of
"now" and "here." "It" is right where you are. At its height this is
the atmosphere of the mystery and the mood of the Mass. Atmos-
phere is created by the evaluative focus brought to the moment.


Page 161 of 177                                                   90%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



At another extreme are the family evenings of boredom and the
parties torn by "interesting discussion." But these too are feeling
 atmospheres, and what mainly matters is the mirroring, the
recognition of what is happening as it happens. The feeling types
know how to mirro. They can bring out the best in a situation
simply by the way they place their attention. They can suffocate
the inappropriate and manipulate a conversation by the same
method of placing values and showing or withholding interest.
     Mirroring is not only reflecting with the mind; it is as well
something that happens in the body. It is a presence in posture, a
registration in the flesh of events as they take place, those stom-
ach swishes of fear or excitement, the blood draining from hands
and feet in coldness, the exhaustion from prolonged tension. In
itself this is the sensation aspect of mirroring, yet feeling draws
values from these reports and makes its judgments.
     The education of feeling involves also the observance of ob-
jective patterns of relationship. There are rules, for instance, about
the relationship of guest and host, of senior and junior, between
master and servant, between friends, even between husband and
wife. In many cultures these forms of feeling are worked out in
great detail. They describe archetypal feeling positions that can
be transposed into other situations, even metaphorical and mys-
tical, such as the feeling of bride for bridegroom or the feeling of
being a "guest" or a "servant."
     We find it difficult to observe objective patterns, especially
when they are hierarchical. To hold a superior position without
either arrogance or obsequiousness, to give an order without its
turning into either a request for a favor or a command, to ob serve
filial piety without succumbing to the family complex - these are
beyond our usual capacities and are not educational aims in a so-
ciety of democratic individualism.


Page 161 of 177                                                    91%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



   These patterns would seem to have little to do with feeling,
especially the feelings of love that, if its commandment be fol-
lowed- whether that of Jesus or Aphrodite - like death is the
great leveler; all forms of the objective order are obliterated. Love
as an emotion is contrary to all structures and functions of con-
sciousness, even feeling. This affect or emotion of love may infuse
and transform the feeling function, but it cannot replace it. Love
is archetypal, belonging to the gods and given by them as Eros.
Agape and caritas, too, are associated with religion; that is, they
too are a grace originating beyond the human. But feeling does
not depend upon the gods; it is not a force, but an awareness, not a
redemption, but an instrument. And odd as it may sound to love's
devotees, we can feel and have educated feeling without love, but
we cannot love and have educated love without feeling. The afect
of love is a simplification; feeling is a differentiation. Where love
joins by fusion, feeling connects through discrimination. The
patterns of these differentiations are coded in feeling forms that
endure beyond the emotional movements of love. Community,
the brotherhood of all men, or Utopian societies of friends based
on love all fall down because of the mistaken notion that love con-
quers all and can replace the forms of feeling.
    The oppositions between Classical and Romantic express less
a difference between head and heart than a difference between

feeling and love, between the endless order of subtle feeling
differentiations and the endless waves of love's emotion that
wash all walls away between this and that, right and wrong, ugly
and beautiful, you and me. By falling-in-love we can reverse all
values and climb up to pinnacles beyond good and evil. Feeling, as
a function of consciousness, has a discriminatory Logos aspect,
which it is the purpose of the Great Goddess to overcome. She
would end discrimination and separation. There fore, the educa-


Page 162 of 177                                                    91%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



tion of the feeling function does not by necessity have to go via
falling-in-love, as the dream of romance and the Romantic dream
of inferior feeling pretend.
     Yet experience tells-the analytical transference is one
example- that falling-in-love can and does produce a major de-
velopment of the feeling function, and we must explore this a bit
further. Falling-in-love has an indirect, not a direct, effect upon
the feeling function. The direct effect, mistaken for true feeling
 development, is the sudden experience of so many positive feel-
 ings. But their expression, under the intense domination of the
 love emotion, may still be oversubjective and distorted by love's
 inflation. And even when these positive feelings are felt and ex
 pressed adequately, this is more the gift of love itself and is an
 archetypally ritualistic part of anyone's behavior, impersonally,
 unconsciously, when he enters the state of being-in-love. The real
 development is later and indirect, when feeling begins its long
 appraisals and discriminations of what is going on, sorting out
 the feelings and responding to and from them. Then a refinement
 of the function takes place. Hence we find the value for psych-
 ology of love letters and love poems and love diaries. Hence the
food a love affair gives for hours of digestive reverie. Hence, too,
the broadened tolerance and understanding for others that a love
affair yields as a late product.
     The main educative effect falling-in-love has on the feeling
function is that through this experience we come to trust our feel-
ings. This is the education by faith mentioned earlier. In love we
risk our feeling and trust its functioning. Falling-in-love not only
opens the door to that host of tender, comical, savage, exalted
feelings; it also affords a safe place where these, and others more
infantile and more suspect, can be allowed in trust. In love we give
value also to the weak, possessive, vain, and clinging feelings. No


Page 163 of 177                                                 92%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 matter what they feel like, we believe in them and give credit to
them since they are the stuff of the affair. Having been received
in a situation where they are accepted, we are able to accept them
ourselves. The credit the other person gives to us teaches us to be-
lieve in ourselves as feeling beings. With this comes the sense of
redemption: that our feelings, our heart are "good" and that even
the feeling wounds of childhood and adolescence can be risked to
exposure, experienced, and healed. To be in love makes us young
again partly because it does return us to these wounds of nega-
tive feelings and their blurted, bleeding expression, redeeming
them by finding for them acceptance within the structure of a
relationship.
     Falling-in-love yields so many feelings that the feeling func-
tion is constellated; else we cannot find our way through. It is put
to the test each time lovers meet. No other function can substi-
tute: we cannot think or puzzle out love's maze with perceptions.
Because falling-in-love tends to wipe out feeling distinctions, the
feeling function is required to organize love. The experience of
falling-in-love, where one is thrown into one's feelings and onto
one's feeling function, is the overwhelmingly convincing proof
that the feeling function exists as an independent, irreplaceable
psychological agent.
     Personal relationships require personal feeling. Here, the
emphasis is on the small. The mystics can instruct us. We like to
believe that the great mystics occupy themselves with the vaster
cosmic things, but they usually talk about small things, very
small things. With the feeling function they reduce intellectual
speculation to matters close at hand, personal issues of food and
nature. Their laughter is born from trivia. Our spoiled feelings are
usually resentments over small things, those little mistakes that
have been neglected as one goes along. Then life turns sour: one


Page 164 of 177                                                 92%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



has soured one's life by missing the small feeling opportunities
and one is left with festering minor irritations. To miss the small
is to miss with one's feeling function. Therefore, personal feeling
needs to be expressed in small ways: personal favors, personal
sharing, personal remarks about exactly what one likes in the
other. The feeling function, by recognizing the other person's
virtues, connects him to these parts, giving him belief in himself.
Personal feeling is also expressed in small ways with eyes, voice,
and hands. The shift from one function to another is often given
just in the change in tone of voice. As the animus commands and
the anima complains, so the feeling function usually has slow-
ness. (It can of course be "put on'" in the fake style.) The feeling
function can pass through the eyes; some theories of friendship
use the image of "face to face" for their model. And hands go be-
yond words whether in gesture, in aggression, or in soothing the
sick.
    The use of first names once also expressed personal feeling,
but like much else this form has fallen. In "primitive" society the
use of names is usually highly ritualized. One often has many
names, and the titles of family members are tied with the forms
of relationship appropriate to each. In the German-speaking
world, appellations differentiate degrees of personal intimacy.
One has a title and a first name and perhaps a nickname too. In
addition, there are the two forms of "you," all of which offers
many combinations. A tale tells that only God knows our true
names, yet in today's society we take other people's names into
our mouths at first encounter. The name in the mouth of another
person is an archetypal expression of feeling. (It signifies intim-
acy; so for instance a dream once told a man, after he had fallen
in love and kissed the woman for the first time, that his name had
been engraved on her tongue.) In Proust there is a passage where


Page 165 of 177                                                 93%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



the first time his beloved mentioned his name he felt as if he had
been held naked in her mouth.

 THE objective patterns of relationship are codified in manners.
 Learning manners means learning forms of feeling. Again, it can
 be argued that what one really feels has little to do with manners.
 Manners, it would seem, prevent feeling, because feeling has come
 to mean a breakthrough of sincerity, putting aside all manners,
 and "coming out with it" "feeling it like it is." Problems of human
 contact between black and white, between revolutionary and
 establishment have reached the place of nonnegotiable demands
where manners are a laugh! To make a case for manners in a his-
torical period of violence points up the difference between feeling
and affect. (Not that feeling cannot also be a conduit for aggres-
sion, as in cruelty, brainwashing, or the code of the military.)
    Yet, manners at their best oppose only affect, not feeling.
Feelings that seem too deeply personal for manners reveal the in
adequacy of our manners, that they have lost touch with their
original purpose. For manners, whether polished or pioneer, give
to feeling a form in which it can be understood and received. They
offer feeling channels for communication; even the negative feel
ings of insult and spleen can be passed on by manners. Through
the adroit use of them we can freeze, snub, hurt, and ridicule,
or show off to arouse envy. That manners become dry, that they
reflect only persona, that they become mannered and lose all con-
tent and connection with sensitivity only confirm the primary
thesis of this chapter: the feeling function is in decay. A standard
sign of psychological decay is the split into polarities. On the one
hand we have blunt and pregnant feelings, on the other, manners
emptied of all service but defense.
    The rediscovery of the archetypal significance of manners
as necessary and viable channels rather than protective moats


Page 166 of 177                                                 93%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 would re-ritualize them and give to the careless acts of every
 day an aspect of ceremony. We would feel with certainty about
 the simplest aspects of daily life - how to behave and what
 is expected. Manners would give us the "manner" of dealing.
 Instead, we must give worried time to molding for each incon-
 sequential thing its own form, or we abandon all such feeling
 efforts, leaving it to the mothering mass of democratic fellow
 feeling, which is always supposed to "understand what I meant
by that." ("The general mess of imprecision of feeling/Undis-
ciplined squads of emotion" - does Eliot not refer to decayed
 manners?) The obsessive worry with which we confront daily
 decisions of feeling, to the profit of advertisers and advisers who
batten on our uncertainty, is the result of feeling forms having
fallen into unconsciousness. Unlived ritual becomes unconscious
obsessions and compulsions.
     Manners are archetypally connected with the numinous; they
imply a relation to power. They appear at their most elaborate
where power is concentrated: in the church, the military, the
government, or in the contest of powers, eg, law courts, sports,
aboard ship, in surgery. Manners are usually associated with the
mistaken idea of ceremony as something bloodless, courtly and
staged. But the "stagin ss" of manners manifests the numinosity
within all life, the archetypal powers that like gods are within
every situation, giving it drama. So, through revitalizing manners
we could return to an archetypal sense of social situations, both
less personal and more numinous, where what we say and do is
carried beyond the power of our individual limits by the import of
the manner in which each act is done.
     Manners are part of adjustment. As we can read in Jung,
extroverted feeling is primarily concerned with concord, consid-
eration, compromise. External values are recognized and adjusted


Page 166 of 177                                                 94%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



to. Adjustment implies such feeling values as joining in and
taking part, sharing and helping, and the affirmation of external
social reality. Moreover, it means letting go of personal reserva-
tions, standing out and standing off. Yielding to the impersonal.
collective unconscious need not take place only through powerful
personal experiences of love, arts, crowds, and religion. It can also
be accomplished by submitting to the collective, for the outer
collective is an archetype in itself as well as being an arena for all
the archetypal forces that are as well within the psyche. Adjust-
ment to the outer collective reduces us to the small proportions of
statistical significance. We are indeed then only one of millions,
only all too dependently human and creaturely. Threatening as
this may be to romantic notions of individuality and our personal
hero myth, it is an experience that challenges the feeling function
to adjust without justifications, to submit without going under
    Adjustment in the last analysis means appropriate behavior,
the "fittingness" of which Plato speaks, the "conduct" of the I-
Ching. That such a simple thing should be an ultimate art of life
shows to what depths the problem of the feeling function can lead
us. "Appropriate," a word we have been fond of using in describing
developed or superior feeling, refers to one's own individual style
and tact in behavior.
    Style and timing too belong to objective forms of feeling. Styl-
ized is of course the same as mannered; we will encounter it in the
decayed extravagances of extroverted feeling as it dries, tending
towards the repetitive, insistent, and ornate. As ornamentation
begins with simple symbolic inscriptions touched with strong
affect and later develops into arabesques and rococo curlicues,
so is stylized feeling a late phase in the organization of passion.
Nevertheless, it remains within the realm of feeling. (Too easily




Page 167 of 177                                                   94%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



we reject mannerisms as brittle, cheap, or sentimental, forgetting
that these too present feelings and qualities.)
     But style is more than stylization. Style is that happy union
of individual feeling adjusted to external expectations. It is the
feeling function itself, expressing personality as the glass shows
off the wine. Or, it is the personality coming through the feeling
function so that what is in keeping with one's style is appropriate
both for the inner truth of feeling and the outer world. Style is
not to be bought in vogues, nor can it even be taught, although
it is the thing that those in search of feeling education want so
badly. It is the style ofa writer the young poet apes sedulously, the
style of the lecturer the student imitates, the style of the analyst
the patient carries off in his transference, the style of the worldly
woman that the young girl observes in silence all through the
party.
     When Alfred Adler talks about a lifestyle as the way to grasp
the nature of a person's neurosis, he is on to the truth that style
shows howa person handles his feelings, howhe gives feeling
to the contents of consciousness, how his values are lived. As
methodical order expresses thinking, so does style express feel
ing. As the style of a period expresses the modalities of feeling
of an era, so the style of a person reveals his feeling life. When it
does not change with the stages of life, the way historical periods
change our modes of style, then style becomes caricature and
stylization. The less observable the style (the less it is stylized),
the more it is part of the way a person simply is, the more we can
claim for him an integration of feeling, so that his feeling manner
is indistinguishable from him. He is all of a piece, in keeping with
his style. Thus, the development of one's own style in painting or
writing is the highest goal of the artist as well as the mark that
lasts the longest. For the rest of us the lesson is the same: the


Page 168 of 177                                                  95%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



search to find ourselves is the search to find our style, the way to
live feeling in life.
     Tact, or the sense of timing, is perhaps the crown of appro-
priate feeling. Ecclesiastes puts it simply: to everything there
is a season. Everything has its time. Perhaps feeling is merely
tactfulness, a matter of timing. Humor depends wholly on it,
and music is the art of time. The feeling function perceives time:
as, for instance, when visiting a person in the hospital, staying
not too short or too long, feeling the time to get up and go. The
quality of time, rather than the amount one gives another, carries
the feeling. For this reason, disturbed feeling- the guilty feelings
from the mother complex -distorts the time sense, and one gives
quantities of time with only grains of feeling.
     Time has a quality- or is a quality. It is not but an accumu-
lation of endlessly clicking identical minutes into eternity. The
development of the time Sense means the development of feeling
awareness of the moment and of biography different from the
moment constructed by the thinking clock. Rather there is a mo-
ment as quantitatively long or short as feeling shapes it. Moments
have sizes: there are long moments, big moments, and moments
so crowded that nothing finds place. Feeling shapes time, break-
ing it up into various kinds of feeling tones. These tones are not
on the same band of continuity as seven o'clock follows six, which
followed five. Feeling time is organized in clusters, more like an
organic growth, so that today has its roots perhaps in a day last
summer (and not yesterday which belonged to a wholly different
branch). Thus we do pick up old relationships again where we left
off. And thus is continuity so essential for feeling development.
    The elapse of time may or may not alter the feeling function.
When we hold a thing long and wrong, we still resent; but
sometimes, through continuity, the feeling function finds a new


Page 169 of 177                                                  95%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 connection and new value to an event and we can forgive. Again,
 there is no other education possible but that of courage to bear the
 long-drawn-out unchanging aspect of oneself. This teaches the
 feeling function patience. How long to hold and when to let go are
 again matters of timing; one has no betterguide than the "inner
 voices" ofthe feeling function and has to trust the guide.
     We can also somewhat be guided by the effects we have on
 others. We may not see ourselves, but we can watch another's
face, hear his voice, and tell something about the effect we are
having. The extroverted feeler can make the other person feel
good. He gives value, compliments, help; he smooths a friction
and notices a need. He can have an encouraging effect. And one
might look for these effects: What do we bring in the room with
us? What sounds through our voice besides the words we are
talking? How much fear do we evoke? Do we bring anyone ever a
laugh, or must they always be defending themselves, guilty? Does
time run by quickly or drag?
    Feeling may be in essence only a matter of giving time to
things; and patience, or the art of slowness, may be, as mysticism
says, the final flower of human feeling. Beyond the fleetingness
of anahata feeling, there is a slowness without depression and a
lightness without inflation. When I have no time for you, I give
you little value. And when we inquire to what a person gives his
time, or to whom, we discover a great deal about his feeling. The
time one spends may express the feeling itself being given.
    These traditional forms of feeling education - manners, style,
timing, personal relationships, marriage, feeling fantasies, fall-
ing-in-love - show ways that have always been there. They show
that feeling does not need specific programs for its education. I
am sarcastic about the popular movement of feeling groups, not
because feeling does not need development, but because their



Page 170 of 177                                                  96%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 starting point is imposed upon life. They are techniques. They
 seem another form of community Protestantism, where one
"works" at love of neighbor under the delusional enthusiasm of
 self-improvement. Sensitivity groups do not give enough room to
the depressive recognition of the fixity of habits and the limits of
love, personality and transformation. Besides, they emphasize the
personal and momentary, whereas the feeling function needs pro-
longed continuity and relation to objective values and impersonal
realities. We are mistaken in believing that these groups belong
to Eros, for that god singles individuals out with his arrows and
connects individuals into couples through intimacy, notori-
ously placing intimacy before community. Eros develops feeling
through the faces of love: pothos (longing), himeros (desire),
anteros (responding), philia, agape, caritas. It is not yet clear which
god has called the groups into life, but we do know they began as
therapy. They derive from a sick situation, and the feeling that
develops there must be seen at least in part in terms of this origin,
just as the feeling in analysis also reflects its background of psy-
chopathology out of which analysis arose. We have groups now
because the traditional forms of meeting - drinking, banqueting,
whoring, fighting, mourning, plotting, dancing- have lost out
and require substitutes. At least the groups offer a substitute
where some pathology may be enacted; what education of the
feeling function takes place there is yet to be seen.
    There are many psychopathologies of feeling. In fact distortions
of the feeling function, such as hysterical reactions or schizoid
ambivalence, are main criteria of psychopathology in general.
Psychopathy, for instance, described as an absence of the moral
sense, or "moral insanity" would seem to refer to peculiarities of
the feeling function. These things are described in any text book
of abnormal psychology and psychiatry.


Page 170 of 177                                                    96%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



     But there are other peculiarities that bear attention. For
 example, avoidance. There is a peculiar trait some of us show-
 ducking out of feeling. We use the classical New England clamp-
 jawed "I should prefer not to talk about that" when something
 gets too close and personal. Or we take the feelings into a group,
 for a catharsis, excited by their discovery and their expression, yet
 avoiding their consequences.
     Or we can turn to Eastern things, which beautifully avoids
 feeling development. Flower arrangement in the manner of the
Japanese master or transcendental meditation have not much
to do with the actualities of the feeling function. We might do
more for its development by exploring the cultural formation of
this function through study of Hawthorne, Hardy, Emerson, and
John or Wesley (in the Protestant case), and spending some time
in Kentucky or Kansas (or with our parents) than pilgrimaging to
an ashram where the modes of feeling have nothing to do with
our own. The Eastern path is a way around the differentiation
of personal feeling, substituting for it collective gentleness and
self-control. Another culture provides a backdrop for contrasting
styles. Henry James shows the American style of feeling by pla-
cing it in Paris. So we read French literature or watch Italian films
to feel more accurately our differences. To take on the foreign cul-
ture and its feeling style provides a collective formula - one now
has a Buddhist name or wears a sari - but the education of the
function is still avoided.
    Usually we avoid feeling by turning it over to someone else:
the other partner in the marriage, the best friend, the secretary or
interior decorator or analyst who "guides" us, telling us how to go
home and "relate" to the children. Sometimes we avoid by living
it all inside with exaggerated introvertedness, never functioning
with it outwardly in the life of people, values, and tastes; or the


Page 171 of 177                                                   97%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 reverse: we live so feelingly outward that we avoid altogether the
 despair and mix-ups of our personal subjectivity.
     We may recall that where feeling functions well a person will
 find importance given to his subjective and/or objective worlds.
 The rest of us have trouble in recognizing what is important.
 We get dejected, or inflated, and our absent sense of what is sig-
 nificant harries us into the pursuit of happiness. We are content
 neither with ourselves nor with our situations. The feelers - even
 if anxious with ideas, abstractions, plans and dates - yet can be
 content, even stupidly smug, because their feeling gives value and
 importance to their psychic contents, relationships and circum-
 stances. So, the feeling types tend to be more secure and to be less
 afflicted with urgent curiosity, rebellion arid a need for change.
     The division within the function between its extroverted and
 introverted faces may account for all those strange phenomena
 called split feeling. The inferior function goes underground. Then
 we lose access to many of our feelings; they disappear with the
 function. Then I do not know what I feel and cannot express a
 feeling without putting myself into a special sort of split condi-
tion. Rather than saying "I am a bitter, mean and dried man," or "I
want you," or "I love sitting in this room," we put distance or time
between what we feel arid how we express it, saying "I used to feel
that way" or "When I was a childIalways wanted" or "Someday,
when I am an old man I shall be loving and kind." We are not pre-
sent where the feelings are, and where the feelings are we are not.
We have split ourselves from them. When a woman asks a man
after ten years of marriage: "Do you love me?" it is less her doubt
for she could not settle her doubt with any answer he might
give), but rather an attempt to connect the man with his feelings.
His answer forces him to feel what he feels, now, to be where his
feelings are.


Page 172 of 177                                                  97%
                      LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



     Split feeling shows in other forms. Some express feelings
 only through letters at a distance; vis-a-vis they are tongue-tied.
 Some only find their feeling after sitting alone in the dark, writ-
ing something down, playing the piano. Some must use another
language, as the love scene in The Magic Mountain where Thomas
Mann drops his native German and has the characters speak in
 French. Some find their love fantasies stirred only through travel
posters of distant places, or a foreign mistress, or something to do
with the future, or another century in the past when they would
rather have lived. Feeling is always somewhere, sometime else:
"not here,"' she says; "not now," he says.
     Now at the end, I suppose the crucial test of courage concerns
the psychopathologies of feeling, those aspects that cannot fit in
with the fantasy of education. Parts never change and never will
change, and completion means including the alchemical sludge
that is merely sludge, the derelict wastage of one's incorrigible
and unredeemed feeling weaknesses: Saturn too rules the soul,
and his limits refuse the fantasy that everything is subject to
development.
     We have been subject to a kind of inferior feeling philosophy
that everything in human nature can be improved, or integrated,
or made conscious. Over analysis there hangs an invisible sign
saying "growth" (or "transformation"). By means of this optimis-
tic feeling philosophy we pay lip service to the feeling function.
The vagueness of the idea suits the imprecision of inferior feeling
(or inferior thinking of the feeling type), giving us a comfortable
and harmonious notion that whatever happens is ultimately for
the good, part of growth, part of the individuation process.
    Yet we know from our own lives and watching the lives of
others, especially those older, that we contain appalling gaps of
unimproved feeling: hatreds that "should" have been over, shabbi-


Page 173 of 177                                                 98%
                       LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



 ness and cheapness, neglect at critical moments, leftover longings
 into old age, wounds unhealed, betrayals unadmitted, cruelties
 continually perpetrated. T.S. Eliot ("Little Gidding," in Four Quar-
 tets) describes "the gifts reserved for age" one of which is "... the
 rending pain of re-enactment /Of all that you have done, and
been; the shame /Of motives late revealed, and the awareness.
Of things ill done and done to others' harm/ Which once you took
for exercise of virtue."
     Although the painful psychopathologies remain to the end,
we do have friendships as a place for these feelings. Friendship
was considered in antiquity to be one of man's finest accom-
plishments, something rare and reserved for the latter part of
life. Friendship does not exist under the invisible sign of trans-
formation; friends are not out to improve each other, since they
accept each other by putting up with each others' pathologies.
Friendship offers a feeling context in which the shameful aware-
ness of inferior feeling can be bared. The re-enactments of the
past and the revelations of one's wounds can be ruminated upon.
Even analysis does not offer pathology such a warm home as does
friendship
   But friendship, too, remains on the level of personal feeling.
The psyche has yet further needs for impersonal satisfaction. But
until our culture has re-established a harmony with the major
archetypal forces within life- the diurnal rhythms and the sea-
sons, the markings of time in biography and the spirits of place,
the ancestors, offspring, family and nation, the movements of
historical events, and death -in terms of the gods and goddesses
who govern the personal, our feeling function necessarily re-
mains in one essential respect inferior, even pathological. For it
is deprived by the secular world in which we are set from bearing
the values of and connecting existence with archetypal reality.


Page 174 of 177                                                    98%
                         LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY




                                References


       There have been many and sometimes rather odd attempts to
       discover the feeling type in biography or in art, or to diagnose
       the feeling type through tests, or to equate the feeling function
       with specific styles. For some of this literature see A. Aigrisse,
       Psychanalyse de la Grèce antique (Paris: Société d'Édition "Les
       Belles Lettres," 1960), who finds the Dionysian religion rep-
       resents the feeling function (as the Olympian gods stand for
       extraversion and Demeter for the sensation function); W.P.
       Witcutt, Blake: A Psychological Study (London: Hollis & Carter,
       1946), claims Blake for the introverted intuitives and remarks
       upon his feeling function; H. Read, Education through Art (Lon-
       don: Faber and Faber, 1943), discusses the kinds of drawing
       and painting feeling-type children characteristically produce.
       On diagnostic tests and the types, see the work of H. Gray and
       J.Wheelwright, and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. A sur-
       vey of the literature and a validation of this type-testing can
       be found in L.J. Stricker and J. Ross, "An Assessment of Some
       Structural Properties of the Jungian Personality Typology"
       Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology 68 (1964).

       Arnold, M.B. Feelings and Emotions: The Loyola Symposium
       (New York: Academic Press, 1970).

       Barfield, O. History in English Words (London: Faber and Faber,
        1953).

       Bradway, K. "Jung's Psychological Types: Classification by Test
       versus Classification by Self," Journal of Analytical Psychology
       9/2 (1964).

       Eliot, T.S. Four Quartets (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Com-
       pany, 1943).


Page 175 of 177                                                             99%
                             LECTURES ON JUNG's TYPOLOGY



        Fierz-David, L. The Dream of Poliphilo: The Soul in Love (Dallas:
        Spring Publications, 1987).

        Gardiner, H.M., R.C. Metcalf, G. Beebe-Center. Feeling and
        Emotion: A History of Theories (New York: American Book
        Company, 1937).

        Guggenbühl-Craig, A. Marriage Is Dead: Long Live Marriage
        (Putnam, Conn.: Spring Publications, 2009).

              "Must Analysis Fail through its Destructive Aspect?"
        Spring: An Annual of Achetypal Psychology andJungian Thought
        (1970).

        Harding, M.E. Woman's Mysteries: Ancient & Modern. With
        a Foreword by C.G. Jung (Boston: Shambhala Publications,
        1990).

        Hillman, J. Emotion: A Comprehensive Phenomenology of Theor-
        ies and their Meanings for Therapy (Evanston, I1.: Northwestern
        University Press, 1992).

                  "Towards the Archetypal Model for the Masturbation
        Inhibition,"Journal ofAnalytical Psychology 11/1 (1966).

              "On Psychological Creativity," Eranos   Yearbook 35 (1966).

              "Priends and Enemies,"Harvest 8 (1962).
              Insearch: Psychology and Religion (Putnam, Conn.: Spring
              .



        Publications, 1994).

       Jung, C.G. Collected Works (CW), trans.   R..C. Hull, 20 vols.
       (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1953-79), cited by
       paragraph number unless indicated otherwise. Psychological
       Types (CW6) contains all of Jung's writings on typology.

              Dream Analysis: Notes of the Seminar Given in 1928-1930,
        ed. W. McGuire (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
        1984).




Page 175 of 177                                                             99%
                             LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



              "Anima and Animus" in CW 7.
              "The Syzygy: Anima and Animus," in CW 9.2.
            "Concerning the Archetypes, with Special Reference to
       the Anima Concept," in CW 9.1.

              "An Account of the Transference Phenomena Based on
       the Illustrations to the 'Rosarium philosophorum," in CW16.

       Jung, E. Animus and Anima: Two Essays (Putnam, Conn.: Spring
       Publications, 2004).

       Mann,              and H. Osmond. "The Many Worlds of
                  H, M. Siegler,
      Time" Jourmal of Analytical Psychology 13/1 (1968).
       Marcel, G. Creative Fidelity, trans. R. Rosthal (New York: Ford-
       ham University Press, 2002).

       Marshall, I.N. "The Four Functions: A Conceptual Analysis,"
       Journal of Analytical Psychology 13/1 (1968).

       Neumann, E. The Great Mother: An Analysis of the Archetype,
       trans. R. Manheim (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press,
        1974).

       Onians, R.B. The Origins of European Thought: About the Body,
       the Mind, the Soul, the World, Time and Fate (Cambridge: Cam-
       bridge University Pres, 1951).

       Reymert, M.L., ed. Feelings and Emotions: The Wittenberg
       Symposium by Thirty-four Psychologists (Worcester, Mass.: Clark
       University Press, 1928).

           _,ed. Feelings and      Emotions: The Mooseheart Symposium
        (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950).

       Richek, H.G., and 0.H Bown. "Phenomenological correlates of
       Jung's Typology" Journal of Analytical Pychology 13/1 (1968).

       Smith, L.P. The English Language (Oxford: Oxford University
        Press, 1966)


Page 176 of 177                                                           100%
                          LECTURES ON JUNG'S TYPOLOGY



        Whitehead, A.N. Modes of Thought(New York: The Free Press,
        1968).

        Whitmont, E.C. The Symbolic Quest (New York: G.P. Putnam's
        Sons, 1969).

        Wickes, F.G. The Inner World of Choice (Boston: Sigo Press,
        1988).




Page 177 of 177                                                       100%
