1
                             2


                 UNDERSTANDING THE
             CENTERS IN HUMAN DESIGN


THE FACILITORS’S GUIDE TO TRANSFORMING PAIN INTO POSSIBILITY



                   ROBIN WINN, MFT 2021
                                         3




                              ADVANCE PRAISE


“Robin has once again brought her gift of clarity to describe the complex system
of Human Design. In this book she compassionately demystifies the strengths and
pain points of our Open and Defined Centers and leads the reader to a fuller
understanding of their puzzle piece in life so that they may reach their fullest
potential. As a clinician, I appreciate her strength-based approach to the Centers
in Human design and the emphasis on helping clients understand these strengths
while working towards ultimate wellbeing.”

   – Melissa Lopez-Larson, M.D., best-selling author of My Child’s Not Depressed
       Anymore: Treatment Strategies That Will Launch Your College Student to
                                                  Academic and Personal Success



“This is a brilliant book! I have never felt so seen and understood as when reading
your detailed accounts of each of the Human Design Centers. Your writing style
and your personal anecdotes make this complex system so accessible. I can’t wait
to get my official copy. Bravo!”

    – Jane Bell, spiritual teacher, guide, mentor, and founder of Presence of Heart



“To know ourselves is to experience freedom. In Understanding the Centers in
Human Design, Robin Winn teaches us how to understand who we are, and our
unique spiritual path. She shows us how our Open Centers enable us to become
the fullest expression of ourselves. This book is for everyone whose role on this
earth is to empower others to become the best possible versions of themselves.”

         – Jill McAbe, business coach, best-selling author of It's Go Time: Build the
                       Business and Life You Really Want, and founder of BOOM-U
                                         4

“When I first heard about Human Design, I was curious to learn more. After taking
a course with Robin, I learned about my own design, which gave me an insight
into why I think and act as I do. As Robin recommends, it is helpful to download
your chart as a reference as you read this book. It makes the information easier to
follow. Just be prepared and surprised at how closely your Human Design chart
touches your soul. It can be a true eye opener! Robin does an excellent job
explaining Human Design so that those of us who are beginners can easily grasp
the meaning and concepts. If you are someone who is curious about how the
universe helped to form everything about who you are, this is the book for you.
You will not be disappointed!”

    – Dr. Shelia Craig Whiteman PT DPT, CLT-LANA, The Pelvic Coach, best-selling
  author of: To Pee or Not to Pee? The Guide to Reducing and Eliminating Urinary
                                                                   Incontinence



“Robin Winn has taken on the enormous task of exploring the often,
misunderstood Centers in her book: Understanding the Centers in Human Design.
I love Robin’s outlook on Human Design. She approaches it as a launching pad,
recognizing that the chart is a beginning, but not the whole finite picture. Robin
tackles the Centers with a fresh perspective by describing the Defined Center as a
privilege. This was incredibly illuminating for me in understanding my own chart,
my clients, and most importantly my partner of forty years! Robin writes with
clarity and effortlessness taking on a complex topic making it easier to
understand. She also writes candidly sharing her own personal story which adds
depth to the many concepts presented. This book is an important contribution to
Human Design and is infused with Robin’s beautiful and generous spirit. It is a
must read if you are trying to comprehend the difference between the Open and
Defined Centers, as well as many of the other multifaceted concepts in Human
Design. Bravo!”

        – Deborah Sudarsky, M.ED., Master Intuitive Coach, best-selling author of
                   Embrace Your Psychic Gifts: The Guide to Spiritual Awakening
                                         5

“Whether you are familiar with Human Design or are a novice, this book allows
you to get tremendous understanding of this rich and complex subject. To me it is
the perfect marriage of the Encyclopedia Britannica and the “French Laundry
Cookbook” (Thomas Keller), explaining background, history as well as the
necessary tools and how to apply them beautifully. Robin takes us on a forward-
looking journey of Human Design incorporating tools that lead the way to
Oneness and Beingness – which I see as her declaration of love towards each
human being and humanity.”

 – Dr. Petra Frese, BCH, CI, Intuitive Scientist, Mental Coach, a best-selling author



“For the post-COVID era, nothing brings more comfort than making sense of what
is going on in this world, and having a deep understanding of Who am I? and Why
I am here at this time? Robin Winn’s book is such a timely gift to this world to
bring new light to readers, especially those who “suffer” from Open Centers in
their Human Design.”

– Xuemei Zhong, Ph.D., best-selling author of The Medicine Mage, 12 Steps from
Depleted Doctor to Magic Healers of the New Earth, and founder of the Medicine
                                                               Mage Academy



“Author Robin Winn again makes the complex world of Human Design easy to
understand in her second book Understanding the Centers in Human Design.
Building on some of the Human Design concepts introduced in her first book,
Understanding Your Clients through Human Design, this book delves deep into
the Centers and the connected gates and channels to provide a
thorough understanding of our uniqueness. Winn's illustrative story-telling and in-
depth teachings makes this book a pleasure to read and a must-have reference
for those using or consuming this technology. Winn's work gave me a deeper
understanding of my own Human Design and that of my clients in my coaching
and healing practice through the experiential Center meditations, tips, and tools.
She provides a unique, balanced view of the Openness and Definition in our
charts as being more about learning how to wield the energy instead of viewing
Openness as weakness and Definition as strength. Winn shows us
                                          6

the empowerment in the openness that can oftentimes feel disempowering. The
most profound concept for me was that the Head is not a decision-making center
and should never be used to make a decision. What might the world look like if
we all started using our unique decision-making Center (our Authority) and
stopped using our heads? Whether you are interested in Human Design for
personal or professional reasons, this book is a must-read and reference
throughout your journey.”

– Lyndsay K. R. Toensing, MBA, WPCC, transformational leadership coach, energy
healer, and best-selling author of The Beautiful Un-Becoming: The Ultimate Guide
                                                  to Life after Spiritual Awakening



 “While reading certain parts of Robin’s second book I teared up (literally). I was
moved by the “passionate aliveness” with which she wrote this book. Her writing
oozes love, authenticity, aliveness, and divinity. Robin has gift of articulating
(seemingly) complex ideas of Human Design into easy-to-understand bite sized
pieces of information by using stories and metaphors. For instance, her simple
and incredibly powerful reframing of Open Centers as not something that is
lacking or missing, but as “wombs” that have the potential to give birth, is
extremely empowering. It opens up a world of possibilities.

It’s difficult to summarize my takeaways from reading Robin’s book as there are
so many, but I will say this: Robin has cultivated a very deep understanding of
Human Design through her dedication to this glorious body of knowledge and way
of life. In the process she has nurtured a magnificent gift to utilize her own design
and help others utilize theirs. For example, she is honoring her Open Throat as a
God Portal, using it as vessel to channel divine energy in the writing of her books,
her conversations, and through her coaching work. I am exceedingly grateful to
be on the receiving end of this divine transmission.”

   – Vandy Verma, business coach, and best-selling author of I Finally Feel Secure
                                                              About My Financial
                                         7

Future: 6 Simple Steps to Make More, Be More, and Live More, and Yes! You Can
Be a Badass Coach!

“I first learned of Human Design from Ms. Winn in 2019 when we were in an
author mastermind program. I was struggling with my identity in not only the
group, but also moving forward in the relaunching of my coaching practice.
Understanding my Human Design through my work with Robin Winn was a life
changer for me! I was able to embrace and honor the Manifestor within and I now
utilize the basic knowledge of Human Design with my coaching clients. This
understanding of Human Design has been extremely powerful for all of my clients
and now with this new book, I will be able to take them even deeper into the
awareness of who they came here to be in this lifetime. From the first chapter,
you will be drawn into Ms. Winn’s story and get to know her as I know her – a
brilliant, loving and kind teacher, mentor, and gifted human being who has so
much to share with this world!"

    – Pat Sheveland RN, PCC, ICF Certified Life Coach, Grief Coach, Qigong Teacher
   and best-selling author of The Mourning’s Light: Life After Child Loss, and Living
 Life in the Middle: The Caregiver’s Guide to Healing, Hope, and Harmony through
                                                           Multigenerational Living
                                         8


                                 CONTENTS


Foreword

Preface

I. Coming to Human Design

1. You Want to Know More about the Centers?

2. My Journey with the Human Design Centers

3. How to Use This Book

II. The Underpinnings of Human Design

4. The Mechanics of Human Design

5. The Centers – A First Look

III. Gifts and Grapples

6. Getting to Know the Head Center

7. Getting to Know the Ajna Center

8. Getting to Know the Throat Center

9. Getting to Know the Identity Center

10. Getting to Know the Will Center

11. Getting to Know the Sacral Center

12. Getting to Know the Emotional Solar Plexus

13. Getting to Know the Root Center

14. Getting to Know the Spleen Center

IV. Looking Forward

15. Electromagnetics
                                  9

16. Deepening the Inquiry

17. Take the Gift

Resources: Helpful Tools

Acknowledgments

About the Author

About Difference Press

Other Books by Difference Press

Thank You
                                         10




                                  FOREWORD


Human Design, a synthesis of Eastern and Western Astrology, the Chinese I Ching,
the Hindu Chakra system and Judaic Kabbalah is a cross-cultural system of
archetypes that helps you get to the root of why your clients are in pain and how
to help your clients cultivate deeper meaning in their lives.

When I first started using Human Design in my Life Coaching practice more than
twenty-two years ago, I was astonished at how simply understanding the chart
gave me deep insights into my client’s purpose and ways for them to create a
meaningful, authentic life. Obviously, this is vital information that significantly
helps your client feel “seen” and heard.

But, the more I used Human Design in my practice, the more I realized it was also
a tool to help me get to the root of why my clients seemed “stuck” in their lives.
The more I understood the components of the chart, the Centers in particular, the
more I could see why things like commitment, motivation, conflict avoidance and
lack of follow-through were simply artifacts of misusing or misinterpreting energy.

So much of what my clients struggled with wasn’t necessarily a result of trauma,
conditioned patterns or family habits. They simply didn’t understand how their
energetic “hard-wiring” was causing them to misinterpret the energy of their
relationships and world around them. Once they understood “how” they were
hard-wired — their unique Human Design energy blueprint — they quickly gained
new ways to navigate through the world without allowing their own energy
system to be overwhelmed by the energy of others. They learned solid strategies
to stay connected connected to their own inner truth and their own inner
navigation system.

In Robin Winn’s first book, she shared with practitioners the power of
understanding the basic elemental configuration of a chart, the Human Design
“Type.” In Human Design, there are five basic personality “types,” each of which
have a unique purpose and role. Understanding Type is essential knowledge for
                                        11

practitioners who seek to help clients decode who they are — and who they are
not.

In this, Robin’s second book, she approaches a deeper understanding of the
elements of the Human Design chart, the Centers, to help practitioners learn how
to use their understanding of the configuration of their client’s chart to empower
clients to master strategies for authentic living. She also shows you how to use
the Human Design chart to help your clients get “un-stuck” and to discover their
natural power to connect more deeply with compassion for themselves and
others.

There is also a flow of how a client experiences the wisdom of Human Design. The
first stage in understanding their Human Design is for them to discover the
vocabulary that helps them explore why their inner perceptions of themselves
and their experience of the outer world don’t necessarily match.

The second phase, which is one that is not addressed in the traditional Human
Design Community, is to use Human Design as a tool to help clients redefine for
themselves who they are, who they seek to become and how to deepen their
relationship with the greater meaning of their life.

The Centers are, as Robin writes, “God Portals,” a way to dive deep into the
experience of the cosmos flowing through you. The lessons we master as a result
of our unique configuration and way we experience life and relationships through
these “portals” helps us to be able to co-create with each other and with the
deeper flow of possibility that the Universe shows us.

The vocabulary of traditional Human Design doesn’t necessarily fit with this
second phase of understanding Human Design. Over the past few years, I created
a new vocabulary that I call Quantum Human Design™ that allows you to see
more clearly understand your unique, vital and irreplaceable role in the Cosmic
Plan. In this book, Robin shares her understanding of Quantum Human Design™
to give you a rich and powerful way to help your clients connect to a deeper place
of purpose and meaning in their lives.

You’re about to embark on a journey that will exponentially help you help your
clients untangle themselves from limiting patterns and behaviors that may have
confounded them over a lifetime and help them discover that they are a cosmic-
                                         12

once-in-a-lifetime-event that is deeply purposeful and beautiful. By the time you
finish this book, you’re going to be able to look at a Human Design chart and, in
less than a minute, be able to get to the heart of why your client may be stuck
and trapped in a narrative that holds them back from fulfilling their potential.
You’re also going to be able to show them a path that leads them to discover the
true meaning and purpose of their lives.

You’re going to know how to give them strategies that will fortify them, deepen
their resilience and to teach them how to anchor themselves in an authentic
understanding of, not only who they are, but how they can become masterful
over their experience of the world.

Human Design presents a powerful framework to support clients in not only
crafting a personal narrative that supports their growth but gives clients a unique
way to understand why and how they may be locked in patterns that limit their
ability to tap into creating what they really want in their lives.

There are nine Centers in the Human Design chart that correlate to the 7 Chakras
in the Hindu Chakra System. Each of these Centers is responsible for processing
different kinds of energy. Each of us has a unique configuration – our own Human
Design – which creates predictable behavioral themes. In this book, Robin teaches
you exactly how to interpret these themes so that you can better help your clients
access their wisdom and support them in making choices that are more in
alignment with their Authentic Self.

Blending her wisdom gleaned from years of practice as a therapist with her deep
understandings of the power of the Human Design chart to truly transform, Robin
gives practitioners fresh insights on how to support and teach clients how to
discover who they are as well as “how” they operate. With gentle words, she
gives guidance on how to most efficiently support your clients in untangling
themselves from patterns and habits that no longer support their more authentic
narrative. She teaches how to use the language of the chart to help clients
discover how to tap into greater resilience and the capacity to stay true to
themselves, no matter what their experience in the world.

This book promises to give you a powerful way to shorten the time you spend
supporting your clients, gives you a strong and accurate starting point to get to
                                        13

the root cause of your client’s pain, helps you help your clients tap into higher
levels of performance and, ultimately, shows you practical ways to enhance your
client’s wellness and deepen the meaning of their lives.

It is my dream that you use the power of this book that Robin has created for you
to help your clients feel seen, heard and truly recognized for who they are – not
for who they think they “should” be or who they think they need to be to feel
loved and accepted.

This information will help your clients discover who they truly are and give them
powerful strategies to stay true to themselves no matter what’s going on in their
world.

Be prepared, as you implement Robin’s insights into your practice, to help your
clients feel genuinely seen and acknowledged – sometimes for the first time in
their lives.

     – Karen Curry Parker, BSN, CFC Bestselling author of Understanding Human
   Design, Human Design Activation Guide, Abundance by Design, Introduction to
   Quantum Human Design™, and The Quantum Human Creator of The Quantum
                                                            Alignment System™
                                         14


                                    PREFACE
When I started writing my first book, I thought I was going to go through all of the
elements of the chart in a very simple, clear way so you could simply look at a
chart and decipher who the person was and how to work with them. I wanted to
deliver the whole package.

I quickly discovered, after outlining the whole book, submitting it for approval,
having it approved (the poor folks looking at it had no idea how massive the book
would have been) that there was no way I could write this amount of material in
the allotted nine weeks the program allowed. I basically had enough time to write
the first chapter which would cover the Types, Strategy, and Authority.

There were easily another six or seven books to follow. So, after almost a year
after embarking on that first book, developing a training program to teach
therapists and coaches this wild and wonderful tool that in a moment’s time
opens a portal into someone’s life, I begin again. I’ve thought long and hard over
the year about which aspect of the chart made the most sense to make available
next.

The simplest thing would be the Profiles, which reveal a person’s learning style.
With knowledge of the Human Design Profiles, coaches could better support their
clients to navigate their unique approach to new opportunities. Or perhaps it
would be better to address Circuitry (the Individual, Tribal, and Collective
pathways), which reveals another layer of understanding inner conflicts and
conflicts that arise from differences that show up in relationships.

Even as I write this and think of the other elements, I wish I could just connect a
tube from my brain to yours and download the whole enchilada. This is the
challenge. There is so much information, and my calling is to make it readily
available. But I can’t. So, I am left with the task of giving it out in manageable
morsels, hoping you will be patient as I take the time that’s needed to craft and
download each aspect.

As I’ve taught and trained people using Human Design in their work, I see so
clearly that Human Design is like a language. When we first learned language, we
had to learn letters, then words, then sentences. As we put the pieces together,
doors to whole worlds opened up to us. Human Design is like that. You have to
                                         15

learn the pieces to step into the whole. To get the full picture, you have to
understand the parts.

I’ve also gotten clear that while, yes, therapists and coaches see the value of
bringing Human Design into their work, they are most interested in understanding
themselves. In fact, I had to shift the focus of my training from Understanding
Your Clients through Human Design to Understanding Yourself through Human
Design. Understanding yourself creates the foundation for understanding others.
Duh!

I sat with the question: What piece in this process of deepening the
understanding of yourself and your clients through Human Design would be most
beneficial to write about next?

The Centers were loudly and frantically calling out to me. Their hands raised,
waving enthusiastically, “Choose me, choose me. I have the most information
that’s readily assessable.” Were the Centers, rich in information and easy to
visually grok, the next piece of Human Design to unpack and share? I was leaning
in that direction but wasn’t 100 percent settled when Covid-19 hit. Suddenly,
every podcast and every panel I spoke on I found myself addressing the Centers,
the Open Centers in particular. How were you and your clients being impacted by
the global experience? Was the issue emotional overwhelm? Was there an Open
Emotional Solar Plexus being bombarded by the world’s emotional distress, taking
in and amplifying amplifying the grief or anger that ripped through the
atmosphere?

Or was terror hijacking you or your client? Did the person whose chart you were
looking at have an Open Spleen Center, the Center of fear? Were they taking in
and amplifying the world’s fear? This Center is all about life and death, fight and
flight – the amygdala response. The Spleen flares up at the possibility that there is
a saber tooth tiger outside the cave, or whatever life-threatening danger might be
lurking. The Spleen Center is all about survival in the present moment. It looks to
the future, projects danger onto the future, and looks to the past, projecting past
terrors onto the future. I felt compassion for the distress that was being activated
in people because of their Open Centers. It felt important to bring this
information into the mainstream as a support.
                                         16

And then, my student Charity asked:

“Could you talk more about the Open Centers as God Portals?”

God Portals was the phrase I coined to speak about the Open Centers. Places of
pure possibility. The pain aspect of Open Centers is so compelling we can get
caught in that whirlpool. Charity wanted to understand more deeply how she
could use the Open Centers as opportunities for growth with her clients, her
family, and in her own life.

I’m writing this book for her. I’m writing this book for anyone who is suffering at
the effect of an Open Center. I’m writing this book for all the coaches and
therapists and parents who can transform lives by shining a new light onto the
entanglements that are part and parcel of the Open Center grab.
              17

I

              I




    COMING TO HUMAN DESIGN
                                         18


                                          1

                       YOU WANT TO KNOW MORE
                            ABOUT THE CENTER?


Charity’s Question:

“Could you talk more about the Open Centers as God Portals?”

Charity had three young children when her husband died in a freak accident.
Preparing to embark from their home in Vermont to visit family, she watched as a
minor car repair altered the course of her life. A malfunctioning car jack dropped
their loaded van on top of her husband, Ollie.

We met a year ago in Washington, D.C. I liked her immediately. For someone
whose tragedy was so recent, she had an aura of peace. Charity emanated a sense
of ground and ease. We were at an Author Incubator event to celebrate and
launch our books. I had just written Understanding Your Clients through Human
Design, and she had just completed The Widow’s Guide: Living with Children After
the Death of Your Spouse.

During one of the breaks, we sat on a couch and looked at her Human Design
chart. I explained that she was here to work within limitations and to tell stories
that bring a new way of looking at life. She shares new values that support the
tribe (family, community) to flourish and survive. Not surprisingly, her
Unconscious Moon is in Gate 51, which is the Gate of Shock. She’s here to be
shocking and have shocking things happen. She has the capacity to transform
shock into heart opening. In fact, two of her three children have the Gate of
Shock. With the Gate of Insight and the Gate of Sensitivity, Charity is here to talk
about and learn about looking at things in new ways. Her goal is to be tuned into
people’s needs and their vulnerabilities.

As Charity listened intently, I felt the impact of the information from her chart
registering. She was lit. Charity knew right then and there that she wanted to
learn more about Human Design and immediately signed up to train with me.
                                         19

Charity learned about her chart, her family’s chart, and Ollie’s chart through the
lens of Human Design. It quickly became clear that the Human Design map would
be key in her work with coaching widows. The perspective she gained from
understanding her chart enabled her to relax and to be more at ease with who
she was. It helped her understand and feel connected to her deceased husband (a
Projector). It helped her better parent her children. No wonder her Manifesting
Generator son took charge!

Human Design helped Charity understand why she was driven to support other
widows on their journey. From her own experience, she knew how easy it was to
get lost in the trauma of tragedy. She knew how seductive the pull was to
disappear, like her husband had, into a lifeless world. Stumbling through the days,
with a community of support, she was ultimately able to untangle herself from
the past and to move back into living her present-day life. Human Design added a
surprising and unexpected perspective and a new level of support and possibility.

When Human Design grabs you, it ignites a fire. The more Charity studied and
trained in Human Design, the more she wanted to know. As she began reading
charts for widows, she realized, that when it came to the Centers, she understood
the traditional explanation of the Open and Defined Centers. But she was
particularly drawn to my unique experience and understanding of them. She
wanted to know more. “Could you talk more about the Open Centers as God
Portals?” Her words rang loudly.



HUMAN DESIGN AS A NAVIGATIONAL TOOL

The wild and wonderful world of Human Design is an ever-deepening dive into
the mysteries of life. It’s about who we are and how we best utilize our time on
earth. Sometimes, it is easier than others to navigate the challenges life throws at
us. Sometimes, it is seemingly impossible to know how to go forward, especially
when tragedy strikes, or our world becomes destabilized in unexpected ways.

As I write this book, it is the fall of 2020. The contagious coronavirus has shaken
the economy, upended our established social patterns, brought death and a
heightened fear of illness and death to our lives. The result is a radical
restructuring of our global world in ways we could not have previously imagined.
                                         20

Meanwhile, climate changes are wreaking havoc as California fires burn, the
presidential election looms large, the political divide threatens to further
destabilize our country, and racial injustice brings massive protests to the streets.

Uncertainty is in the air. We are undergoing a profound and powerful period of
destabilization. Can Human Design help us navigate these waters?

Can Human Design foster stability? Can Human Design help us support others
who are in their own personal deep waters? I think so. In fact, I believe it was
given to us at this time for this very purpose.

When I lived in the country on Dream Farm Road in Inverness, the nights were
pitch black. Getting from my car to the house was treacherous. And yet, it only
took the small light on my keychain to make the path easy to navigate. Turning on
the light to see and understand the Centers brings a level of clarity that makes
otherwise painful inner terrain easy to traverse. The Centers are the gateway to
discovering that stability, to helping us and our clients find the way in the
darkness of uncertainty.

If you’re picking up this book, you most likely have some prior knowledge of
Human Design. Perhaps you’re a coach or therapist and you’ve read my book
Understanding Your Clients through Human Design. Maybe you’re using Human
Design to work with your

clients. Or maybe you’re wanting to understand yourself, your family, or your
circle of friends better. I’m assuming you have a basic sense of the Centers and
want to know more about how they function and how they are opportunities for
growth.

However, if you are new to Human Design, no worries. Unlike some Human
Design texts, which are complex and conceptually challenging, my intent is always
to make Human Design user-friendly. If you’re wanting more information on
Human Design, please download a free digital copy of my book Understanding
Your Clients through Human Design:
https://www.clientsandhumandesign.com/free-book.
                                        21

In the next chapter, I’ll tell my story about the power of understanding the
Centers in my life and how I came to work with them from my unique
perspective.

Continue Reading This Book If…

You want to be able to look at a chart and in a nanosecond have a sense of what
your client may be grappling with, where their strengths and vulnerabilities lie,
where they might mistakenly think something is wrong with them, and how to
support them to stabilize in new ways. Check to see if any of these apply to you or
your clients:

    You have a story that the Open Centers are scary or problematic.
    You think something is wrong with you or you feel deficient for any number
     of reasons.
    You don’t remember things and can’t make up your mind or can’t stop your
     thoughts.
    You don’t feel certain about things and feel you should.
    You don’t feel heard or seen.
    You don’t know who you are, don’t feel like you belong.
    You don’t have consistent access to energy like other people do.
    You don’t have the capacity to go out and do what you say you’re going to
     do.
    You are either very emotional or void of emotions when it seems like you
     should have them.
    You can’t get started with projects and feel under constant pressure.
    You lose track of time and feel you shouldn’t.
    You are someone with a spiritual inclination who doesn’t want to fall prey
     to spiritual bypass.
    You want to feel confident when approaching your clients.
    You want to speak to your client's Openness and Definition in a way that
     empowers them and honors their vulnerability.
    You’re excited by the possibility that the Open Centers may offer an access
     to your client's potential.
    You’re open to new ways of looking at the chart, and human beings.
                                         22

    You are ready to take a wild ride into the multidimensional holographic
     structure of the Centers in the bodygraph!


Whatever your intentions, I trust that there is a reason that you are called to look
with me through the unique lens that I bring to this powerful and
transformational system. May these words shine light on your path and help
stabilize you as you navigate the changing terrain ahead.
                                   23


                                    2

                MY JOURNEY WITH THE HUMAN
                          DESIGN CENTER


LET ME INTRODUCE MYSELF



                       I'm Nobody! Who are you?
                         Are you - Nobody - too?
                         Then there’s a pair of us!
                 Don’t tell! They’d advertise - you know!
                    How dreary - to be - Somebody!



                                                            – Emily Dickinson
                                         24

In these first few lines of her poem, I’m Nobody, Who Are You? Emily Dickinson
unequivocally declares that to be Nobody is a boon. For me, as a young person
growing up in a family of Somebodies, let’s be clear that was not my experience at
all.

Let me introduce myself. In Human Design speak, I’m a 6/2 Emotional Generator,
with the Left Angle Cross of Wishes. I have an Open Head Center, Open Ajna
Center, Open Throat Center, Open Identity Center, and an Open Will Center. Had I
known growing up what all that means, I’m sure a lot of suffering could have been
avoided or at least had a context. That was not the case. I suffered because I did
not know how my system was designed to operate. I suffered a lot. Especially the
first thirty years of my life. Which, if you understand the Profiles in Human Design,
that makes perfect sense. But that’s for the next book. This book is about how the
Centers impact us, and how they are potential sources of pain, or potential
sources of support.

This book is about looking at a chart and being able to see potential areas of
suffering and strength in a person’s life. With that knowledge, you can help
yourself or someone you’re working with have a context – an understanding – as
to why that might be so. With knowledge of the Centers, you have access to
possible ways to work with suffering in the service of aligning with an authentic,
empowered self.

In this chapter, I’m going to tell my journey with the Centers with the hopes that
it will give you a context and appreciation for them. Perhaps my story will call you
to reflect on your own life journey in relation to the Open and Defined Centers in
your Human Design Bodygraph. Hopefully, you will be inspired to discover the
riches they hold for you.

By the way, had I known as a child what I know now from a Human Design
perspective, I would likely not have suffered the depths of despair that drove me
to find solace; nor would I have devoted my life to helping others meet and
transform their suffering. If I had known then what I know now, I wouldn’t be
writing this book. I’m grateful for the challenges that demanded my attention and
inspired revelations that brought me to where I am today.
                                         25

My Story

I was born the first girl after five boys into an intellectually oriented,
overachieving, WASP family. My mom said she was thrilled to have me; in fact,
the story is she kept going until she had a girl. My brothers were not so excited.
“Aw mom, why’d ya have to go and have a girl?” My oldest brother’s words were
documented in my baby book.

From the outside, the family looked great. At the time I was born, my dad, a
Manifesting Generator, was a Lt. Colonel in the Army, a cardiovascular surgeon at
the Fitzsimons Army Hospital outside of Denver, Colorado. He was part of a team
of trailblazers in the field of open-heart surgery. Well respected, a humble, gentle
being, he chose to retire from the Army to enter private practice in a small town
in Northern California. My dad preferred to practice medicine rather than follow
the path of his father, an Army General, who had stayed in the Army and become
an administrator. As amazing as my dad was, he fell under the radar in
comparison to my mom.

My mom, the Manifestor, was a bright, powerful light who naturally impacted
everyone and everything she met. Of course, I would have chosen this family and
this mother to ensure I had the full-blown experience of being nobody. You see,
my mom was not a warm, fuzzy mom. She was fun. She was dynamic. She was a
leader and the president of every organization she joined. She became a private
pilot in her late forties, and then got her own plane and became an avid air racer.
She was regularly in the papers for her feats. The whole town knew Shirley Winn.
From my view, the whole world knew Shirley Winn. She was definitely Somebody.
Oh, and my brothers were not far behind. Valedictorian. National debaters. Ivy
league colleges. My family made a big splash in our little town.

I neglected to say my sister, Heidi, was born four and a half years after me. Thank
God! To her, I was Somebody. I was her big sister. I had the job of nurturing her.
She has been and continues to be my biggest fan.

But in the bigger world, I was lost. I honestly had no idea why I had been sent to
planet earth. I surely did not belong. I had no clue who I was or what I was
supposed to do. I truly felt like a nobody. I was not like other people. I was not
like my brothers and my parents. I was not like my boisterous, fun-loving, and
                                          26

outgoing sister. I was shy. I was sensitive. I had feelings. I got hurt by a look or a
tone of voice. To be fair, my sister and my father were the closest I had to feeling
seen. But my dad was married to the hospital, and my baby sister couldn’t protect
me in the rough and tumble masculine world I was tossed into.

As early as I can remember, I was trying to find a way out. At six, I lay in my bed at
night wanting to die. I didn’t feel that I had any value. But the realization that I
was a bad person and would go to hell if I died knocked the option of death off
the list of possible escape routes. I set out to prove I belonged in this family, and
that I was good, after all. I wanted to prove that I was worthy of being a Winn. I
studied the world around me to see how to behave. I became a really good girl.

In sixth grade, we studied Greek mythology. As I read about the various gods and
goddesses it dawned on me that God…the Father in the Sky was also a myth, a
crutch, and that I was not doomed to hell after all. This revelation at once freed
me from a future hell at the same time that it threw me into a living hell.
Suddenly death was an option.

I became obsessed with death as a way to end my internal nightmare world.
Remember, what I presented to the outside looked perfect, and I worked very
hard to maintain that image. When something bad would happen in my life – a
rejection or some threatening external world event – I would imagine putting a
plastic bag over my head. I know it sounds ridiculous now, but to be fair, as a child
I was warned about the danger of dying if you put a plastic bag over your head.

Somehow, I managed to survive. It was not easy, and I was smart. I learned to
leave my body, to dissociate, as a way to numb myself to the roughness of the
world. I also wrote poetry. I wrote about death, about dying young, and about
escaping the pending nuclear disaster. Writing was the one place I could speak
out loud. It was the one place I had a voice. My speaking words didn’t get much
traction in my family or in the world. Side note: all these are cues to challenges
with the Open Centers…we’re getting there.

My mother believed life was an adventure. I followed in her wake, staying busy
and playing the edge in order to avoid my feelings. Keeping my good girl image to
the world as a freshman in college, I secretly entered the newly bourgeoning
underground gay Mecca. The year was 1977.
                                           27

As I turned twenty-five, I began studying Rosen Method Bodywork. This gentle
transformational work combined touch and talk. It worked by meeting the
physical tension in the body, which allowed the emotion or the experience that
held that tension in place to be recognized and freed. Marion Rosen called it The
Great Undoing. It was my first adventure in meeting myself, and it opened
Pandora’s Box. I began feeling all those repressed feelings that I had locked away
in the service of fitting in. Fortunately, therapy was in vogue among my friends, so
I set out to pacify the monster I had unleashed.

For the first time in my life, I had a place to talk and be heard. It was amazing. But,
the downside was that I embraced a victim culture. I was a victim of my mother,
and of my brothers. I suffered because I wasn’t heard, seen, or acknowledged.
They caused my suffering because my needs weren’t met. To be good, I had to
make them bad. Let me be clear, it’s not that any of that wasn’t true. It just
wasn’t ultimately true. This will make sense as I continue my story.

So, while it was very healing for me to be heard, it also brought to the foreground
my suicidal ideation. As I started to come back into my body, allowing myself to
stay and feel rather than dissociate, I was bombarded by the world around me.
My value was glaringly in question. I didn’t have a clear direction in life. I still
didn’t feel like a somebody and it wasn’t looking good. Being gay was becoming
problematic as it was no longer a secret, and my mom believed, at the time, that
gay people belonged in mental institutions. I was still fighting my own internalized
homophobia, so I didn’t feel exactly gay or straight. Meanwhile, I was supposed to
be making a living and proving myself in my family’s eyes. I seemed to be failing in
that realm, too. It all felt utterly hopeless. I simply was too sensitive for this world.

Then my Saturn Return hit. I was twenty-eight, sitting in a living room at a hand
analysis party. The guy took one look at my hand and said, “You’re about to go
over a waterfall.” I blurted back, “People die when they go over waterfalls!” He
shrugged his shoulders. I was in the throes of desperately wanting to die. It was
my only chance for peace. Multiple times a week, I would drive my little yellow
VW Bug from Berkeley to the Golden Gate Bridge. Peering over the edge I longed
to jump. Fantasies of how to go occupied my waking life. They were my hope.

Let’s just say I struggled mightily with my mind. One time I paid for a gun and was
waiting for my order to process. My lover (now wife) had a dream about me
                                          28

getting a gun, and she brought it up in our couple's therapy. Our therapist asked
me point blank if I’d bought one. I am not one who can lie when asked a direct
question. She made me promise to cancel the order. Yes, I tried to exit. Obviously,
and thankfully, I survived. My brilliant failsafe idea was to put a blow dryer into a
tub of water.

I turned on the blow dryer, stood in the tub, dropped the blow dryer into the
water then watched in suspended time as the blow dryer continued to blow
under water. Jumping out of the tub I pulled the plug. I got a shock alright, but it
wasn’t the electrical one I was hoping would take me out. In that moment, I knew
I wasn’t allowed to crossover. I had the overwhelming feeling that I should have
died. I should be dead. I was overcome with a feeling of gratitude. I knew from
that point on I was living on pure grace.

 I spent the next ten years in intensive therapy, committed to putting the energy
I’d spent on dying into living life. I looked at my emotional stuff. I got reflected,
seen, and heard. I got some of the nurturing I thought my mom should have given
me. I stabilized. I stopped dissociating. I came into reality. I developed a healthy
ego. I built a thriving practice. My partner and I bought a house and had a
commitment ceremony.

I went to graduate school to become a therapist to help other people with their
pain. I was successful. It wasn’t easy. I did a lot of hard work. I was still trying to
prove my worth. And even with all the ground and stability I had garnered, I still
wasn’t free. I lived under the threat of not trusting myself. I couldn’t extricate that
lingering fear that if something happened that I couldn’t bear, would I to try to kill
myself? I harbored shame. Once again, I had to keep my pain a secret to protect
an image.

It wasn’t until I met Bryon Katie in 1997 that I eradicated the story of suicide once
and for all. In a flash, boom. Gone. Well...in a series of flashes. Using her system
of inquiry called The Work which consists of four questions and a turnaround, I
questioned my beliefs one by one. As I did, I began the radical transformation
from managing and surviving life, to actually living and thriving. Chunk by chunk,
my defenses fell away. I inquired: I shouldn’t have tried to kill myself – is it true?
Who would I be without that thought? Who would I be without the story that I
                                         29

can’t trust myself? Free. Who would I be without the story that I’m not valuable?
Not lovable?

As I inquired, duality collapsed and huge spaces of vast, empty – but totally full –
love and value appeared. I was love. I was value itself. Unshakable trust was born.
I began the shift from looking outside to looking within at a deeper level than I
had ever experienced in therapy. I began what I now understand from a Human
Design perspective was the shift from living from my ego body to living from my
quantum body.

Pause. Stop. Wait. What am I talking about?



ENTER HUMAN DESIGN

Studying with Katie was the beginning of a new journey that would transform
how I saw and understood the world. There were many teachers and teachings
that I worked with following this initial clearing of the decks with Katie that
continued that transformational process. Some of those I’ll talk about, as they
gave me more perspective. I realize, in retrospect, that they taught me how to
work with the Centers and clear conditioning in a variety of powerful ways. But
I’m getting ahead of myself.

 Let me first talk about what happened when I began to truly understand the
workings of my Human Design chart. Having my first Human Design reading in
2005 was good. It was helpful. It gave me a reflection regarding how I operate as
a Generator. I learned that I needed to follow and trust my yeses and my noes.
Most importantly, it helped me see, understand, and appreciate that my wife, as
a Projector, had a very different operating system than I did. That was a game
changer. It wasn’t until 2013 – when I picked up Karen Curry’s book (now Karen
Curry Parker) Understanding Human Design and began seven years of intensive
study under her tutelage – that I could look back and make sense out of all I had
been through and why. Let’s take a moment to look at my story from the vantage
of the Open Centers in my chart.
                                          30

I had an Open Head Center: I was taking in everyone’s thoughts and beliefs,
thinking they were mine. I wasn’t, as Katie would say, asking myself what I
thought. This created a very unstable mind.

I had an Open Ajna Center: I wasn’t designed to be certain. I didn’t have a
consistent way to process information. I thought I was supposed to be certain and
know things. I thought I should be able to hold on to information. I couldn’t, and
as a result, I thought something was wrong with me. I thought I was dumb. This
was easy to assume when I was surrounded by brilliant mental thinkers. There
was a joke in my family that by the time they got to me, all the brains were gone.
Just for the record, I did graduate from UC Berkeley, and I do have a master's
degree. But I didn’t go to an Ivy League school, and I didn’t get 790s on my SATs
like my brothers. So, yes, I felt dumb. I see it as ridiculous now, but it was brutally
important then.

I had an Open Throat Center: I wasn’t designed to speak until I was invited or
acknowledged. I wasn’t designed to be heard until the timing was right. Okay.
That explains a lot about why I didn’t feel heard as a kid. I watched my Manifestor
mom and Manifesting Generator dad have no problem being heard and making
an impact in the world. Of course, I also had a Manifestor brother, two
Manifesting Generator brothers, and my other two brothers with Open Throats
were unabashedly louder and more dramatic than everyone put together in their
attempt to be heard. Let’s just say there weren’t a lot of invitations for me to
speak or much interest in what I had to say.

I had an Open Identity Center, or G Center, as we call it. Um. Well. Let’s just say
this was the root of my pain. I wasn’t designed to have a fixed identity. I wasn’t
designed to be Somebody.

Cymbals crash. Cacophonous loud sounds, please.

That’s right. I didn’t know who I was or what direction to go in because that’s
simply not how I operate. No job, no accomplishment, no role is ever going to give
me the solid sense of identity I see in the people, like my wife, who have Defined
G Centers. It’s just never going to happen. I don’t mean to scare those of you who
have Open G Centers, but hopefully this knowledge will help you, as it has me,
                                           31

come to appreciate, love, and embrace that Openness with full curiosity. If I am
not comparing myself to others, who am I?

The last Open Center I have is my Will Center. The Center of Value. With an Open
Will, I was taking in everyone else’s lack of value, amplifying it, and feeling it as
my own. I was trying to prove my value when that’s simply not the job of the
Open Will Center.

I see the Open Centers as filters that are taking in and processing the world. My
filters were all clogged up with other people’s garbage that I mistook to be my
own. No wonder I suffered! I was miserable, trying to live someone else’s life. I
was a walking garbage dump.



Using Human Design with Others

Human Design gave me so much clarity and perspective on my life that I, of
course, brought it into my work with my psychotherapy clients. As I ran their
charts, I began to shift how I understood them and their lives. I could see from
their Type and from their Open Centers where they could easily have been prone
to suffering in their childhood, as well as in their current life. Instead of attributing
suffering to past stories, I saw that the suffering was almost inevitable, given their
charts. I understood that in and of itself, the suffering wasn’t the problem. What
we did with the suffering, with the beliefs that something was wrong with us,
with the thought that we should be different than we are…that sealed the
suffering into present day reality. I also saw how pain could either become a
cesspool, an endless loop of despair, or it could be used as motivation to do the
work of liberation – to come back to the truth of who we are.

My enthusiasm for Human Design knew no bounds, and I began shifting the bulk
of my practice from doing psychotherapy to offering Human Design readings. I
quickly discovered that people expected me to talk for the entire session and tell
them what I knew about them. I was delivering a brain dump of information. It
was good information. They were being seen and reflected. I was sharing this
unbelievably amazing tool with them. Many people reported that their lives were
transformed from the sessions. I, on the other hand, was burning out. I’d gone
from being a listener to being a talker. My Open Throat was not going to last.
                                        32

There were a few other problems. For one, I often didn’t enjoy the sessions. I felt
drained by the push to give information. This was supposed to be a catalytic
conversation, but it often ended up being a monologue on my side. Somehow, I
felt like I had to prove the validity of Human Design, and give people something
that would blow them away. It was a lot of pressure that felt like performance. In
line with that, I didn’t feel people were getting what I knew was possible from the
chart.

They weren’t entering the chart. They weren’t owning the chart. The chart was
staying a concept, as if it was something outside themselves. I know the feeling.
I’ve felt that during astrology readings many times. In my own practice, I was used
to doing deep work with people psychologically and spiritually. With me by their
side, my clients journeyed into the unknown, exploring through inquiry who they
were. Delivering Human Design sessions seemed at times almost superficial in
comparison. I’d become a missionary for a message, but I wasn’t delivering the
living message. I knew something was terribly wrong when I passionately gave a
reading to my book coach, Angela Lauria, and she almost fell asleep during the
session. She’s one who only responds to absolute authenticity, and I was not
meeting her where she was in that moment. I was trying to give something to her
that she wasn’t asking for. It was seriously sobering.

The last thing that was not sitting well with me was the negative rap people had
in regard to the Open Centers. So many people hated their Open Centers. I get it.
They’re called the pain points for a good reason. They’re also the place where
we’re designed to be wise. I had come to love my Open Centers. As I spoke about
earlier, they showed me why I suffered so much. They helped me understand
why, coming from an educated, basically non-violent family (there were those five
boys being boys), with two parents who acted like parents, with resources,
opportunities, and travel…that I would feel so badly from such an early age.

Obviously, there are other things we could consider, and I have, but the context
of Human Design explained so much. It felt like such an accurate reflection that,
looking back, I couldn’t take what I experienced from the Open Center pain
personally. It felt more mechanical, mechanical, if that makes sense. The bottom
line was, I loved my Open Centers and I wanted to find a way to talk about the
Open Centers to my clients that would wake people up to the power and the
                                          33

potential the Open Centers hold. If we’re not completely identified with and
hijacked by the pain, if we clear the filters of the debris we’ve collected, the Open
Centers become doorways to a world I can only begin to describe.

I notice I’m not talking about the Defined Centers, which have their own
challenges – which we’ll get to when we look at each of the Centers – but in my
story, it was the Open Centers that brought me to my knees and raised me from
the dead. It was in understanding the Open Centers, the pain and possibility they
held, that shifted how I brought Human Design to people.

I will tell you throughout this book that where you have Defined Centers you have
privilege. You have a ground that those of us with that Center Open can only
dream of. Yes, you’ve got to work with some issues of stabilizing and managing
that Definition. You need to be in right relationship to it. But Definition is a gift.
No two ways about it. It’s the gift of your form. Openness, while not steady or
stable in the world of form, is magnificent in its own right. One way to say it is
that our Open Centers occupy the formless aspects of ourselves.

I’m sliding into the conversation of the quantum body here. I discovered that it is
in acknowledging and identifying with both the form and the formless aspects of
myself that I enter another expanded dimension of living. Maybe this is getting a
little woo. Let me back up.

As I looked at my love of the Open Centers, I started to see how I had healed a
great deal of the pain of those Centers on my long journey of discovery. I
understood that it was the ego’s desperate drive for stability that compelled us to
grab hold of the information that bombards our Open Centers daily in order to
get some ground, painful though it may be. The healing of the Open Centers rests,
from my personal experience, in stabilizing them, not on the ego, but on our True
Nature, for lack of better words. This is where we step out of the psychological
and into a spiritual dimension. This is where I say the Open Centers are God
Portals, pointing the way to aspects of ourselves that rest in the great mystery.

Let me use my Open Identity Center as an example. I spent a large portion of my
life trying to prove I was lovable by having an identity. By being somebody. This is
the theme of the Open Identity Center. The vulnerability of this Center is to feel
unlovable. As I did my work with my various teachers and teachings, (driven by
                                          34

pain) I came to discover that I am love itself. There is nothing I can do to get love
or lose love. There is no role I can take that will make me lovable. I stabilized on
being love, rather than rushing to fill the hole of not being lovable by trying to
prove my lovability. This is the healing of the Open Identity Center. It is not a
conceptual understanding. It is a realization. It changes the whole game of life.
How to get there? That’s another question that we’ll address in the chapters on
the Centers.



Discovering the Quantum Body

In preschool, I sang the song: Head, shoulders, knees, and toes, knees, and toes.
Head, shoulders, knees, and toes. Eyes and ears and a mouth and a nose. Head,
shoulders, knees, and toes, knees, and toes!

I was learning the parts of my body. Later, I learned that I had a heart and
kidneys, bones, muscles, and a lymphatic system. There was a whole world to
discover about the inner workings of my body. My dad was a doctor, remember?
We had anatomically correct rubber replicas of a heart and of the human eye. We
had books of anatomy, and pictures of dissected organs and diseased body parts.
When I got ill with Mono in sixth grade, I learned about white blood cells. The
exploration of the human body and how it functioned was part of my world.

In my twenties, as I turned to alternative medicine, I began learning about
different healing modalities that portrayed the workings of the body from
different vantages. I learned about the meridians in my body from getting
acupuncture. When I went for homeopathy for help with my hay fever and
menstrual pain, I learned about the energetics of the body. Studying yoga, I
learned about chakras and the etheric body. In my thirties, I was introduced to
Ayurvedic treatments when I was trying to get pregnant. There I learned that my
doshas needed to be in balance.

Around that time, I studied Holographic Repatterning, now called Resonance
Repatterning. We looked at the physical body, the emotional body, the mental
body, and the etheric body. Each had its own system and theory, each could be
healed through frequency, or energetic modalities. In my forties, when I delved
into Tibetan Buddhism there was yet another elaborate understanding of the
                                       35

body, made of both the physical and the subtle body elements. In intensive
meditation, through direct experience and pointing out instructions, I became
even clearer that I was not my body, and that I am way bigger than any physical
form.

There are so many stories I could tell about experiencing myself as being more
than my physical body. They range from being in the presence of awakened
beings, to qigong, meditation, inquiry, and bodywork experiences. But perhaps
my deepest experience of being more than my physical body comes from being a
death midwife, witnessing the vast expanse of the unencumbered soul. Those
experiences may be the making of another book.

For now, what’s important for me to share is that, in the same way the Open
Centers gave me a context to understand my pain, they also gave me a context to
understand and name those experiences of being more than a physical body.
When I put together the experiences of my Open Centers with the experience of
my Defined Centers, I understood Human Design to be the map of what I
experience as the quantum body.

There is a saying that all roads lead to Rome. Perhaps it was the work of my
Magnetic Monopole (read Chapter 9 on the Identity Center) that drew exactly the
teachers and teachings from a variety of backgrounds and modalities that I
needed in order to learn how to clear my filters and to claim my authentic self.
These incredible teachers and teachings taught me to understand the importance
of liberating ourselves from inherited beliefs and merged identities.

The wisdom and support I was given bring me to this moment with you as I
attempt to share the Rome of this book: Your Human Design chart is not only
something external to you that you look at on a piece of paper or on a computer
screen. It is not only a manual for how to best operate and live your life. Your
Human Design chart is the blueprint of your multi-dimensional holographic
quantum body.

We are so much bigger than we can imagine. There is work to do to recognize and
claim our unique self. It’s time to stop diminishing ourselves. It’s time to stop
fighting who we are. It’s time to reclaim our magnificent quantum selves and take
our rightful place in the order of life.
                                        36

Here is a partial transcript of a transmission from Dr. Jacqueline Hobbs, who says,
better than I ever could, what Human Design is up to. She speaks to what we
must do in order to claim our sovereignty. Her overall message is that we must
free ourselves from what she calls our slave state. In my translation, this is our
ego dominion over our essential being. She takes it a bit farther. In any case, I
offer this transmission from her that your path to clearing your filters of your
Open Centers and working with the duality of your Defined Centers may liberate
you to be in alignment with your spark – to be the lighthouse you are meant to
be.

                 “…anywhere that you are being weighed down
                      By the unresolved patterns of someone
                           you are emotionally close to.
                     Understanding that it is your job to carry
                             only your own frequencies
             Continually evaluating what is you and what is not you.
              We are all joined, and bonds of affection bring certain
             personal wavelengths into close proximity with our own.
              But our overall personal signature is entirely different
                   to the signature of any other one individual.
              Through togetherness we claim the parts of our souls
                  which we are not embodying or fully living….
                       Seeking to connect there will then be
                              strength in difference.”



Quantum Human Design™

In Chapter 4, you’ll learn about how Human Design was transmitted to Ra Uru Hu.
Hang with me here. The material has an aliveness that reveals itself differently to
different people. In other words, there are now various streams of Human Design,
just like there are a variety of streams of Christianity or Buddhism. Some look
through a more mental lens. Some through a more esoteric lens. The stream that
spoke to me and that I have immersed myself in is Karen Curry Parker’s teachings.
She was a student of Ra’s and, through her unique cognition, grounded Human
Design in the frequency of the heart.
                                       37

Recently Karen has opened another Human Design door with a new level of
understanding. She calls it Quantum Human Design™. Unfortunately, I haven’t
had time for this new material to seep into my bones. Otherwise, I would have
used the new Quantum Human Design™ language for the Gates and Channels
throughout this book. As it is, I mention each of Quantum Human Design™ names
for the Centers, and occasionally refer to the Gates in the new language.

What I present here is my own cognition of Human Design based on Karen’s
teachings and grounded on Ra’s information. To my knowledge, what I refer to as
the quantum body is not a traditionally taught Human Design concept. It is my
lived experience touched by Human Design that I share with you. T

hat said, and, in perfect cosmic alignment, as I’m doing the final edits for this
book, Karen just announced that she was coming out with a book this month
called The Quantum Human. I look forward to reading about the quantum human
from her lens. Meanwhile, join me in looking at who you are, as a quantum
human body, through the lens of the Centers!
                                         38


                                         3

                         HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


It’s time to begin your exploration of the Centers and discover how they point to
where you or your clients, family, or friends are vulnerable to pain and struggle,
and where you, or they, have or can find stability and ground though
understanding the Centers. This is at once a profoundly pragmatic and magically
mystical journey. As I write these words, I feel as though I’m preparing a speech
for an awards ceremony to introduce someone who has won a major award. The
Centers deserve a major award. They deserve a place at the head table. They
deserve to be recognized for their huge contribution. I think about the discovery
of penicillin, and how impactful it has been on the health and well-being of
humanity. Understanding the Centers and utilizing their medicine could have an
equally great impact on the health and well-being of humanity. What you’re
embarking on is that monumental.

But before you set off, a few things need to be in place. You must first have the
map – the big picture of what Human Design is – as well as an understanding of
what role the Centers have in the Human Design picture. Once those are
established, we can zoom in to experience the depth and breadth of each of the
Centers. It is in this deeper understanding and direct experience of each of the
Centers that the opportunity for healing and transformation is made readily
available.

I realize some of you reading this book will be more familiar with Human Design
than others. For some, this may be your first foray into the wilds of Human
Design, whereas others of you may already be using this transformational tool
professionally.

If you are new to Human Design, you will want to have a copy of your Human
Design Chart. Go to www.geneticmatrix.com to order your free chart. You will
need to have your birth time, date, and place. To get the most from this book, it is
imperative that you understand Type, Strategy, and Authority as the foundation
of Human Design. I will touch on the Five Types, Strategy, and Authority in
                                          39

Chapter 4, but I encourage you to read Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 in my book:
Understanding Your Clients through Human Design. This will give you a bigger
foundational picture than I can offer in this book. You can download it for free
here: https://www.clientsandhumandesign.com/free-book.

The other important piece I want to make sure is clear is that, even though the
Centers stand on their own, the chart is always part of a larger whole. Looking at
the Centers in this focused way is a starting point. Eventually, you will want and
need to weave the information you gather from the Centers into the whole of the
chart.



WHAT’S IN THE CHAPTERS



Just so you have a sense of what lies ahead as you step deeper into this book and
into the waters of the Human Design Centers, let me lay out the path. In Chapter
4, I will introduce you to the philosophy and some of the basic mechanics of
Human Design. In Chapter 5, you’ll get an overview and general understanding of
the Centers, what their themes are, how they operate, why they are so central to
the chart and our lives. Chapters 6 through 14 focus specifically on each Center,
beginning with the Head Center.

Here, you’ll get a more in-depth understanding of each Center, followed by a
guided meditation to help you begin to access and embody your own Centers in a
lived way. These nine chapters look first at the Defined Center, then at the
Undefined Center. In either case, you’ll learn about the gifts that are offered by
the specific Center and the grapples accompanying that Center, followed by how
to work with that Center, and finally tools to help align with the Center. This is the
meat and potatoes of the book, and the Working with and Helpful Tools sections
are where the rubber hits the road.

In Chapter 15, we’ll take a beginning look at Centers in the chart as a whole. What
happens if someone has a lot of Defined Centers or Open Centers? We’ll weave in
a bit of the dynamics between Defined Centers in relation to Open Centers. We’ll
                                          40

also look at electromagnetic connections and planetary transits impacting
Definition. Don’t worry if this is Greek to you now. I’ll explain it soon!

In Chapter 16, I’ll discuss some of the challenges you might face as you look at
your chart or someone’s chart. Finally, in Chapter 17, I’ll share more about why I
wrote this book and what my hopes are for you.



USING THIS BOOK AS A RESOURCE

Given what is covered in the coming pages, there are several ways you can use
this book to your benefit.

You can, of course, devour it, reading it from cover to cover. My wife, who is not
one to tolerate reading material that is not to the point and easily readable, has
thoroughly enjoyed reading the draft, finding it helpful for her. So, that bodes well
for you! You could also use this book as a resource, though I recommend
familiarizing yourself with the bigger picture of Human Design and the Centers
before going straight to the Centers.

I bring in a unique perspective that may provide a broader lens. In any case, have
your chart or your client’s chart, or the person of interest’s chart available as you
go through the chapters on the 9 Centers. You could, for example, start at the
Head Center, and look at your chart to see if it’s colored in or white. If it’s colored
you have a Defined Head.

Read the intro to the Head Center then read about the Defined Head. If it’s not
colored in but rather white, we call it Open, or Undefined. In that case, read
about the Open Head Center to understand more about how that Center may be
operating in your life. To anchor what you discover, I recommend keeping a
journal of your revelations as you go through the Centers.

Using This Book as a 9-week Inquiry Course

Another way you could use this book is as a nine-week inquiry and exploration
course into the 9 Centers. Each week, take one of the Centers. Using your chart,
do daily meditation and inquiry into that Center. Try on different tools to work
with that Center. Have the intention of seeing how the Center currently operates
                                          41

in your life, and how you might more closely align with the possibility it holds for
you.

APPROACHING THIS BOOK FROM A PLACE OF OPENNESS

In any case, I invite you to approach this book, and the chart, with a spirit of
openness. In my early twenties, when I studied Rosen Method bodywork with
Marion Rosen, she talked about the importance of listening hands. Listening
hands let information come in. I invite you to bring that quality of listening as you
read. Let yourself have a listening mind, a listening heart. Suspend knowing and
bring full curiosity.

I don’t presume to have the corner on truth. On the contrary, I am one of many
who have entered into a relationship with Human Design that is an unending,
ever-unfolding exploration and discovery process. I offer you what I have found to
be true and useful in my thousands of hours of working with people using Human
Design. If I were to write this book next year, it would be a different book. This is
how it should be. Human Design is a living and breathing quantum system.

The trajectory of Human Design is to shift your authority from an external source
back to where it belongs – within you. We’re talking about claiming your
sovereignty. So, while I am asking you to be open and curious about what I’m
bringing to the table regarding Human Design – and in particular the study of the
Centers – I’m also trusting you to take what resonates resonates and let
everything else fall away, like water off a duck’s back.

After all, this is a beginning exploration. A starting point. Hopefully, this book sets
you up to understand more fully where you and your clients may be vulnerable
and have grappled. Hopefully, this book inspires you to use those grapples to
access the gifts that are your birthright. We are not victims of our charts. Where
there is pain, there is a doorway to transformation. The big questions I believe the
Centers point to are: Where am I trapped in patterns that are not in alignment
with my authentic, essential self? How do I liberate myself and stabilize in my
authentic self? How can I live the life I am here to live and offer the gifts that are
mine to contribute? As Einstein said:

                   “We cannot solve our problems with the same
                    thinking we used when we created them.”
                                        42

 To answer these questions, we must go beyond the thinking mind. We must go
beyond the realm of the ego. We must enter into the quantum realm. I invite you
to read this book as if you were starting on a journey to a new land. Would it be
okay to bring an open mind, an open heart, and your spirit of curiosity? Journey
well, my friend. I look forward to hearing what you discover about yourself as you
travel.
       43


        II

THE UNDERSTANDING
OF HUMAN DESIGN
                                         44


                                          4

                  THE MECHANICS OF HUMAN DESIGN


INTRODUCING HUMAN DESIGN

Human Design is a system that was downloaded to a Canadian fellow named Ra
Uru Hu who was on retreat off the coast of Spain. It was 1987, the Harmonic
Convergence, when he came back to his cabin to discover it was filled with light
beings. The story as I understand it is that for days, these light beings meticulously
transmitted a cascade of information. They said that Human Design was brought
here to support the evolution of Humanity. It is for everyone, but it is particularly
for parents to parent their children. They explained that each person is a unique
and perfectly designed puzzle piece in the giant puzzle of humanity.

Each one of us is needed, as we are designed, to bring our part to the larger
whole. When you try to live someone else’s puzzle piece, you suffer, and
humanity loses out on your gift. If parents know who their children are from the
beginning, they can support their child to live their design out the gate. This
alleviates tremendous efforts and struggles. Most of us have not had that good
fortune. Instead, from a place of pain, we are compelled take the long journey of
letting go of who we mistook ourselves to be in order to align with our true
nature.

While it would be wonderful if we could be seen and supported as children to be
our authentic selves, it is never too late to make the turn to come home. Human
Design shines a bright light, revealing those areas that may have wounding, as
well as pointing to the pathways leading home.

Your Unique Puzzle Piece

Your unique puzzle piece is derived by your birth time, date, and place. Much like
astrology, which in fact is one of the components of Human Design, where the
planets were at the time of your birth informs what your puzzle piece will be.
There are many elements that combine to create your unique puzzle piece
                                         45

including the Chinese I Ching, the Judaic Kabbalah, the Hindu chakra system, and
quantum physics.

Your puzzle piece is a majestic synthesis reflecting a layered weave of knowledge
about you, how you operate, and how you best function. Your chart – your
Human Design bodygraph – is in effect both a blueprint of and a manual for your
puzzle piece. Your bodygraph reveals the makeup of your quantum body. In the
same way that you were born into a physical body, you were also born into a
multidimensional, multi-faceted, holographic quantum body.

Okay. Maybe that sounds a little wild. And to be fair, Human Design is on the
cutting edge, breaking down and through thought barriers and outdated
concepts. It brings in a new vantage of who we are and how we best operate.
Given that understanding, I want to ask you, for the purpose of this book, to
embrace the possibility that you have a quantum body that you can know and
work with for your benefit. Would you be okay with that? I think it will make
more sense to you as we delve into the Centers.

Just take a momentary glance back to the time before autopsies when people had
no idea what was inside the human body. Once the map was laid out, the organs,
the arteries, and the various systems that need to be in balance to keep us
healthy were revealed. As a result, our relationship to how to care for ourselves
shifted.

And with evolving knowledge we keep upgrading what we eat, how long we
sleep, and what we do to keep our body/ mind/ psyche balanced and functioning
optimally. For example, a friend of mine has Type 1, or Juvenile Onset Diabetes.
She needs insulin to live. If we didn’t understand the functioning of the body, the
spleen’s lack of and need for insulin in her case, she wouldn’t be living the vital,
creative life she enjoys. Most likely she wouldn’t be living at all.

Knowing your bodygraph is the next evolution of that greater knowing and
understanding of ourselves. Knowing how our quantum body functions enables us
to thrive at a level that was perhaps inconceivable to many of us. And beyond the
personal level is the understanding from a Human Design perspective of how our
quantum puzzle piece connects with other quantum puzzle pieces creating a
living, breathing, gigantic, seven-billion-piece quantum puzzle.
                                          46

Okay. Yikes. Getting pretty out there. Let’s just pause for a second and remind
your brain that you don’t have to comprehend everything at once. Like with the
human body, there are layers and layers of information to learn and discover
about your quantum body through the Human Design Chart. You don’t have to
know everything about your body to know that too much sugar is not good for
you or that excess alcohol kills liver cells. Though it did help me to learn that my
amygdala was stuck in the on position after my car accident. It was relieving to
realize my amygdala was sending non-stop danger messages alerting me to the
life-threatening danger it perceived.

No wonder I was feeling under attack. Knowing this helped me have a context for
what my body was doing, seemingly without my say. It called on me to strengthen
my witnessing observer so I could work with the trauma rather than be caught in
it. There are parallels with the quantum body. Once you see how you’re being
impacted, because of how you’re designed, you too can use tools like the
witnessing observer to stabilize your response.

But I’m getting ahead of myself. Let’s talk about the basic premise of Human
Design.

The Basic Premise of Human Design

So, your chart – your puzzle piece – your quantum body is perfectly designed.
There is nothing fundamentally wrong with you. You are basic goodness. You are
unique. You are needed exactly as you are designed. I can remember Lama
Palden, my Tibetan Buddhist teacher, telling us how the Dalai Lama was so
perplexed by the Westerners. He would sit with some of the greatest scientists
and they would tell him that they had low self-esteem.

This confounded him. In Tibetan Buddhism, there is the understanding that each
person is fundamentally good. There is not a story of the fall of Adam and Eve.
There is no story of being born into sin. There is no shame of being human.
Human Design looks at life through a similar lens as the Dalai Lama does. You are
not bad. You are not deficient. Your incarnation is a precious human birth, as the
Buddhists would say.

And your multi-faceted, multi-dimensional quantum body is a wonder to behold.
It is designed to interact with the environment and others interdependently. It
                                         47

has its own breath, its own filtration system. Like our physical body, we can either
be in harmony with our Design, with our quantum body, or we can disregard and
disrespect it – with consequences. It is here where we suffer. Being out of
alignment with our operating system wreaks havoc in our lives. When we try to
be other than who we are, we degrade ourselves.

We suffer. When the ego is put at the helm, at some point disaster will strike.

Differentiation is Key

From a Human Design perspective, we need you to be you. In that way, you
complete the whole puzzle. There are no hierarchies in Human Design. No puzzle
piece is any better than another. There are differences, yes. And our culture does
idealize some traits and capacities more than others. But the truth is
differentiation is important. It provides a rich and vital tapestry. Differentiation
allows for a much-needed dynamic complexity.

The first layer of differentiation in this puzzle shows up in the Five Types. If you
were looking at a puzzle, you might first see the sky, the water, the land, the
buildings, and people. From there you would start to differentiate: clouds, and
waves and mountains and homes, adults, children. As you look closer, you see
more and more detail. The Human Design puzzle is like that with ever-deepening
layers

of complexity. Before we zoom in on the Centers as an aspect of the puzzle, it’s
important to name basic, fundamental Human Design pieces that begin the
differentiation process. These are fundamental to any discussion on the Centers.
But before we can introduce the bigger puzzle pieces, we have to look at the
mechanics of the chart, so you know what you’re looking at. This is the geeky
part. Hang in there. It’s like learning a language. Once you get the basics, a whole
world of understanding becomes available.
                                         48

THE PIECES OF THE CHART

The Neutrino Stream

It all starts with the neutrino stream. In quantum physics, the name neutrino
means “little neutral one.” Neutrinos are tiny subatomic particles traveling close
to the speed of light that are similar to electrons but have no electrical charge and
very little, if any, mass. They are the most abundant particle in the universe and
trillions of them stream through our body day and night. According to science, its
possible neutrinos are the reason that matter exists. So, let’s look at that.

At the moment of your birth, the neutrino stream flowed through the planets,
picking up the energies of the planets that were transiting through some
combination of the 64 Hexagrams. Bear with me here, there’s a bit information
that’s helpful to understand. If you’re familiar with astrology, at the time of your
birth, the planets were in some configuration above and below the horizon,
placed within the twelve houses and twelve astrological signs. In Human Design,
instead of the planets placed in the houses and signs, they are placed in some
combination of the 64 Hexagrams of the I Ching. So, let’s talk about the I Ching.

The I Ching Hexagrams

The I Ching is an ancient system of divination often called The Book of Wisdom. It
is comprised of 64 Hexagrams. Each hexagram is made of six parallel whole or
broken lines. The whole, or solid, lines are yang or masculine. The broken lines are
yin or feminine.

The first hexagram is six solid lines, the most yang/ masculine expressive energy in
the chart:
                                        49




The second hexagram is six broken lines, the most yin/ feminine or receptive
energy in Human Design:




The third hexagram is a combination of solid and broken lines, as are the
remaining sixty-one hexagrams:
                                           50




Each hexagram has a meaning, containing certain information. The first
hexagram, for example, the most yang/ masculine energy in the chart, has to do
with the strong energy of making a creative contribution. I think of the first
hexagram like sperm, out to create. The second hexagram is the most
yin/feminine energy in the chart and has to do with receptivity. Think of the egg
or the womb. The third hexagram is like the first child. It’s called Difficulty at the
Beginning. When you think of a child, it takes time before the child matures
enough to contribute to society. It takes time for the child to be in the world on
its own.

The Planets

Traditional Human Design works with twelve planets (including the Earth), as well
as the North and South Nodes. As in astrology, each of the planets has a certain
theme and carries a particular energy.

Sun: What you’re here to express and give to the world

Earth: What grounds you

North Node: Your life theme following your Uranus Opposition (between age
thirty-eight and forty-four)

South Node: Your life theme before your Uranus Opposition
                                         51

Moon: What drives you

Mercury: Communication. What you like to talk about, learn about

Venus: What you value within yourself and others in terms of the feminine aspect

Mars: A potent yang/ masculine force – immaturity that needs to develop

Jupiter: Expansion, blessings – where you offer your gifts and receive blessings

Saturn: The Great Teacher – where we are called to be in integrity

Kiron: The wounded healer – where we are wounded, transform the wounding,
and help others with that wounding

Uranus: Where you are unique – surprising, unexpected energy

Neptune: Our spiritual path

Pluto: Transformation, expansion – where we experience the depth of life
through cycles of birth and death (release)

Putting Together the Planets and the Hexagrams

Circling back around, at the time of your birth, your planets were in some
combination of those 64 Hexagrams. The hexagrams each carry an information
packet of meaning, and each planet has a theme or its own energetic information
system. The Sun, with the biggest energy in your chart, has the theme of
expressing, or shining who you are out into the world. The neutrinos bind the
energy of the planet with the hexagram which creates a combo energy. Say, for
instance, that at the time of your birth, the Sun was in the first hexagram.

When you combine the energy of making a creative contribution with the Sun
expressing into the world, we could imagine that a big part of your life most likely
revolves around the theme of making or attempting to make a creative
contribution in the world. If your Sun was in a different hexagram, your
experience walking through the world would be quite different. For example, if
your Sun was in the 51st Hexagram, which carries the energy of shock, the biggest
energy in your chart would involve shocking people.
                                        52




Creating Definition

Just to make sure we’re on the same page here – each planet has a theme, and
each hexagram has a theme. The Definition in your chart is born from that
combination of the neutrino stream picking up the energies of the planets in the
hexagrams at the moment of your birth. Let me say that again. The Definition in
your chart comes from the neutrino stream picking up the energy of the planets
in the hexagrams at the moment of your birth. This is the act of creating the form
aspect of your quantum bodygraph. We call this moment of your birth the
conscious aspect of your chart.

Conscious and Unconscious Definition

I’m going to explain the Conscious and Unconscious aspects of the chart so you
can look at the chart and have a clear sense of how it’s created. Keep in mind, the
conscious and unconscious Definition is not crucial to the bigger conversation
we’re headed toward on the Centers.
                                          53

When you look at your chart, you’ll see two sets of numbers; one set is black, the
other red. Those numbers are the hexagrams. Next to those hexagrams are the
symbols depicting the planets. The black numbers indicate which hexagrams your
planets were in at the time of your birth. We consider this energy conscious.

You will undoubtedly recognize it in yourself when you hear that your Conscious
Sun, for example, is in the first hexagram, which we name Gate 1. These energies
in black create the aspect of our quantum form that we’re conscious of. Just a
reminder that if you’re reading this as a paperback, this book is printed in black
and white so you will not see the colors on the charts here.

In the same way that at the moment of our birth the neutrino stream picked up
the energies of the planets in the hexagrams and created our conscious quantum
body form, the same process happened three months prior to our birth. The
neutrino stream picked up energy of the planets in the hexagrams and created
the Definition of our unconscious quantum body form. This information is
recorded in the second set of numbers which are in red on the left. We speak of
this prior date as the moment when the soul landed. When the unconscious
information from the unconscious aspects of your chart is reflected to you, you
will most likely recognize it in yourself, though you may not walk around
identifying yourself in that way.

When we transpose these black and red numbers of the planets in the hexagrams
at your birth and three months prior to your birth onto the chart we get your
unique blueprint. We get your bodygraph. The map of you. This is the energy
pattern that will be consistent throughout your life. This is your Definition. Your
Definition shows up in three ways: as Hanging Gates, as Channels, or in the
Centers.

There are 64 Gates (since there are 64 Hexagrams in the I Ching), 36 Channels,
and 9 Centers. Gates can either be what’s called Hanging, when they’re on their
own, or Channels when they join together with another Gate.

Hanging Gates

Whenever half the Channel is colored in and the other half of the Channel is
white, we call it a Hanging Gate. It doesn’t matter if the gate is black or red, or
both black and red; if it only fills half the Channel, it is a Hanging Gate.
                                       54




Channels

When two Gates (or hexagrams) come together, they create what we call a
Channel. There are 64 Gates which come together to create 36 Channels. In terms
of determining Definition, it doesn’t matter if the Gates are black, red, or both
black and red. What matters is that they come together, completing that piece of
the circuit. Wherever there is a Channel, the Centers on either side become
Defined. We’ll get to Centers in the next chapter, but first let’s make sure you
understand Circuitry as each of these Circuits has a theme.
                                          55




Individual, Tribal, and Collective Circuitry

To add a little more complexity to the picture, each of those Channels creates
different Circuits on the bodygraph. The Circuitry is connected to the evolutionary
process. This is another book waiting to be written. For now, let me give you a
first introduction, because I will be referring to the Circuitry throughout the book.
To make it simple, there are fundamentally three kinds of circuits: Individual,
Tribal, and Collective.

Individual Circuitry

Individual Circuitry is mutative. Its job in the evolutionary process is to bring
something new to humanity.
                                          56




Tribal Circuitry

Tribal Circuitry is passionate and emotional. Its task in the evolutionary process is
to ensure the survival of the tribe and everything that entails. This includes the
energy of procreation, business, sales, agreements, war, food, and education.
                                          57

Collective Circuitry

Collective Circuitry is about sharing information. It’s concerned with structures,
government, school systems, laws, rules, and regulations. All of this will be
pertinent as we go forward.




Now that you have a big picture understanding of some of the map of Human
Design, let’s take a brief look at the big puzzle pieces, the Five Types, along with
their Strategy and Authority. These are foundational to our work with the
Centers.

THE FIVE TYPES

In the Human Design puzzle, there are basically five different kinds of puzzle
pieces, called Types. Which means you and everyone you know are either a
Generator, Generator, Manifesting Generator, Manifestor, Projector, or a
Reflector. If you’re not yet familiar with the Types, I’ll give a brief overview, but
please go read my first book Understanding Your Clients through Human Design.
The focus of that book is to explain the Types and how to work with them.
                                       58




Your Type – along with what’s called your Strategy and Authority – form the basis
of the quantum Human Design bodygraph. They define your puzzle piece and are
the first and foundational layer of knowledge you need in order to understand
your operating operating system. Each Type has a Strategy, a particular operating
system, and optimal way of navigating the world.

Each Type is paired with what’s called Authority, which gives you the manual on
how you best make decisions. It’s essential that you are following your Type,
Strategy, and Authority in order to work with your Centers. Many of the problems
we encounter with the Centers come as a result of not being aligned with our
fundamental puzzle piece.

Just to weave things together here a bit, your Type, Strategy, and Authority are
determined by which of the Centers in your chart are Open or Defined, and which
of your Defined Channels go to which Centers. The important thing to know for
our purposes is that we cannot look at the Centers without taking into account
your Type, Strategy, and Authority. Are you in alignment with them? This is the
                                          59

question that we will revisit throughout this book. Where you are not in
alignment with your Type, Strategy, and Authority, you’ll find you cannot access
the potential gifts of the Centers.

For those of you new to Human Design, here is a brief overview of the gifts and
strategies of the Five Types followed by the Four Authorities. Don’t worry if this
sounds like Greek. I include it in case you need to refer back to it.

The Five Types and Their Strategies

Generators

Generators have Defined Sacral Centers and no Motor to the Throat Center. The
Generator Strategy is to respond.

Generator Gifts:

Sustainable energy
Inner GPS
Responsive nature
Proclivity to find and master their life’s work
Relational capacity

Manifesting Generators

Manifesting Generators are fundamentally Generators. They have a Defined
Sacral like Generators. They also have the Manifestor aspect of a Motor to the
Throat Center. Therefore, they have the attributes of the Generator (see above)
with the power of the Manifestor. The Manifesting Generator Strategy is to
respond (Generator) and inform (Manifestor).

Additional Manifesting Generator Gifts:

 Being heard and manifesting
Impacting people and situations
Empowering people
Capacity to act on their own
Being prolific Multi-tasking
                                        60

Manifestors

Manifestors have an Open Sacral Center and a Motor to the Throat Center. The
Manifestor Strategy is to inform.

Manifestor Gifts:

Initiating action
Impacting
Speaking and being heard
Acting independently
Leadership

Projectors

Projectors have an Open Sacral Center and no Motor to the Throat Center. The
Projector Strategy is to wait for the invitation.

Projector Gifts:

Quality of being
Magnetic
Strategic maturity
Wise guides of humanity
Leaders of the future



Reflectors

Reflectors have no Centers Defined. The Reflector Strategy is to wait twenty-nine
days before acting or making decisions.


Reflector Gifts:

Clear mirrors
Fluidity
Oneness with nature
Knowledge
connected to all things – awakening
                                        61




AUTHORITY IN THE CHART

Along with Type and Strategy, Authority is central to working with your unique
puzzle piece. It is inextricably connected to your Centers. Authority shows you
how to best make decisions given your design. Again, this is beyond the scope of
this book to address fully. I will say that there are numerous ways people break
down Authority. I’ve simplified it to four basic kinds of Authority.

      Emotional Authority
      Sacral Authority
      Splenic Authority
      No Authority

If you have Emotional Authority, you have a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus
Center. You will need to determine what kind of emotional wave you have:
Individual, Tribal, or Collective. You will then have the job of working with that
wave. With this Authority, you are not designed to make spontaneous decisions.
You can also refer to Chapter 12 in my book Understanding Your Clients through
Human Design for more information about the waves.

If you have Sacral Authority, you do not have a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus
Center but you do have a Defined Sacral Center. You are designed to make
decisions in the moment by listening to your Sacral yeses and noes.

If you have Splenic Authority, you do not have a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus,
nor a Defined Sacral, but you do have a Defined Spleen. You are designed to listen
intently to your intuition and follow it.

If you have No Authority, your Emotional Solar Plexus, Sacral, and Spleen Centers
are all Undefined. You will do best if you can talk out your thoughts with someone
who is neutral. In this way, you can hear yourself and get clarity.

RECAP

In this chapter, we began the conversation of how Human Design came into being
and its philosophy that everyone is perfectly designed. We’ve clarified that each
person is a unique and valuable piece of the puzzle of humanity. We’ve
                                         62

acknowledged the importance of differentiation. We’ve introduced the mechanics
of Human Design: the neutrino stream, the I Ching hexagrams, the planets,
Conscious and Unconscious Definition, Hanging Gates, Channels, and Circuitry.
We touched on how Centers become Defined. We looked briefly at Type,
Strategy, and Authority as the basis of the Human Design puzzle.

We’ve noted that the Type, Strategy, and Authority will be woven into the
conversation about the Centers. You’ll find that I often only refer to Strategy and
Authority. Type is inferred from Strategy. There are many more layers of the
puzzle that have vital bits of information that impact and reveal the design of your
unique quantum body. But for our purposes, we are focusing on the Centers and
the riches they provide.

In the next chapter, we’ll dive into the Centers. Hopefully, you’re not too flooded
with information and this crazy picture with shapes and colors will begin to make
more sense to you!
                                         63


                                         5

                      THE CENTERS – A FIRST LOOK


INTRODUCING THE CENTERS

When you look at your Human Design chart, the first thing you notice is the
Centers. They are the nine triangle, diamond, and square shapes that are either
colored in green, yellow, red, or brown, which we call Defined. Or they are not
colored but instead are white, which we call Undefined or Open. These Centers
are magical doorways.

In this chapter, we’ll look at what Centers are, what makes a Center Defined or
Undefined, and what the implications are in a broader scope. This will set the
stage for the deeper, chapter by chapter dive into each Center. Each Center is a
hub, similar to the chakras, holding a certain frequency or energy information
system.

Each Center has a particular meaning and function. Whether these Centers are
Defined (colored in) or Undefined (white) tells us a lot about a person. It tells us
which of the Five Types a person is. Definition and Openness in the Centers reveal
what a person’s strengths and vulnerabilities are, and what areas they’ve most
likely been conditioned to believe they’re someone other than who they are. The
Centers offer a world of information into who we are, what we may grapple with,
and what our gifts might be. They are both the map and the portals into the map
of our multidimensional holographic quantum selves. Each center processes a
particular kind of energy. Here is a chart of the Centers and a list of what energy
each Center is processing.
                                          64




The Head Center: Inspiration and ideas, a pressure center

The Ajna Center: Processes information

Throat Center: Manifestation and articulation

G Center/ Identity Center: Self-love, direction in life, identity

Will Center: Capacity to commit, value, material world (motor)

Sacral Center: Sustainable energy (motor)

Emotional Solar Plexus Center: Emotional energy (motor)

Root Center: Adrenalized energy (motor), a pressure center

Spleen Center: Intuition, fear, time, and immune system



The Four Motors

Just to complicate things a bit, there are different kinds of Centers. Four of the
Centers are called Motors. These are the Sacral Center, the Root Center, the
Emotional Solar Plexus Center, and the Will Center. The Motors generate energy
and operate in a particular way. You’ll hear more of the details of the different
                                         65

Motors when we go into the Centers individually. For now, just be aware of which
of the four Centers are Motors.




The Three Awareness Centers

There are also three Awareness Centers: the Spleen Center, the Ajna Center, and
the Emotional Solar Plexus Center (which is also a Motor). Each of these Centers
focuses on a particular kind of consciousness. The Spleen Center has a body
consciousness and is focused on the survival of the body and survival intelligence.

The Ajna has a mind consciousness and is concerned with mental intelligence. The
Emotional Solar Plexus has a spirit consciousness and is focused on awareness.
Again, we will look more closely at this in the individual chapters on these
Centers.

Open and Defined Centers

Centers become Defined (colored in) when two Gates join and form a Channel.
The Centers on either side of that Channel automatically become colored in or
Defined. If, on the other hand, the Center has no Channels, it is left white and is
then Undefined or Open. You will have some combination of Defined and Open
Centers in your chart, unless you are in the 1 percent of the population, called
Reflectors, who have all their Centers Undefined. There are also a small number
                                         66

of people who have all their Centers Defined. We call these unusual charts 9 and
0.




Defined Centers Broadcast

Everything we’ve just discussed so far has laid the groundwork so we can now
step into the power and the mystery of the Centers. Let’s start with Definition in
your chart.

Where you are Defined in your chart – whether it is a Center, a Channel or a Gate
– you are broadcasting those energies 24/7. This energy is always on. There’s
nothing you have to do to broadcast. The energies are the broadcast. Where you
are Defined, you have consistent access to yourself through these energies. Your
Definition gives you a sense of ground. This is energy you can count on. It’s
familiar, it’s where you know yourself.

With your Definition, you have substance. Your Defined energy is your quantum
form body which interacts with the world. Whether you’re aware of it or not, it
operates as an externalizing force. This is your yang energy. There’s a potential
potency and a possibility of impact with Definition. There’s a strength in meeting
the world. In your Definition, there’s a kind of recognizable embodiment.
                                         67

Defined Energy Carries a Consistent Theme and Operates in Duality

I want to pause here for a moment and say that where we are Defined, we
consistently carry the theme of that energy. There’s a certain kind of privilege
privilege or abundance related to the theme of the Center that is accessible to
Defined Centers. But let’s be clear. It’s the theme of that energy, and it operates
on a continuum. This means you can either have that energy or not have it. You
can use it or misuse it. Either way, the theme is at play. Let me use the example of
Gate 63, the Gate of Doubt. This is a Gate that comes off the Head Center and is
the beginning of the left-brain Logic Circuit. If you have that Gate Defined in your
chart, you’re designed to doubt things. It’s a gift.

I have that Gate and I can sniff who or what teachers or teachings are authentic. I
can see what paths make logical sense for me to try. Using that energy to
interface with the world, especially when I’m listening to my Generator Strategy
and honoring my yeses and noes, gives me a ground and supports my path.
However, if, or when, I turn that energy on myself and doubt myself, then that
same energy becomes poison in my system. I experience an immediate superego
attack. We are not, after all, logical beings. Logic is not an energy that should be
used to question ourselves.

The Defined areas in our chart operate in the realm of duality – good or bad and
right or wrong. The task with Definition involves working with polarities. We’ll
explore this more in depth when we look specifically at how to work with aligning
with our Definition. This, you’ll see, is different from the process of working with
our Openness. With Openness in our chart, we are not working in the realm of
duality or polarity.

Let me use another example. Imagine for a moment that the Defined Centers in
your chart are like White men. They have a certain amount of privilege and
power. They have testes that are sperm factories. They are creating by going out
into the world and impacting it. Now, some of those men may be wealthier than
others. Some may have different financial inequities. Some men may have more
position and power than other men.

They may have higher or lower sperm count. But they are still men. Their privilege
grants them certain rights, such as higher pay and easier access to power
                                          68

positions than women. Generally speaking, a woman in our culture will have to be
twice as smart as a man to get the same CEO job. She’s vulnerable in ways men
simply are not. I’ll continue this analogy in a moment when we look at Openness
in the chart. But for now, let’s continue to get a sense of Definition in our chart, in
our quantum body.

We Are Both Defined and Open

 One way to approach our quantum body through our Human Design Chart is to
see that we are both yang and yin. We are both Defined and Open. We are both
particle and wave. Our job is to discover how to utilize the gift of our Definition
and Openness to be aligned, rather than at war with the puzzle piece we’ve been
given.

When we embrace the privileged parts of our Design – the Definition – and learn
to use them according to our Strategy and Authority, they provide a ground and
stability in our lives. They are powerful forces. They give us purpose, direction,
and well, definition. They enable us to move through life in flow and with ease. In
your Definition, you recognize yourself. How skillful you are with your Definition
determines your experience of pain or empowerment in relation to your
Definition.

The more I embrace my Definition, the clearer my path becomes. For example,
I’ve got my Conscious Sun in Gate 3, which is called Difficulty at the Beginning.
Really? My biggest energy in the chart is difficulty at the beginning? That was hard
to hear. At least my ego didn’t think that sounded very good. I’ve also got
Neptune, my spiritual path, in Gate 28, the Gate of Struggle. That was really a
downer at first.

But you’ve read my story. It makes sense, right? I’m here to have difficulty at the
beginning, which I did, because I’m bringing in new mutative energy. I didn’t feel
like I belonged on the planet. I was in effect, from the future, bringing something
new that took time to be recognized. As far as having struggle as my spiritual
path, I'm designed to struggle and help others with their struggles.

Once I got on board with this, I stopped making myself wrong for my struggles
and started using those energies consciously. I began to respect what I bring into
the world in the timing it comes (writing this book in my sixties!). I treasure all the
                                         69

struggles I’ve had. They’ve helped me understand people’s suffering from the
inside out. My struggles taught me not be afraid of pain. Those struggles were
fuel for my transformation, which I, in turn, offer as service.

I’ve come to love and appreciate my Definition. It’s an ever-deepening process of
leaning into it. My Definition holds the ground for my Openness. I’ll explain more
about this later. My hope is that, at this point, you’re getting very curious about
your Definition and how aligned you are with it. I hope you are wondering how
well you’re utilizing your Definition. I hope you’re ready to learn what your
definition says about you and how it might support you.

The Open Centers

As I said, “I love my Definition.” But even with all the ground, direction, and
privilege my Definition provides, the Openness in my chart, in my quantum body,
is my true love. It holds a mystery continuously waiting to be discovered.

As we talked about earlier, the Definition in our chart is where we are
broadcasting ourselves in the world. On the other hand, the Openness in our
chart is where we are receiving all those broadcasts from the people around us as
well as from the energy of the transiting planets (See Chapter 15.). We could say
that our Definition is our outbreath, while our Openness is our inbreath.

Where we’re Undefined or Open, we’re taking the world in. This energy is fluid
and flexible. It’s variable. It is the formless aspect of our quantum body. Our
Openness is the place where we don’t know ourselves as an ego or as a body. Our
Openness is the yin balance to the yang definition. Like the womb that creates
from receiving, our Openness holds the mystery of life. It is the vast fluctuating
unknown.

And it is part of who we are as much as our form. Our Definition is part of who we
are. Together they make a whole. The form has been privileged. Most of us don’t
walk around aware of ourselves as ginormous ever-expanding beings embodying
the limitless unknown. We condense ourselves into the known. We have no clue
who we are. Most of us don’t recognize how magnificent we actually are. We
haven’t begun to tap into the possibilities this precious birth and this quantum
body offer us. Clearly, I feel a tremendous passion and excitement about the
Open Centers!
                                          70

Open Centers as Pain Points

 In the traditional understanding of Human Design, our Openness – especially as
far as the Centers go – are our pain points. Understandably so. They are where we
are conditioned. Think about it. Our ego does not like the unknown. It would
rather have pain than emptiness. At least pain is something. In our Open Centers,
we grab hold of things – thoughts, feelings, fears, lack of value, and pressure. This
gives us a sense of identity where we have none.

We create whole worlds by taking on and wrapping around beliefs that don’t even
belong to us. We are conditioned by our parents, family, teachers, friends,
culture, and ancestry. The pain we experience is the pain of identifying with what
Ra called the Not Self.

In Buddhism, the teaching is that all suffering comes from a misidentification or
taking ourselves to be something we’re not. With the Open Centers, we get
caught in the comparing mind as we look around and see that people with
Definition in the places we’re Open have something we don’t have. We tell the
story we’re deficient, and we believe something is wrong with us.

Accessing the Hidden in Jewel in the Open Centers

Our Open Centers are like filters taking in the world and sorting through what
comes in. The job with the Open Centers is to filter out and become wise about
the information you’re processing – whether it’s the ideas that the Head Center
processes, or the emotions that the Emotional Solar Plexus processes, or any of
the other Centers. But to become wise, we have to be able to differentiate what is
ours versus what is another’s.

We have to have a strong witnessing observer. We have to be detached. We have
to be comfortable with our Openness. We have to be married to our Strategy and
Authority. We have to understand that while the Defined Centers provide
consistent access to the known, the Open Centers provide access to pure
possibility. This is not an easy task.

And yet, there is a jewel hidden in each of the Open Centers and our job is to
clear the debris so we can access it. Each one of the Open Centers could be seen
as a spiritual path. Each Open Center holds the possibility of truly letting go into
                                          71

the formless and accessing the all of life. This is a different process than working
with the duality and polarity found in Definition.

 It is more like going into the hole to discover the whole. nd it is not easy. It is not
easy in the same way it is not easy to be a woman in a man’s world. But I wouldn’t
trade my female gender. There is a power in being a woman that a person in a
man’s body will never know. And, in a way, as I write this, I’m aware this analogy
is outdated as the gender spectrum collapses. But I think it still it works.

We Have Access to All of the Chart, However…

My Human Design mentor, Karen Curry Parker, assures us that we all have
everything in the chart. She teaches that where you are Open in your chart
doesn’t mean you are lacking that energy. She sees the Open Centers more like
baskets that you put a lot of things into and choose what you want. She explains
that with Openness, you get to be wise about if and how you use the energy. I
understand that perspective. I can appreciate that the Open Centers are a kind of
tasting ground to see what you like and what you don’t like, what you want to
keep and what you want to let go of. It’s true that we have access to all the
energies even though they are not consistent or sustainable.

However, as someone with an Open Identity Center, I have a radically different
experience of the world than someone with a Defined Identity Center. When I
compare my Openness to being born a girl into a predominantly male family, it’s
clear that I do not have a penis. I will never have a penis. My experience as a girl
was fundamentally different than my brothers’ experience of life because they
had penises. Even if I did transition gender and have constructive surgery to have
a penis, I still cannot make sperm.

A man does not (yet anyway) have the capacity to carry and birth children.
Likewise, I will never have a Defined Head, Ajna, Throat, Identity, or Will Center. I
can have penis envy, or I can explore and value the gifts of being a woman. I can
feel deficient and tell a story that my life is screwed because of my Open Centers,
or I can discover the power that lies in wait in the unsolvable mystery of who I
am. Having a Defined Center is not better than having an Open Center. They are
just different, and we need to honor the differences.
                                         72

An important thing to keep in mind is that every puzzle piece has both Defined
and Undefined aspects. We are both yin and yang. Our Defined and Open
Centers, Channels, and Gates electromagnetically connect with others. We rely on
one another, and just as we rely on the sperm to enter the womb and meet the
egg to continue our species, we rely on the Defined aspects of ourselves to
intermingle, if you would, with the Open aspects of others and vice versa. It is like
a giant lovemaking of sorts. Each one of us is our own living, breathing, quantum-
embodied universe which then connects with the whole of living, breathing,
quantum-embodied universes, making one inseparable whole quantum puzzle.

Electromagnetics

How Definition impacts Openness, either through planetary transits or in human
relationship, is referred referred to as electromagnetics. It’s a fascinating study
unto itself that we can only briefly touch on here. Basically, wherever you have a
Hanging Gate, you’re electromagnetically drawn to people who have the other
half of that Channel to complete it – to create the full circuit.

If you have the Gate 53 Starting Things, Defined off your Root Center, and I have
the Gate 42 Finishing Things, Defined off my Sacral Center, when we connect, we
have access to the whole Channel. If you have an Open Sacral and Open Root and
those Gates connect to form a Channel, then you have access to both root and
sacral energy. This gives you a boost. But it’s not sustainable. We’ll go a little
further into this in Chapter 15.

Working with the Open Centers

Let me just talk a little bit more about the work required with the Open Centers.
The first task is to see them for what they are. The Open Centers are the formless
aspect of yourself that is fluid, open, receiving, and most likely full of unfiltered
garbage. Understand where they are causing you pain and investigate.
Understand that there are ways to clear the filters and develop new relationships
with your Open Centers.

The next task is to do the work to clean those filters. As you do, a new light comes
in. A new world is born. The Open Centers become what I call God Portals – or
doorways to our essential selves. The question then becomes how to stabilize the
Open Centers on the truth of who we are. In the Diamond Work, we call it The
                                          73

Turn. It’s the shift from identifying with our egoic patterning to identifying with
our True Nature. This is a powerful gift that the Open Centers provide.

Using Human Design to Embody the Whole of Us

There are many remarkable and life-altering gifts that are accessed through
knowing, understanding, and utilizing our Human Design. One of the biggest gifts
comes from understanding through the Centers that we are both form and
formless. The Definition and Openness in the Centers call us to a new kind of
embodiment. It’s time to recognize and embody our multi-dimensional,
holographic body. We can no longer afford to split off from our formless aspect
any more than we can afford to walk around in a dissociated state. It’s time to
heal our traumas. It’s time to show up in the fullness of who we are. It’s time to
live our piece of the puzzle.

Diving into the Center’s Gifts and Grapples

 In the next nine chapters, we’ll look at each of the Centers in depth. I’ll begin
with an introduction to the Center, followed by a meditation to begin to plant the
seed of experiencing the Center as an embodied experience. Next, I’ll introduce
the Defined aspect of the Center, its gifts, its challenges (or grapples), followed by
how to work with the Defined Center and what tools you might consider to aid
you.

Following the Defined Center, I’ll introduce the Open Center aspect. Instead of
starting with the gifts, as I did with the Defined Centers, I start with the grapples.
This is purposeful. The pain of the Open Centers is generally the presenting issue
in most charts. From the grapples, we’ll explore the gifts that particular Open
Center offers. Next, I’ll share my thoughts regarding the God Portal for that
Center. Finally, we look at how to work with that Open Center and helpful tools to
support you and your clients. So, now begins the immersion into the deep end.
       74


       III

GIFT AND GRAPPLES
                                          75


                                          6

                GETTING TO KNOW YOUR HEAD CENTER




INTRODUCING THE HEAD CENTER



We begin our exploration into the Centers with the Head Center. This is the top
triangle on the bodygraph. If the triangle is colored yellow, then it is Defined. If
the triangle is white, it is Undefined, or Open. The Head Center is generating
inspirations, thoughts, and ideas. It’s asking and pondering the big questions in
life: How? Why? and What?

The Head Center is one of two pressure Centers in the chart. In this pressure
system, as questions arise, the immediate pressure to answer them also arises,
almost simultaneously. Whether the Head Center is Defined or Undefined in a
chart will determine how that pressure impacts a person. We’ll talk more about
that later in the chapter.

What Is Unique to the Head Center

There are a few things that only show up in regard to the Head Center:
                                         76

      The Head Center only connects to one Center - the Ajna.
      The Head Center only has three Gates.
      The Head Center is not motorized.
      The Head Center is not a decision-making Center.

The Head Center Only Connects to One Center – the Ajna

For now, there are a few important things to keep in mind with the Head Center.
The first thing to note is that the Head Center is unique in that the only Center it
connects to is the Center directly below it, the Ajna Center. All the other Centers
in the chart connect to multiple other Centers. So, what does that mean? The
Ajna Center and the Head Center are intricately connected.

The Head Center has questions, thoughts, and inspirations. The Ajna attempts to
process the information, to bring it from the conceptual realm into a pragmatic,
usable form. They work in tandem. You’ll learn more about this when you read
the next chapter on the Ajna Center.

The Head Center Only Has Three Gates




The second unique aspect of the Head Center is that it only has three Gates
coming off of it. These are Gates 64, 61, and 63. This is important, so I’m going to
                                          77

take a moment to flesh out those Gates. Our focus will be on the three types of
questions the Head Center is asking and looking to answer. As you read this,
check your chart or your client’s chart to see which, if any, of these Gates are
Defined.

The Head Center is reaching into the unknown, trying to make sense of life. It’s
under pressure to know. It attempts to know by asking three questions from
three different perspectives. Each of these questions is connected to one of those
three Gates.

Gate 64 Asks the Question How?

The Gate on the left is Gate 64. This Gate is called Confusion in traditional Human
Design. In Karen Curry Parker’s Quantum Human Design™ language, she calls it
Divine Transference. This Gate is part of the right brain Sensing Circuit. It is under
pressure to make sense of the past. It is trying to resolve chaos and confusion.
The right brain operates through an abstract lens in a non-linear way, often using
symbols and dreams to communicate.

It offers big downloads of information that may take years to unpack or fully
comprehend. The questions generated from this Gate revolve around the
question How. How do you manifest your big dreams? How do you take the
information information from the past and use it to go forward safely? How do
you make sense of the download you’ve been given? This can be disorienting and
confusing energy. This is especially true if you are viewing it through a logical lens.
Thus, the name: The Gate of Confusion.

Gate 61 Asks the Question Why?

If you or a client has Gate 61 Defined, the middle Gate coming from your Head
will be colored red, black, or both red and black. Here you are dealing with the
Individual Knowing Circuitry. This is mutative in nature and is here to bring some
new thought or new awareness to the planet. This Gate is called Mystery in
traditional Human Design. It’s known as the Gate of Mystery or Wonder in
Quantum Human Design™. Thoughts generated from this Gate are way ahead of
their time. With this energy defined, you can know things. You don’t know how
you know, but you know. Regardless of what anyone else says, you know things.
                                          78

This Gate is reaching into the mind of God. It is attempting to know the mysteries
of life. This Gate is asking the question Why? Of course, these mysteries are
ultimately unknowable. If you have this Gate Defined, you can easily get
frustrated by the pressure to know something only to discover there is more to
know. The other option is to relax and enjoy the journey of perpetual discovery.
Here you can bask in wonder and trust your knowing as it perpetually deepens
into the mystery.

Gate 63 Asks What?

The last Gate, Gate 63, is Logical Collective Circuitry. Left brain in nature, Gate 63
is called Doubt, in traditional Human Design and Curiosity in Quantum Human
Design™. This energy looks to the future to make sense of which path to follow
and what to pursue. Thus, it asks the question What? There is pressure to
understand and make sense of patterns. Gate 63 uses doubt – or curiosity – to
see what is a good next step.

Most of us have been indoctrinated to believe this is the penultimate lens
through which to approach the unknown, but truly it is only one of three ways
and has had more than its share of time in the Sun as the King God. If you do not
have Logical Circuitry in your chart, you may feel like you’re out of the loop or
that something is wrong with you. Honor and respect your right brain and your
knowing!

Just one more tidbit on Gate 63. Since I have it Defined, I know it well. This energy
is meant to look outside at the world in order to hypothesize, in a prudent way,
what is next. I love this gate. It's very intelligent energy. It can see which teachers
are authentic, what is bullshit, and what is truth. The doubting aspect can be very
wise. However, this is also considered one of the Yellow Flag Gates in the chart.

If this Energy of Doubt is turned inward, it acts like poison. It can stop any forward
motion before it begins. It can act to truncate possibility rather than supporting
discernment. Humans are not, after all, designed to be looked at through the
microscope of logic. That lens cannot possibly perceive our vast complexity and,
in fact, diminishes our stature.

Vandy Verma is an author and a student in my Human Design training for
coaches. She has the Gate 63 and learning about this gate was a turning point in
                                          79

her life. She realized she was misusing this energy. Her words: “OMG! I realize my
favorite flavor of suffering is self-doubt. I’ve been using it destructively and now
I’m using constructively. I was using it exactly the opposite of how I should have
used it. It’s a strength but I was using it against myself like an autoimmune
disease.”

 In all of these cases, regardless of where the question is coming from, questions
are a fundamental and natural exploration of life. We are designed to reach into
the unknown in order to find knowing. The conundrum we all have to work with is
the fact that the ego does not like or tolerate the unknown. The ego is in a rush to
answer these questions as quickly as it possibly can. Our work with this center is
to not rush into knowing. We must learn to restrain the urge to answer questions
that demand our attention as an attempt attempt to merely relieve the pressure
of not knowing.

Something magical happens when we learn to wait, tolerate the pressure, and see
what arises. It’s a bit like having an orgasm. If you rush through the tension for
the release you miss the exquisite pleasure of the opening. There is a great deal of
pleasure to be had in the Head Center, but much of it is lost to us with our
inability to sit with the pressure of the unknown and open to the astonishing
answers it can bring when we don’t push.

The Head Center Is Not Motorized

 The third thing to keep in mind with the Head Center is that it is not motorized. It
does not have a Motor to the Throat Center. To be clear, it’s not the only Center
that’s not motorized. But, blindly and collectively, we act as if it were motorized.
Why is this so important? Well, in our culture we’re conditioned to believe that if
we have a thought, we should be able to act on it and have it come to fruition.
This is absolutely absolutely not the case from a Human Design perspective, and
this is the source of much angst. As a coach or therapist, you will find this piece of
information a game-changer once you know how to use it.

The Head Center Is Not a Decision-making Center

The final thing to keep in mind is that the Head Center is not a decision-making
Center. Let me say that again, in a different way, more emphatically. Never go to
your Head to make a decision! The Head Center is not designed to be a decision-
                                           80

making Center. A Center for ideas and thoughts? Yes. A Center for questions and
possible answers? Yes. One of the biggest insights Human Design offers is this
shift from relying on our minds for answers and direction, to tapping into our
Authority. You can learn more about Authority by downloading my free digital
copy of Understanding Your Clients through Human Design and read Chapter 12.

https://www.clientsandhumandesign.com/free-book

 In a moment, we’ll delve into differentiating and more deeply understanding how
to work with the Defined Head and Open Head Centers. We’ll explore their
distinct gifts and challenges. But first, let’s take time to connect, in a visceral way,
with the Head Center. Together, let’s bring this map into an embodied and lived
experience. I invite you to put everything aside. Give yourself the next five to
twenty minutes to explore your Head Center through this guided meditation.



CONNECTING WITH YOUR HEAD CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

Pause for a moment and take a breath.

Feel where your sitz bones make contact with your chair. Can you feel the weight
of your body as it rests into the surface of the chair?

Now, sense your arms and legs.

Take a breath and intensify your focus on your arms and legs.

What do you notice?

Do they become heavier?

Next sense your belly.

Breathe into your belly, feeling it expand and relax with each breath.

Rest for a moment in your belly.

Do you notice your mind getting stiller as you bring your awareness to your belly?

Now, simply bring your awareness to your breath.

With each breath, deepen your awareness of your body.
                                            81

Relaxing and opening, allow yourself to come more fully into the present moment.

From this resting place, shift your focus to your head.

Is your mind quiet or busy?

Do you notice tension or ease?

Now picture your Human Design chart.

Imagine that in the same way that you have a physical body, you also have a
holographic, multi-dimensional body.

Picture your chart as your multidimensional vehicle or body for this lifetime.

Smile at it.

Welcome your awareness of it.

Set the intention to get to know it.

Get to know yourself through it and as it.

Turn your attention to your holographic Head Center.

Is it Defined or Undefined in your bodygraph?

Can you allow yourself to feel into it?

From a place of curiosity, what do you notice?

Just a first approximation.

Imagine a child discovering their toes for the first time.

Can you discover what your Head Center feels like?

Are you able to feel the Definition or the Openness?

Is your mind busy like rush hour traffic?

Or is it at rest like sitting by a lake looking up at the night sky?

Maybe it's somewhere in-between?

Whatever you notice is perfect, even if it is nothing.
                                         82

We are just beginning our investigation into this new dimension of ourselves.

It takes time to differentiate.

The Head Center is the home of the pineal gland.

Take a moment to acknowledge your pineal gland.

Would it be okay for a moment to allow your physical body and your holographic
body to occupy the same space?

 Perhaps you could begin to breathe into your pineal gland, which rests in the
center of your head.

For many of us, it is crusted over, congested, and contracted.

Can you set an intention to allow it to unwind and relax?

Now as we bring this meditation to a close, expand your awareness to include
your entire body and bodygraph again.

Take a few long, deep breaths.

Sense your arms and legs.

Sense into your belly.

Bring your awareness back into the room.

Take a few minutes to write down what you discovered.

Consider starting a journal specifically to keep track of your observations and
experiences with the different Centers.

Return to this meditation again and again if it speaks to you.

Or you can devise your own. The point is to begin to lean into your quantum
body, to allow yourself to embody it.

You have a rich and powerful journey ahead!
                                          83

THE DEFINED HEAD CENTER

Thirty percent of the population has a Defined Head Center. You know what that
means, right? That less than a third of the people on the planet are filling the
airspace with ideas and inspirations. The rest of us with Open Head Centers are
taking in those thoughts and inspirations and amplifying them! My Head Center is
Undefined. When I see someone with a Defined Head Center, I admit, I have a bit
of Defined Head envy. Maybe a little like that occasional penis envy? What would
it be like to have a Defined Head? What would it be like to have consistent access
to your thoughts? What would it be like to know what you think? To be able to
count on your mind? What would it be like to remember things, for God’s sake!

In our culture, which prioritizes thinking, having a Defined Head is definitely an
advantage. Just as a reminder, if you or someone you work with has a Defined
Head Center, by definition they also have a Defined Ajna. The Head Center can
only become Defined is if there is a Channel to the Ajna. If this is the case, both
Centers automatically become Defined.

This is especially powerful because, along with consistent access to ideas and
inspiration, you have a consistent and reliable way to process those ideas. Your
mind is searching, asking questions, and your Ajna is busy trying to come up with
usable answers. Voila! A very solid and grounded person – mentally. At least that
is the possibility.

Remember that where we are Defined, we are looking at a theme or a continuum.
Definition exists in duality, in the positive and negative aspects of the theme. We
can be on the high side of that theme or the low side. With the Defined Head and
Ajna, you can be full of questions that you’re constantly looking to solve. Your
mind is getting clarity in order to move forward.

The other possibility is that you can be caught in a loop of confusion. Your mind
can be hijacked by questions which can trigger feelings of despair when you’re
not able to come up with answers. You can have the energy of constant mental
activity or the depletion of mental energy, worn out by all the thinking. In any
event, with Defined Head and Ajna Centers, you are thinking constantly. There is
no way around that.
                                          84

The Gifts of the Defined Head Center

So, let's take a look at the gifts of the Defined Head Center:

    You are a source of information and inspiration.
    You have consistent access to your mind and thinking.
    You know what you think.

You Are a Source of Information and Inspiration

First of all, with a Defined Head, you are a source of information and inspiration.
You can’t help it. Whether you are conscious of your thoughts or not, whether
you are speaking your ideas or not, you are broadcasting. Your mind is like a 24/7
radio station, asking questions, and searching for answers. You are perpetually
searching for ways to make sense of the world. You are probing life and sharing
your discoveries.

Meanwhile, the rest of us have our radio dialed to your station – whether we
know it or not! I think of my Human Design mentor Karen Curry Parker with her
Defined Head and Ajna. She’s like a perennial geyser, a constant stream of ever-
evolving information. It’s jaw-dropping to witness her endless capacity to inspire
and educate. Her mind is truly a thing to behold. It’s like a wonder of nature! She
has an incomprehensible storehouse of teachings and recordings going back
twenty years.

You Have Consistent Access to Your Mind and Thinking

You have the enviable gift of having consistent access to your thinking. You
actually know what you think and remember what you think! It’s mind-boggling
to those of us with Open Heads who are often at a loss when it comes to having a
thought and holding on to it.

You have the capacity to think about what you want to say, maybe write it down
or not, and then speak it or present it. For those of you who have this gift, it’s like
the air you breathe or the water you swim in. It’s what you know and expect.
Again, the analogy of privilege is a good one. You are privileged and it’s hard to
imagine what someone’s life might be like who doesn’t have that same privilege.
                                         85

One thing to note is that how your mind processes and what you think about on a
consistent basis is dependent on which Channel or Channels are Defined. Take a
look here and see which Channel or Channels you have Defined.




Channel 64-47 Abstraction

For instance, if you have the Channel on the left, the 64-47, you have Collective
Sensing Circuitry. You will have consistent access to right-brained, abstract
thinking. You will be asking the How questions. Your mind will be looking to the
past, at symbols, and dreams. You will be trying to make sense of big thought
downloads. You may find yourself wondering how to use the information you’re
receiving. A positive mindset is crucial for you in order to recognize what you’re
being given. Your mind must be clear if you are to bring to earth your big ideas
and make them usable.

Channel 61-24 Awareness

If you have the Channel down the middle Defined, you have the deeply mutative
Individual Knowing Circuitry connecting your Head to your Ajna Center. You will
be asking those big Why questions and trying to find answers that are
understandable. You are reaching into the mind of God – into the mystery –
                                         86

searching, probing, bringing new understanding to humanity. You will be
continuously tweaking and re-tweaking your answers as new information comes
in. You are a thinker!

Channel 63-4 Logic

If the Channel on the right is Defined, the 63-4, you have the esteemed Logic
Channel. With this left-brain Collective Logic Circuitry, you are constantly using
your mind to come up with logical answers, solutions to questions about the
future. You are asking the question What? What to do? What direction to go? You
are designed to think logically, have logical answers, and share your solutions with
humanity.

You Know What You Think

My wife has a Defined Head and Ajna with the Channel of Answers, the 63-4. She
always knows what she thinks. If we are with a group and people are asking
where we should go to eat, she has an answer. She likes having and giving an
answer. Her chart has the Gate of Opinions in addition to the Channel of Logic. In
any conversation, about anything, I can count on her to have an idea or an
opinion. In many ways, I rely on her Defined Head to give me something, as a
Generator, to respond to.

Someone with the Head Defined through 61-24 will have a deep knowing about
what they think, though they may not share it if they don’t believe it will be
understood. Someone with the 64-47 may have a case of legitimate right brain
confusion, but they still know their brain is in process. They are thinking about
something that takes time to understand.

The Grapples of the Defined Head Center

If it’s so great to have a Defined Head (and with it a Defined Ajna), you may
wonder what challenges someone might face with this configuration.

    Your mind doesn’t stop thinking.
    You can have limited bandwidth in your thinking.
                                          87

Your Mind Doesn’t Stop Thinking

When I do Human Design coaching sessions with people, I ask them to send me
their three greatest challenges. Invariably people with a Defined Head report that
they can’t quiet their minds. While we are taught to value mental activity in our
culture, there is also a competing narrative that tells us we shouldn’t be in our
heads. We’re told that we shouldn’t think so much. The New Age influence and
the influx of spiritual tools such as yoga and meditation all teach the value of a
quiet mind. There can be a formidable superego attack, and a feeling of failure
when the Defined Head is unable to attain the elusive quiet mind.

There are two problems here: One is, with a Defined Head and Ajna, you’re
designed to have an active mind. There’s really not much to do about that
activity. It would be unkind for me to tell you to stop thinking. It’s what you do.
You do, however, have a choice in how you respond to your active mind. We’ll
address this in the next section.

The second problem surfaces if your active mind gets caught in a mental loop.
Under pressure to come up with answers, with no solution in sight, you may lose
patience or faith and try to dissipate the pressure. You may create messes by
taking action that’s not in alignment with your Type and Authority. Or you may
turn the pressure inward and experience anxiety and/ or depression. This can be
painful and debilitating.

You Can Have Limited Bandwidth in Your Thinking

Okay, you've got consistent access to your thinking, and you have a grounded
mind. You can count on your Head and Ajna to look at problems and come up
with solutions, but your thinking is limited. You look at things through a particular
lens. You don’t necessarily have a lot of flexibility in your thinking.

Your mind can be fixed. Your Defined Head is designed to broadcast ideas, not
necessarily be receptive to ideas. You may have to be coaxed into expanding your
thinking. I’ll use my favorite example here, my wife. Suppose I suggest something,
like, how to arrange the furniture in our living room. (Always a brilliant idea, of
course.) Her immediate response is no. She can’t see how it will work. But, once
I’ve put the furniture in the configuration I’m imagining, she’s surprised at how
well it works. But, if her mind can’t conceive it, she will initially block it.
                                          88

Working with the Defined Head

As you turn your attention to your Defined Head, have the intention of becoming
more aligned with the power of this Center. Remember that you are working with
a consistent theme: inspirations – or not; questions and the search for answers –
or not. Your Defined Head will be engaged in thinking. The question is what kind.
The ego is just as happy engaging with the negative as it is with the positive. If a
child wants attention, it will go after negative attention if positive attention is not
forthcoming. So, we are looking to align with the optimal functioning of this
Center. In Karen Curry Parker’s Quantum Human Design™, she refers to the Head
as the Quantum Interface Center. Another question we could ask ourselves as we
approach this Center is: How do we engage the Defined Head in a way that will
optimize our interface with the quantum field? Following are some ideas:

      Appreciate the Defined Head.
      Come to peace with mental activity.
      Develop patience and tolerance with the question/ answer process.
      Don’t act on your thoughts!
      Rely on your Strategy and Authority.
      Realize you may not always be right.

Appreciate the Defined Head

It is so easy and habitual to be negative toward our physical body and the same is
true with our quantum bodygraph body. When something is valued, it responds
positively. So, the easiest first step is to appreciate that you have a Defined Head.
You are fortunate to have this gift. It is a kind of wealth or potential access to
wealth, if you choose to respect and utilize it. Affirm how powerful your Defined
Ajna is. Take time to learn about how your Head Center is Defined. Which
Channel defines your Head Center? The more you consciously understand the
nature of your particular energy, the more likely you are to be in alignment with it
as a resource.

Come to Peace with Mental Activity

You are designed to have a brain that is continuously firing. We need your mental
activity, your thoughts, your inspirations, and your questions. Make friends with
the aliveness of your firing neurons! Catch any negative self-talk around how your
                                           89

brain works. Stop badgering your mind because you believe it should be resting
when it is not. The key is to choose how you respond to your mental activity. Is
your mental activity in charge, or does your awareness have the upper hand?

Think about dog training. If you take a dog for a walk, it is going to be excited to
sniff everything. It’s curious and engaged. If the dog is in charge, you are pulled
around by the dog. You’re holding onto the leash, maybe jerking your arm if your
dog sees a cat and goes after it. If you are the alpha, your dog looks to you for
where to focus. It still has all the impulses to follow all the smells but there is a
bigger reward for following your cues. Your awareness can free you from being
jerked around by your mind.

Develop Patience and Tolerance with the Question/ Answer Process

Your mind is designed to ask questions and seek out the answers. It’s natural to
feel the pressure of those questions and the need to find the answer. The
problem comes when the answers aren’t forthcoming in comfortable timing. The
ego doesn’t like the pressure pressure of the unknown. As a result, you might
employ a variety of tactics to try to dissipate the discomfort.

One tactic is to declare a solution, regardless of its credibility. This gives the ego a
sense of ground and completion for the moment. Another tactic could be turning
the pressure inwards. This tactic could flood your system with a cascade of
irrelevant questions. The onslaught could cause you to collapse into confusion. Or
you could find yourself in a mire that renders the question utterly unanswerable.
In this case, you’re likely to experience anxiety or depression.

But again, anything is preferable to the pressured disorientation of not knowing.
Another option could be to take an action, any action, regardless of its efficacy.
This, again, can temporarily relieve the pressure, and the ensuing terror, of having
to know something you don’t know. If you can relax and allow the full process of
questioning, you have the possibility of being at ease with your mind. Practice not
knowing. Practice waiting for an answer. Trust that what you need to know will
come at the right time. After all, it is not what your mind is doing that is the
problem. It’s how you’re reacting to what your mind is doing that causes the
distress.
                                         90

Don’t Act on Your Thoughts!

 We just spoke about action as a way to avoid feeling the pressure of not
knowing. I want to address a different angle here – the tendency to overrate our
thoughts. We give our thoughts a lot of weight. We believe them and create
whole worlds. We identify with our thoughts and feel compelled to follow them.
For a moment, let’s visit the world of Byron Katie. Imagine that thoughts are just
that – thoughts. They arise. They are not even personal. We attach to them and
assign meaning to them. What would your world look like if you were to be the
witness of your thoughts rather than (like the dog analogy above) being
compelled to follow every thought?

Rely on Your Strategy and Authority Rely on your Strategy to know when to ask
your questions, when to share your answers, and when to take action. In Human
Design, the mind is not a decision-making Center. The way to know which thought
to follow – how to be the dog owner, so to speak – is to follow your Strategy. If
you have a thought, no matter how brilliant, if you look to your Strategy, you will
be directed in regards to that thought. For example, if you are a Generator or
Manifesting Generator, are you making something up in your head or are you in
response to something?

Here’s an example from my life: My wife and I moved from Point Reyes, California
to Fairfield, Iowa. Before we moved I was commuting over an hour every day to
see clients in Berkeley. We had a thought that life would be simpler in the small
town of Fairfield. We knew that there would be less traffic and no commute. We
had the thought that we’d be near family and develop a spiritual community. Side
note: If you know anything about Fairfield, it’s the Transcendental Meditation
capital of the world. In the town of 10,000, up to 5,000 are meditators. There is a
consciousness-based elementary-to-high school as well as a consciousness-based
university in the town.

We both had family living there. Sounded like a great place to relocate and spend
the rest of our lives. There were so many thoughts that drew us to make the
radical move after living in the Bay Area for thirty years. Well, it didn’t work out
so well. Now, my commute was on an airplane once a month flying back to
Berkeley.
                                          91

There was a family drama that was not comfortable at all. And, while my wife did
get paid to meditate eight hours a day, I missed a feminine, embodied approach
to spirituality. We were not flourishing in the new soil. One day, out of the blue,
my wife said to me, “I want to go to Hawaii this year.” That seemed inconceivable
to me as my workload had diminished dramatically in the move. Within the hour,
I got an email inviting us to come to Maui to housesit that summer. We could pick
when and for how long.

Let me break this down. My wife is a Projector. Her Strategy is to wait to be
invited or acknowledged. She had a thought, but that wasn’t enough. Remember
our thought to move to Fairfield had not panned out so well. She was invited to
go to Maui. Meanwhile, I am Generator and my Strategy is to respond. I still did
not have a yes. I was concerned about the finances. Long story short, I discovered
that the flights to Maui were equivalent to the flights from Iowa to the Bay Area.
Then, I learned through an astrocartography reading that Maui would be an
optimal place for me to live. I had a huge sacral yes. Now, we happily live on
Maui.

The bottom line here is to be aware of your thoughts but not to give them
jurisdiction. Follow your Human Design Strategy and Authority, and you will be
well guided on your path.

Realize You May Not Always Be Right

Finally, if you have a Defined Head, you are designed to broadcast thoughts and
inspirations, not necessarily to take them in. Which doesn’t mean you don’t listen
or hear. From a Human Design perspective, your thoughts arise within a
bandwidth. You may have thoughts that you feel very certain about. With a
Defined Head and Ajna, it’s important to leave a little space for the possibility that
someone else’s thought might hold a better solution.

Can you accept the idea that you might not always be right? You do not have the
gift of the Open Head that is designed to look at all possibilities. You’re looking for
answers within a framework. This, on the one hand, gives you mental ground but,
on the other hand, limits your thinking. Just be aware of this. It could open a door
of flexibility that may not be natural to you.
                                         92

Helpful Tools

When approaching the Defined Head, there are a few tools that can be helpful.
Some of these will also be appropriate for the Open Head.

      Use the Defined Head and Ajna to look back at itself.
      Inquire using recurring questions.
      Inquire using The Work of Byron Katie.
      Practice meditations that occupy the mind.

Use the Defined Head and Ajna to Look Back at Itself

The Defined Head coupled with the Defined Ajna has tremendous self-reflexive
capacity. The trick here is to cultivate awareness and train the mind to look
directly at itself. This practice will strengthen the muscle of being in charge of
rather than at the effect of the active mind. There are a number of ways to do this
including the inquiry and mediation tools that follow.

Inquire Using Recurring Questions

The practice of inquiring into the mind using repetitive questions can be
particularly useful with the Defined Head. It entails either working with a partner
or doing the exercise alone. With a partner, set the timer for five to fifteen
minutes. The person asking the questions is the neutral observer. The person
answering the question is engaging in an inquiry. We do inquiry to discover more
about ourselves.

Our first responses to the question are usually what we already know. As the
question is asked repeatedly, we begin to get answers that may surprise us. The
trick is for the person answering the questions to keep their attention on
themselves. This is not about telling the observer something about you. It is not
about engaging them. This is for you to hear yourself. The Observer, meanwhile,
is not trying to show understanding. They are holding space for the Inquirer to
access and hear themselves.

It looks something like this:

I’ll use the example of doing this in my training this week.
                                         93

Observer asking question to a Manifesting Generator classmate with a Defined
Head:

“Can you tell me what you know about your Defined Head?”

(Side note: If this had been a person with an Open Sacral the question would be:
“What can you tell me about your Defined Head Center?”)

Inquirer answers.

Observer: “Thank you. Can you tell me what you know about your Defined Head
Center?”

Inquirer answers.

This repeats for the set amount of time, even if the Inquirer apparently runs out
of things to say. The answer might be “Nothing, at which point the Observer
would merely thank the person and ask the question again.

The student in my training realized that much of her frustration with her husband
stemmed from the differences between her Defined Head and his Open Head.
This is a common issue. Remember, when you have privilege, it can be hard to
understand those who don’t have that privilege.

You can also do this alone as written practice. First, set a timer. Then simply write
the question then write the answer. When you have exhausted your thoughts,
write the question again, and see what comes. Let whatever shows up have its
life. Don’t censor, even if you write I don’t know. Ask the question again.

Inquire Using The Work of Byron Katie

Katie’s work is genius when it comes to cleaning up the mind, seeing thoughts for
what they are, and getting aligned at a higher level. In her inquiry process, you
begin by writing your judgments on what she calls a worksheet. The format is:

Fill in the worksheet

I’m angry at ____ because ____.

I want ___ to ___.

I need ___ to ___.
                                          94

_____ should/shouldn’t ___.

______ is ____ (make a list).

I never want to experience ____ again. And I’m willing to experience ___ again.

Once you have completed the worksheet, take your thoughts to inquiry with four
simple questions and something that’s called a Turnaround.



The Questions

      Is it true?
      Can I absolutely know it’s true?
      How do I react when I believe that thought?
      Who would I be without that thought?


The Turnaround is merely taking your sentence, for example, I want my husband
to answer my questions, and turning the sentence around by replacing your name
where you’ve got their name. So, I want me to answer my questions. Or I want me
to answer my husband’s questions. Ask yourself if that is as true or truer than
your original sentence. See what you discover.

Practice Meditations That Occupy the Mind

Other skillful means to work with the Defined Head involve using meditation
techniques that occupy the mind. You may have the tendency of fighting the mind
to try to get it to be quiet. If this is the case, you can actually focus the mind in a
way that stops the searching activity. A few excellent choices include mantra
repetition, visualization, and chanting. Moving meditation like qigong or tai chi
can also occupy the mind, demanding a level of focus that inhibits the mind spin.
Tibetan Buddhist Meditation and Transcendental Meditation are particularly good
for the Defined Head.
                                        95

THE OPEN HEAD CENTER

What’s in an Open Head?

An astonishing 70 percent of the population have Open Head Centers. Do you
have an Open Head Center? Chances are likely! With an Open or Undefined Head,
you are not designed to have consistent access to your thinking. Uh oh. How’s
that supposed to work in our culture where so much emphasis is put on our
capacity to think clearly? Being smart is equated with knowing information. We’re
graded in school on memory retention.

This is not the expertise of the Open Head! The Open Head is receptive, taking in
all the thoughts and inspiring ideas in the field and amplifying them. People with
Open Heads just aren’t designed to hold onto those thoughts. Obviously, there
are some grapples in this scenario, some very real challenges which we’ll get to in
a minute.

But don’t be discouraged. The gifts of the Open Head are formidable. You have
the possibility of a flexible mind, deep wisdom, and magnificent expansion. As you
come to understand your Open Head, you have the opportunity to work
consciously with it. You can come into alignment with your Open Head and use it
at the highest level. Remember, every part of the chart is perfect. We need your
Open Head to function at full capacity!

The Grapples of the Open Head Center

As I pointed out, there are a number of grapples that someone with an Open
Head Center may encounter. In Human Design, these Open Center challenges are
often referred to as Pain Points. Here are some of the big ones:

      You can’t rely on your mind.
      You may not remember things.
      You can have a story that something’s wrong with you.
      Your mind has been conditioned.
      You’re under pressure to come up with answers.
                                          96

You Can’t Rely on Your Mind

With an Open Head Center, you are taking in the thoughts and inspirations of the
people around you. It’s like your mind can easily be tossed in the wind. You’re
with Kathy who’s talking about a new coach she’s working with and you think, Oh,
I should work with that coach. Then, you’re with Bob who’s taking a coaching
program on becoming a speaker and you’re like: That’s what I need. Then, your
friend, Bess, tells you she’s going back to a full-time job because she’s tired of
being self-employed, and you think, Maybe I should do that….

The Open Head will look at all the possibilities. It’s not biased. That’s one of its
gifts, which we’ll discuss later. But it is also somewhat of a curse. You can get lost
in the possibilities. It can be hard to know what you think with an Open Head. This
is where Strategy in your Human Design becomes so important. You may be
completely enthusiastic about an idea in one moment, only to drop it and
passionately embrace another idea in the next moment. People may see you as
flaky, ungrounded, or ditzy. You simply can’t rely on your mind to be consistent.
You’re not designed to.

With your Open Head, you can get disoriented by little things like deciding what
to eat or what to wear. You may go into a restaurant craving an omelet, only to
see someone eating a burger and find yourself ordering a burger. You can be
stumped when it comes to things like giving speeches or writing papers. You
cannot turn to your mind for readily available information. You may look to your
Head and find it is blank. There can be a deer-in-headlights moment when
someone asks you a question you know you should be able to answer, or you’re
expected to say something, but you have no clue what to say.

You May Not Remember Things

The challenge of not being able to rely on your mind is tied to the inability to
remember things. Occasionally, people with Open Heads have photographic
memories. There’ll be more on that in a bit. But, more often than not, the
experience is one of thoughts coming in and going out. I have the Open Head
Center and experience my mind more as a Monet painting. I remember
impressions of things. Not details. My wife, with her Defined Head and Ajna, can
remember how much the electricity bill is each month. I would have to squeeze
                                         97

my brain to search for that information. We’ll address this more when we get to
the Ajna, but having a brain that functions so fluidly can make navigating this very
logical world a bit dodgy.

You Can Have a Story that Something Is Wrong with You

Which brings me to the next challenge. People with Open Heads can think
something is wrong with them. Maybe you worry that you have early-onset
Alzheimer’s, or that you’re just not as naturally smart as other people. This
niggling feeling drives people to overcompensate to prove they’re okay. Think of
women trying to prove their worth. They become like superwoman to show
they’re capable. This feeling of mental inadequacy can also show up when people
with Open Heads get overwhelmed by people with Defined Heads. In this case,
they can feel like too much information is hitting them, or that they don’t know
what to say when they’re asked a question. Their mind can go totally blank.

Recently I did a Human Design coaching session for a woman who had an Open
Head. I described how the Open Head functions and the challenges she might
face. Later she told me the session brought a lot of relief and shifted her attitude
toward her mind. She had been in an accident as a child and for years had
assumed there was something wrong with her head. When she heard the
description of the Open Head, she realized it matched what she had perceived as
symptoms from the accident.

Your Mind Has Been Conditioned

With an Open Head Center, you can be impressionable. You take in the thoughts
of people around you as if they are your own. As a child, you take in the thoughts
of your parents, your teachers, your community. We all do this, but a Defined
Head has more of a chance of knowing what it thinks. An Open Head merges with
the thoughts of others.

If you don’t question those thoughts, they can create an identity. This can set
your life on a course that may not actually be in alignment with who you are and
what you’re here to be. You may be uncomfortable with your Openness and grab
hold of thoughts in an attempt to have something to ground you. This is not how
you’re designed to function and can cause mental tension.
                                         98

You’re Under Pressure to Come Up with Answers

The Open Head is one of the two pressure Centers. You walk into a room, and
pick up on everyone’s questions, spoken or not. Your mind immediately goes to
work trying to come up with answers. It’s just what your head does. Picture the
spinning wheel on your computer as it searches files. Your mind is continually
under pressure to come up with answers.

The thing is, you like coming up with answers. For a moment it relieves the
pressure. But only for that moment. Then the next question surfaces. These
questions may have nothing to do with you, but still you’re compelled to deal
with them. We’ll be addressing how to work this phenomenon, but for now, just
recognize that’s what you’re up to/ up against.

The Gifts of the Open Head Center

We’ve looked at the issues you or your clients may have to grapple with if you’ve
got an Open Head; now we get to delve into the enormous gifts that are available
to you.

      You are a flexible thinker.
      You take people and information in deeply at a mental level.
      You have the possibility of a still mind.
      You’re here to explore human consciousness.

You Are a Flexible Thinker

With an Open Head Center, you are designed to look at the whole of life. You are
not limited to a bandwidth but have the flexibility to see all sides of an issue. You
can entertain a very logical aspect as well as a very right-brained perspective. You
can look at something from a conservative view or a liberal view. When your
thinking isn’t clouded by conditioning, you’re open to new ways of thinking and
looking at life. With this comes an enthusiasm for the possibilities life offers.

You Take People in Deeply at a Mental Level

The unimpeded Open Head is spacious and receptive. It can know what people
think, almost like a mind reader. And, while you may have a fluid mind, whole
pieces of information can drop in, almost as if from nowhere. As a therapist, if I
                                           99

didn’t take notes after sessions, I would completely forget what I’d talked about
with clients.

The upside was that I didn’t hold onto the information between sessions; the
downside was it could seem like I hadn’t been tracking from week to week. As I
relaxed and became more comfortable with how my mind worked, I found that
with the slightest clue, the whole session would download, and I would have
access to every detail. It wasn’t from a place of holding on or storing, it was seeing
it.

Now is a good moment to talk about the photographic mind some people with
Open Heads enjoy. When the mind is clear without thought, it can take in
information directly. Recently I read a chart for a renowned MD who had a totally
Open head with an Open Ajna as well. I wondered how it would be to go through
medical school with all the detailed information required to memorize. When I
asked him about it, he said that things that were important to him he could
remember in vivid detail. Other things were lost on him.

You Have the Possibility of a Still Mind

Without the constant chatter of the Defined Head, you are able to have a still
mind. If you learn to tolerate and not resist the pressure to answer everybody’s
questions, and the discomfort of the blank mind, you can empty your mind. You
can enjoy an uncluttered mind, a resting mind, a mind at peace. With some work,
it’s quite possible.

You’re Here to Explore Human Consciousness

Your wide-open mind is curious and engaged. It connects with the world through
the mental lens. You are here to be one of the deep thinkers, exploring and being
wise about what is important to look at and understand. Central to this
exploration is curiosity about consciousness itself. With your flexible mind, you
have the capacity to traverse the unknown. You discover the majesty of life
without having to have things neatly resolved and figured out. Yours is a creative
mind, naturally full of wonder.
                                        100

The Open Head as a God Portal

Once you have freed your mind of egoic conditioning and habitual patterns, you
are available to enter the realm of the essential domain. This is the realm of
Being. Imagine that there is no separation between your mind and all of life. You
step into a state of Oneness through your mind. Innate intelligence is revealed.
Your quantum mind opens a whole new set of gifts and possibilities. They may
initially show up as flashes of insight.

These states of awareness can, over time, become stabilized into what Faisal
Muqaddam calls stations. This is part of the path of awakening – reclaiming our
essential self. We’ve identified ourselves as a body, or particle. We have the
opportunity to organize around and embrace ourselves as a quantum body, or a
wave, as well. Full transparency: I speak to this having touched into it and
witnessed it in others who are further along the path. I do not profess to
understand it completely. I leave you to discover for yourself what is possible
when you let go of

the structures that define your thinking and directly open into the space of the
great unknown. Here are some glimpses into the God Portal aspect of the Head
Center:

    You enter a state of Oneness with Universal Mind.
    You can know all things.
    You have a mind at rest.

You Enter a State of Oneness with Universal Mind

When there is nothing between you and all of life, you become one with the Mind
of God, whatever you might call that. Your mind is no longer personal but holds
the entirety of life in an ever-expanding, multi-dimensional capacity. Perhaps
you’ve experienced this through meditation or in that moment of grace when
you’re watching a sunset and the world stops.

Maybe, like Byron Katie, you’ve hit rock bottom, and something completely alters
the way you perceive reality. For Katie, it was a cockroach crawling on her foot.
The first time I consciously remember this happening I was nineteen, home from
college, lost and miserable. My mind was crashing in on me (Okay, I was deeply
                                        101

depressed). I was mired in the web of my dire thoughts and beliefs about myself
and the world.

Then, I read Yogananda Paramahansa’s book, Autobiography of a Yogi. I stepped
into a different dimension. I didn’t stay in that dimension; I was more like a
visitor. But, over time these experiences became more familiar. Byron Katie said it
took her seven years to stabilize into what she calls peace. What expansive mind
experiences have you had? Is your mind stabilized in peace?

You Can Know All things

It can be daunting from the ego’s perspective to have access to the entire library
of knowledge, but consider, if your mind is not cluttered, what you might
perceive. When we’re talking about the quantum body and the quantum field
where there is no time and space, anything is possible. The Indian saint, Ammachi,
was born in rural India with no formal education, yet she reads, speaks, and
understands multitudes of languages.

She has access to knowledge and information that is unfathomable. There are
countless stories of highly developed spiritual teachers knowing things from the
past, as well as from the future. I can remember Ram Dass telling the story of
meeting his guru, Neem Karoli Baba, a.k.a. Maharaji, for the first time. Maharaji
unnerved Ram Dass when he addressed the private thoughts which Ram Dass had
been having about his mother the night before.

My mind flashes to Charity and her deceased husband. I imagine the widows she’s
coaching. I wonder what they might understand about the death of their spouses
from this larger vantage. With her totally Open Head, Charity has come to a
knowingness of the perfection of it all. With the bigger God View, the tragic,
unexpected death of her husband opened her heart.

It brought a level of understanding life beyond linear time. She has a direct
experience of her connection with her husband that is unshakable. She has an
understanding that his death was not a mistake. Unshackled from the belief that
it should not have happened, she is able to step into the present without
abandoning or dissociating from the past. This is the nectar available from
stepping into the God Portal.
                                         102

I’m not saying someone with a Defined Head doesn’t have this capability, and I’d
like to hear more from those with a Defined Head about what your experience is.
I imagine it is more focused on a particular ray of knowing rather than the whole
picture. I’m guessing all roads lead to Rome, and with enough focus, the Defined
Head lets go into the great expanse. The Open Head, designed to naturally rest
and fill all space, has access to Oneness by letting go of focus.

In the Diamond work, there is an essential vehicle called the Diamond Dome. It
accurately describes the God Portal of the Open Head that can see all things.

Here’s an excerpt from A.H. Almaas, who speaks about this knowing from a place
of Being,

           “…The Diamond Dome is the essential mind that brings about the precise
       understanding of the levels of knowing. There is the usual learned, discursive
  knowledge based on memory, which is necessary for functioning in our daily life,
but basic knowing – knowing the presence of Being – is not a reflective knowing; it
    is the knowing of Being, which is knowing by direct experience.... The Diamond
       Guidance is an adjunct to our ordinary intellect and can navigate any kind of
         knowledge. That is what gives it its power. An intellect that can use mental
 knowledge while also having a foot in the universe of presence can conceptualize
                 all kinds of knowing – whether mental or direct – with exactness.”

                                                        — The Jeweled Path, p. 195

You Have a Mind at Rest

The nature of the Open Head Center is to be the space in which all thought arises.
There is a dynamic stillness that can be accessed through deep meditation. In
Vajrayana Buddhism, the path of Mahamudra is called The Great Seal. It brings
into Oneness relative and absolute reality. Mahamudra is the realization of the
great plop, where your mind settles into itself and rests in its True Nature. This is
referred to as natural great peace.

Sometimes this state is realized in extraordinary or life-threatening circumstances
when the mind can’t fathom the events at hand and surrenders into stillness.
When your filters are clear, your mind can rest. Like a mountain that remains still
while animals scurry, rivers flow, and trees and flowers grow, your mind remains
                                          103

calm. Insects buzz and birds sing, but still, your mind is at peace. All the activity of
the mind can rise, but it has no bearing on the mind at rest.

Working with the Open Head Center

The big question is how do we work with the Open Head Center – in ourselves
and with our clients? I have some ideas, but as I write this, the world is in a state
of utter chaos and disruption. There is so much confusion about what is true and
what is fake news. The barrage of social media floods our Open Head Centers.
Like computer technology, so much is changing so fast. New ways of opening our
minds and directly experiencing truth are coming to meet the current need. From
where I stand now, this is what I suggest:

      Appreciate your Open Head Center.
      Learn to tolerate mental pressure without acting on it.
      Witness thoughts rather than identifying with them.
      Decondition or clean the filters of your Open Head Center.
      Follow your Strategy and Authority to discern which thoughts to act on.

Appreciate Your Open Head Center Instead of resisting, fighting with, or dissing
the way your mind is designed to function, shift your attitude. Stop squeezing
your head trying to make it be something it is not. Make a decision to befriend
and get to know your Open Head. The compulsion to compare is hardwired into
our world of duality.

Defined Heads are not better than Open Heads. Even this belief robs you of the
gifts your Open Head possesses. Get to know your Open Head – its strengths and
its vulnerabilities. Have compassion for the glitches or awkwardness the Open
Head might experience. Take time to appreciate and have gratitude for what
you’ve been given. As you do, your Open Head will reveal itself to you in
unimaginable ways.

Learn to Tolerate the Pressure Without Acting on It

Okay. The Open Head Center is known as a pressure Center. You are under
pressure to come up with answers. I walk into a room and I am poised to come up
with answers for people, in a knee-jerk fashion. This is a subconscious reaction. I
                                         104

can’t help it. That mechanism has got a life of its own. What I can do, is witness
the pressure without acting on it.

I can learn to tolerate it rather than trying to immediately dissipate it with
answers. I can take my time to choose which answers I want to answer, trusting
that the pressure will soften. Be clear on this. You are not designed to answer
everybody’s questions! You will wear yourself out. You’ll be like the dog owner
being jerked around by the dog on the leash. No! Choose the questions that feel
good to you to answer. Let the rest go. Do not be a victim of your mind!

Witness Thoughts Rather Than Identifying with Them

The best way to work with the Open Head is to understand that thoughts arise,
and they are not personal. I remember standing on a street corner in Holland
when someone asked Byron Katie, “Why do we even have thoughts? What’s the
purpose?” She explained to us that they’re like children, they come to be seen.
She asked if we could just let them have their life without attaching to them.

When we believe we are our thoughts, we get tossed around by them. Eating
foods that aren’t good for us, taking jobs that sound good but aren’t right for us,
the list is infinite. Basically, we live a life that is not ours. When, on the other
hand, we identify with the space within which thoughts arise, rather than the
thoughts themselves, we stabilize the mind. We liberate ourselves from
downloads of ancestral mental patterns, familial conditioning, and societal
pressures to think, believe, act in a sanctioned way. We become free to enter the
moment and see for ourselves what is true for us.

Give this freedom to yourself. There are definitely tools to help establish the
observer or the witnessing mind which I’ll touch on in the Helpful Tools section
below.

Decondition/ Clean the Filters of Your Open Head Center

Establishing a witnessing mind is the first step to cleaning the filters of your Open
Head. Sometimes seeing the thoughts you’ve attached to is not enough to release
them. They get entangled in the weave of your identity and letting them go can
be threatening to the ego. You’ve attached to them for your survival – to fit in to
                                           105

be safe – after all. So, letting go of your conditioning is a huge deal. It is also
essential to your well-being.

You cannot live a full and fruitful life if you are following thoughts and beliefs that
were programmed into you. And as you do shift your identification from believing
your thoughts to resting in the Openness of your mind, your whole world
changes. You open to a new level of safety and understanding. You appreciate
differences and see the world through a differentiated lens. Time and space are
altered. Instead of a limited view of life, you open into a bigger world view. As you
do this the perfection of life reveals itself. Wow.

I remember sitting on a ski lift going up the mountain at Heavenly Valley in Tahoe
as a child. The quiet stillness, the open vast expanse of the sky, and the vivid
detail of the earth below permeated my being. It was if time stopped and I was
enveloped in a nectar of astonishing beauty. The perfection of life.

I don’t know what path or paths you will choose to decondition your Open Head.
There are many. Some involve a lot of effort on your part, some require less.
Follow your Strategy and Authority to see what works for you.

Follow Your Strategy and Authority to Discern Which Thoughts to Act On

So, you’re witnessing your thoughts. You’re not succumbing to the pressure to
answer questions that are not yours to answer. You’re actively cleaning the filter
of your conditioned mind. Now you have the important task of discerning which
thoughts to act on.

For most of us, a thought arises, we attach to it, believe it, and then act on it.
We’re trained to look to our mind to tell us what to do, which direction to go.
From a Human Design perspective, you can’t lead an authentic life true to your
unique self if you’re not following your Strategy and Authority.

Once you are clear on your Strategy and Authority, your Open Head is no longer a
hindrance. You’re no longer being tossed around by your mind’s continuous
shifts. You have guidance in terms of which thoughts to follow. Take someone like
me, for instance, with an Open Head Center and a Defined Sacral Center.

As a Generator, I’m designed to be in relationship with and respond to what the
world offers me. Writing a book like this can be somewhat of a nightmare. I go to
                                        106

my head to see what to write. Blank. Then, I sit with my wife and we do inquiry. I
am dumping my mind, witnessing my conditioned thoughts as I speak – I can’t do
this, I don’t know what to say…and so on.

She says something in her inquiry that sparks me. I have something to respond to
with an enthusiastic yes, I sit down, and thoughts flow. Whole worlds of
information open up to me. As a person with a Defined Sacral, a no is equal to a
yes. The information is telling me which direction to go. It tells me to either
respond or not to respond. If my mind is flooded with thoughts, pulling me in
opposing directions, I can remedy this. I can turn to my Sacral Center and get a
visceral sense of which thought to trust.

Helpful Tools

The Open Head calls for attention. Depending on who you are and what you’re
drawn to, there are a variety of ways to tend to the Garden of the Mind. Because
the Open Ajna necessarily has an Open Head, I’m offering the same tools for both
of these.

      Meditation
      The Work of Byron Katie
      Sensing your arms and legs, bringing your awareness to your belly
      Essential oils as a practice
      Tapping
      Connect to Being

Meditation

Meditation is a clear choice for cleaning the filters when it comes to the Open
Head and Ajna Centers. Here are a few you might consider:

Vipassana meditation is currently a popular and widely available technique. It
guides you to witness the mind through your breath, your thoughts, and your
sensations. Vajrayana Buddhism includes Vipassana meditation but takes it a step
further to look directly at the mind with the practice of Mahamudra. Through a
series of questions, called Pointing Out Instructions, the insubstantiality – the
absence – of mind is laid bare. This is medicine for the Open Head.
                                        107

Vajrayana has a variety of meditation practices. These are all geared to shifting
our identification from our habitual thought patterns to a more authentic and
naturally aligned self. These require time and effort and are best done with the
guidance of a skilled teacher.

Byron Katie has a simple meditation I often suggest to people with Open Heads.
First, you put your thoughts on a cloud, one at a time as they arise. Next, you let
the thought pass with the cloud. You can do this anytime or anyplace, and though
it is simple, it does the job.

Transcendental Meditation doesn't look directly at thoughts, but the practice of
TM makes space for thoughts to arise without waging war with them or trying to
make them go away. This has a back-door effect of loosening the grip of the mind.
This takes daily practice to reap the benefits of an unencumbered Open Head
Center.

Any meditation, really, that helps you dis-identify from your thinking is deeply
supportive. One technique technique that has been particularly helpful for me is
mantra recitation. This can be done as part of a meditation or in daily life.
Basically, the mantra is taking up space the habitual thoughts would inhabit.

The Work of Byron Katie

If there is one tool that has had the biggest impact on clearing my thinking and
conditioned mind, it is The Work of Byron Katie. In this simple yet potent process,
you write down your judgments and inquire into your thinking. This is a fantastic
way to look at the painful thoughts we identify with and to inquire into their
truth. As we see our internal fake news, our attachments to conditioning naturally
fall away. We become sober in our thinking rather than looking at life through a
lens cluttered with distortions.

(See the full inquiry of The Work in the Helpful Tools section of the Defined Head,
or in the Resource section at the end of the book.)

Sense Your Arms and Legs, Drop into Your Belly Center

This might seem like an odd choice to add to the mix, but don’t be deceived. This
simple practice has big ramifications. I first learned about sensing the arms and
legs and dropping into the Belly Center from Faisal Muqaddam in my Diamond
                                        108

Logos Training. This was a core teaching to become present, to drop out of the
congested mind, to rest in Being.

Later, when I was studying essential oils with Greg Toews, he spoke about
working with the arms and legs as a way to heal dissociation and bring people into
the present. He had helped at least nine cases where psychologists lifted MPD
(Multiple Personality diagnosis – when they were still called by that name) simply
by working with the arms and legs. Greg says:

“Dissociative disorders are more cardiovascular than psychological. The circulation
in the arms and legs is poor which results in diminished oxygen/ blood levels in the
head. The energetic pathways in the arms and legs known as meridians are also
quite compromised. Energetically this is tied to your ability to be present and
realistic. When a person has significant issues in this area, they tend to “check
out” or not be present. This is known as dissociation or automatic behavior.”

Greg uses what he calls the Mugwort Technique to work with dissociation and
fixated thoughts to bring people into the present. Here’s what he says about it,
followed by the technique:

“The Mugwort Technique helps to open the channels and reboot the immune
response. It helps one to not be so fixated on the thought processes which means
you are able to break out of the “fear thinking” and become more present and
alert. Automatic behavior means your brain doesn’t process what is happening, it
just takes action based on what is triggered. The Mugwort Technique helps one to
be more in their body and to cognitively process what is happening so they can
make a conscious choice. This is good for physical well-being, better cognitive
processing, and deeper meditation for spiritual practitioners.”

Mugwort Technique: Regeneration of the Immune Response/ Opening the
Channels:

Mix the essential oil Mugwort with a lotion or massage oil and place on the areas
below. Mix twenty drops of mugwort to one ounce of base oil or lotion and then
apply. And/ or breathe Mugwort (or substitutes listed below), focusing on each of
the body parts below for three to fifteen breaths each. Repeat numerous times
for a deeper experience.
                                         109

Single Oils: Artemisia, Mugwort

Blends: Artemisia Complex, Mugwort Supreme

Sustained Inhalation for three to fifteen breathing cycles

      Soles
      Ankles
      Knees
      Hips
      Palms
      Wrists
      Elbows
      Armpits
      Navel
      Navel Minor

Essential Oils

I’ve just introduced The Mugwort Technique and now I’m going to bring essential
oils into the toolbox again. The use of essential oils is a new path for me. It’s one
that took me by surprise. My sister kept telling me I needed to experience the
essential oil work with Greg Toews. Eventually, it became easier to take a class
with him than to resist her. My first experience was a Relationship workshop. I
spent two days smelling oils and focusing on different parts of my body. I know it
sounds a bit strange.

But by the end of the weekend, chunks of conditioning – that I had not even been
aware of – had suddenly disappeared. I felt a lightness in my relationship with my
wife that reminded me of a feeling I had when we first met. After forty years
together, we had built some unsuspected defense structures that had created an
unconscious film of separation. Since that initial class, I have studied intently with
Greg. At every turn, the oils have aided me in dropping unconscious patterns and
lightening my load. In fact, I’ve used the Mugwort Technique throughout the
writing of this book to help ground me and bring me back to the present.
                                         110

Tapping

Tapping, also called the Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT), is a phenomenal
resource to work with any of the Open Centers. Karen Curry Parker uses this
simple and accessible tool extensively in conjunction with Human Design to help
people clear patterns.

Basically, you state an issue you want to resolve and then you tap on certain
points in your body. You can Google Karen’s site for easy instructions:
www.humandesignforeveryone.com/eftforeveryone.html.

Connect to Being

There are two ways to meet and work with the Open Centers. One is to clean the
filters by dredging up all the garbage and taking it out through inquiry or
whatever tool you might use. This involves directly addressing the issues. The
other way is to go directly to Being, the essential domain. Here, as with the
essential oils, the issues fall away of their own accord. It’s as if the frequency of
the essential domain doesn’t have space for that which is at a lower frequency.
Those issues simply cannot survive in the rarified air of Beingness. The challenge
here is connecting to Being, which is a practice in and of itself. You will have to
explore and find your own way with that. In the Diamond Work, we would call on
essential states – like the Diamond Body, for instance – to bring clarity. There is a
prayer I used to say when I first began my Rosen Practice.

This was my way of not engaging in the garbage of my mind that insisted I had
nothing to offer. It was from Catherine Ponder: Of myself, I cannot do it, but the
Christ within me can, and is performing miracles of mind, body, and spirit here and
now. (Insert the name of the person I was working with) is made whole now.
Sometimes, I would put the name of my client in at the beginning if they were
trapped in their pain body and I had no clue how to help them.

We’ve looked in depth at the Head Center. Hopefully, you have some insights and
new ways of thinking about your mind. Now, let’s shift our focus to look at the
Ajna Center, which is intimately connected to the Head Center.
                                        111

RECAP

You’ve learned about the Head Center. Perhaps you’re surprised that it’s not a
decision-making Center.

Maybe you’ve discovered you have an Open Head and some things are starting to
fall into place. Maybe you’re understanding why you feel different from other
people. Take some time to reflect. What Channels and Gates do you have coming
off the Head Center? What does that mean to you? Does it make sense? Can you
use the information in a pragmatic way?

In the next chapter, we’ll look at the Ajna, which is closely connected to the Head
Center. In a way, we’re just continuing the inquiry of mental energy. Look back at
this chapter as you need to. Take your time and enjoy the process of learning.
                                          112


                                          7

                              GETTING TO KNOW
                               THE AJNA CENTER




INTRODUCING TO THE AJNA CENTER!

The Ajna is a powerful Awareness Center. It is the second Center, the upside-
down triangle just below the Head Center. When it is Defined, it is green; when it
is Open, it remains white.

The Ajna enables us to process information. This Center takes inspiration from the
Head Center and makes sense of it. It can see the whole and all the parts. With
the ability to review and analyze data, the Ajna makes information usable. Karen
Curry Parker calls the Ajna Center the Divine Translator. I love this description. It’s
appropriate since the Ajna Center translates and gives order to a world that can
be overwhelming with mental input. And while Anat Baniel wouldn’t have the
context of the Ajna Center, in her training for special needs children, she often
speaks about a healthy brain as being able to make sense out of nonsense.
                                         113

“Intelligence,” she says, “is the capacity to differentiate.” This is the job of the
Ajna Center. So much information bombards us every moment. Without this
analyzing function, we would be lost, unable to discern, for example, if there was
a door in the wall. I know from my experience with a head injury, that when my
Ajna was not functioning well, my world became very small. I couldn’t tolerate
sounds or lights or much input of any kind. Talking on the phone was exhausting.
Going out to a restaurant was unthinkable. My brain couldn’t process the input.

When we are in tune with the Ajna Center, the capacity for mental clarity is
stunning. However, understand that the Ajna is not a decision-making Center.
And here is where so much confusion is created. Operating at its highest level, the
Ajna sees through a neutral lens and is impartial to outcomes. With no Channels
connecting from the Ajna to a Motor there is no possibility to directly manifest
ideas into action. In order for the Ajna’s exquisite information to be utilized, it
must be connected by a Channel to one of the Four Motors: The Will Center, ESP
Center, the Sacral Center, or the Root Center.

Otherwise, the Ajna’s information must be invited and acknowledged before it’s
shared. In any event, the information must be delivered at the right timing. As
with all Awareness Centers, the medicine they deliver turns to poison if it is given
to a person who is not able or available to receive it. From a Human Design
perspective, yes, tap into the Ajna clarity, but then you must follow the guidance
from your Authority to make aligned decisions. (See Chapter 12 on Authority in
Understanding Your Clients through Human Design).

A healthy Ajna is flexible and open to what is arising. It has the ability to see if
some answer, opinion, or thought is off track from a detached vantage. The Ajna
is the ultimate witnessing observer. Using the Ajna Center to control and
dominate is an act of rigidity that actually diminishes the power of the Ajna to
function at full capacity. It’s better to use this brilliant mechanism to
communicate and empowerby offering multifaceted perspectives and possibilities
seen from clarity without attachment.

I think of Anat Baniel, again. In her NeuroMovement Training, she used to tell us
that she could tell which gymnasts were going to perform well at the Olympics by
looking at their wrists and hands. If they were tense, she knew that the brain was
                                         114

occupied and not fully present for the task at hand. Grabbing onto our thoughts
causes tension in our musculature.

This contraction robs us of our attention to meet the moment with all our
intelligence intact. Anat also explained that the sign of a healthy brain was the
ability to reverse its action. In other words, to not to be caught in a loop or
pattern. If you’re attached to a belief or attached to being right, you can get
caught in one of these loops. There’s something we’ll need to sort out in terms of
flexibility as we turn to look more closely at the Defined and Undefined Ajna,
which will become clear as you read more about the Ajna.

There are six Gates that come off the Ajna Center; three of them connect to the
Head Center, and three to the Throat Center. Which Gate or Channel is activated
will determine how the Ajna functions. In this chapter, the particular Gates are
discussed in the section Working with the Specific Gates. But first take some time
to connect to your Ajna Center.

CONNECTING TO YOUR AJNA CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

 Before we dive into the Open and Defined Ajna Centers, take a moment to come
into the present and actually connect with your Ajna Center from an embodied
place.

Begin by feeling your sitting bones on the chair.

Sense your arms and legs.

Notice your breath.

Now, put your focus on your Ajna.

Is it Defined or Undefined?

What do you notice as you feel it?

From a place of curiosity, notice: Is there tension?

Does your forehead feel relaxed?

Along with the neocortex and the visual cortex, the pituitary gland is associated
with the Ajna.
                                         115

This master gland plays a huge role in ensuring we function optimally.

Is your processing center functioning well?

Are you able to maintain a healthy mindset?

Are you able to have a neutral attitude toward the information that arises – the
answers you come up with, the opinions, insights, and ideas that show up in your
life?

Or does your negative mindset hamper your progress and diminish possibilities?

Are you wrapped around your answers, ideas, insights, and opinions, in an effort
to hold on to some sense of being right or safe?

Are thoughts, beliefs, and ideas caught in the eddy of your mind with no exit plan?

Has your ego hijacked your mind?

Are you striving to be certain?

Now, put your attention on your heart.

What do you notice?

Would it be okay to send a stream of appreciation from your heart to your Ajna
Center?

Would it be okay to gently smile at your Ajna Center?

Make a decision to connect to your Ajna, to be curious about its function in your
life, to understand it, and to tap into its resources.

Think about this connection to your Ajna Center as an ever-deepening
relationship.

You’re getting to know a previously unacknowledged aspect of yourself.

Bring your awareness back to your breath.

Sense your arms and legs.

Place your focus on your Belly Center.
                                        116

Gently open your eyes.

Take some time to journal about your experience.

What did you notice?

Whether you come back to this meditation or create your own, make friends with
your Ajna.

THE DEFINED AJAN CENTER

 If the Ajna Center is Defined, you will see the upside- down triangle colored green
below the Head Center. Roughly 47 percent of the population has the gift of a
Defined Ajna. The Defined Ajna gives you consistent access to your processing
center. Living in our mentally oriented world, people with Defined Ajnas are at a
great advantage. And yet there are challenges as well.

The Ajna Center becomes Defined when there is a Channel from either the Head
Center or the Throat Center.

Ajna to the Head Center

If the Ajna is Defined from a Head Center Channel, the Defined Ajna seeks to
translate the information from the Head Center. This could be right brain/
abstract information (Channel 64-47), left brain/ logical information (Channel 63-
4), or information that comes from an innate knowing (Channel 61-24). In any
case, the mind will be constantly active, consistently processing the information
provided.

(See Chart #16 in Chapter 6.)

Ajna to the Throat Center

If, on the other hand, the Ajna is Defined from the Ajna to the Throat Center, you
will have consistent access to speaking your mind. If the Definition comes from
Channel 17-62 Acceptance, you will be in touch with your opinions, and share
them freely (or not). If the Ajna Center is Defined from the Channel of Structuring,
Channel 43-23, you will be working to articulate your unique insights in a way
they can be understood. If your Defined Channel is Channel 11-56 Curiosity, you
                                         117

will most likely be compelled to form your multitude of ideas into stories to share
with humanity.




My wife has the very logical Channel of Answers, with Gate 63 coming off the
Head Center connecting to the Ajna with Gate 4, the Gate of Answers. As an
aside, her Conscious Sun is in Gate 17, the Gate of Opinions. She has answers and
opinions for any situation. I’ll speak about the high and low sides of this in a
minute.

Charity meanwhile has the Channel 11-56. In her chart, Neptune, denoting the
spiritual path, is in the Gate 11, the Gate of Ideas coming off the Ajna Center.
Charity’s Spiritual path is to share her ideas. Her Conscious Earth is in the Gate 56
reaching down to the Throat Center. She is nurtured by telling stories. Thus, her
spiritual path is to take her ideas and share them as stories. If you read her book,
you will see she is an extraordinary storyteller!

My all-time favorite Channel in the entire chart is the 43-23, which we often refer
to as the Freak/ Genius Channel. The 43 is the Gate of Insight which comes off the
Ajna Center. I am always thrilled, and a little envious, when I see this Defined in a
chart. If you have this Individual Circuitry Defined in your chart, you have the
capacity to focus on something that has been looked at for centuries and see it in
                                         118

a new way. You are shining the light in places that have remained in the dark.
With Gate 23 Assimilation coming off the Throat Center, you strive to articulate
what has never been spoken or named. You have an extraordinary job – although
it’s not always an easy one.

One of my former clients, Dena Evans, has the Channel 43-23. She was a star
women’s basketball athlete. And although she was small as far as basketball
players go, she played brilliantly. Dena turned down an offer to play at Stanford,
which gives you an idea of her caliber.

At some point in her career, she shifted from playing basketball to creating a
basketball training. High-level basketball players came from all over the US to
attend – men and women both. Dena had a unique way of seeing and
understanding the game that she could articulate and use to help others improve
their game.

Just so I know you’re clear – if you or your clients have one or more of these six
Channels Defined, the chart has a Defined Ajna, along with the corresponding
Defined Head or Defined Throat Center. Stop here and reread this if you’re
confused. This is foundational, and important to understand.

The Gifts of the Defined Ajna

In full transparency, let me say that I do not have a Defined Ajna. I am reporting
what I have been taught from the Human Design lens and what I have seen and
learned from the people in my life, my family, and my clients. It is up to you to see
what resonates, and to deepen your understanding of your Defined Ajna, or the
Defined Ajnas of those you interact with.

That said, with a Defined Ajna, you may not even realize how fortunate you are.
You can count on your mind in a way you most likely take for granted. You are
privileged, or blessed, with the gift of having consistent access to:

      Resting in certainty
      Counting on your mind to hold and process information
      Enjoying mental stimulation
      Having mental ground – not being easily influenced by others’ thoughts

Resting in Certainty
                                         119

Let’s face it. You can trust your mind. Unlike the Open Ajna, which we’ll get to
shortly, you’re not bombarded by other people’s thoughts. You have access to a
stable mind. Remember, the Defined Centers are broadcasting information.
Connected to the Head or Throat Centers with a Defined Ajna Center, you’re
designed to inspire people. You give people things to think about.

You impact the field with your thoughts. Our Western world is mind-based, and
you have access to your mind and the workings of your mind. You are designed to
be certain. That’s a very grounding quality. An I know therefore I am kind of
energy. In other words, you have a sense of existing through your mind.

Let me go back to my wife for a moment: She always knows what she thinks. As I
mentioned, when we’re with a group and nobody has an opinion about where to
go for dinner, she has an opinion. She’s comfortable with that, happy to share
what she thinks. She’s always available with answers.

And, with a Defined Ajna, she has a level of certainty that’s natural to her, even if
she’s not right. It’s gotten a bit complicated when you bring in the rest of the
chart, given she’s a Projector with her Sun in the Gate of Opinions. That takes
some skill to navigate, but let’s save that for the Grapples. Consider Charity with
her Defined Ajna as well. She trusts herself to tell her story. She knows she can
help other widows to heal by telling their stories.

Counting on Your Mind to Hold and Process Information

Part of resting in certainty is the ease with which you hold and process
information. With a Defined Ajna, your mind has a consistent way to process that
you can count on. It may be so familiar to you that you don’t even realize you
have that gift. But trust me, you do. And with that processor, you have the
capacity to analyze data. How you do it will depend on which Channel or Channels
you have Defined, but that skill is available to you.

Enjoying Mental Stimulation

Your Defined Ajna feeds on information. It enjoys mental stimulation. We could
say it needs mental stimulation. It needs something to focus on, to process, to
analyze. It’s exciting and fun for the mind to look at things in new ways and make
sense of them. The Defined Ajna is designed to be actively processing the world.
                                         120

Having Mental Ground – Not Being Easily Influenced by Others’ Thoughts

The Defined Ajna enjoys a feeling of being mentally grounded. You have the gift of
solidity in your thinking. You’re not knocked around by other people’s thoughts.
You can hold onto your own view. This is a beautiful and powerful support that is
available to you.

The Grapples of the Defined Ajna

With a mind that can’t stop thinking, you or your clients may grapple with:

      A constantly active mind
      An overwhelming task
      Believing your thinking
      A potential to be headstrong Inflexible certainty
      A tendency to make decisions from your mind
      Dependence on your mind as the sole source of your wisdom
      Feeling inadequate if you’re unable to put your thoughts into action
      The challenge of timing Medicine turned to poison

In each of these cases, the Ego, in its quest for safety, has hijacked the actual
mechanism of the Ajna.

The Ego is using the Ajna’s capacities not from a place of open curiosity, but from
a striving to know and prove what it knows is true.

A Constantly Active Mind

When I give a Human Design coaching session, I ask people to send me their three
greatest challenges prior to the session. More often than not, people with
Defined Ajnas include the challenge of not being able to quiet their mind.
Invariably, when I explain that they are designed to have a mind that never stops
working, the relief is palpable.

It is easy to think something is wrong with us when we’re told, especially in
spiritual circles, to quiet our mind, and we’re not able to. What happens if you
stop resisting your active mind and instead learn to work skillfully with it? What
happens if you claim and celebrate your capacity rather than reject or diminish it?
                                          121

An Overwhelming Task

When the Ajna Center is Defined from a Channel coming from the Head Center,
the Ajna has the daunting task of processing the Head’s three big questions:
What? Why? and How? No wonder the mind is so busy! If the chart is Defined
though the right brain, abstract Channel 64-47 Abstraction, you will be constantly
looking at the past to secure the future. You’re asking the question How? With a
mind processing dreams, symbols, and images and everything abstract, the
ensuing confusion can take time to unpack and understand. If your mindset is
negative – if you’re caught in a no-possibility thought pattern – you will miss the
insights and the revelations offered.

If your Ajna is Defined from Gate 61 to Gate 24, the Channel of Awareness, you
will be consistently engaged in understanding the Why of life. You are destined to
continuously search, stretching into the universal Mind of God to make sense of
life’s mysteries. If you get caught in believing there is a final answer, you can
succumb to the pressure to find it. You then enter an endless search for meaning
that can be depressing, anxiety-ridden, and overwhelming. Your mind is designed
to engage in this ongoing process of tweaking and re-tweaking your discoveries,
but not to land with a final answer.

Finally, if your Ajna is Defined from the left brain, logical circuitry of the Channel
63-4, the Channel of Logic, you are here to look to the future to figure out what
makes logical sense in terms of things working out. You’re here to come up with
answers. Your mind has answers for everything.

The problem is, you may not be right. If you attach to your answers as truth, you
may find yourself frustrated when things either don’t work out as you planned, or
your answers aren’t well received. Your work lies in holding your answers lightly
with curiosity. Your task is to view your answers as possibilities, rather than as
facts.

Believing Your Thinking

Coupled with the overactive mind is the challenge of attaching to your thinking.
Byron Katie called it Believing Your Thinking. Our thinking is just that – thoughts.
In our culture, we have over-idealized thoughts, and tend to think that what we
                                           122

believe is fact. It’s part of our cultural conditioning and gives a sense of safety. If
we believe we know something, we feel oriented – we feel safe.

There is a premise here that we can actually know something. One of the
problems is that we attached to thoughts as young children and have neglected to
upgrade the beliefs to the present moment. For example, if you had an older
sister who impinged on your space as a child, you might have drawn the
conclusion that people can’t be trusted to respect you.

Your Defined Ajna gets that idea trapped in its wiring and plays that loop over and
over again. Instead of being in the present moment and using your Defined Ajna
to assess the current situation, you see through the old lens and develop a
defensive structure, an attitude that people are unsafe. You are going to need to
liberate that pattern and work with bringing your Ajna into the present moment
in order to find peace and ease.

The other difficulty with believing our thinking is that we attach to our thoughts
as if they actually belonged to us. We identify with them, believing they are
personal to us, rather than merely thoughts arising in an ocean of thoughts. I
learned the truth about thoughts first from Byron Katie, and her inquiry process,
and again, when I got pointing out instructions from my Tibetan Buddhist Lama.
We'll get to that in the working with the Ajna section.

A Potential to Be Headstrong

 Yes, when you emphatically believe your thoughts as fact and identify with them
as yours, you can become engaged in defending what you believe to be true. You
can actually push your thoughts into the field and on to people with almost
religious vigor. Remember that Definition in the chart is, by nature, not
particularly receptive.

The Defined Ajna can act like a force with no possibility of shifting perspective.
This holding onto a thought and taking a stance can easily alienate people and act
as a barrier to intimacy or connection. Your thinking can become very focused and
righteous, causing you to lose the bigger, relational picture. We can see this
playing out in the current political climate.
                                        123

Inflexible Certainty

Hand in hand with the potential to be headstrong is the vulnerability of using your
natural tendency toward certainty in an unconscious way. With a Defined Ajna,
you are designed to be certain. Your certainty offers the grace and ease to
operate without debilitating doubt. However, don’t take a stance of certainty
without realizing the possibility that there may be information you have not
considered. Such a position would prove to be a hinderance to you and those
around you.

Recently, I watched the movie Misbehavior which is based on a true story about
how the Women’s Liberation Movement was launched in Britain in the early 70s.
Five women were arrested for disturbing the peace at the Miss World contest,
declaring that the women in the contest were being treated like cattle. What we
would describe now as blatant sexism, at the time was defended as the norm.
Bob Hope continually sexualized and demeaned the women for the enjoyment of
the audience.

The movie pointed out a blind certainty held by the producers and the culture of
that time. Beyond a shadow of a doubt, the misogynistic world of that time
believed that the title, Miss World, was the highest honor a woman could aspire
to. Any suggestions that women’s value shouldn’t be based on cultural ideals of
beauty were met with ridicule and astonishment. Bob Hope stood in his righteous
certainty that left no room for another narrative. A

Tendency to Make Decisions from Your Head

With such a powerful grounded thinking capacity it would make sense that those
with a Defined Ajna would be drawn to make decisions from the information
they’ve analyzed and gathered. The Western world view would support and
honor this method. From a Human Design perspective, however, the Head and
Ajna are never the places to look for decisions.

They are information Centers, not decision-making Centers. It’s like asking a
computer to make a decision about whether you should marry someone. Yes,
your brain could analyze all the data. It could make pro and con lists. But in the
end, it is your Authority, determined by your chart, that will support you to make
                                         124

aligned decisions and deliver the best results. (See Chapter 12 in Understanding
Your Clients through Human Design for an explanation of the Types of Authority.)

Dependence on Your Mind as the Sole Source of Your Wisdom

Again, your mind, your Defined processing center, gives you an advantage. It gives
you a kind of ground. You can easily defer to it at the cost of listening to your
intuition or your Sacral response. You may override your emotional sense of well-
being for something that sounds pragmatic, reasonable, and sound. The problem
is that facts and data do not take into account deeper knowing. A bigger picture.
A sensibility.

They are limited to the information at hand. If you are looking through a lens that
is already compromised from past experiences, you may pass by an opportunity
that could benefit and support you. If you happen to be in a negative space and
believing your negative thinking, you will take what you think as fact and your
actions will be limited. It’s a delicate balance between using the mind versus
turning to the mind as your guidance system.

Feeling Inadequate if You’re Unable to Put Your Thoughts into Action

Remember that the Ajna is an Awareness Center. It is not an action center. There
is no Channel that connects directly to a Motor. You are not designed to think of
something and put it into action, contrary to popular belief. You must follow your
Authority to have your thoughts come to fruition.

That said, many people with Defined Ajna’s have tried and failed. This can lead to
a great deal of frustration and doubt about the information your Ajna is
producing. It's easy to think something is wrong with you, when in fact, it’s merely
a matter of not being skillful with the genius you’ve been given.

The Challenge of Timing

Much of the failure comes from poor timing. With the Ajna, the information
offered must be spoken in the right timing, whether it’s opinions, insights, or
ideas. No matter how genius, if the timing is off, you’re in trouble. Likewise, if the
people you’re speaking to are not available to hear you or are not interested in
what you have to say, your brilliance will fall on deaf ears. This is where you are
                                        125

vulnerable to questioning yourself, rather than realizing that you were throwing
pearls to swine.

Medicine Turned to Poison

 When you are not tuned in to the situation but you're trying to share your
knowledge without a willing receptor, it is actually an affront to the people you’re
talking to. There are two ways to look at this. One is that you aren’t connected to
the person you’re with and you’re dominating them with your answers, opinions,
insights, or thoughts. Your thoughts become like objects you’re hurling at people
who then have to duck to avoid.

Maybe you’ve watched people get overwhelmed by your barrage. From your end,
you were just trying to offer what you had to give – your thoughts on the
situation. There is another way to see it. This is an extreme analogy Byron Katie
used to use. She said to think of the difference between lovemaking lovemaking
and rape.

The action can look the same, but one is wanted, the other is not. When you think
you’re giving something loving to someone, and they don’t want it, it’s like rape.
Or this might be easier to digest: What is medicine to one person is poison to
another. If someone’s system isn’t available to take what you’re offering, they
can’t process it and it is actually toxic to them.

Working with the Defined Ajna

So, you or someone you are working with has a Defined Ajna. How do you best
work with it?

    Appreciate what you have been given.
    Stop resisting the activity of your mind.
    Value your certainty, at the same time leave space for not being right.
    Learn to detach from your thinking.
    Train yourself to analyze, receive information, then turn to your Authority
     for decision-making.
    Appreciate that what you have to say may not be welcomed.
    Know that what you are offering is valuable, but not infallible.
    Work with your timing.
                                            126

    Bring your Ajna into the present moment.
    Work with the specific gates.

Appreciate What You've Been Given

The first step is to appreciate that you have capacities other people may not have.
This is not about fostering arrogance or being better than people with Open
Ajnas. Rather, it’s about recognizing and honoring difference. Your Defined Ajna is
a gift – a strength. The more you recognize and understand it, the more skillfully
you can utilize it.

Stop Resisting the Activity of Your Mind

This requires making peace with the fact that your mind is designed to be in
action. There’s nothing you can do about it. Well, you can stop trying to put it in
rest mode, when that is truly unnatural for you. Once you or your clients are no
longer fighting yourself, you can begin the work of understanding, befriending,
and utilizing the particular steady stream of information that runs in your system.
You can also start to explore relaxing with your thoughts, looking directly at your
thoughts, and opening to the space between your thoughts. This inquiry into your
mind can be deep, profound, and rewarding.

Value Your Certainty, at the Same Time Leave Space for Not Being Right

Feeling certain offers a level of ground. It brings confidence and enables you to go
forward. With the Defined Ajna, you or your client have the gift of mental sure-
footedness. The glitch is, you're not always right. When I share this piece with
couples, where one person has the Defined Ajna and the other has an Open Ajna,
they often laugh out loud.

The Defined Ajna can be so convincing and so compelling that it can leave little
room for the partner's point of view. The key here is for everyone to appreciate
the certainty and at the same time, hold it lightly. It's a possibility. It’s not a fact.
You may question your thoughts and beliefs with a curiosity and rigor. That’s
different from attacking yourself or diminishing yourself for feeling certain and
having something not be accurate.

If you've got a Defined Ajna and don't resonate with feeling certain, the lack of
certainty may also show up as a challenge in your life. Remember, with Definition
                                        127

in the chart, we are working with themes. If you are not aligned with the energy
that the Definition is broadcasting, you may be living and broadcasting the
opposite of that theme or the absence of that theme. When this is the case, it's
time to examine the thoughts and beliefs that have been caught in your wiring,
and free them, so that you can access the stream of certainty you are entitled to.

Learn to Detach from Your Thinking

As you begin to leave room for the possibility that your thoughts, opinions, ideas,
insights, answers, rationalizations, and mindset may not always be accurate or
right, you can start to explore the next level of using your Defined Ajna. When you
let go of attaching to your thoughts, you have access to a higher level of
functioning. The Ajna is a neutral observer. It processes information. When you
become the witness of your thoughts, you no longer are at the effect of them.

With a Defined Ajna, you have the extraordinary capacity to use your mind to look
at your mind. It might be akin to the path of Jana Yoga in Hinduism, the path of
Inquiry, the path of using the mind to understand the nature of the world. In
Buddhism, there is a path that uses logic to look at the nature of the mind in
order to free oneself of the mind.

Someone with Defined Ajna is well suited to this path once they are aware it is an
option. Meditation is a great tool to support detaching from identifying with your
thoughts. Meditations in the stream of Vipassana – which train you to watch your
thoughts – are particularly good. Byron Katie also has a powerful meditation.

She has you look at your thoughts as they arise, put them on a cloud, and let
them pass. Her tool, The Work, is an incredible inquiry tool to look into the nature
of your thinking to discover what is true. It becomes immediately clear when you
do The Work that much of what you think is simply not true. There is a big space
that opens when you are no longer at the mercy of your thinking.

Train Yourself to Analyze, Receive Information, Then Turn to Your Human Design
Authority for Decision Making

Part of learning to detach from identifying with your thinking is discovering that
your thinking is not your source of guidance. Once your Defined Ajna has done its
remarkable job of sorting through information, your next task to use that
                                         128

information wisely. This isn't accomplished by following what it says to do.
Rather, you will now need to turn to your Authority as shown in your bodygraph.

Here’s an example: One of my author colleagues, Veronica Anderson, is clearly
brilliant.

An M.D., she graduated top of her class from Princeton. With Defined Head and
Ajna Centers, Dr. Veronica has mental capacity out the wazoo. In her book, Too
Smart to Be Struggling, she chronicles her extraordinary path to becoming a
thriving ophthalmologist with her own clinic employing a group of MDs. We could
say her Defined Head and Ajna led her to the pinnacle of her career – something
we could all admire and envy. And yet, as a Projector, she was burning the candle
at both ends. Understandably, she flared out. The ensuing rest that was required
to heal opened the door to her listening deeply to her Authority, which in her
case is Splenic.

Splenic Authority relies on intuition as guidance. Dr. Veronica stopped following
the guidance of her head and listened instead to her intuition. She spent six
months resting. Really deeply resting. During that deep dive, her capacity as a
medical intuitive became pronounced as she watched diagnoses written in the
sky.

She is the one to turn to if you can’t figure out what’s going on with your body.
She now trains MDs and high performing women to listen to themselves and to
their clients. Her upcoming book is Get the Respect You Deserve: 7 Secrets to
Getting Seen and Heard in Your Job. Dr. Veronica has learned to use her brain
well, but not to turn to it for direction. Her intuition is a much more reliable guide.
Her intuition holds the big picture for her and allows her to bring her piece of the
puzzle to serve humanity.

What is your Authority? Your client’s Authority? Don’t miss out on tapping into
your best decision-making tool – which is never your mind.

Appreciate that What You Have to Say May Not Be Welcomed

So, you have mental capacity. You have thoughts. You have opinions. You have
answers. You have insights. You have ideas. You know something and want to
share it but when you do, it is rebuffed or ignored or dissed. This can be very
                                          129

confusing to someone with a Defined Ajna. A friend of mine – who I met at
Rockstar Camp – has her Ajna Defined through that Freak/ Genius Channel 43-23.
Like Dr. Veronica, she is a Projector who has achieved status in her life, though for
her it is as the head of an HR department.

As we looked at her chart, she acknowledged that it's very frustrating when
people don’t listen to her. Some do, and that’s great. But I saw that she had
begun to question and doubt herself. This is something that I typically see in
people with Defined Ajnas. The antidote here is to come back to the realization
that what you have to say matters.

It’s just that it is not for everyone’s ears. You must clean up any old patterns of
belief that you don’t have anything important to offer simply because what
you’ve tried to communicate hasn’t been well received. It’s emphatically not true.
Your ideas, opinions, thoughts, revelations, hypotheses, and knowing matter, but
they have no value in and of themselves. They must be relayed to the right people
in the right timing.

You have got to learn to value yourself first, and not throw your pearls to swine.
In part, this could be achieved merely by making a decision that what you have to
say is valuable. Then fake it until you feel it in your bones. If that does not shift
the path your neurotransmitters fire, then try writing The Work and see what
thought patterns you can clean up. Some possible statements you can work with
are: People should listen to me. People don’t listen to me. I need people to value
what I have to say. Give it a go! You’ll be surprised what you discover.

Know That What You Are Offering Is Valuable, But Not Infallible

Once you have established the value of your Defined Ajna and its powerful gifts,
you must remember to hold your thoughts lightly. This goes back to detaching
from your thoughts. You may be absolutely right about whatever it is you’re
thinking or professing. But if you are wrong, and that is one of the possibilities,
the tendency can be to call on your superego to attack you.

This could easily trigger the old patterns of dismissal. This is not a resourceful use
of your energy. Better to know from the outset that you can be certain without
being tentative. You can trust your thinking and value your opinions while
remaining open to shifting. I remember Byron Katie saying to me once: “Would
                                         130

you rather be right, or would you rather get what you want?” Often, we hold on
to being right and lose in the long run.

Work with Your Timing

The key to being heard with a Defined Ajna is timing. Just because you have
something to say has no bearing on whether you should say it in the moment it
arises, if at all. We’re back to the don’t throw your pearls before swine scenario.
You must be clear about your intention to have what you say be heard. This
involves speaking it in the right timing to people who can hear it. It requires clarity
and patience. Use your Strategy to discern who those people are and what the
right timing is. This is true kindness to you and to them. For example, if you are a
Projector, wait to be invited before you share your wisdom. If you are a
Generator, wait to respond before giving your insights. This takes tremendous
discipline and restraint at times. But you will fare much better for it.

A side note here: My Human Design mentor, Karen Curry Parker, has a Defined
Ajna. Her mind is a thing to behold. Her capacity to channel information and
generate content is phenomenal. I was interviewing her recently for a podcast,
and she told me that she’s been talking about things for twenty years that people
are just now starting to comprehend. She has had to be patient. She has had to
wait for the world to catch up to what she knows.

Bring Your Ajna into the Present

Think about it, when we are dissociated from our bodies, we do not have the
body feedback information needed to stay safe. We miss cues; whether we
physically trip or mentally misread signals, we are at risk. Being embodied –
present to the moment – offers a ground and capacity to respond appropriately
to what we have to face. Likewise, being dissociated from our bodygraph, in this
case, the Defined Ajna, actually trips us up and keeps us from the rich knowing
that is available to us.

When your mind is caught in the past or out in the future, the Ajna is not available
to process incoming data. When your mindset is mucked up with past stories, you
can’t see clearly the immediate possibilities. The more work you can do to clean
up limiting beliefs and your attachment to and identification with your thoughts,
                                         131

the more capable you are of using your Defined Ajna to the full extent. I’ve got a
thirteen-year-old iMac which runs slowly.

I have a lot of unnecessary information stored on it. If I were to let go of what
wasn’t current, it would be way more efficient and enable me to work more
effectively. You get the drift. There are many tools available to help. One of the
most effective I’ve found is Byron Katie’s process of writing your thoughts on
paper so you can look at them directly.




Work with the Specific Gates In other chapters, you will see that I talk about
specific Gates in terms of gifts or grapples. With the Ajna, it makes sense to me to
insert them here. Here are the Gates and ways you can think about working with
them:

Gate 47 Realization

This Gate comes off the Ajna reaching toward the Head Center. It’s a right brain,
Sensing Circuit energy that is trying to make sense of the big downloads from
Gate 64 Confusion. What is important to know here is that this is the mindset
Gate. You must have a good mindset in order to recognize the revelations that are
offered from the 64. If you have a negative mindset, you can miss them. We
                                         132

consider this a red flag Gate, because mindset is such a huge deal. If you have this
in your chart, you have a mandate to continuously align your mindset.

Gate 24 Rationalization

If you have this Individual Knowing Circuitry energy, you can rationalize anything.
Be aware of this tendency, and keep an eye out on yourself! This is also called the
re-tweaking Gate, as you are continuously taking information and looking it over
and over, trying to upgrade what you’re understanding. Your mind is designed to
work non-stop. Don’t judge yourself for this or think you need to stop this activity.
Instead, look for the gaps between your thoughts. There you will find answers
that the brain can’t conceive.

Gate 23 Answers

If you have this left brain, Logical Collective Gate, you are designed to come up
with answers. But your answers are suppositions. They may not be correct. Keep
that in mind. Also remember that you must deliver your answers in right timing,
or else they will fall on deaf ears. Use your Strategy and Authority to guide you.

Gate 17 Opinions

If you have the left brain, Collective Logical Circuit of Opinions, you have
consistent access to your opinions. Just remember that they are just that –
opinions. Hold them lightly and be prepared to shift them as new information
comes in. That said, your opinions are important, but in order to be heard, you
must offer them in the right timing. Learn to be skillful with your opinions by
following your Strategy and Authority.

Gate 43

Insight With this Individual Knowing Circuitry, you just know things. This is
mutative energy, so your insights are out of the norm, for sure. You have the
amazing ability to look at something and see it in fresh light. Your insights can
shift the trajectory of humanity. Just know when you work with this aspect of
yourself that this is part of the Freak/ Genius Channel. If you share your insights
with someone who is not asking for them or not ready to hear them, you will be
perceived as a freak.
                                          133

If you speak them in right timing, according to your Strategy and Authority, your
insights will be recognized as genius. Timing is everything here. Don’t get
discouraged if people don’t understand or appreciate your insights. Know that
they are not the right people, or it is not the right timing. Recalibrate. Wait until
you have people who can understand and appreciate what you are bringing. As
with all Knowing Circuitry, there can be some melancholy as you are so different
from others. See this for what it is, and don’t go down the drain with it.

Gate 11 Ideas

 If you have this right brain, Collective Sensing Circuitry Defined, you are here to
have ideas. Lots of them! More than you know what to do with. There are a few
things to be aware of here. First, know that you are not meant to act on all of
your ideas. You come up with ideas for others. Second, the ideas which are yours
to work with, you must guard carefully. Other people will take your ideas and
monetize them. So, enjoy the ideas that run through you without feeling
pressured to bring all of them to fruition.

Helpful Tools:

    Develop a witnessing observer.
    Do The Work of Byron Katie!

Develop a Witnessing Observer

This is perhaps the most important tool you could employ with a Defined Ajna.
The Ajna is the master witness. Turn that capacity to look at your thinking. Watch
your mindset. Watch your rationalization. Watch your attachment to your
answers. Watch your insistence on your opinions. Watch your judgments of your
insights. Watch your attachment to your ideas. The act of witnessing puts a layer
of curiosity between you and your beliefs. It enables you to have some
perspective and be less invested. Once you have witnessed, turn what you see to
inquiry.

Do The Work of Byron Katie!

 Katie’s work is the perfect antidote to believing your thinking. Ask yourself: Is it
true? How do I react when I believe that thought? Who would I be without that
thought? You can do this with your mindset, your rationalizations, your answers,
                                        134

your opinions, your insights, and your ideas. This will give you incredible freedom
from the trappings of the mind that believes what it thinks! (See the Resources
section at the end of the book for the complete inquiry process.)

THE OPEN AJNA

Where we are Open in our charts, we are taking in the world around us. These are
receptor sites. The Ajna is the center of processing, analyzing, and making sense
of data. It takes in all the information presented, to make sense out of nonsense.
But, how do you do that with an Open Ajna? Some people’s first response when
they realize they have an Open Ajna is to feel like they’re missing something vital.
Other people feel a big relief, like, no wonder they’ve struggled so much trying to
process and retain information.

When I look at someone’s chart and see they have an Open Ajna, I wonder how it
is for them, how they’ve navigated life without consistent access to their
processing center. For most of us, it’s not that easy in a world that privileges
mental capacity. In response, those of us with Open Ajnas have often
compensated by making extra efforts. Historically, women have had to work twice
as hard as men and had to be twice as capable, in order to get the same job or
status. The compensation that comes out of a feeling of lack can produce great
results.

But it can also create a pressure and a tension that is ultimately not in alignment
with or respectful of the power of the Open Ajna. Again, I picture women leaders
like Margaret Thatcher who have taken on the persona of men, feeling that is the
only option to gain respect. In fact, the power of an embodied woman – say, for
example, Stacey Abrams – embracing who she is, has a grounded, enlivening,
invigorating, and heart-opening impact. It’s much more potent than the facsimile
of the strained and unnatural male persona.

Those with Open Ajnas can struggle to process information in a reliable way. It is
also possible, with an Open Ajna, to have a processing center that is naturally
functioning at a level beyond what we consider normal. Occasionally I meet
people, especially if their Ajnas are completely Open, who have photographic
memories. It’s happened enough times that I hold open that possibility as well.
                                        135

As you enter the world of the Open Ajna, I invite you to amplify your spirit of
curiosity. Watch the tendency to grab hold of thoughts, to succumb to the ego’s
attempt to take over your Ajna! The Open Ajna is truly remarkable, valuable, and
worthy of respect in its own right.



If you or your client are one of the 50 percent of the population with an
Undefined Ajna, the second Center from the top – the downward facing triangle –
will be white. Your first center, the Head Center, will automatically be white, or
Undefined, as well since there are by definition, no Channels going from the Ajna
Center to the Head Center.

Remember, a Center becomes Defined when two Gates meet and form a Channel,
creating Definition in the two Centers on either side of that Channel. As with all
the Open Centers, there are profound gifts and formidable challenges. The Open
Ajna is made more complex or potent due to the fact that it is always paired with
an Open Head Center.

The Grapples of an Open Ajna

Where we are Open is where we take in and receive the world around us. Where
we are Open is where we are conditioned, where we believe we should be
different than we are. The Open Centers reveal our pain points. With that in mind
(and we will get to the gifts after you’re clear on the grapples), here are some of
the challenges you, or your client, with an Open Ajna may face:

      No consistent way to process information
      The challenge of holding onto thoughts, data, and information
      The lack of mental groundedness
      Not designed to be certain
      Where to focus?
      The totally Open Ajna

No Consistent Way to Process Information

With an Open Ajna, when information comes in, you don’t have a consistent way
to sort, analyze, and process information. Sometimes you may process through
your intuition, another time through your logical left brain, another time through
                                        136

your abstract right brain. You just never know. This can be unnerving and
confusing, leaving you with a feeling of not being able to trust your mind.

The Challenge of Holding onto Thoughts, Data, and Information

Which brings me to the next point. Your brain does not hold onto information in
the same way someone with a Defined Ajna does. My wife has a Defined Ajna.
She remembers the amount of electric bill, the internet bill, the cost of gas, the
name of the actress in the movie we saw last week, and on and on. Her brain
retains information. My brain is more like a sieve.

People with Open Ajnas often have fear that something is wrong with their brain;
they wonder if they have Alzheimer's because of the way information flows in and
out. They can be afraid of looking stupid when they can’t come up with an answer
for an obvious question. Their minds can go totally blank like a computer freeze,
unable to access the file.

The Lack of Mental Ground

Which brings me to the next point. With the fluid experience of the Open Ajna,
there can be a lack of mental ground. You may not know how your mind is going
to behave. You may not be able to count on your mind to be stable. In our
culture, this is sometimes called flaky. When the mind is free to look at things
from various perspectives and goes in and out of being online, a person can be
inconsistent in their thinking or variable in their perspective.

Depending on how you were viewed, or treated, or conditioned with your Open
Ajna, you could end up feeling mentally insecure and deficient. You could easily
not trust yourself. As a result, you could strain your brain, squeeze your head, and
pressure yourself to hold onto thoughts, trying desperately to get mental ground
by exertion.

One way we try to get mental ground is by merging with other people’s thoughts
and opinions. We identify them as our own to have something in our heads,
rather than the ominous nothingness that we defend against. The problem here is
that, as soon as that person is out of our field, either the thought goes with them,
or we are left exerting effort to hold onto the thought. It’s like a muscle that’s
                                         137

reached for something then forgotten to let it go, leaving the hand in a contracted
state, unable to reach for the next thing that comes by.

Not Designed to Be Certain

Desperately wanting the mental ground that you witness other people having and
being conditioned to believe that certainty is a virtue, you attempt to stabilize
your mind by being certain. The only problem is, with your Undefined Ajna, you
are not designed to be certain. This thinking is so counter to our cultural norm
that it may be hard to even fathom.

The analogy I like to use is driving a car. Imagine you’re holding onto the steering
wheel with your hands tight. You’re trying to stabilize the car through the effort
of keeping the wheel from moving. You’re not allowing the flexibility of the small
movements that are continuously correcting and adjusting to the ever-new input
the car is encountering. By trying to stabilize the steering wheel by holding tightly,
you actually become an unsafe driver.

The lighter you hold the wheel, the more responsive you are to the obstacles in
the road. Likewise, with the Open Ajna, if you can hold your mind lightly, you are
free to respond in the moment to the changing data. This requires tolerating and
allowing for uncertainty. If you grab hold in order to be certain, you miss out on
important cues that could enhance your capacity to understand and analyze
information.

I find that people with an Open Ajna can be more certain than those with Defined
Ajnas. This is always a flag for me. I can feel it. There is a rigidity, a defiance, a
proving that smacks of the Ego having hijacked the person’s sensibility. On the
other hand, I have seen people with Open Ajnas become so flummoxed at the
notion of having an opinion or coming up with an answer, that they freeze and
lose all access to their Ajna.

Where to Focus?

Your Open Ajna is constantly taking in and amplifying the thoughts, ideas,
opinions, and insights of those around you. Then it’s attempting to process the
barrage. Where do you focus? It’s like a camera lens trying to find the subject in
the field, zooming in, zooming out, trying to find a landing place. The Open Ajna
                                        138

has to grapple with what information is worth processing. Remember, it’s got the
Open Head feeding it from all directions. Meanwhile, there is the looming
pressure to come up with answers. The receptive Open Ajna acts like a magnet. It
draws information to it so that it can easily become flooded and overwhelmed.

The Totally Open Ajna

no Hanging Gates are coming off of it whatsoever, the question of where to focus
can be intensified. With nothing to organize your thinking around, the feeling of
lostness – the lack of ground – can be crazy-making.

The Gifts of the Open Ajna

Where we are Open, we are vulnerable to conditioning, thus the Open Centers
are referred to as our pain points. In our Openness, we take on other people’s
thoughts and treat them as if they are our own. I see the Open Centers as filters
that get gunked up with debris. As we clean those filters, liberating ourselves
from – in the case of the Ajna – thoughts, beliefs, and neuropathways that are not
in alignment with who we are, we open to our wisdom. We step into choice. We
become available to experience without a veil, the full spectrum of the Ajna’s
capacities. The pain transforms, becoming the doorway to what I refer to as The
God Portal. Here are the gifts from the traditional

Human Design perspective, followed by my understanding of The God Portal
level.

    You’re here to be wise about what to process.
    You can process information in a variety of ways.
    You can have a brilliant mind.

You’re Here to Be Wise about What to Process

When the Open Ajna functions without being under the influence of conditioning
and the distortions that conditioning brings, the Ajna is capable of seeing clearly
which thoughts and beliefs warrant processing, and which to let pass. The Open
Ajna can see many sides to an issue, bringing a flexible mind and free-thinking
spirit that allows space for new thoughts to be considered.
                                         139

You Can Process Information in a Variety of Ways

Coupled with the capacity to be astute in discerning what it processes, the Open
Ajna has a wide array of tools at its disposal. Depending on what the situation
calls for, it can tap the breadth and depth of the right brain, abstract approach
which interprets dreams and symbols. Here it takes into account the past as it
senses into – more than figuring out – what is at hand.

The Open Ajna can also engage the left brain, logical aspect of the mind to predict
and hypothesize what to analyze and how to go forward. It can also utilize the
knowingness that comes seemingly from nowhere but is clear, perhaps a direct
line to Universal Knowing. In addition, the Open Ajna can draw upon intuitive
knowing, gut knowing, emotional knowing, and mental knowing. Thus, the Open
Ajna has a plethora of possible ways to navigate and make sense of the nonsense,
the chaos, it perpetually encounters.

You Can Have a Brilliant Mind

With the flexibility of looking at life through myriad lenses, the potential for
brilliance can go far beyond the grounded Defined Ajna’s capacities. Take Albert
Einstein for instance: his Open Ajna coupled with his totally Open Head enabled
him to peer into the workings of the universe in new and astounding ways. When
the filters are cleared, miraculous insights become available (we’ll look at this in
the God Portal).

My mother had an Open Head and Ajna. She graduated from college at eighteen
and finished her Ph.D. at twenty-one. She was a genius at test-taking, and, in her
late forties, took up aviation. She consistently got 98 percent to 100 percent on
her flight tests while the guys in the class got scores in the 70 percent range. The
teacher suspected the secretary was slipping her the tests so he began locking
them up.

When my mom went to take her written exam, she found the test much harder
than she had been prepped for. The fellows in her class had all been notified
they’d passed while she hadn’t heard. She got a call saying she had passed the
test for the Commercial License, but they had no record of her private pilot’s test.
She’d mistakenly been given a more advanced test. She went in and took the
private pilot’s test and easily passed.
                                       140

Another way, which I mentioned before, that the brilliance of the Open Ajna can
show up is a photographic memory. It’s as if there is not a barrier between the
information and the mind. This can also show up as a capacity to almost hear or
see people’s thoughts. It’s like going into Oneness with someone’s mind and
picking up on what they’re thinking. This is an asset for any coach or therapist
who can access the clarity of the Open Ajna.

The Open Ajna as a God Portal

      The Diamond Body – neutral witness
      Access to all knowledge
      Laser focus
      Unshakable mental stability

The Diamond Body – Neutral Witness

In the Diamond Approach, the Diamond Body is the essential vehicle whose
function is to see and process the whole and all the parts simultaneously. When
the Open Ajna is unimpeded, we embody the neutral witness and thus have
access to an unfathomable level of clarity. In this unhindered state, there is
nothing between the Open Ajna and the Oneness of the universe.

The level of complexity is daunting and unavailable to the Ego. And yet with the
light of the Diamond Body, order is revealed in a harmonious simplicity. If you
have done extensive meditation – or perhaps through ingesting psychotropic
substances – you may have pierced the Ego’s veil and gotten glimpses of the vast
workings of the universe.

Access to All Knowledge

As we touched on above, the Open Ajna can access everything from photographic
memory to mind reading. But it goes beyond that. From the Diamond Body
perspective, the entire knowledge of the universe is accessed and processed
through the combination of the Open Head and Open Ajna Centers. This includes
information throughout time and space, including access to the Akashic records.
This is a very spacious mind that is open to the full spectrum of information and
able to process it.
                                          141

Laser Focus

The Diamond Body has the extraordinary capacity to instantaneously process
information from a non-preferential place. Likewise, when the unimpeded Open
Ajna places its focus on something, a light turns on and reveals everything there is
to know about the object of its focus. This surpasses the sophistication of any
supercomputer we could imagine.

I’m going to use myself as an example here. When a client shares a dilemma with
me, and my Open Head and Ajna are clear (this practice requires true neutrality), I
can see in a nano-second the entire scenario. The problem and possible solutions
reveal themselves. Whether and how I share what arises, or not, is another issue
that takes its own skill. There is no thinking or effort involved. The information is
just there. The light gets turned on and I see.

Unshakable Mental Stability

As you learn to relax your mind and surrender to your Open Head and Ajna, you
Open to your essential self, your Being. You land in the present moment. Instead
of identifying with, and thus being tossed about by the thoughts or processing
styles of others, you become the neutral observer; you become the witness to the
myriad of thoughts and processes that are in continuous motion. As the observer,
you rest in the spaciousness, identifying with spaciousness itself. As a result, you
access an almost inconceivable stability which engenders a natural certainty. This
certainty is predicated on flexibility and flow. It is not based on the rigidity of the
Ego’s need for security and safety.

I remember the first time I accessed this clarity. It was 1998 or 1999. I was in the
back seat of a car, sitting directly behind Byron Katie. We were driving to an event
she was doing in Tucson, Arizona. Katie said something – I can’t remember what –
and my mind went still. For a moment, I glimpsed the world in perpetual motion,
a constant swirl of change. And yet, the act of witnessing the movement was an
experience of peace and stability, a ground in my mind that I had never known
before. I can remember turning to her and saying, “I get it. The only thing that’s
constant is change.”
                                        142

Working with the Open Ajna

    Appreciate your Open Ajna.
    Clean the filter of conditioning.
    Find the ground/ stability.
    Use your Strategy and Authority as guides.

   Appreciate Your Open Ajna

   We are wired to hold onto and identify with pain. It’s our primitive brain’s way
   of trying to keep us safe. But to truly access the gifts of the Open Head and
   Ajna, you must shift your attitude and begin to appreciate them. By treating
   your Open Ajna with awe and respect, seeing it as a source of possibility, you
   open to receive the blessings it has to offer. Instead of dissing your mind, and
   believing it should be different, practice the qigong inner smile. Send
   appreciation to your brain exactly as it is. Claim your mind as a witness rather
   than falling into the habit of being at the effect of the people around you and
   the conditioning from the past.

   Clean the Filter of Conditioning

To liberate yourself from the pattern of habitually identifying with other people’s
thoughts, beliefs, ideas, answers, and just, in general, their mind patterns, commit
to looking diligently at the thoughts that arise. See what you’re believing that is
untrue. Decide to either stop comparing or to use the comparing mind
consciously to discover the truth.

Byron Katie’s work is the best filter-cleaning agent I know, but it is not the only
one. There are many Buddhist meditation practices that will clear the filter.
Cognitive therapy can be a useful tool here as well. Anything that will help free
your ego from the desperate need to know and be certain will bring tremendous
clarity and ease into your life.

There is a story my Diamond Teacher, Faisal Muqaddam, used to tell us about his
childhood in Kuwait. That culture did not overwork the brain. It was understood
that the mind was designed to be at rest until something appeared that actually
required thought. He was shocked when he came to the US and experienced the
rampant mental flurry and head tension from overthinking. We have been
                                         143

conditioned to think as an ongoing action rather than to allow ourselves to know,
or to use that function specifically in the right timing. Can you imagine if you were
surrounded by people whose minds were at rest? What that would do to the
energy in the field?

Find the Ground and Establish an Authentic Stability

If you have the good fortune to be in the presence of someone with a stable
mind, you can actually get the transmission of that state. I believe this is what
happened to me being with Katie. Yes, I did The Work, but being in the presence
of her unshakable mind gave me a template – a new path. On your journey to
stabilize your Open Head and Ajna, here are a few guideposts that may be helpful:

    Surrender, lean into, or fall into your openness.
    Relax and open. Rest in being. Wait. Practice not going after information.
     Rather allow information to come to you.
    Allow knowing.
    Keep in mind that mental stability comes as we become the witness to
     what’s arising.
    Detach from identification with thoughts and see thoughts as impersonal.
    Free yourself of the need to be certain. When you find yourself being
     certain, see that as a sign that you may be identifying with your ego.

Use Your Strategy and Authority as Guides

Retrain your mind from the pattern of going to your head for knowledge by
looking to your Strategy and Authority instead. This will give you a trustworthy
way to discern what thoughts are conditioned and what are supportive to you.
For example, if you’re a Generator with an Emotional authority, you may have a
response to something someone says.

You first start to process it from an old pain vantage, but when you check your
gut, you know better. You wait and let more information come in, which lets you
see a bigger picture. You’re flooded with compassion for the person rather than
reactivity. You’ve shifted from processing something from the habitual stance –
 where you believe that what’s being said is personal to you – to seeing it is more
about the person and what they’re experiencing than about you.
                                         144

Helpful Tools

It is easy enough to say find the ground and establish authentic stability. And this
does provide an initial orientation. But how is the big question. How do you
liberate your Open Ajna? For each of you, and for each of your clients, the journey
will be unique. I see the Open Centers as direct access to connecting with
universal Oneness. They are our spiritual portals: the doorway to knowing
ourselves as spirit, as essence.

There are particular tools I regularly use and recommend specifically for the Open
Ajna that you might find helpful:

      Meditate.
      Do The Work of Byron Katie.
      Sensing your arms and legs, bringing your awareness to your belly.
      Use essential oils as a practice.

Meditate

Meditation is a clear choice for cleaning the filters when it comes to the Open
Head and Ajna Centers. Vipassana meditation in particular is geared to looking
directly at the mind. Byron Katie has a meditation I often suggest that guides you
to put your thoughts on a cloud, one at a time as they arise, and let them pass.
Transcendental Meditation doesn’t look directly at thoughts.

However, it makes space for thoughts to arise without going to war with them or
trying to make them go away. This has a back-door effect of loosening the grip of
the mind. Vajrayana Buddhism has a variety of meditations. They are all geared to
shifting our identification from our habitual thought patterns to a more authentic
and naturally aligned self. Any meditation, really that helps you disidentify from
your thinking is deeply supportive.

I would add here a tool that has been particularly helpful for me, which is mantra
recitation. This can be done as part of a meditation or in daily life. The mantra is
taking up the space the habitual thoughts would otherwise inhabit.

Do The Work of Byron Katie
                                        145

If there is one tool that has had the biggest impact on clearing my thinking, it is
The Work. In this simple yet potent process, you write down your judgments then
inquire into your thinking. This is a fantastic way to look at the painful thoughts
we identify with and do an inquiry into their truth. As we see our internal fake
news, our attachment to conditioning naturally falls away. We become sober in
our thinking rather than cluttered with distortions.

                              (See Resources for Katie’s complete inquiry process.)x

Sense Your Arms and Legs, Drop into Your Belly

As I mentioned in the chapter on the Head Center, this might seem like an odd
choice to add in the mix. But do not underestimate this simple practice. It can
help bring you immediately into the present moment.

Use Essential Oils as a Practice

Essential oils have the extraordinary ability to cross the blood/ brain barrier to
access and work directly with the brain. You can release trauma and tension by
smelling specific oils as you focus on different parts of your body. There is so
much clearing and healing you can do with the oils on so many levels. There is a
technique called the Mugwort Technique that can bring you into the present
moment. This is a new path for me, and I find it surprisingly supportive.

                                           (See Resources for Mugwort Technique.)

RECAP

This has been a long and full chapter. All the Centers are important and unique,
but the Ajna holds a special place. If we can be in alignment with our Ajna, we can
work with the other Centers from a place of clarity. The overarching theme with
the Ajna, in general, is to retrain your mind. Learn to shift away from the pattern
of going to your head for the answers.

Instead, rely on your Strategy and Authority to recognize which of your Ajna’s
insights, opinions, or ideas should be followed and ultimately expressed. Take
some time to reflect on what you’ve learned about your Ajna. What’s your
relationship to certainty? Do you rely on your Ajna without even realizing it?
                                         146

In the next chapter, we’ll explore the Throat Center. This is a key Center in the
chart. It could be a game changer in your life. Take your time and get to know
your Throat Center!
                                          147


                                          8

               GETTING TO KNOW THE THROAT CENTER




INTRODUCING THE THROAT CENTER

Approaching the Throat Center is like looking out at the Grand Canyon in
suspended awe. It is so majestic. It is so powerful. It embodies the beauty, the
splendor, and the magnificence of creation. The Throat Center is a thing to
behold. It is so multi-faceted, so powerful, so important. It’s key to our
relationships, our creativity, our survival, our well-being, our sense of self, our
power.

Through the Throat Center, we express ourselves. We speak our thoughts,
express our feelings, and share our intuitions. We use our voice to take
leadership. And, perhaps most importantly, when we put our words into action,
we create. Through our Throat Center, we make manifest the glory of God. This is
the Center of creativity and possibility. This is the Center through which we
                                        148

manifest. In the beginning, was the word. With the Throat Center, we hold the
power of the word.

The Throat Center is so vital in the Human Design chart that all the energy in the
chart is rushing to make its way to the Throat Center. Sometimes called the hub,
or the town square, of the chart, it is the gathering place through which we
connect to others. With eleven Gates connecting to six Centers, mechanically
speaking, the Throat Center connects to more Centers and Gates than any other
Center in the whole chart.

With its vast diversity and its huge impact, the Throat Center is worth getting to
know, understand, and work with. Your capacity to show up, be heard, create,
and manifest rests with your alignment with your Throat Center. It also has a role
in our physical health as it is associated with the thyroid and parathyroid glands.

These small but powerful glands are responsible for our metabolic processes –
regulating how we assimilate and digest food, and – for that matter – life. If you
misuse your Throat Center by not following your Type, Strategy, and Authority,
you risk burning out your thyroid and/ or your vocal cords. This is very easy to do
and can cause serious health issues. It’s also avoidable. As I said, it’s worth
knowing how to care for and align with your unique Throat Center.

CONNECTING TO THE THROAT CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATIOON

Let’s take a moment to connect with this powerful energy and begin the process of
befriending your Throat Center.

Begin by taking a breath and dropping your awareness down to your sitz bones.

Can you feel the weight of your body dropping into the chair?

Expand your awareness to include your entire body.

Taking another breath, relax. Sense the whole of your body.

Bring your awareness to your throat.

What do you notice?

Is it tight or relaxed?
                                             149

What sensation do you feel?

Smile into your Throat Center as you breathe.

Imagine your Throat Center expanding out to fill the space in front of you.

Now allow your Throat Center to fill the space behind you.

To the left of you. To the right of you.

Feel your Throat Center expanding in all directions.

Rest and relax.

Now imagine your quantum body, alive, vital, full of energy wanting to get to your
Throat Center.

Can it make it to your Throat Center?

Or is it blocked?

Imagine for a moment that any blocks dissolve and that you are free to speak, to
express yourself.

What do you want to express?

What do you want to manifest through your Throat Center?

Can you allow it?

Can you allow yourself to fill all space with You, the voice of You, and the
expression of You?

What would it feel like if you could speak and be heard?

What would it feel like if your voice mattered?

Take a minute to let that feeling sink in.

You are the voice of the world.

Your voice matters.

Through your voice, you are known.
                                         150

You exist.

You bring your unique gift to the world.

Now take a moment to appreciate and thank your Throat Center.

Set an intention to deepen your connection with your Throat Center.

Set an intention to be skillful with this powerful force.

Slowly bring your awareness back to the rest of your body.

Sense your arms and legs.

Sense your belly.

Gently open your eyes.

Take time to write down your thoughts and experience.

Come back to this meditation again or create your own.

Give yourself the gift of your voice.

Take time to write down your thoughts and experience. Come back to this
meditation again or create your own. Give yourself the gift of your voice.

THE DEFINED THROAT CENTER

As I write this, I’m sitting on my lanai. It’s around sunset on Maui and the birds
are making their evening racket. Their rich diverse voices are cooing and hooting,
chirping and chattering, in a melodious cacophony that demands I pause and
listen to their song. They make me think of all the Defined Throat Centers being
like these birds, each with their unique song.

They have a particular consistent tone, their way of speaking. They’re comfortable
chatting it up with the world. Occasionally there is a bird, louder than the others,
that stands out, its voice resounding, impacting the field. These birds, I muse for a
moment, are like the folks with a Motor to their Throat Centers whose powerful
voice almost has an implicit command to be heard.

Are you one of the 72 percent of the population that has a Defined Throat
Center? What tune are you sharing with the world? There is so much diversity in
                                         151

the expression of the Throat Center. With connections to six different Centers and
eleven different channels, which Center and Channel you have Defined to your
Throat Center will determine the nature of your song. What theme are you
consistently announcing to the world?

If your Throat Center has a Defined Channel to the Ajna Center, you are here to
speak your mind. If the Defined Channel is to the Emotional Solar Plexus, you are
here to express feelings. If your Throat Center is Defined by a Channel to the Will
Center, you are designed to take leadership, to speak from a place of power and
authority. If your Throat is Defined through a connection to the Identity Center,
you have the task of making a unique creative contribution. If your Throat Center
is Defined through the Sacral, you’re here to manifest your actions through your
words. If your Throat Center is Defined through your

Spleen Center, you’re speaking your intuition. Which Center does your Throat
Center connect to? However, your Throat Center is Defined, you are truly blessed.

The Gifts of the Defined Throat Center

 In full transparency, I do not have the gift of a Defined Throat Center. My
knowledge of the Defined Throat comes from the teachings I’ve received, hearing
people talk about their experience, and witnessing others, most notably people
close to me: my wife, my parents, three of my six siblings, my friends, and the
clients I’ve worked with. I invite you to take what I say then inquire into your own
experience to discover what the gifts of your Defined Throat hold for you.

There are a few things to keep in mind as we look at the gifts of the Defined
Throat Center. It is not a simple picture. As I said earlier, the Channel you have
Defined will determine the path of consistent access you have to your Throat
Center. Add in the complexity of whether you have a Motor to the Throat,
whether it’s an unconscious or conscious Channel that defines your Throat
Center, and whether or not you have a Defined Head and Ajna. Each of these
distinctions shifts the picture. Let’s take a look at both the broad strokes as well
as the closer view.

    You have consistent access to your voice.
    You have a level of confidence.
    If you have a Motor to your Throat Center.
                                         152

You Have Consistent Access to Your Voice

With a Defined Throat Center, you will have consistent access to your Throat
Center. Whether or not you use your voice, whether or not you speak what you
have to say is a different matter. And, whether or not you’re heard when you
speak is also a different matter. This gets into your capacity to follow your Type,
Strategy, and Authority. Regardless, you have access to your Throat Center. This
may be so natural to you that you don’t even recognize it. Like the bird singing its
song, you have a particular song that has a specific quality.

I think of Karen Curry Parker here, and her consistent voice, her song of Human
Design. While she’s ever-evolving and always upgrading her teaching and content,
her song remains constant. Her tone of voice is one of warmth and compassion in
the service of expansion. Let’s look at the different Channels – or songs we might
say. Check your chart to see which of these thirteen Channels you have Defined
and what that might say about your song:

Defined Channels from the Throat Center to the Ajna:

With a Defined Throat connecting to the Ajna Center, you’re here to speak your
mind.

(See Chart #18 Ajna to the Throat Center.)

Channel 17-62 Acceptance

 You have the gift of speaking your opinions and articulating details if you have
the left brain, Logic Channel with Gate 62 Details, coming off your Throat Center
and connecting with Gate 17 Opinions, in the Ajna, Defined. My wife has this, and
I can attest she always has something to say when asked her opinion! She loves
this quality about herself – especially when, as a Projector, she’s invited to share
those opinions.

Channel 43-23 Structuring

If you have this Individual Knowing Channel Defined with the Gate 23 Splitting
Apart or Assimilation, and the Gate 43 Insight or Breakthrough, you have the gift
of speaking your insights in new ways that can transform the world. You have the
                                        153

potential of bringing a new light of awareness to the planet. True confessions:
This is my favorite Channel in the whole chart.

My friend Pali Summerlin has this Channel. She can look at any issue you present
and see it from a perspective you couldn’t have imagined. It’s a real gift. My
friend Dr. Veronica has it as well. We call her The Oracle. Through her eyes, I have
seen and understood racism in ways I never grokked before.

Channel 11-56 Curiosity

 With this right-brained, Sensing Circuit Channel Defined, you have an abundance
of ideas with Gate 11 Ideas connecting with Gate 56 The Storyteller. You have the
gift of being a storyteller, always sharing your ideas through stories. I can
remember one client I had who questioned this about herself. It was such a part
of who she was that she didn’t recognize it until I started pointing out how each
time she explained something, she was telling me a story.

Throat Center to the Emotional Solar Plexus Center:

When you have your Throat Center Defined by a connection to the Emotional
Solar Plexus, you’re here to express your feelings. You automatically have a Motor
to your Throat Center. That makes you a Manifestor or Manifesting Generator.
Because of your Motor to your Throat Center, you naturally empower everyone
around you.
                                        154

Channel 36-35 Transitoriness

If you have this right-brain, Sensing Circuitry with the Gate 35 Change and the
Gate 36 Crisis both Defined, you have a Motor to the Throat Center. You have the
gift of speaking, from your Emotional Solar Plexus, what you need and want. You
manifest through your desires. You are here to bring change through crisis, or a
variety of new experiences. The Gate 35 is sometimes referred to as The Jack of
All Trades, so, with this definition, you undoubtedly have a variety of capacities.

Channel 22-12 Openness

 If you have Gate 12 Caution Defined off your Throat connecting with Gate 22
Grace, you have deeply emotional Individual Knowing Circuitry. You have the gift
of combining your wordsmith capacities with social grace when you’re in the
mood. You have the possibility of articulating the depths of humanity’s despair as
well as the heights of their elation. Perhaps you are a public speaker, a poet, a
musician, or a dancer; however, you do it, your voice is powered by the Motor of
the ESP.

Throat Center to the Will Center:




With a Defined Throat connecting to the Will Center, you are here to lead.

Channel 21-45 Money
                                         155

If you have Gate 45 The King or Queen Defined as well as Gate 21 The Treasurer,
you are here to voice leadership. With this strong Tribal Circuitry, this is the one
place in the chart where you have the gift of taking charge. You also have the gift
of working independently.

The Will Center is a Motor, so the Throat Center is empowered with this
materialistically focused Manifestor or Manifesting Generator energy gifting you
with the capacity to commit and follow through. This brings tremendous
confidence to your leadership. Used skillfully, this is an awesome energy!

Throat to the Identity Center:

With a Defined Throat Center connecting to the Identity Center you are here to
speak authentically from your heart.




Channel 13-33 Prodigal

If you have Gate 33 Retreat or Privacy Defined as well as Gate 13 The Listener,
you have the gift of listening deeply, reflecting on the past, and sharing what
you’ve discovered when the timing is right. This is right brain, Sensing Circuit
energy, that is based on experience rather than thoughts.

Channel 1-8 Inspiration
                                        156

If you have Gate 8 Contribution and Gate 1 Creative Expression Defined, you have
the gift of making a creative contribution. This is Individual Knowing Circuitry, so
you can speak from deep knowing and articulate things in a unique way. My wife
has this energy. I can always count on her to have words that capture the heart of
a situation in an unusual way. While you undoubtedly feel pressure to make a
contribution, your biggest contribution is being your authentic self.

Channel 7-31 The Alpha

If you have Gate 31 Influence, and Gate 7 Self in Interaction (or The Collaborator),
you have the gift of leadership and influencing the future. However, unlike
Channel 21-45, you cannot take leadership – you must be called to it. This is the
voice of democracy – you lead by the mandate of the people. This is left brain,
Logical Circuitry that looks to the future to see what can be improved. Hillary
Clinton has Gate 7, while Bill Clinton has Gate 31. The pragmatic heart force of
Gate 7 seeks to guide the voice of leadership in Gate 31.

Channel 10-20 Awakening

 If you have Gate 20 Defined and also Gate 10 Defined, you have the gift of loving
yourself in the moment. Sometimes called The Buddha Gate, this is the energy of
empowered awakening. When you are aligned with this energy, you support
everyone in your field to love themselves. With this extraordinary Individual
Knowing Circuit, you embody the voice of authenticity as you live and speak your
truth.

Throat to the Sacral Center:

With a Defined Throat connecting to your Sacral Center, you are here to manifest
your actions through your words in the moment.
                                      157




34-20 Charisma

If you have Gate 20 In the Now, and Gate 34 Power Defined, you are the
archetypal Manifesting Generator. Your gift is the simultaneous combustion of
word and action becoming deed. You can almost manifest at will. When you’re in
alignment, which means when you’re creating out of response, your creative life
force knows no bounds. You are here to live in the moment to the beat of your
own drum. As you do, you inspire and empower everyone around you to follow
and live their truth.

Throat to the Spleen Center:

With a Defined Channel from the Throat Center to the Spleen Center, you are
here to speak your intuition and express your expertise.
                                          158




57-20 The Brainwave

If you have Gate 20 In the Now and Gate 57 Intuition Defined, you have the gift of
speaking your intuition. You also have an intuitive sense, when you are following
your Strategy and Authority, of what to do in any given moment from the survival
wisdom of the Spleen Center. This is Individual Knowing Circuitry, so you naturally
know things.

48-16 Talent

 If you have the Gate 16 Enthusiasm and the Gate 48 Depth Defined in your chart,
you have the gift of combining your intuitive instincts with your depth and
enthusiasm. With your sustainable enthusiasm, you have the capacity to develop
a skill or talent. This is left brain Logical Circuitry, so this talent is mastered over
time by repeating and upgrading patterns. Think about the passion and dedication
it takes to become proficient with a musical instrument.

You Have a Level of Confidence

Whether you are aware of it or not, there is a confidence that comes with
consistent access to the Throat Center. Of course, there are other configurations
configurations in the chart that could overshadow or make you doubt that
                                         159

confidence. And, there is always the potential opposite of the theme. None-the-
less, if you are following your Strategy and Authority, with a Defined Throat you
have a consistent song that you have access to.

Motor to Your Throat Center

If you have a Motor to your Throat Center, you are by definition a Manifestor or
Manifesting Generator. With this, you have the added gift of having your naturally
consistent access to your voice turbo-charged. You have the both the gift of
manifestation and the gift of being heard. These cannot be underestimated. It’s
said that if Human Design were a game, the way to win would be to get a Motor
to your Throat Center. So, you arrive having won. Not only that, but you empower
everyone around you by your presence – electromagnetically giving everyone
around you access to that energy.

Again, I think of Karen Curry Parker, who almost daily writes long, inspired,
heartfelt and relational emails to the Human Design Community. Add to that her
plethora of books and her speaking and teaching. She’s like an endless geyser
manifesting, creating from her Motor to her Throat Center.

Of course, there are a few challenges with your Motor to your Throat Center as
well. We’ll address those in the next session on grapples. But truly, if you are
following your Strategy and Authority, you are supremely blessed. You have the
keys to the treasury.

The Grapples of the Defined Throat Center

Blessed with the Defined Throat Center’s gifts, you may also encounter both
general as well as specific challenges, depending on which Channel you have
Defined and which Center it is Defined by. Always remember that where there is
Definition, the gift is consistent access, but the theme of the Definition arrives in
duality, with the polar opposite possibility as well.

So, let’s say you have the Channel 1-8, for example, and you’re here to make a
creative contribution. You could spend your lifetime lamenting that you’re not
making your creative contribution. The theme is present, but as the opposite. This
could be true for any of the following Channels coming from the Throat Center.
Let’s take a look and see what grapples you or your client might be encountering.
                                         160

    Speaking within a bandwidth
    Needing to follow your Type, Strategy, and Authority to empower your
     voice
    Honoring timing
    Grapples specific to channels

Speaking within a Bandwidth

Whenever there is Definition, the energy of the theme is expressed within a
bandwidth, whereas in Openness all possibilities become available. In this case, if
you have a Defined Throat, your speech is consistent within a bandwidth. This is
not a grapple in and of itself, it’s just that you may not have the variety of options
in tone, or in how you say things.

Think for a moment about certain actors or actresses who have a distinct voice,
whereas other actors or actresses have a range of what they say and how they say
it. With a Defined Throat, there may not be a level of sophistication in your voice
that enables you to meet the person you’re with. Remember, with a Defined
Throat you’re broadcasting your voice, not receiving. Sometimes you may say
things in a blunt kind of way.

If your Channel to the Throat Center is Individual Circuitry, you may speak your
unique thoughts without regard or awareness of their impact. I’m ultra-sensitive
to tones and have had to learn not to take the tone of Defined Throat energy
personally.

Needing to Follow Your Type, Strategy, and Authority to Empower Your Voice

This is so big. Yes, you have this incredible gift. And yet, you have to read the
instruction manual in order to use it to its fullest potential. If not aligned with
your Design, you risk all kinds of problems. Some of the biggest include not being
heard and burning out. Here are a few examples: My wife has a Defined Throat
Center, and she’s a Projector. She has things to say, but unless she’s
acknowledged or invited, she won’t be heard. It’s baffling to watch people
blatantly ignore her.

Even within our relationship, we’ve had to find ways to make sure her voice is
heard. If Manifestors and Manifesting Generators don’t inform before they speak,
                                          161

they risk being rebuffed. The impact of their Motor to the Throat is thwarted. This
could happen even when they do inform, but the odds are better with informing.
The result in either of these cases can be a sense of feeling disheartened or
disempowered. For Generators and Manifesting Generators, if they are not using
their voice in response, they easily can burn out, or they can use their powerful
voice in an unskillful way that can be dominant or aggressive.

Honoring Timing

In any of the above scenarios, there is always the question of timing. When you
speak do you do it in a way that will be empowering and manifest what you are
wanting to create? Unfortunately, waiting to speak is a skill that’s not taught as a
virtue. Our culture is all about use your voice, get in there, be heard. The squeaky
wheel gets the grease. For my wife to wait, as a Projector, it could be a long time
before the door to speak is opened. For a Manifesting Generator with the 34-20,
they may be so compelled to put their thoughts into action, to speak at every
opportunity, that they don’t wait to respond. The result? They totally dissipate
their energy and burn themselves out. Honoring the timing of your words is
crucial to accessing the riches of your voice.

Grapples Specific to Particular Channels:

Channels Defined from the Throat Center to the Ajna: (See Chart #18 Throat to the
Ajna.)

Channel 17-62 Acceptance

Channel 43-23 Structuring

Channel 11-56 Curiosity

With any of these three Channels Defined, timing is everything. If the timing is off,
you can be filling the field with your mental gifts to no avail. You can also get a bit
rigid if your ego holds on too tightly to believing that what you have to say must
be heard. This is the place where you are in possession of valuable pearls that you
must respect and protect. Do not throw your pearls to swine! Another way to say
this is that what you’re offering is a kind of medicine. However, if the person is
not ready to receive it, the medicine becomes poison to them. They can’t tolerate
what you’re saying so they reject you.
                                        162

Channel 17-62 Acceptance

The timing of when you share your opinions with the 17-62 will determine
whether or not they are heard or ignored.

Channel 43-23

Structuring The timing of when you share your brilliant insights with the 43-23 will
determine if you are seen as a freak (which means you’re ahead of your time and
people aren’t ready for what you’re bringing) or a genius. You can stop believing
in yourself and your knowing – to the point of feeling something is wrong with
you – if your insights are continuously not valued.

Channel 11-56 Curiosity

The timing of when you share your multitudes of ideas through story with the 11-
56 will determine if what you have to say is listened to. If you’re consistently not
heard, it can feel disheartening, like your gifts aren’t received. If you’re not
following your Strategy and Authority, you may be talking away with no audience.
You might decide that what you have to say isn’t important, but to not speak
could be like holding back a dam. You must find a way to work with this energy, to
honor it.

Throat Center to the Emotional Solar Plexus Center: (See Chart #21.)

Channel 36-35 Transitoriness
Channel 22-12 Openness

With these Motor-to-the-Throat Channels, you have an emotional wave that you
must wait out before you act or risk making messes.

Channel 36-35 Transitoriness

With the Channel 36-35, you have a restless desire for new experiences. You
cannot tolerate boredom and can jump into things just to avoid that feeling. I’ve
seen clients with this Channel dissipate their energy by getting excited by the next
new thing, only to become bored and depleted, leaving a string of projects half-
done. They end up not trusting themselves and their desires.

Channel 22-12
                                          163

Openness With the Channel 22-12, you have the grapple of not forcing yourself to
speak or be social when you’re not in the mood. You have to listen and wait, and
look within rather than succumb to external pulls.

Throat Center to the Will Center
(See Chart #22.)

Channel 21-45

The Money Line With the Channel 21-45, yes, you have the capacity to take
charge with this Manifesting energy of the Will Motor going to the Throat. But
unless you honor your Will Center and the work-to-rest cycle, you will burn
yourself out. You’re designed to be the leader. However, it can be challenging for
you to trust people to be as competent as you are. As a result, you may not
delegate. This can easily lead to overworking and burnout. You also have the
challenge of needing to follow your Strategy. You must inform people before you
take action or else risk having people feel dominated by you.

Throat to the Identity Center:
(See Chart #23.)

Channel 13-33 Prodigal
Channel 1-8 Inspiration
Channel 7-31 The
Alpha Channel 10-20

Awakening All of these Channels from the Throat Center to the G Center involve
speaking from the heart. What can happen if your voice isn’t heard or if you are
criticized triggers the turtle effect – you can stop speaking. Your heart, in effect,
gets hurt, and you can pull in and mute yourself. This is a loss for everyone. We
need what you have to say. Your grapple is to become skillful, to follow your
Strategy and Authority, to get clear on place and timing. Heal any of the past
wounding and come back out!

Channel 13-33 Prodigal

With the 13-33, you can get stuck in stories of the past. Instead of taking time to
reflect and learn from past experiences, you can become victimized by them. This
is not pretty and creates a lot of suffering.
                                        164

Channel 1-8 Inspiration

With the 1-8, you are here to make a creative contribution, to inspire people with
your unusual offering. When you are not making that creative contribution, you
suffer. If you get caught in your head thinking you have to figure it out, you miss
the boat. If you’re busy doing in order to make a creative contribution, you’ll burn
yourself out. You are the creative contribution. Living your life authentically, in
accordance with your Type, Strategy, and Authority, will naturally guide you in the
manifestation of your unique self. Living as a creative contribution takes
awareness and a bigger view of life. While it’s simple, this is not easy.

Channel 7-31 The Alpha

With the 7-31, you are here to be a leader. You’re here to be called into
leadership. The grapple comes when you try to take leadership. This is Democratic
leadership. You become the voice of the people. If your ego steps in, the
dynamics shift and you actually lose the power of your voice.

Channel 10-20 Awakening

The Channel 10-20 is one of the red flag channels. As empowering as it can be, it
can be equally disempowering. We refer to this as the verbal gunslinger. If you
are not self-loving, what comes from your heart to your voice is distorted. There
can be a vitriol that is cruel to the core. You have a responsibility to keep your
power in check and use it wisely.

Throat to the Sacral Center:
(See Chart #24.)

34-20 Charisma

Speaking of power, this is the most powerful Channel in the chart. If you are not
following your Manifesting Generator Strategy, you can be busy doing without
responding in the moment. The result – total burnout. I have had many clients
with this challenge. They have capacity but lose it by burning out. There is also an
unusual conundrum I’ve seen many times where people with this Channel act like
Projectors.
                                          165

They feel unseen and unheard. Their energy is drained. I attribute this to not
being in full integrity with their Sacral responses to the point where they have
shut down their Sacral Motor and burned out their adrenals or thyroid. The
challenge here is to slowly rebuild your relationship with your Sacral, starting with
baby steps. You’re designed to live a deeply individually oriented life. It’s as if you
have abdicated that to live according to something outside yourself – following
the beat of someone else’s drum. This is actually not a viable option for you.

Throat to the Spleen:
(See Chart #25.)

57-20 The Brainwave
48-16 Talent

With Spleen energy to the Throat, you have a distinctly intuitive sensibility.
However, it is easy to override your instincts if you get pulled into the loud noises
in your mind giving you direction.

57-20 The Brainwave

 With the 57-20, you have the capacity to speak your intuition in the now. Your
first grapple is to listen, hear, and trust what your intuition is telling you, rather
than listening to your thoughts. Your second grapple is to articulate what you
know. However, this is an Awareness center, not a Motor, so while you may have
insights for people in terms of what would be good for their well-being, you don’t
have energy to make that happen. Your words may not come to fruition. The last
grapple here is timing. You must learn to be skillful in your timing or else risk not
being heard or not have what you have to say be trusted by another.

48-16 Talent

The 48-16 demands patience. You must first get clear on what you’re passionate
about before jumping in for the long haul of doing the work of mastery. This could
be a life-time endeavor requiring not only time but resources to develop your
talent. If you don’t follow your Strategy and Authority, you may get excited and
leap into things without the internal and external resources to follow through.
                                         166

Working with the Defined Throat Center

      Appreciate the gift.
      Be clear on your Type, Strategy, and Authority.
      Differentiate what you need to be skillful.
      Develop a witnessing observer.
      Give your Defined Throat a voice.

Appreciate the Gift

When you begin to appreciate the gift of your Defined Throat, then you can begin
the work of being skillful with how to best use that gift. But that can’t happen if
you don’t recognize what’s possible for you. I find many clients, especially
women, are shy about claiming the power of the Defined Throat Center. There is
a power in voice, and as much as we long for it, we also defend against it. It’s so
core to our empowerment that it’s one of the places it’s easy to feel
disempowered and victimized.

If we hold onto that story of victimization, we deny the gift. So, the first thing
you’ll want to work with, for yourself or others, is claiming where you have
consistent access to your Throat Center. Your task will be to see first where you
might be denying that energy, then to begin nourishing it. Look for places where,
for example, you are making a creative contribution. Look for times when you did
listen to and follow your intuition.

Remember a time when your Freak/ Genius was able to shed light on something
and change the course of a project or a relationship. You get the drift. So, tease
out where you’re denying this energy and begin to affirm where you have it. This
will begin to turn the disempowered barge around.

Be Clear on Your Type, Strategy, and Authority

In order to access the riches of your Defined Throat, you must know how to work
with your particular quantum vehicle. If, for example, you are driving a stick shift,
you need a different skill set than if you are driving an automatic. If you are
driving a Prius, you have to know how to turn on the car without a key. Likewise,
your ease and fluidity with your Type, Strategy, and Authority must become
second nature.
                                        167

Otherwise, the old patterns of going to your head – or pushing your throat out
there – will leave you burned out and disheartened. You’ll end up questioning
what you have to offer. If you have a Motor to the Throat Center, your challenges
and gifts will be very different than if you don’t.

Differentiate What You Need to Be Skillful

You’ll also need to get clear on what your particular Channels need in order to be
heard. This dovetails with Type, Strategy, and Authority, but is also different.
Perhaps you’re a Generator with the 43-23. Not only do you have to wait to
respond, you also need to wait for right timing. Do you have a Channel from your
Identity Center to your Throat Center? If so, it’s important that you’re around
people who know not to criticize you.

Do you have the Verbal Gunslinger Channel? Can you pause before blurting
something that could be hurtful? Are you listening to and respecting your
intuition? Do you need to wait out your emotional wave before jumping in?
Become familiar with the gifts and grapples of your particular Channel or
Channels. Get clear what is called for to live the high end of the energy of that
Channel. The importance of the Throat Center energy cannot be underestimated.
You have riches waiting for you if you’re aligned with your Definition and use it
skillfully.

Develop a Witnessing Observer

Once you have gotten clear where you disempower your voice, and what
strategies you need to employ to get back on track, you can begin the work of
seeing yourself in action. Watch when you are not successful with your voice and
when you are. Don Miguel Ruiz talks about stalking yourself as if you were
tracking an animal.

From a neutral observer stance, you can compassionately see where your
neurotransmitters have fired in an old pattern. Perhaps you’re enacting an old
pattern of trying to take power or trying to be seen. You can witness your ego in
action. You can also begin to differentiate when you’ve allowed your natural,
authentic self to show up. Compassionately witnessing yourself in action is a huge
support in shifting your dynamics.
                                         168

Give Your Defined Throat a Voice

There are so many ways to give your Defined Throat a voice. You will have to
explore and see what works best for you. What I know is that Definition seeks
expression. And it will express itself either positively or negatively. Your Defined
Throat will either powerfully claim its voice or powerfully fall into the hole of no
voice. Think of it like exercising your body. Find people, places, and situations
where your voice is welcome and celebrated. Give you to you.

Helpful Tools

Here are a few tools I recommend, though I look forward to hearing from you
what you find supportive:

    Inquiry
    Speaking circles
    Creative expression

Inquiry #1: Five and Five

I’m particularly fond of the Five and Five inquiry practice. This practice is done
with a partner. One person is the designated Witnessing Observer, the other
person is The Inquirer. Set the timer for five minutes. The Inquirer begins by
inquiring. It could be an inquiry into a topic, like Where do I disempower my
voice? Or What is the path to empowering my voice? Or it could be an inquiry into
what is present in the moment. Either way, the Inquirer takes their time to see
what arises. T

his is not sharing information with another person. This is not looking for
approval. This is the opportunity to listen to yourself. The Observer is there to
hold space for your listening. They are not nodding you on or responding with
sighs or empathic groans. They are merely there to support you and to hear you.
When the timer goes off, thank each other and then switch roles. You could do
longer turns, like fifteen minutes.

Or you could do rounds of Five and Five, going until you agree to stop. My wife
and I do this Five and Five almost every day. It gives us a chance for her Projector
self to be heard and my Open Throat to speak. Most importantly, it gives us an
                                        169

opportunity to listen to ourselves. With this structure, you protect against the
proclivity of one person hogging all the space. It’s quite magical and healing.

Inquiry #2: The Work of Byron Katie

I will invariably come back to The Work as a go-to method of clearing places
where we believe a story, where we’re convinced we’ve been done wrong (and
I’m not saying we haven’t). These are the places where we haven’t found an
empowered way forward. With this inquiry, you could write a worksheet on the
person who you feel shut down your voice.

Or you could listen to your disempowered voice and put that on paper: People
should hear what I have to say. I need people to listen to me. My voice gets lost in
the crowd. There’s nothing I can do to be heard. Write your story of
disempowerment and inquire. This will begin to untangle the knot that keeps your
voice stuck. This is worthy work. We need your voice! What you have to say
matters.

Speaking Circles

If you can find a Speaking Circle in your area, I highly recommend going to one. If
not, you can go online and do a Speaking Circle online. These are similar to the
Five and Five inquiries, only you are being witnessed by a group of benevolent
people focused directly on you. Your job is to keep eye contact with one person at
a time and speak to them.

This innovative tool, developed by Lee Glickstein to overcome his speaking
anxiety, has helped thousands of people access their voice. This is not a
performance, rather it is learning to speak in relation to others. Many of us
experienced wounding in our family of origin around our voice and being heard.
This format begins the process of reclaiming our voice in a safe context. It’s
powerful and healing. http://www.speakingcircles.com

Creative Expression

 Invitation to play here. Improv, dance, writing, art. There are many wonderful
resources to support your creative journey. Check out what speaks to you. Maybe
you’re called to do a home study course using Julia Cameron’s book, The Artist’s
Way. Or there is a wonderful studio called the Center for Creative Exploration in
                                        170

San Francisco that has intuitive painting classes on Zoom. They require no prior
experience. You show up and, in the moment, see what color you’re drawn to.
Red. Okay. You dip your brush in red. Then you check in, what’s wanting? A dot? A
line? You bypass your thinking logical mind and allow expression to happen
through you.

It’s like inquiry, but through color and shape. Improv is also great. Dance is
fantastic. Music and singing are amazing. I loved doing Megan Jo Wilson’s
Rockstar camp. It is designed to support people who are ready to empower their
voices. Megan Jo coaches people, especially women, to find their voice through
song. However you do it, find a way to allow your expression to have a life.

THE OPEN THROAT CENTER

Having an Open Throat Center is a bit tricky. Only 28 percent of us are blessed –
or cursed, depending on how you’re feeling about it – with the Open Throat.

Blessed because with an Open throat, you have a sophistication with your voice
that is enviable. Your capacity to tune into another person and meet them with
your voice is a powerful force. You have access to a rich flexibility and fluidity
spanning the tone of your voice to the content of what you say that can be awe-
inspiring. You are poised with potential to access any of the Channels driving to
the throat. And yet, having an Open Throat Center can create serious pain in your
life if you don’t understand it and work with it skillfully.

The problems start when you’re a kid and people don’t listen to you. With an
Open Throat, unless the conditions are right, your voice isn’t easily heard. That’s
hard. It’s confusing and distressing and crazy-making. It’s like you’re invisible.
Maybe you respond by shutting down and shutting up. The other choice is to get
louder, act out, do anything in a desperate attempt to be seen and heard. You
learn a pattern that plays out into your adult life.

Maybe you’re convinced no one will listen to you, so you stop even trying to be
heard. Or you’re determined to ensure you’re seen and heard, so you get louder
to draw attention to yourself. You don’t care what you have to do or say to get
that attention, because the need to be seen is so great. In any case, there is a
fundamental insecurity as you can’t rely on your voice to be heard.
                                        171

Remember the Throat Center is connected to your capacity to speak your
intuition, to manifest your actions, and to speak your authentic truth. It allows
you to speak your mind, to be empowered through speech, and to articulate your
feelings. If none of those Channels are defined, you don’t have consistent access
to those capacities. It can leave you with a feeling of impotence and inadequacy.
Especially when you look around and see other people being heard. Remember
78 percent have that Defined Throat. You’re left wondering what’s wrong with
you.

So, obviously, there are some serious challenges with the Open Throat Center.
Keep in mind, as we turn to look more closely at the challenges, that you are
ultimately headed toward the gifts. Understanding Understanding the challenges
enables you to shift from the disempowered experience, so readily available to
anyone with an Open Throat, to access and utilize the pure potential your Open
Throat offers. In truth, all of the Channels to Throat Center are available to
empower you – when the timing and circumstances are right.

The Grapples of the Open Throat Center

When I think of the challenges that come with the Open Throat, I picture a huge
traffic jam of cars trying to merge into one lane. So, take a breath and know as we
face the challenges of the Open Throat Center that you may feel anything from
triggered to relieved. These are big waters, and they have core vulnerabilities.
Here are some of the main grapples:

      You speak but are not heard or noticed.
      You feel the pressure to talk but don’t know what to say.
      You deplete your energy trying to be seen and heard.
      You can blurt things out.
      You can talk incessantly.
      You can't plan what to say and say it.
      You’re dependent on connecting with others to manifest.

You Speak but Are Not Heard or Noticed

This is a tough one, much like what Projectors have to contend with. With an
Open Throat Center, you have to wait to be invited or acknowledged before you
speak – even if you are a Generator. What happens is that we are conditioned to
                                        172

speak out. We watch other people speaking out and being seen. We think that’s
how we’re supposed to be. When it doesn’t work, we either blame them or
shame ourselves. We get louder to try to be heard. We act out. We say
something, anything to be recognized. At this point, negative attention is better
than no attention.

You Feel the Pressure to Talk but Don’t Know What to Say

With your Open Throat, you’re taking in all the voices around you. You naturally
feel under pressure to say something. If you have a Defined Head and Ajna, you
probably have some idea of what you might want to say, but you can’t trust how
it’s going to come out. If you have an Open Head or Ajna – you’re kind of out to
sea. You have no clue what to say. Your mind can go blank. Someone asks you a
question and you’re like a deer caught in headlights. Not easy.

You’re under pressure to talk because it’s how you can be seen and known. But
what are you going to say? You go to your head but when you speak, it sounds
like somebody else’s voice. Not you. You’re going to have to learn to let go and let
your voice speak. This is so hard to do, especially when all you want is to feel
some kind of control. Perhaps you try to rig your system by writing something out
ahead of time, say if you’re giving a speech, or want to say something to
someone. It falls flat, but you cannot prepare the same way someone with a
Defined Throat can. This is a huge challenge.

You Deplete Your Energy Trying to Be Seen or Heard

With a Defined Throat, and definitely without a Motor to the Throat, you are not
designed a) to have sustainable throat energy, and b) to be heard by speaking
out. Obviously, it’s important that we’re seen and heard. You develop a strategy
of talking. Pushing into conversations. Demanding, in various ways, to be heard.
This takes an enormous amount of energy that you don’t have consistent access
to through your Throat Center.

You have been throwing your pearls to swine with no return. You burn out your
adrenals or your thyroid. It takes your whole body down. This is a serious
problem. Your challenge is to stop trying to make yourself heard. I know it sounds
like being a doormat. It is anything but. We’ll get to that. For now, just have some
empathy for yourself if this is you.
                                         173

You Can Blurt Things Out

With your Open Throat, words seem to come of their own accord. I know, for
myself, I hear what I’m saying as I speak it. Often times you’re picking up the
voices in the room and speaking what is unspoken. I used to have this proclivity. I
can remember my wife would cover her eyes every time I raised my hand in a
group. She was terrified of what I was going to say. Most of the time, I didn’t
know ahead of time.

There would be an internal pressure that I had to speak. And then, it would come.
This was my liberated voice. Prior to that I had shut my voice down so intensely
that when the blurts came they popped out of nowhere. I couldn’t trust myself. I
remember a time as a kid when my mom got pulled over by an officer. I said
something like, “That’s really funny that you pulled my mom over, usually it’s my
dad that speeds. But he never gets caught.” My parents were not happy with me.

This Open Throat speaking was sometimes a challenge for me with clients.
Something would arise and I would say it. I wasn’t attached to it, it was arising, I
was sharing it to see if it had resonance. But with one person in particular it was
not at all skillful on my part. The grapple of waiting even if you feel pressure to
speak is a tough one.

In my early days with Bryon Katie, I was popping. I had so much to share, so much
wisdom, so many insights and ideas. I wanted to be seen and recognized. I had my
hand up pretty much non-stop. At one-point, Katie turned to me and said: “Do
you think we care what you have to say?” That stopped me in my tracks. I realized
that no, probably no one cares what I have to say.

It was at once devastating and liberating. It shut me up for two years which was a
huge gift. It stopped my habit of going out to get approval. It threw me into the
witness. It opened the door for me to investigate everything I wanted to say and
why. What was my motive? What was I trying to get? It was incredibly sobering.
My ego took a huge hit. It was big, life-changing medicine.

You Can Talk Incessantly

With an Open Throat Center, you can talk and talk and talk and talk oblivious to
the fact that you’re taking up all the space. The drive to be heard is so great that
                                         174

you ignore the cues both from within and without. This is not especially great for
you, and it actually doesn’t give you the contact you’re seeking from talking. In
fact, you more likely push people away. It’s like you're inserting yourself rather
than being in relationship with someone.

You Can’t Plan What to Say and Say It

I touched on this earlier in the grapples but it’s worth highlighting. This challenge
makes it hard to trust yourself when it comes to writing or speaking.

For me, writing this book, for instance, has its particular challenges. Finding a
consistent voice takes deep listening for me. My songbird, if we stick with that
analogy, is one I have to listen for within. It doesn’t just sing out in the same way
someone with a Defined Throat can. I have to fall into the emptiness and let the
writing come through. It takes tremendous trust to jump in. Of course, once you
get me going, there’s no stopping me – as you can see!

You’re Dependent on Connecting with Others to Manifest

 If you have an Open Throat, you rely on electromagnetic hookups to access your
Throat Center. In particular, you’re looking to get a Motor to your Throat in order
to manifest. To do that, you are dependent on connecting with others. In the Gifts
section I’ll reframe this as a positive, but it also has its challenges. For instance,
coming back to writing this book, I’ve tended to write in the vicinity of my wife.
When we come together, I get a hook up from my ESP, my Root, and my Sacral
going through my Spleen connecting my intuition with my Throat.

So, I get three Motors and my intuition connecting to my Throat Center. There are
other things I have access to as well when she’s around. If you don’t have a
Yarrow in the next room and are isolated in Covid, trying to write a book could be
hard. Typically, I would suggest going to a café or being around people in order to
get access to a Motor to your Throat Center. It’s just something you have to
consider and manage with an Open Throat.

The Gifts of the Open Throat Center

Though there are numerous challenges with the Open Throat Center, there are
powerful gifts that more than offset the challenges. Let’s take a look:
                                        175

      Your Open Throat can be a channel.
      You can energetically connect to people with your voice.
      You can speak for the group as a whole.
      When you connect a Motor to your Throat Center, it’s amplified power.
      Your Open Throat is a magnet.
      Your Hanging Gates off your Open Throat Center focus and ground your
       vocal power.

Your Open Throat Can Be a Channel

When your Throat Center is clear of conditioned debris, when you no longer strive
to be seen and heard through your voice, when your ego is out of the way, your
Open Throat Center is free to allow the unknown to flow through. This could look
like so many different things. One of those is being a channel. Perhaps it’s for
those who have crossed to the other side. Perhaps you allow the voices of high
beings to come through. However it looks, being a channel is one of the
possibilities.

I remember when I had a session with the Feng Shui intuitive Marie Diamond. She
told me that I worked with frequency and that I would be working with thousands
– if not hundreds of thousands – of people over the internet. This was maybe in
2003 or 2004. She said there will be times when I would sit with people, not
knowing what I was going to say, and the words would come to meet the people.
This is the exact energy I’m talking about. That is the possibility of the Open
Throat Center. I haven’t yet opened my Throat Center to that degree – but I’ll
keep you posted!

You Can Energetically Match and Connect to People with Your Voice

Your voice is free to show up in a variety of ways. You have a palette of hues to
work with when it comes to tone or variation. How you say something will match
the person or people you’re with. This is a huge boon, especially for therapists,
coaches, speakers, and parents. It’s as if you take the person in and give them
back to themselves through your voice. It’s a kind of mirroring. I know this quality
well and appreciate it. It’s not something I consciously do; it moves through me
and adjusts accordingly. Bill Clinton has an Open Throat. Many times, people
                                        176

reported they felt he was speaking specifically to them. That is the gift of an Open
Throat meeting each person where they need to be met.

You Can Speak for the Group as a Whole

I alluded to this in the grapple section. With your Open Throat, you are taking in
and amplifying all the voices in the room. There is a kind of pressure to speak and
name people’s experience. I often found myself speaking the unspoken truth in
groups. Speaking what others were either unwilling or unable to say or articulate.
It wasn’t always welcome, and I martyred myself a number of times. But, in the
places that welcomed it, it was a transformational force. It’s a very powerful
energy that is looking to be expressed. You have to be clear on your Type,
Strategy, and Authority. You need to be certain of whether or not it is your calling
to be the voice for the group.

When You Connect a Motor to Your Throat, the Power is Amplified

This makes sense, right? Where you are Open, you’re taking in and amplifying. So,
when you take in the energy of a Motor to the Throat, you’re amplifying that
energy. It’s not sustainable, but for the time it’s streaming through you, you can
be more powerful than someone with a Motor to their Throat. Think again of Bill
Clinton or Barack Obama. Both were powerful speakers. Neither has a Motor to
the Throat. They do have Hanging Gates that support them – we’ll get to that in a
minute.

Your Open Throat Is a Magnet

Again, somewhat akin to a Projector who magnetizes people with their Open
Sacral, the Open Throat draws people to them. When you are not acting like
someone with a Defined Throat and pushing yourself out into the world to be
recognized, your Open Throat acts like a magnetic vortex attracting the right
people to you.

These people want to hear what you have to say, and ultimately want to hear
what they have to say through you. I know that may sound wonky but think of the
mama bird who chews the food up before giving it to the baby. You have the
power of taking in people’s Throat activations, digesting it, and giving it back to
them in a clear, powerful form.
                                         177

With your Open Throat, people can feel seen and heard by you. If you can learn to
tolerate waiting and letting people find you, your world will open in unimaginable
ways. This is what happened with me and Katie. I did her first school (remember,
I’d shut up by then). I was asked to assist at her second school where I was a
terrible assistant from my view, getting horribly sick, and acting like a total bitch.
At the end of that school, she asked me to be her right hand person. She gave me
the job of Curriculum Coordinator.

It was actually the perfect job for an Open Throat. I wasn’t attached to what came
through me and she welcomed the truth. Other people were trying to please her
by telling her what they thought she wanted to hear. I trusted her to hear
whatever I said and decide for herself. Well, there was that time I told her
explicitly not to wear her brown dress for the photo shoot…you can guess what
she wore…I mean I did have my opinions…I still have copies of those photos.

Your Hanging Gates off Your Open Throat Center Focus and Ground Your Vocal
Power

Each one of your Hanging Gates that come off your Throat Center will give you
some place to focus your Throat energy. You will be looking for people with the
other half of the Channel to give you access to a Defined Throat. This will
empower your voice and your Throat Center. Look to see which Hanging Gates
you have and read about them below.
                                          178

Gate 62 Details

If you have the Gate 62 coming off your Open Throat Center, you will be
grounding your voice on details. Details could be a superpower for you. This is left
brain, Logic Circuitry which gives you a practical voice, a voice of reason.

Gate 23 Assimilation or Splitting Apart

 If you have this Hanging Gate you will be attempting to articulate things in new
ways, breaking them down to shine new light. This is Individual Knowing Circuitry,
which gives your voice a deep ground in knowing. It’s imperative to be skillful in
the timing in which you share your knowing.

Gate 56 The Storyteller

If you have this right brain, Sensing Circuit Hanging Gate, your Openness will be
grounded on storytelling. You can be a powerful storyteller if you share in the
right timing.

Gate 35 Progress or Change

If you have this Collective Sensing energy, you have the gift of many talents. Your
voice will be one that shares from experience and only engages in worthwhile
adventures. You value aliveness and have little tolerance for boredom.

Gate 12 Caution

With this Hanging Gate, you are designed to have a shy/ bold nature. You voice is
meant to be used when you are in the mood. This is Individual Knowing Circuitry
reaching for the Emotional Solar Plexus. With it, you have the gift of the
wordsmith. You have the capacity to speak to the depths of humanity’s suffering
and the heights of their elation.

Gate 45 King or Queen

With this Hanging Gate, you have the gift of leadership. Even though you cherish
your individual path, your voice is part of the Tribal Circuitry reaching to the Will
Center. Your voice is one of a teacher speaking to guide the tribe.
                                         179

Gate 33 Privacy and Retreat

 With this Hanging Gate, you have the gift of looking back at the past and
reflecting on what has gone before. When the timing is right, you share your
insights. This is a right brain, Sensing Circuit, so you are reflecting on past
experiences with the hope of improving the future. This is the only gate Marianne
Williamson has coming off her Open Throat Center. In her presidential bid, she
spoke passionately about the issue of reparations. She addressed past wrongs
committed against the African American people. Her focus in the Course in
Miracles work is to look to the past and forgive for they know not what they do.
All with the intent on moving forward to a more peaceful realm.

Gate 8 Contribution

With this Hanging Gate, your voice is one of transformation. Your focus will be to
support others in their creative contributions. This is powerful Individual Knowing
Circuitry. Your voice will be unique, reaching for authenticity.

Gate 31 Democratic Leadership, and Influence

With this Hanging Gate, you are here to be called into leadership and speak the
voice of the people, not your ego’s voice. This requires waiting on your end, for
the right time, the right place, and the right call.

Gate 20 In the Now, The Collaborator

 If you have this Hanging Gate, your voice is most powerful when you speak from
the present moment. You have the gift of knowing when to manifest power.

You are here to inspire others and connect people and resources. This Individual
Knowing energy figures large in my chart, as my Conscious Moon occupies this
gate. I love this energy and work to honor it.

Gate 16 Enthusiasm

With this Hanging Gate, you have a zest for life and the inclination to leap into
new experiences. Your voice is one of enthusiasm and you have the uncanny
capacity to wing it, even when you’re not fully prepared. This is left brain, Logical
Circuitry, so ultimately your passion serves to support your mastery through
repetition over time.
                                          180

The Open Throat as a God Portal

We’ve come to my favorite portion of the Throat Center – the God Portal. Here
we imagine and open to what’s possible when your Throat Center filters are clear,
when there is nothing between you and the universe.

Here are a couple of possibilities:

    The universe speaks through you.
    All creation is available to you.

The Universe Speaks through You

 This is similar to what I was alluding to regarding channeling but on a much
grander scale. If there is nothing between you and universe, then you have the
possibility of consciousness, God, the mystery, speaking through you. Think about
the poetry of the saints or the music of Bach. What high frequency could you
imagine being a vessel for if you had no ego attachment? Would you be an
oracle? A sage? Would it matter?

All Creation Is Available to You

Given that the Throat is the center of manifestation, it stands to reason that if
your Open Throat is fully available, you potentially could create at will. You have
access to all creation. This may be a bit of a daunting thought at first. But if you
look back, have there been any instances where you were so clear, there was
nothing between you and what you desired, and it showed up effortlessly? I think
this is more in alignment with where we’re heading and that the Open Throat
Center may be leading the way.

Working with the Open Throat Center

      Appreciate your Open Throat Center.
      Develop a witnessing observer.
      Get skillful with your timing.
      Relax, trust, and stop trying to control.
                                        181

Appreciate Your Open Throat Center

The grapples of the Open Throat are so easy to identify with and get caught up in.
Before you can open to the gifts, you have to know what they are and recognize
that the grapples can be worked with. Look to see if you have any Hanging Gates
coming off your Throat Center. Begin to consciously ground on that energy as a
support while you learn to relax and let go into your Openness.

Develop a Witnessing Observer

To clear your filters, you must know what’s gunking them up. Using inquiry tools
with your witnessing observer, you can begin to get a picture of where you have
wounding in your Throat Center. Then you can begin the process of healing – of
reclaiming your powerful voice. The more you know about yourself, the more you
have to work with. Watch and see – are you using your voice skillfully?

Get Skillful with Your Timing

 Are you waiting to be acknowledged or invited before you speak? Or are you
rushing in to say something really important? Can you learn to watch and wait?
Can you hold onto your pearls until the timing is right? The more you can tolerate
the buildup of pressure without speaking to try to relieve it, the more potent your
words will be when you do speak – in the right timing.

Relax, Trust, Stop Trying to Control

The impulse to use our words to manage anxiety and pressure is intense. Yet, as
you learn to relax and let words come through you, there is an ease and a grace
you can begin to depend on. You can trust the words to come in the perfect
timing. Maybe not the timing you think they should. Or your ego thinks they
should. But, when you learn to relax and let words come through, something
quite magical happens. You get out of the way and what comes through you is
more articulate than you could have ever imagined on your own.

Helpful Tools

I’m recommending the same tools that I did for the Defined Throat, as I think they
work with the Throat Center regardless.

    Five and Five Inquiry
                                        182

    The Work of Byron Katie
    Speaking circles
    Creative expression

Five and Five Inquiry

This practice is done with a partner. One person is the designated Witnessing
Observer, the other person is the Inquirer. Set the timer for five minutes. The
Inquirer begins by inquiring. It could be an inquiry into a topic, like Where do I
disempower my voice? Or What is the path to empowering my voice? Or it could
be an inquiry into what is present in the moment. Either way, the Inquirer takes
their time to see what arises. This is not sharing information with another person.
This is not looking for approval.

This is the opportunity to listen to yourself. The Observer is there to hold space
for your listening. They are not nodding you on or responding with sighs or
empathic groans. They are merely there to support you to hear you. When the
timer goes off, you thank each other then switch roles. You could take longer
turns, like fifteen minutes. Or you could do rounds of Five and Five, going until
you agree to stop. I love this practice for my Open Throat. It’s like exercising a
muscle. Only in this case, it’s the muscle of letting go and allowing. Find someone
to share this high play!

The Work of Byron Katie

Katie’s work is brilliant for clearing any wounding around your Open Throat
Center. You could write a worksheet on the person or people who you feel shut
down your voice. Or you could listen to your disempowered voice and put that on
paper: People should hear what I have to say. I need people to listen to me. My
voice gets lost in the crowd. There’s nothing I can do to be heard. However it
shows up for you, put your voice on paper. This will begin to unlock the chains
that keep your voice silent. The need to do this work can’t be underestimated.
Regardless of your past experience, the truth is that world needs your voice!
What you have to say matters.
                                         183

Speaking Circles

Speaking Circles are similar to the Five and Five inquiries, only you are being
witnessed by a group of benevolent people focused directly on you. Your job is to
keep eye contact with one person at a time and speak to them. This innovative
tool, developed by Lee Glickstein to overcome his speaking anxiety, has helped
thousands of people access their voice. This is not a performance, rather it is
learning to speak in relation to others.

Many of us experienced wounding in our family of origin around our voice and
being heard. This format begins the process of reclaiming our voice in a safe
context. It is powerful and healing. I’ve found this process especially helpful with
my Open Throat. I can stand in front of an audience and wait. Wait to see what
arises. There is no pressure to speak, just the possibility of speaking if something
arises. Invariably it does, though there have been times when I have taken full
turns in silence, in deep connection with the group, one person at a time.

Creative Expression

Invitation to play here! Improv, dance, writing, art….

Give your Open Throat Center a chance to be creative – to express itself in a
myriad of ways. I had huge openings with my Open Throat when my friend Jane
Bell dragged me to a painting class at the Center for Creative Exploration in San
Francisco. I did not identify as an artist, much less a painter. But these classes
were different. They didn’t require skill or talent or experience in painting. They
required presence. Being present with yourself.

Listening to what color calls you. What shape? A dot? A line? You bypass your
thinking, logical mind and allow expression to happen through you. It’s like
inquiry, but through color and shape. This intuitive painting process gave voice
through color to what wanted to come through. Here’s an excerpt I wrote as part
of my artist’s statement. (By the way, for a beginner, I ended up being a prolific
painter, selling my art, and owning a small gallery.)

“I love painting. I love what comes unbidden seemingly out of nowhere. I love
giving birth over and over again to the wild aliveness that lurks beneath the
smooth surface waiting for its breath – its life born in shape, color, and form.
                                         184




When I paint, my twenty-five years in the healing arts is temporarily set aside as I
shift my focus from being present for the world of another to focus on my own
world and the moment that calls to me. In this meeting, I awaken to the galactic
explosion of being.

 Traditionally, in the Painting Experience, one’s paintings are protected from the
critical eyes of others, or carefully shared as one would share a passage from a
journal. It is process painting, meaning the painting is much less important than
the process. Painting in this way afforded me a kindness and a spaciousness to
discover – without external reflection of right or wrong, good or bad – what
wanted to come through me.

My judge, though quick to show up, was not allowed to monopolize the situation.
After all, the paper was insignificant – if not irrelevant. What mattered was the
immediate moment, and the act of allowing myself to simply choose a color and
put it on paper. More often than not, I had no idea what this color on paper would
create. I only knew to check inside and see if the dot or the line was connected to
my inner aliveness.

And I learned to stop immediately if I was disconnected or “doing” to produce a
result. I learned to listen within and respect what I heard – something I was quite
skillful at with others, but with myself, and especially in art which was so concrete
and elicited such a strong desire for things to look good, I was challenged.
Surprised and in awe, what emerged from this process was a plethora of paintings
streaming with bold beauty, and a passionate aliveness – a true reflection of me!”

So, painting, pottery, any kind of art is healing nectar for the Open Throat. Improv
is also great for allowing your voice to show up in unexpected and out-of-ego-
control ways. Music and dance are also powerful forms of expression. However
you do it, don’t let past hurt keep you trapped in the dungeon. Find a way to
allow your expression to have its life.
                                        185

RECAP

By now I hope you are thoroughly intrigued by the Throat Center. Remember, all
the energy of the chart is rushing to get to the Throat. The Throat enables us to
manifest. It allows us to be seen and heard. It is fundamental to our sense of
agency in the world. Shutting down our Throat Center is no longer a viable option.
It’s time for every voice to have its song play and be recognized in the melody of
the spheres. And just a reminder that it’s not necessarily about speaking out loud.
The pauses in the melody can be as powerful as the music.

What are your thoughts about your Throat Center? What did you discover? Take
some time and journal. Do you have an Open Throat? If so, how does that impact
you? If you have Motor to your Throat, do you feel in alignment with your power?
Or are you living the low side of the polarity? What can you do to work with your
Throat Center? Pick one thing. Make a commitment to work skillfully with your
Throat Center.

From the Throat Center, we turn to meet and embrace the Identity Center. This
Center is as important, and perhaps even more central than the Throat Center.
Are you ready?
                186


                9

GETTING TO KNLW THE IDENTITY CENTER
                                         187

INTRODUCING THE IDENTITY CENTER

While all the Channels the chart are driving to get to the Throat Center in order to
create and manifest, it is the Identity Center, or G Center, as it’s called, that is
central to the whole chart. The Identity Center is perhaps the most remarkable
and powerful of all the Centers. It is the organizing principle of the chart – and
therefore of our quantum body. Karen Curry Parker calls this the Calibration
Center. It is the heart of the chart. It is the seat of the Magnetic Monopole, a
magnetizing force with a single magnetic pole. Meaning, it only attracts, it doesn’t
operate in the realm of duality. It houses unity consciousness. The G Center,
through the Magnetic Monopole, keeps all the Centers connected as a whole.

There is a purity to the Magnetic Monopole; you could say it’s the purity of our
hearts. It draws love and beauty to it. It draws what’s needed for your life, from
people and work, to places and experiences. It sets the direction of your life. It is
love itself, attracting love and the essence of love and beauty. When we follow
our Strategy and Authority, we align with this force. When we don’t know
ourselves, when we don’t trust ourselves, when we don’t honor ourselves, we
resist what we magnetize and go to war with ourselves and our lives.

In the Human Design teachings, the Magnetic Monopole is the spark of life, our
unique self, that calls us into a body to inhabit the earth as humans and departs
from our body when we die. In the Diamond work, we call this The Point of Light.
It is the aspect of your unique essential self that is unborn and undying: the You of
you, the Is of you, that lives throughout time and space. If you believe in
reincarnation, it is the aspect of you that reincarnates.

In the Identity Center, we recognize who we are. We know ourselves through this
organizing principle of the G Center. Here we have an identity. With a Defined G
Center, you have a stable sense of identity, or the polarity – the feeling of not
having an identity or direction. Regardless of how you think or feel about yourself
(remember these can be conditioned), you have an innate solidity of self. You
have consistent access to being a Somebody. With this, we say in Human Design,
you have an innate sense of lovability.

I’m going to address your objections when I talk about the Defined G Center, but
for now, sit with this possibility: 57 percent of the population know who they are,
                                         188

have a definite direction in life, and know they are fundamentally loved or
lovable. They have the privilege of a Defined G. The remaining 43 percent (I’m
one of those, as you recall from my story in Chapter 2), land on the earth clueless,
not knowing who they are, not knowing which direction to go.

Those of us with an Open G are often lost. This is a big discrepancy. People with a
Defined G have no idea of the benefits they start with. It’s like the difference in
kids getting an education from a White, wealthy neighborhood where each kid
has their own computer, compared to a ghetto neighborhood where kids don’t
have school supplies and rely on the school lunch program.

The discrepancy in the access to resources is staggering. You don't realize it as a
kid growing up. Despite the discrepancies, each puzzle piece is perfectly designed.
There is a method to the madness of this colossal difference. The human spirit is
resilient and amazing, and the gifts of the Open G Center are incomprehensible. I
can attest to that!

Take your time with this chapter. Read about yourself, but also read about those
with an Open G. If you have a Defined G Center, it may baffle you to imagine what
those of us with Open Gs grapple with. It’s a little like me as a White person trying
to imagine what it’s like to grow up Black. What is a non-issue for someone with a
Defined G, can become a threatening situation for an Open G. If you have an
Open G, you may find yourself breathing a little more deeply, resting into
yourself. Finally, some aspect of yourself that you knew but had no words for has
been recognized and named.

In a moment, we’ll dive further into differentiating the experiences of the Defined
and Open Identity Centers. But first, let’s take look at some of the technical
pieces. The G Center is the diamond shape in the middle of the chart. If it is
Defined, it will be yellow in color. If it is Undefined, it will be white. This Center
has eight Channels going to four other Centers: The Throat, the Will, The Sacral,
and the Spleen. The Gate 10 Self-love, is featured because it travels to three
different Centers: The Throat Center, the Spleen Center, and the Sacral Center.
The Channels off the G are all about love and direction in one form or another.
                                        189

Here are the gates coming off the G Center; check and see which, if any, you have.
They will be significant in terms of where you focus your love and what direction
you are called.




From the G to the Throat:
(See Chart # 23.)

Gate 1 Creative Expression

If you have this Defined, you are driven by love to express yourself in your unique
way. You are designed to make a contribution and will be miserable when you’re
not.

Gate 7 The Role of the Self

Karen Curry Parker calls this Gate The Collaborator, which makes more sense to
me. It’s the energy of supporting leadership out of love. Giving direction through
support. Hillary Clinton has Gate 7. Like it or not, she is designed to support and
influence those in leadership positions and generate teams that support
leadership.

Gate 13 The Listener
                                        190

If you have this Gate, you have the magnetic pull that draws people to tell you
their secrets. You give direction by listening with love and respect to what people
tell you.

Gate 10 Self Love

This potent Gate holds the energy of self-love. When you love yourself, you
electromagnetically empower everyone around you to love themselves. When
you are not self-loving, it is unbearable, and you go to blame and shame to deflect
the intolerable feelings. Connecting to the Throat Center, you are designed to
speak your truth. If you are not self-loving, this Channel becomes the verbal
gunslinger as your words can be laced with hatred, cutting to the core.

From the G to the Will Center:

Gate 25 Love of Spirit

With this Gate your purity – your innocence – shines. This is universal love that
can be so bright that it’s overwhelming. It connects with the Will Center through
the Gate of Shock or Initiation. When we go through a shock, we often open to
this all-encompassing love.

From the G to the Sacral:

Gate 2 Receptive

This second hexagram of the I Ching is deeply receptive. It is the womb receiving
the sperm. It directs by receiving and deciding what to do with what it has
received.

Gate 15 Extremes

This Gate holds the love of humanity, having compassion for extremes of rhythms
and behaviors. It has a deep love of nature as well. If you have this Gate, you most
likely flourish when you allow extremes of rhythm in your schedule.

Gate 46 Love of Body

This is the determined love of a fetus as it pushes its way out into the world,
ready to live an embodied life. If you have this Gate Defined in your chart, you
may be magnetized to do yoga or play sports. You may, on the other hand, be out
                                        191

of sync with your body which will be bad news bears for you, making you
vulnerable to illness.

Gate 10 Self Love

This potent Gate holds the energy of self-love. When you love yourself, you
electromagnetically empower everyone around you to love themselves. When
you are not self-loving, it is unbearable, and you blame and shame others, to
deflect the intolerable feelings. Connecting to the Sacral you are designed to take
action that is in alignment with your love of self – anything less will be
uncomfortable, and, well...not self-loving.

From the G to the Spleen:

Gate 10 Self Love (again)

This potent gate holds the energy of self-love. When you love yourself, you
electromagnetically empower everyone around you to love themselves. When
you are not self-loving it is unbearable, and you go to blame and shame to deflect
the intolerable feelings. The G connecting to the Spleen through Gate 10 enables
you to be in touch with your intuition, to know in your heart what is best for you.
This gives you clear direction. Following your intuition allows you to align with
your heart in an auspicious and profound way.

Now that you have a general sense of the Identity Center and its phenomenal
place in our chart and in our lives, let’s take this knowledge out of a conceptual
context and begin the process of connecting to the G Center in an embodied way.
It’s time to meet and discover the heart power that waits for you to recognize it.

CONNECTING TO THE G CENTER –GUIDED MEDITATION

Begin by closing your eyes and feeling your sitting bones on the chair beneath you.

Take a breath.

Release the day, allowing yourself to come into the present moment.

Notice what is here now.

For me, there is a gentle breeze wafting up against my skin reminding me of
something Byron Katie said while we were sitting together in the desert.
                                                 192

Let go of whatever thoughts or images arise.

Come back to your breath.

Begin to sense your arms and legs.

Allow yourself to be embodied.

Allow yourself to inhabit your human body.

Feel the shape of your form in space.

Now, expand your awareness and your body sense to the earth beneath you.

Keep expanding into the earth all the way to the other side of the earth.

All the way to the sky beneath us.

Now bring your awareness to your crown.

Feel the sky touching the crown of your head.

Allow your awareness to expand, sensing your quantum body as you expand up
into infinite space and beyond.

Now take time to expand out to the left of you.

To the right of you.

Occupying all space in both directions.

Include the front of you, the back of you.

Now, feel yourself expanding in all directions out into infinite space.

 Bringing your awareness back in, focus on the spark, the point of light in the
center of your chest.

See how small or large it is.

Don’t try to shift it, just allow it its life.

Smile into your Point of Light, your infinity spark.

The you that has existed before this birth and will continue after this birth.
                                          193

There is no actual birth or death for this spark. Sense into the purity of you.

The love that you are.

Relax. Open. Allow.

Be available for whatever thoughts or sensations arise.

Welcome them.

Let them pass.

Bring your focus back to your spark.

Let go.

What do you notice?

Allow whatever arises, and rest into the space of the heart.

Smile gently at your heart and your unique spark.

Let your heart know you are ready to come home to the truth of who you are.

If you feel called, ask your spark if it has a message for you.

When you’re ready, thank your heart – your spark.

Thank You.

 Gently bring your awareness back to your physical body Sense your arms and
legs, sense your belly.

Gently open your eyes and look around the room.

Take your time.

If you’re called, write down your experience. Set an intention to spend time with
your spark. Let yourself get to know this aspect of yourself.
                                         194

THE DEFINED G CENTER

If you have a Defined Identity Center, count yourself blessed. You have consistent
access to your identity and to your direction in life. You know who you are. You
have a sense of where you’re going. You have an inherent ground in yourself.
When I meet people with Defined Identity Centers, it is obvious to me.
Energetically, there is a solidity in who they are that astonishes me.

Human Design says this is the Center of lovability and if you have it Defined, it is
said that you fundamentally fundamentally know you are loved and lovable. I’ve
spent the last half hour with my wife discussing this. She has a Defined G Center.
It’s not her experience that she is fundamentally lovable. And honestly, a lot of
clients tell me the same thing. I’m trying to make sense of this because they look
like and act like they are lovable.

They take care of themselves. They’re not easily swayed by people’s expectations.
They often report feeling solid about themselves. They also say that they are
connected to love. Some describe it as having consistent access to loving, for
example, loving animals. Other say they are very loving but feel others don’t really
see them to love them. It becomes a question of whether you feel lovable for
your authentic self.

I’m saying all this so you know it’s not a black and white thing. Even with a
Defined Identity Center, you may have been conditioned in one of your Open
Centers to believe otherwise. Nevertheless, someone with an Open G Center will
experience you as solid in yourself. You have a there-there. You might have a
negative self-image, but you have consistent access to a sense of yourself. That is
nothing to take lightly. You are not easily swayed by people’s expectations. You
walk your own path, even if you perceive yourself as insecure.

The Gifts of the Defined G

      Center You have a solid sense of self.
      You are connected to the stream of love.
      You have direction in life.
      You have gifts specific to particular Channels.
                                         195

You Have a Solid Sense of Self

So, you have a solid sense of yourself. You have a self you can look to and rely on.
You may not necessarily like yourself at this point. But you matter. You have a
strong knowing of who you are and what you want.

You Are Connected to the Stream of Love

In traditional Human Design language, we would say you are fundamentally
lovable. But I’ve found it more accurate to say that people have a connection to
the stream of loving. It may be turned toward themselves (which is what it looks
like to me), or it may be that they feel consistently loving to others, animals,
nature.

One way to think about it is that you have a self that can be loved (or not). One
Human Design specialist with a Defined Identity Center described being very
strong in herself but she doesn’t feel like people love her for her because they
don’t understand her. This my wife wholeheartedly agrees with. She lights up as
she tells me she loves herself, she’s comfortable with who she is, she loves life.
What is your experience with your Defined G?

You Have Direction in Life

In Human Design, we say that people with a Defined G go to the restaurant of life
and choose off the menu. People with Open Gs go to the buffet and piece
together a meal. Typically, people with a Defined G have a steady path. When I
look at my three brothers with Defined Gs, they are the ones who had jobs that
had titles that were on the menu: Accountant, CEO, Geologist.

The rest of the family – well we can talk about that in the Open Center section!
It’s not necessarily that the Defined Gs are more mainstream. That is not quite
accurate. We could at least say Defined Gs tend to have a steady stream in terms
of life direction. Again, this is not black and white. It’s not as simple as you have
direction in life. You could also feel the lack of direction in life as a recurring
theme.
                                          196

You Have Gifts Specific to the Particular Channels

One thing to keep in mind with the Defined G is that the Channel that defines the
G determines the focus of the love or direction the energy flows. So, it could look
very different for different people.

For example, if your G is Defined to the Throat, you will be speaking from your
heart. You are a truth teller. You have an authentic voice. My wife has this. She
doesn’t say a lot, but when she does, it is from her heart. It’s grounded and
connected. Let’s look more closely at the specific Channels and the gifts they
offer. Look at your chart to see which ones you have Defined.

If you have the G Defined to the Throat Center:
(See Chart #23.)

1-8 Inspiration

 With this Individual Knowing Circuit, you are here to make a unique creative
contribution from your heart. You are here to impact humanity by living true to
your authentic self. By your example, you inspire others to live in alignment with,
and express their authentic selves. Your greatest gift is to be who you are.

7-31 Leadership

This is energy in the Collective Logic Circuit. You’re here to be a leader, to lead
from your heart as you’re called into leadership to represent people’s voices.

13-33 Prodigal

This is Collective Sensing Circuitry. You have the gift of looking back at past
experiences, reflecting on them, listening deeply from a place of love, then
sharing the wisdom you’ve garnered when the timing is right.

10-20 Awakening

You have the gift of loving of yourself in the moment – when you are aligned with
this energy. This is a powerful force. It is empowered awakening that sparks
everyone in your field to love themselves. With this extraordinary Individual
Knowing Circuit energy, you embody the voice of authenticity as you live and
speak your truth from a place of self-love.
                                         197

If you have the G Defined to the Will Center:




51-25 Initiation

With this Centering Circuit Defined, you have a distinct gift of waking people up to
the truth of who they are. This is potent mystical energy that seeks to initiate
people into self-awareness. It is strong medicine. I think Byron Katie is the perfect
example of someone who uses this energy skillfully.

If you have the G Defined to the Sacral Center:
                                        198

Each of these Channels have the Sacral Motor pumping energy into the Identity
Center, connecting action with authenticity and direction in life.

29-46 Discovery

This Collective Sensing Circuitry carries the capacity to surrender or persevere.
When you have a sacral yes for something, you can trust your stamina will carry
you to success. Sometimes referred to as succeeding where others fail, and failing
where others succeed, you are here to do unusual work in the world.

14-2 The Beat

With this Individual Knowing Circuitry, you have the gift of managing resources
that you’ve generated in response to mutative opportunities. Which is to say,
when you follow your Sacral yeses, you engage in work that brings resources and
direction to your life that impact the world. Even though this is Individual
Circuitry, often the resources you generate are for the benefit of others. You have
a real and enviable skill. Karen Curry Parker calls this the luckiest Channel in the
chart.

5-15 Rhythm

With your strong connection to nature’s rhythms, you have a deep love of life, of
nature, of animals, and of humanity. This is Collective Logic Circuitry that has its
own pattern and flow. Life force energy from the sacral pumps to your Identity
Center, guiding your timing and direction in life – when you follow your Sacral
yeses. Your large aura attracts people into your flow which is guiding humanity to
a more secure future. Your presence is a magical gift effortlessly weaving the web
of life together with the threads of love.

34-10 Exploration

You are here to love and trust yourself. With this Centering Circuit energy, you are
here to follow your convictions guided by your Sacral responses. When you do
this, you inspire and empower everyone in your field to love and trust
themselves. This gift is transformational, calling people to step out of their
conditioned patterns and listen deeply to themselves.
                                           199

If you have the G Defined to the Spleen:




57-10 Perfected Form

You have deep intuition connected to your direction in life, and your love of
yourself. Your gift is to spontaneously know in any moment what needs to
happen to survive. Your incredible sensibility makes you a trustworthy person to
follow in dicey situations. Your gifts are revealed as you follow your Splenic
awareness and embrace what you love. In this way, your joie de vivre – your love
of yourself and what you create – becomes infectious, inspiring others to live life
from a place of authenticity and self-love.

The Grapples of the Defined G

Center Of course, there are also challenges you face with your Defined G Center:

    You can think people should go the direction you’re going.
    You can lose heart if you follow someone else’s direction.
    You may not recognize the gift of solidity and lovability.

You Can Think People Should Go the Direction You’re Going

With your Defined G, when you’re clear on a direction, you think this is the
direction everyone you are with needs to go. You can be flummoxed when people
                                          200

want to go a different direction. From a Human Design vantage, you’re really not
designed to follow someone else’s path, so it’s not like you can shift directions to
follow. Your work is to learn to let people have their own path.

You Can Lose Heart if You Follow Someone Else’s Direction

 Meanwhile, if you do give up on yourself and go a direction other than what is
right for you, it can be deeply disturbing to you. To the point of giving up on
yourself. You lose heart. It’s so important for you to stay on track with yourself
and claim the treasure of you. When you abandon yourself, everyone loses.

You May Not Recognize the Gift of Solidity and Lovability

 If you have a Defined G and you’re not taking advantage of your gift, perhaps
you’ve got some conditioning. Maybe one of your Open Centers is telling you
you’re inadequate in some way. Maybe you drew a conclusion as a child that
convinced you of some lie. Maybe it didn’t feel safe as a child to show up
authentically and so you created a protective identity. In this case, it could be
hard to feel loved. Especially if you believe what’s being loved is a false self. If you
are not in touch with feeling loveable you may be caught in the low polarity of
this theme, namely the lack of feeling loveable. This is painful. It’s like a wound
calling to be healed.

Working with the Defined G Center

    Recognize and honor the gifts of the Defined G.
    Have compassion with the limitations.
    Clear up your beliefs that could obscure your stream of loving.

Recognize and Honor the Gifts of the Defined G

After the grapple with my wife about her lovability, she came back into the room
fifteen minutes later, her face lit up. She told me that knowing that her Defined G
gives her access to her lovability was helpful. She’s going to focus on her
lovability. Just seeing and hearing that it was part of her Design shifted something
for her. That touches me. If one person can use this chapter to make a shift
toward claiming their lovability, that makes the whole book worth the effort. As
we continued the conversation, she was clear that she loved life. That she loved
nature. That she loved herself. If you know her, she’s an extremely loving person.
                                          201

As I write this, I think again of Karen Curry Parker and her Defined G Center. Her
heart gives and gives and gives and gives. She gives in her classes, she gives
through her books, she gives through her speaking at conferences, she gives on
her TEDx talk. She gives with her emails and her support for her students. She is a
giving heart. And even though she’s been ahead of the world for the past twenty
years, bringing new material that hasn’t been easy for some people to digest, she
has continued to give.

Her direction is set: She’s here to empower people to love themselves and others.
She’s here to help people know the truth of who they are: unique, magnificent
beings with value and purpose. That kind of giving is the gift of a Defined G. When
I think of my three brothers again, I don’t think of them as loving in the way I
think of mama bear Karen. But as I sit with it, I see they have a steady stream of
love going to their children. It’s beautiful actually.

If you have a Defined G, you are here to have a steady stream of love flowing
through you out into the world. If that is not the case, then you need to see what
is blocking your stream. Do you have clogged Open Centers? You were not placed
here on earth to be shut down or silenced. We need your gifts and whatever it
takes for you to reconnect with them must be a top priority. This is your precious
human birth and your unique spark at stake.

Likewise, if you are not loving yourself or feeling lovable, this is the polarity of the
theme. You may be holding onto this end of the stick. Use inquiry to go into the
hole of feeling unlovable or unloved. See what stories you’re telling yourself to
keep that belief intact. Where do you have Open Centers? How are they
informing you? If you have an Open Will, are you questioning your value? Do you
have an Open Throat and aren’t feeling seen or heard? Do you use that to draw
the conclusion that you’re not loved? If you have one of the Individual Circuit
Channels, you’re bringing mutative energy and may not feel like people get you.
This could be triggering, or you could recognize it as being about them, not you.

Have Compassion with the Limitations

With a Defined G, you’re not meant to follow other people, nor are you meant to
go off-road, so to speak. My oldest brother, Pete, who I spoke about in my last
book, is a Manifestor with a Defined G. You might think he went off-road by
                                        202

running first descent river trips in China and Tibet. But, throughout his life he
stayed in his lane: geologist, river guide, adventurer. In contrast, my brother
Michael with an Open G worked for a publishing company in New York before
becoming a traveling photographer/journalist, traversing Marco Polo’s footsteps.
On his world travels, he became enamored with Ethiopia, came back to New York,
and started an Ethiopian Restaurant in the building he owned and worked as a
landlord. He got involved with Mantak Chia in the early 80s and co-wrote a
number of Mantak’s books on Taoist practices.

Eventually Michael became a well-known teacher of Taoism, starting a yearly
Taoist summer camp with teachers from all over the world. Meanwhile, he
started leading trips to the sacred sites of China, combining qigong with the
adventure travel. All the while, he has been a businessman, negotiating deals
from oil, to efficient battery motors, to Internet safety. His dream is to build a
replica of an ancient Taoist temple to hold healing retreats in the hills of North
Carolina. You see the difference between Pete and Michael? It would be flat out
wrong for Pete to do what Michael did.

Clear Up Your Beliefs That Could Obscure Your Stream of Loving

 Know that you can connect to your stream of loving and do whatever it takes to
claim your inheritance! Deepen and celebrate your connection to love by clearing
up whatever is between you and loving. Become aware of where you are loving. Is
it toward nature? Animals? People? Feel that, welcome that. See if you can
expand that to other areas of your life. Perhaps it is time to allow yourself more
authenticity in order to open your stream of loving.

Helpful Tools

      Reflection/ Inquiry
      Ho Oponopono prayer for healing and forgiveness
      Release Technique
      The Work of Byron Katie

Reflection/ Inquiry

Look at what stories you’re telling yourself about not being lovable or having a
clear direction in your life. Check to see which Open Centers you have and how
                                          203

they might be blocking your capacity to recognize yourself. Take radical
responsibly for your experiences experiences and use a tool to help release those
stories and patterns that keep you from your inheritance.

Ho Oponopono Prayer for Healing and Forgiveness

I love you, I’m sorry, forgive me, thank you. This powerful prayer is like a natural
cleanse for past trauma. Use it free yourself from any places you might feel less
than loving.

Release Technique/ Sedona

Method My brother Steven introduced me to the Release Technique ten years
ago. It comes out of Lester Levenson’s experience of having a heart attack in
1952. At that time, the doctors had no cure and sent him home to die. He was
forty years old. Lester was a scientist and wasn’t going to give up that easily. He
started doing an inventory of his life.

He discovered that he was happiest not when he was loved by others, but rather
when he was loving. He started consciously loving all the situations in his past
where he felt less than loving. Within months he was healed, living pain free. He
didn’t see a doctor for the next forty years. Lester began teaching his method to
others to help them release their pain and suffering and come into their stream of
loving.

There is a simple specific pattern of inquiry:

Step 1: Focus on an issue you would like to feel better about.

Step 2: Ask yourself one of the following questions: Could I let this feeling go?
Could I allow this feeling to be here? Could I welcome these feelings?

Step 3: Ask yourself the basic question: Would I? Am I willing to let go?

Step 4: Ask yourself this simpler question: When?

The Work of Byron Katie

Use Katie’s work to help you get clear. Read her book: I Need Your Love, Is It
True? If you are caught in the hole of not lovable, or not feeling loving toward
yourself, others, and life, then definitely, read this book.
                                         204

THE OPEN IDENTITY CENTER

If you have an Open Identity Center, you are not designed to have a fixed identity.
You don’t have consistent access to any one identity or direction. You’ve most
likely tried a lot of different things. Your life has perhaps gone in many different
directions. You may have a chameleon quality about you – an ability to fit in in
any situation with anyone. You’re like an actor playing different parts but leaving
the role behind to move on to the next one.

You may feel lost or disoriented disoriented at times, not knowing exactly who
you are or what direction to go. Because you don’t have a stable identity, place is
crucial – where you live, the city, the house, where you sit in restaurants. Most
people I work with who have Open Identity Centers recognize this quirky fact
about themselves, but they think it was just something about them.

They’re somewhat surprised and delighted to discover they’re designed that way.
People are also consistently relieved to hear that the thing they’re doing is not
the thing they have to do forever. Again, they know this, but the permission is
liberating.

Consider the surgeon who has a fabulous job but is way ahead of his time. He has
lots of mutative energy. I could see him easily changing what he’s doing to be
more aligned with his visionary self. He knows this to be true and is waiting for
the right timing to make a shift. Likewise, it’s often a relief for parents with Open
Gs to discover that being a mom, for instance, isn’t going to give them the
ultimate lovability or ultimate satisfaction they seek.

Nor is being the CEO of a company company or writing a bestselling book.
Nothing external can fill the hole of no self. With an Open G, you’re not on the
path of becoming a Somebody. Instead, you are creatively meeting the world in
the moment, showing up in response to who and what is in front of you. The love
you are is not a steady external stream broadcasting into the world. You are more
like a field of love within which the truth of love is discovered.

 You are not on a path from A to B, instead the path and your destination are one,
in the moment. I can’t get a consistent identity from writing this book. But, in the
moment of writing, I experience myself as a writer. This is hard to describe. It’s so
cool really, as long as you’re not thinking you should be different than you are. If
                                           205

you’re thinking you should be different, like the story of my first thirty years, it’s
extreme suffering.

The Grapples of the Open Identity Center

      You don’t have a clear direction in life.
      You can question your lovability.
      You don’t have a fixed identity.
      You’re vulnerable to place.
      Defined Gs don’t understand your dilemmas.

You Don’t Have a Clear Direction in Life

With an Open G, you are wide open. You can go any direction you’re called. If you
don’t know your Strategy and/ or don’t follow it, you most likely go to your Head
Center to try to figure it out. Well, that doesn’t really work. You can feel lost, you
can feel confused. The unique spark that you are doesn’t have a way to show up
and shine its light. This can be depressing and disheartening. With your Open G,
you may latch onto or merge with people with Defined Gs and follow their
direction, but it isn’t yours, and ultimately will feel dissatisfying. It’s like going
through the motions without any skin in the game, without any passion or juice.

This was a cause of great distress for me growing up, especially as I was trying to
figure out who to be and what work to do. I had the conditioning that told me I
needed to be someone of value; I needed to prove I was someone worthy of love.
But I didn’t feel valuable and I didn’t feel worthy of love. I was all over the map.
After getting my BA in English Literature at UC Berkeley, I moved to New York.

There I worked as an intern for Phyllis Chesler, who was working on her latest
book. I left that job to work at East West Books, selling books, and teaching yoga.
Next, I worked at a burrito shop, then did a stint as an editor before moving back
to Berkeley. At Berkeley, I worked at a daycare center and cleaned houses while I
studied to become a Rosen Method Bodyworker. Finally, I settled into being a
bodyworker and therapist. But even then, I was always learning new things to
bring to my work. I was always coloring outside the lines.
                                          206

You Don’t Have a Fixed Identity

You also aren’t designed to have a fixed identity. You’re fluid. Depending on who
you’re with, a different different aspect of you will show up. You don’t know who
you are. We laugh about it now, but at one point, my sister and I wondered if we
had Multiple Personality Disorder. We were so unstable in our identities.

I can remember in tenth grade being given the assignment to symbolically depict
who we were. I made a circle with multi-layered cloth, divided into twenty slices
of material of different colors and textures. I was not one thing. I was multi-
faceted in every direction. There was a gold button in the middle. I think now that
was my spark, my point of light.

The truth is, with your Open G, you’re taking in the identities of everyone around
you and amplifying them. You’re buffeted around by whomever you’re with. It’s
hard to sort out who you are in the midst of everyone else. This can be confusing
and make you feel like something is wrong with you. Maybe you feel like you’re
playacting your life rather than being a person in it.

I remember reading Kafka’s The Trial in high school. It was uncanny how closely it
matched my experience experience – I felt I was on trial for some crime, but I had
no idea what it was. The only thing I could fathom was that I was on trial for being
born. For existing. This is the angst of an Open G!

You Can Question Your Lovability

With this confusion comes the question of your lovability. What after all is there
to love, if you don’t fundamentally exist in any consistent way? In our culture, we
get a sense of our goodness and lovability from the roles we play. But, if we know
deep down that those roles are not who we are, the felt sense of being lovable is
called into question.

I want to make sure we don’t fall into simplistic thinking here. You can’t just look
at an Open G and project a lifetime of suffering. It really depends on the whole
chart. If someone has a totally Open G, I’d say it's definitely more challenging, as
there is no gate to hang on to for direction or a sense of self.

But take my friend, Lucia, for instance. I call her the Projector Poster child. She
doesn’t have all the complications many Projectors have. She was seen and
                                         207

recognized by her family growing up. She was taught to follow her own guidance,
and getting juvenile diabetes forced her listen to her body – it was a matter of life
and death. So, she didn’t have a pattern of overriding herself.

When I asked on Facebook, “Who has a Defined G and do you feel lovable?” she
posted: I do not have a Defined Identity Center and I do feel lovable. My wife and I
had already discussed her as an anomaly. I look at her chart and see her
Conscious Sun is in Gate 10, the Gate of Self Love. She loves herself. It’s clear.
And, she has three other gates coming off of her G. These gates give her
consistent access to loving and life direction.

You’re Vulnerable to Place

 This is really important information. If you are living in an area – or going to
school in a place, for example – that doesn’t feel good to you, it will impact
everything. It will impact who you meet, what jobs you get offered, and how you
function. If you have a child with an Open G, keep your eyes open. If they’re not
flourishing, there may be a problem with location.

Because Open Gs don’t have a fixed identity, they get their sense of identity from
their surroundings. Where you sit in a restaurant matters. Where you live
matters. When I learned about my Open G and saw that I was not getting the
work I expected after moving to Iowa, I had an astrocartography reading to find
out places that would be good for me as well as my wife. Of all the places we
were considering, Maui was the best. The difference between living in Maui and
living in Iowa in terms of what has come into my life is dramatic.

A few years ago, I had a Vedic astrology reading and the fellow told me that the
sure way to make me go crazy was to have me live in a chaotic environment. He
was so right. This is the Open G feeling themselves as the environment. When I
gave Cheyenne, a Reflector, a Human Design coaching session and was telling her
about the Open G, she said something like: “That must be why I can’t tolerate
even a chip on a dish. I feel it like it’s me.”

Defined G’s Don’t Understand Your Dilemmas

I’ve alluded to the vast difference between living as a person with a Defined G and
living as a person with an Open G. With your Open G, you can wonder if
                                        208

something is wrong with you, as you see these incredibly confident people know
what they’re doing and where they’re going, ostensibly good with their path. To
make things more challenging, people with Defined Gs often don’t have a clue
about their privilege and can’t understand your lack of stability in who you are
and where you’re headed. They want you to go with them, which you’re capable
of doing, though it doesn’t ultimately work. So, bottom line, you can feel further
shamed or feel like you have to fabricate an identity to pass, so to speak. I’m sure
there are more dilemmas, but you get the sense of what you’re up against.

The Gifts of the Open G Center

Now that we’ve so fully laid out the challenges of an Open G, what are the gifts?

    You have an openness and flexibility.
    You’re designed to be wise about direction and true love.
    You have a rich and varied life.

You Have an Openness and Flexibility

With your Open Definition comes an open spirit. You’re not so clear about what
you want or what direction you’re going, so you’re available to discover life.
You’re able to meet and make friends with a wide swath of society. You don’t
have an agenda for how or who people should be. This makes for an excellent
therapist or coach. You will want to look and see which Hanging Gates, if any, you
have coming off your G Center – these will be handholds for identity and
direction. For example, if you have an Open G with Gate 1 Self-Expression, you
will feel like you have an identity when you are creatively expressing yourself. You
recognize yourself with substance as you express yourself.

Obviously, having an Open G is also great for actors, giving them a lot of
possibility in how they play roles.

You Have a Rich and Varied Life

You’re not only open to people, you’re open to your direction in life. Most Open G
folks I know and have worked with have tasted so many dishes from the buffet of
life. This gives them a wide knowledge and tool base. I stopped giving my resumé
out at some point because the number of things I’ve done, and done in depth, is
                                         209

almost unbelievable. Obviously, a big drive in doing so many things was searching
for identity. Along the way I learned a ton that became my life’s gifts.

You’re Designed to Be Wise about Direction and True Love

 With all that testing and tasting, you learn what is in alignment with you and
what is not. You’re designed, with an Open G, to become wise about direction
and to come to understand what is true love. Ultimately any direction that is
aligned with your Strategy and Authority will be gratifying. You do not need an
end goal, an arrival place. Remember, you are going to the buffet of life and
choosing a variety of experiences to see which direction you’re called to go. We
could say you’re a non-linear being.

I think about my dad here. He had eight Centers Defined with an Open G Center.
And, while he did have a long and fruitful career as a surgeon, in an odd way it
wasn’t his identity. He definitely wasn’t going for an identity as a Somebody in the
Army. He left right before he was going to be promoted to Colonel. His father was
an Army General, but my dad could not care less about the status. He didn’t want
to move to up and work in administration, which is where he would be headed if
he stayed.

He also chose a place to retire to that was good for him. My parents build a house
a block from the hospital so he could walk or bike to work. He chose a hospital
clinic in a small town where all the doctors got the same salary, regardless of their
specialty. He had been wooed by large hospitals in Los Angeles that promised big
financial rewards, but that didn’t feel right to him. He was wise about direction.
He was clear about what was good for him and his family.

The Open G as a God Portal

Now we get to my favorite aspect of the Open G Center – the God Portal. Clearing
the filters of the conditioning – that you should be somebody, that you should be
loved a certain way, or that you’re not lovable – liberates you from the clutches of
deficiency. Here are the God Portals I perceive with the Open G.

    You are love itself.
    You are the space within which all love arises.
                                          210

You Are Love Itself

When your filters are clear, you stabilize not on an identity, but on the realization
that you are love itself. I spoke earlier in the chapter, in the Helpful Tools section,
about Lester Levenson, and how he shifted from trying to get love to being the
one loving. His experience points to this God Portal turn. But, let me be clear, this
is not an action of being loving toward someone. This is not a doing; it is rather
the act of recognition that you are an emanation of love. Your being is love. Here
you stabilize, as it were, on the space in which love arises. Which is love.

You Are the Space Within Which All Love Arises

 In the second turning of the wheel in Buddhism, when the next level of teachings
was introduced, the Buddha pointed to the formless, explaining it was not empty
but rather full of compassion. When we expand our understanding of our heart
from our physical heart organ, to our quantum, holographic, multidimensional
galactic body, we open to a new dimension. We allow our heart to fill all space.
We understand our heart is all space. This is a radical shift in perception which
dramatically alters our experience of the world.

There were so many ways Byron Katie pointed to this reality. She would say, “I
walk into a grocery store and I know everyone in that store loves me. They may
not know it yet, but they cannot help but love me. That is their nature. That is who
we are. We are made of love.” She always talked about this being a loving
universe. No wonder my magnetic monopole drew her to me. She was the doctor,
the surgeon my heart needed to clear my clogged arteries, to give me a new
chance at life.

This opening into the space of love is beyond magnificent. It is our true direction,
our True North. If you are lost, looking for a purpose in life, this is it. What you do
from there is secondary, is a natural movement in and from love. These are only
words, and they can only point to the heart that patiently lies in wait, as Katie
would say, for you to come home to it. Your path is to come home to the heart
and realize the love that you seek is you.

I do not want to mislead you. For most of us this is not a one-time revelation that
ends all suffering. I think of the story Maharishi, the founder of Transcendental
Meditation, often told to show the path of awakening: You take a cloth and put it
                                          211

in yellow dye. It fades in the sun. You dye it again, again it fades, though less so.
You do this process until the brightness of the cloth is no longer subject to fading
in the sun. Byron Katie’s version was that she had her awakening then spent
seven years questioning the thoughts that arose until she was stabilized in love.
This is a path.

 I know for myself, once I had a taste of this truth, so much garbage fell away. The
long search for looking to be loved – to prove I was lovable – came to a screeching
halt. I was no longer on trial. All charges were dropped. But still, there are layers
of myself that arise which show that not all of me has gotten word that all is safe.
There is a world waiting to be held in the space of the heart. Here we get a bit
esoteric. Going back to that giant puzzle and the awareness that we are part of a
whole. Katie would say, “My work is not done as long as you are suffering, you are
an out picturing of me.”

Working with the Open Identity Center

      Appreciate, have compassion for, and reflect the challenges of the Open G.
      Know how the Open G operates.
      Develop a strong witnessing observer.
      Clean the filter.
      Go into the hole of no self – allow the lostness.

Appreciate, Have Compassion for, and Reflect the Challenges of the Open G

 As you begin to work with the Open G, begin with appreciating it. Free of past
conditioning, it is quite remarkable in in its flexibility and capacity to meet life
from an almost open innocence. It has no need for recognition. Rather, it is alive
to the rich variety of experiences life offers. Be curious about what your
experience, or your client’s experience, has been with an Open G.

Recognize that it may have been challenging or confusing, although don’t assume
that. My friend Pali Summerlin tells me she always loved her Open G – she felt like
she could be anyone and it didn’t matter. It will depend where else you have
Definition in your chart. For example, with Pali, she has a Defined Head and Ajna
with Channel of Insight 43-23 connecting them. She had a grounded way to look
at and understand her Open G.
                                         212

For most people I’ve worked with, it’s quite disorienting and the effort to be
somebody has created tremendous suffering. Have compassion for the challenges
you may have faced as a result of this aspect of your design. Consider that you
could have a different relationship with this energy. Perhaps you could begin to
accept it rather than fight it?

Know How the Open G Operates

The best way to befriend your Open G is to get clear on how it operates.
Understand that you’re taking in the identities of the people around you and
amplifying them. You don’t have a fixed identity. Understand that you need to be
in a location that feels good to you. That place is key for you. Understand that
when you are questioning your lovability, you are believing an untrue story.
Understand that you are different than people with a Defined G, and there is
nothing wrong with that.

And understand that you are here to choose your experiences from the buffet of
life – not choose off the menu. Enjoy the variety and richness. Remember that
you are not here to derive your identity from the roles you play. Finally, be clear
on the support your Strategy and Authority offer in guiding your direction in life.
Take some time to look at which, if any, Defined Gates you have coming off your
G Center. These will give you some direction, some ground, some identity to hold
onto in the flux of Open G.

Develop a Strong Witnessing Observer

It’s imperative that you have the capacity to look at your life and discern what is
yours and what belongs to other people. In order to clear the gunk you’ve picked
up from conditioning in the past, as well as current merges, you must be able to
see what’s what. This demands a strong, non-judgmental internal witness. If you
are judging what has happened in the past or what’s happening in the present,
your awareness will be occupied with the act of judging. In order to clean the
filters, you need clear vision.

Develop a meditation practice or inquiry practice to support and ground you.
Basically, you’re asking yourself to shift from identifying with your ego and its vast
network of entanglements. Instead, choose to identify with your Being, your
essential self. The ego does not have a stronghold in the light of awareness. With
                                          213

a steadfast witness, you can see what is true. It’s the first dose of medicine for the
suffering.

Clean the Filters

With a strong witness, you can begin the task of cleaning the filters of your Open
G. You can begin to take stock of your past by looking to see where your filters got
clogged. The best way to this is to look at your pain: What were you taking in that
was toxic, that was less than loving? Who wasn’t loving themselves? Who told
you that you weren’t lovable? Who didn’t have direction in life or told you that
you needed to be somebody? What are you still believing? What identities have
you attached to? Do you believe you have to do something or be someone to get
love?

Use your witness to take inventory, then begin the inquiry process. Bring the light
of awareness to see what is truer than your long-held beliefs. You may be
surprised to find beliefs that lurk beneath the surface, steering your life from a
place of old defensive reactions.

Go into the Hole of No Self – Allow the Lostness

When you are ready, I invite you to explore the core pain of the Open G – the
terror of being nobody. This is the terror of not having an identity. The terror of
not existing. It’s one thing to talk about it, it’s quite another to allow yourself to
experience it. Most of us spend our lives defending against it. Once we face the
hole of no self and meet it with open arms, a door opens. On the other side is a
new world. I’m not saying you won’t ever get hooked back and have moments of
questioning your lovability. But those moments don’t stick. They’re not real.
They’re seen for what they are – desperate attempts by the Ego to have a life.
Traversing this hole is the ultimate medicine for the Open G.

Helpful Tools

Many of the tools for the Defined G are also helpful with the Open G, with a few
additions:

    Put yourself in the right place!
    Inner Smile Reflection/ Inquiry
    Ho Oponopono prayer for healing and forgiveness
                                          214

      Release Technique
      The Work of Byron Katie Tibetan
      Buddhist Meditation
      Put Yourself in the Right Place!

If there is one thing that could shift your life with an Open G, it is this. Commit to
yourself to be aware of and honor what you feel like in any given location. If it
does not feel good in a restaurant, find a different seat or leave. If you are not
happy where you live, do everything you can to relocate to a place that feels good
to you. Remember, you’re taking your identity from your environment. You
matter. How you feel matters. Respect yourself!

Inner Smile

This simple Qigong meditation tool is surprisingly powerful. Think about it: When
we are judging or disapproving of something, we are entangled with it. The act of
smiling to your Open G and any pain or suffering that might be lodged there
actually begins the process of disentangling from it. It’s a turn toward compassion
and peace. You can do this anytime in any place. The Inner Smile is a salve for our
wounding.

Reflection/ Inquiry

 Look at what stories you’re telling yourself about not being lovable or having a
clear direction in your life. What are the origins of those stories? Explore them.
Write down your thoughts. Take radical responsibility for your experiences and
use inquiry to help release those stories and patterns that keep you from your
inheritance.

Ho Oponopono Prayer for Healing and Forgiveness

Use this powerful prayer to release any debris caught in your filter: I love you, I’m
sorry, forgive me, thank you. This prayer is a natural cleanser for past trauma. Use
it to free yourself from any places you might feel less than loving.

Release Technique/ Sedona Method

This technique is the way Lester Levenson cleared his filter in 1952 following a
heart attack at age forty. At that time, the doctors had no cure and sent him
                                         215

home to die. He was a scientist, and he wasn’t going to give up that easily. He
started doing an inventory of his life and discovered that he was happiest not
when he was loved by others, but rather when he was loving.

He started consciously loving all the situations in his past where he felt less than
loving. Within months he was healed, living pain free and without seeing a doctor
for the next forty years. He began teaching his method to others to help them
release their pain and suffering and come into their stream of loving. There is a
simple specific pattern of inquiry:

Step 1: Focus on an issue you would like to feel better about.

Step 2: Ask yourself one of the following questions: Could I let this feeling go?
Could I allow this feeling to be here? Could I welcome these feelings?

Step 3: Ask yourself the basic question: Would I? Am I willing to let go?

Step 4: Ask yourself this simpler question: When?

The Work of Byron Katie

Use Katie’s work to help you get clear. Read her book: I Need Your Love, Is It True?
If you are caught in the hole of not lovable, or not feeling loving toward yourself,
others, or life, do The Work!

                                                 (See Resources for the full Inquiry.)

Tibetan Buddhist Meditation

The meditation practices in Tibetan Buddhism specifically address identity. One of
them is called Deity practice. Here you focus on a deity, say for example Tara, the
female Buddha who removes suffering. You first focus on her outside yourself,
but ultimately you become Tara. This is a skillful way to shift our identity from the
Ego’s grasp and expand into an identification with our true nature.
                                         216

RECAP

 It’s a bit hard to find words big enough to reflect the magnitude of The Identity
Center. It is a major organizing force of our quantum body. It magnetizes what we
need in our lives. It is the power of Love. It holds the spark of our unique, infinite
self. It is the connective nectar between our puzzle piece and all the other puzzle
pieces. And it is the very substance of our puzzle piece.

What did you discover about your Identity Center? Did it surprise you? How do
you feel about having an Open or Defined G? Are you moved to take an action to
be more in alignment with yourself through your G? Take some time and journal
your thoughts. Develop a relationship with your G Center. See how your life
changes when you do.

Now we turn to the Will Center, which is powerful and important in its own way.
It is the support we need to navigate the material world. Onward!
                                           217


                                          10

                  GETTING TO KNOW THE WILL CENTER




INTRODUCING THE WILL CENTER

The Will Center is the little triangle off to the right. If it’s Defined, it’s colored in
red, if it’s Undefined or Open, it’s white. One of the Four Motors, this is the one
Center that is predominately concerned with the material world. For being
represented as the smallest shape on the chart, it exerts tremendous power in
the world. Embodying the themes of value and capacity, the Will Center holds the
I can do energy, an important energy when it comes to the well-being of the tribe.
In the new Quantum Human Design™ language, Karen Curry Parker calls the Will
Center the Resource Center.

What’s so curious is that in the scope of things, relatively few people have this
energy Defined. Just 37 percent of the population have this privilege, yet the
qualities of the Will Center are idealized, and we are all expected to have and use
them. For those with consistent access to their Will energy, there is a support that
makes life a bit easier. Think of living in the Unites States as opposed to living in a
third world country. Some level of the material world is made easier.
                                         218

Does that mean that those of us without consistent access to that energy are
lacking or doomed to struggle? No. Not at all. We are simply not meant to
exercise our Will in the same way. It’s not a deficiency, it is how we were
designed. If we can step out of the world of comparison, we can begin to see
complexity and a range of operating in the world that allows for variation,
difference. An Open Will Center is here to be wise about what is valuable.

Much like people without a Motor to the Throat are drawn to people in order to
access that, those of us without a Defined Will Center can benefit by being around
those with a Defined Will Center.

A tricky little guy. I can feel my own ambivalence toward the Will Center as I go to
connect with it. It is the cause of pain in so many people’s lives – and the core of
glory for others. What’s your relationship to your Will Center? Let’s find out.

CONNECTING WITH THE WILL CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

Begin by taking a deep breath.

Feel your sitz bones resting on your chair.

Notice where your body is tense.

Take a breath and breathe into that tension.

Become aware of any sensations in your body.

Shift your posture to make sure you’re comfortable.

Take another deep breath. Settle into this moment.

Let the past and the future drop away.

Bring a little smile to your lips.

Sense your arms and legs.

Take a moment to rest in your breath.

Just rest.

From this resting place, turn your attention to your quantum body.
                                           219

Feel yourself as a multi-dimensional holographic being that energetically expands
out into the world and draws the world into it.

Feel yourself as a unique energetic being connected with all of life.

With each exhalation, expand out into the universe.

With each inhalation, take the world in.

Now shift your focus to your Will Center.

Is it Defined or Open in your chart?

Notice your response to it.

Do you have an immediate thought arise in relation to it?

Do you wish it were different?

Are you at odds with it or do you feel good about it?

Do you trust yourself to be able to do what you say you’re going to do?

Or is that a challenge for you?

Do you value yourself?

Or do you question your value?

Just notice.

Either way, can you just smile at your Will Center?

For the moment, can you let it be what it is, as it is?

 Can you open to the possibility that your Will Center can be a support for you,
that it holds hidden treasures waiting to be revealed?

Can you make the decision to get to know your Will Center and how it has
operated in your life?

Maybe there are ways to be with and work with your Will Center that you haven’t
yet imagined.

Take another breath.
                                         220

The Will is big energy.

It’s important to understand how it operates in your life.

It’s important to be aligned with it.

It’s important to respect it.

To know it.

Take another breath, letting it out slowly.

Set an intention to discover the power of your Will Center.

When you’re ready, begin to sense your arms and legs. Sense your belly.

Gently open your eyes and bring your awareness back into the room.

Take some time to journal about your experience. Imagine you’re getting to know
a new friend. What did you discover?



THE DEFINED WILL CENTER

Okay. Let’s face it, you’ve got superpowers. You’re one of 37 percent who has
been endowed with the enviable capacity to say what you’re going to do and do
it. You have consistent access to your will power, and that is a highly valued trait
in our world. You know how to navigate the material world and your presence is a
boon to everyone around you. You have the capacity to be capable, competent,
and inspiring. Need I say more? Well yes, actually. It’s not quite that simple. First
of all, remember that where you are Defined, you have the theme of that energy,
which is either being expressed – or not.

So, you may have these amazing qualities available to you, but you may not be
utilizing them. In the event you have a Defined Will Center and are feeling less
than capable, that’s something you’ll want to explore and rectify. Secondly, the
Will Motor is designed to work to rest. You do have the capacity to push through,
but unless you’re following your Strategy and Authority, you can burn out. It kind
of goes without saying, but if you’re burned out, you are not able to use the
phenomenal gifts of your Defined Will Center.
                                           221

Just one more thing before we go deeper into the gifts and grapples of the
Defined Will: there are four Gates coming off the Will Center, creating Channels
to four different Centers – the Throat Center, Identity Center, Sacral Center, and
Emotional Solar Plexus. Which one of these Channels you have Defined in your
chart will determine how you exert your will power.

The Gifts of the Defined Will Center

There are so many boons that come with the Defined Will Center. I’ve alluded to
them, but here is a closer look:

      You have the capacity to decide you’re going to do something and do it!
      You have competency and inspire others.
      You value yourself.
      Each of the Four Channels has a particular gift.

You Have the Capacity to Decide You’re Going to Do Something and Do It!

This is no small feat. Trust me. For those of us who don’t have this muscle, the
world is a different place. But let’s stick with you. You’re designed to make
promises and keep them. This builds your trust in yourself and your capacity.
There’s an element of proving yourself here. With a Defined Will you have that
egoic drive to test and prove you can do things.

For you, it’s not a big deal. It's healthy for you to exercise your will. It’s high play.
It’s a bit like going to the gym and working out. It gives you satisfaction. The Nike
slogan Just Do It! captures the spirit of the Defined Will Center: it’s fun, go for it.
It’s invigorating to challenge yourself, to compete and achieve success.

You Have Competency and Inspire Others

With your capacity comes a level of competency that is remarkable, really.
There’s a grounded trusting of yourself that can easily elude those of us with
Open Wills. This competency engenders leadership and inspires the people
around you to do more than they believe they can do – to stretch and accomplish
things that were unimaginable on their own. The classic example of a Defined Will
is Tony Robbins who, as a motivational leader, inspires people to go beyond their
perceived limits. One of the things he’s famous for in his inspirational trainings is
having people walk across hot coals.
                                        222

You Value Yourself

There is a level of value that comes from trusting ourselves and our capacities.
With the Defined Will, there is a hidden support, a feeling that the universe has
your back. There’s a kind of snowball effect here, a building of confidence and
value as you take action in the world and get the results you set out to
accomplish. The more you value yourself, the more you can do. The more you can
do, the more supported you feel. The more supported you feel, the more you
value yourself. And so, the person with the Defined Will increases their sense of
value with each accomplishment.

Each of the Four Channels has Particular Gifts

Whichever Channel defines your Will Center will determine how the strong Will
energy shows up consistently for you.




21-45 Money Channel

If you have Definition in Gate 21 The Treasurer/ Control and Gate 45 The King or
Queen, you have the Money Channel. With this very grounded and materialist
force, you have gift of being in control and taking empowered leadership. I’ve
worked with CEOs who have this Channel and their natural capacity to take
                                         223

leadership brings a feeling a safety, a sense that someone is at the helm that can
be counted on to guide the ship.

37-40 Channel of Community

If you have Definition in Gate 40 Deliverance or Aloneness, and also in the Gate
37 Friendship, you have the powerful Tribal Channel, Community. You have an
emotional strength. You are designed to make clear, solid agreements which are
beneficial for the tribe and where you are well-compensated. When these are in
place, you have the gift of working tirelessly on whatever project you’ve
committed to.

44-26 Channel of Surrender

If Gate 26 The Trickster is Defined from your Will Center and connects with Gate
44 Energy, coming off your Spleen Center, you have the Tribal Channel of
Surrender giving you a Defined Will Center. Here the materialistic Will Center
Energy connecting with intuitive, survival-oriented Spleen Center energy creates
the gift of sales.

You are intuitively strong. You have the ability to transmit to the tribe what is
valuable for our survival. You are here to sell an idea or a product to benefit the
tribe. With this Channel Defined, you have the superpower to accomplish
enormous amounts of work in a fraction of the time it would take others.

My friend, Dr. Veronica, who I spoke about earlier, has this Channel. Robin Theiss,
who you’ll hear about in the next section, named her The Oracle. I couldn’t have
said it better. Dr. Veronica is the ophthalmologist turned medical intuitive who
can see diagnoses written in the sky. She transmits a message from a deep place
of knowing that is both pragmatic and intuitive, regardless of the topic.

Another author/ coach who I studied with and who also trained with me in
Human Design is Megan Jo Wilson. I mention her because, like Dr. Veronica, she
has this channel. She’s here to sell a message to the tribe. The twist is, she’s got
Gate 51, the Gate of Shock (you’ll read about that next). Megan Jo is here to sell a
message in a shocking way. She empowers women to claim their voice through
what she calls Rockstar Camp.
                                        224

She basically shocks women, not necessarily singers, to step into their power and
own their voice by putting them on stage to sing with a band in front of a live
audience that is live-streamed. Megan Jo recognizes that we need women’s
voices to be heard for the survival of the tribe. In her unique way of supporting
women, she is transmitting empowerment, the possibility of coming out from the
shadows into the full glory of who we are, as we are.

25-51 Channel of Initiation

 The last of the four Will Center Channels is different. It is the only Channel
coming off the Will that is not Tribal in nature. Here we have the Individual
Centering Circuit at play. So, if you have the Gate 51 Shock Defined in your chart
and it connects with the Defined Gate 25 Love of Spirt which comes off the
Identity Center, your Will is Defined through the Channel of Initiation. Unlike the
other Defined Will Center Channels, the force here does not come from the will to
do something. Here, you have the gift of shocking people into their hearts, into a
higher level of understanding.

This is the gift of awakening. You also have the gift of enduring shocks, the will to
survive and transform the wild disruptions that show up in your life and mess with
your world. This energy is shamanic in nature, transforming the material world by
placing it into the arms of Spirit. When you are shocked out of your familiar,
known world, you have no choice but to land in a different dimension of reality.
Another possibility with this Channel is to work with people who are experiencing
shocking situations, helping to bring people into their hearts.

My colleague Robin Theiss, who was in my book-writing cohort and went through
my Human Design training, is a Projector with this Channel. Robin wrote a
bestselling book called Motivating Adolescents: Your Child’s Journey to Success. In
it, she recounts her own hero’s journey of being initiated, and how she came to
help adolescents who are struggling find their way.

Often times the parents of the kids she works with are in shock, not knowing how
to help their child move forward. I clearly remember Robin telling me that nothing
shocks her anymore. She’s heard it all. Robin works with shock. Her deep, soulful
understanding of shock as a pathway to transformation enables her to help
parents and adolescents in shocking and heart-opening ways.
                                        225

The Grapples of the Defined Will Center

Okay, yes, of course, there are a few challenges that come with the powerful
Defined Will Center. You risk burnout.

    You’re not following your Strategy so you can’t access your will power.
    You can get frustrated with people who don’t have Defined Will Centers.

You Risk Burnout

So, you have this impressive Defined Will Center. You can push through and work
long hours or do whatever it takes to reach your goal. What you can do is
phenomenal. You have the capacity. But just because you can do it doesn’t mean
you should do it. Remember, the Will Center is a Motor. It works to rest. Unless
you are resting between jobs, so to speak, you can and will burn out. This can
leave you completely without energy, without capacity. Your health in this case is
usually compromised. It’s honestly not a pretty picture.

You can also burn out if you’re exerting your will for something that is not in
alignment with your Strategy. Remember Dr. Veronica. She went through medical
school, doing rounds while she was pregnant and working inhumane hours. She
could do it. She did. But she paid the price. Her body gave out on her.

You’re Not Following Your Strategy So You Can’t Access Your Will Power

You have the sense that you have capacity, you just can’t access it. This can be
extremely disempowering. Perhaps you’re a Manifesting Generator with the 37-
40 who is not waiting to respond. You’re busy making agreements with people
but they’re not good for you, in which case your Will Center may not cooperate.
You may not have the energy to push through. Or say you’re a Projector and are
trying to exert your will without first being invited or recognized. Nothing
happens because you’re not seen. To engage your Will Center, you must align
with your Strategy and Authority.

You Can Get Frustrated with Others Who Don’t Have Defined Will Centers This is
an interesting challenge that the Defined Will Center people face: they naturally
have more capacity than people with Open Will Centers. On top of that, when
people are around them, the Open Will Center folks take in and amplify the
Defined Will. In that case, the Open Will can have even more capacity than the
                                        226

Defined Will. People are empowered around you to do things they couldn’t have
imagined. Remember Tony Robbins and the fire walk. So that’s a good thing,
right? You inspire people and help people break through barriers. The challenge is
that when they leave your presence, they lose that capacity.

There are a few pieces to consider here. First, if you’re a coach and you think
someone should be able to do something because you can – wrong. They don’t
have that Motor. They don’t have the capacity. So, it’s actually unkind and not
skillful on your part to project on them like that. They end up failing, thenyou end
up being frustrated with them and with yourself. Second, say your client says
they’re going to do something while they’re with you.

They feel like they can. They’re in your aura. They’re empowered. They commit to
it. Then they get home and they’re like I can’t do that. This very thing happened
to some friends of mine who went to a Tony Robbins event. They got all fired up.
They enthusiastically paid him for courses. Once they got home, they looked at
each other and realized there was no way they could do what he was asking them
to do.

Think of the ramifications of this. Let’s say Dr. Veronica knows what’s going to
help someone. She also knows patient compliance is a problem. If she prescribes
something and someone enthusiastically commits to a protocol while they’re with
her, she cannot count on them to follow it when they get home (unless they have
a Defined Will). Similarly, I have a client who has a Defined Will Center. When her
kids are home with her, she can support them to make big breakthroughs in their
finances and action plans.

 But when they leave her, they cannot sustain it. With your Defined Will, you have
to be clear that most people don’t have your superpower! Working with the
Defined Will Center Value your Will Center and use it wisely. Understand why you
don’t have access to your Will Center Motor. Appreciate the true support you can
offer others. Work with the energy of the gates that come off your Will Center.

Value Your Will Center and Use It Wisely

You are in possession of a great gift. Care for your Will Center Motor and use it
wisely. To ensure it remains available to you, you must cultivate awareness of it.
Learn to follow your Strategy. Is this project a good use of your Will? Know that
                                        227

you have access to a great power. Don’t be afraid to exert yourself, but also, don’t
let your ego take over and push you beyond limits merely to prove yourself from
an out-of-balance, egoic mindset. The unique and powerful Will Center energy is
very potent. It can be used to break through limits, but only if you are in
alignment with it. Remember you are using it – don’t let it use you.

Understand Why You Don’t Have Access to Your Will Center Motor

There are fundamentally three reasons why you might not have access to your
superpower. When this happens, you need to understand and respond to each
situation accordingly. First, you may have a thought about what you want to do
but your Strategy is not in agreement and doesn’t allow access. The important
thing here is to be aware of what’s happening and basically be humble. You are
being protected. If you’re a Generator, you must have a yes to access the Motor.

Again, if you have a no and push your Will Center Motor, you will burn out.

The second reason you may not have access to your powerful Will Center energy
is that you are already burned out. You haven’t taken care of yourself. Your ego
has been in charge and pushed you beyond a healthy limit. In this case, you have
the job of recovery. Rest and renewal. You have the task of rebuilding the trust of
your Will Center.

The final reason you may not have access to your Defined Will Center is that you
are in your own way. Remember, when there is Definition, you have the theme –
in this case, either the theme of having capacity or the theme of lacking capacity.
You will be occupied with one end of the stick or the other. Most likely, you are
telling yourself some story about yourself that is programing you to not access
your Will Center. What would happen if you allowed yourself to be that powerful
and strong, to have that much capacity?

I was working with a talented coach who felt stalled. A Manifesting Generator,
she has a Defined Will Center and a power-packed chart. She initially didn’t
identify with having the strong Will Center energy and being able to create her
program. She felt she was hiding. As we talked more, it became clear that when
she had a full yes for something, she went full-bored. Nothing stopped her.
                                        228

The interesting thing here – and we all have to be cognizant of this – is you have
to look at the whole chart. She has her Conscious Sun, the biggest energy in her
chart, her unconscious Moon, which drives her, her Conscious Mercury, what she
likes to talk about, and her Conscious Saturn, what she has to be in integrity with,
all in Gate 52, the Gate of Stillness.

Her chart is all about waiting. Waiting in dynamic stillness until the right moment
to act. It’s like holding the bow taut with the arrow until the exact moment to let
the arrow go to hit the bullseye. In her case, we needed to reframe hiding as
waiting. We needed to reframe the feeling that she was lagging with her program
to she was waiting for the right timing. Then, and only then, could she activate
her Will Center.

Appreciate the True Support You Can Offer Others

Your authentic support comes from your presence. Your Defined Will Center
enables those with Open Will Centers to access the Will energy when they are in
your auric field. You are an inspiration to people. Your power to support others in
accessing Will energy does not come from pressuring or demanding that others to
be like you.

Learn to be compassionate toward yourself in relation to others when you find
yourself getting frustrated or being disappointed in their lack of capacity. Watch
the tendency to make them wrong or less than. Learn to be compassionate
toward them as well. You actually have something they don’t have. Work with
people to find their own unique way to master the things they are attempting.

And be clear that not everyone is meant to prove themselves in the same way you
are. Recognize that your accomplishments do not make you any more valuable
than others. Be clear on this. The ultimate function of your Defined Will is to
support others in the tribe. Be vigilant with the comparing Ego that is out to prove
that there is a hierarchy and that you are higher up than others!

Work with the Energy of the Gates That Come off Your Will Center

Check to see which of these Gates you have defined, take responsibility for the
power you wield, and use it wisely.
                                          229




Gate 21 Control, The Treasurer

What do you feel the need to control? Be vigilant with your impulse to control.
Investigate it. Is your ego controlling out of domination or fear? Or are you
coming from a clear and empowered place, aware of your environment, in tune
with your Strategy, and using your drive to control respectfully for all concerned?
Gate 51 Shock, Initiation Explore your relationship to shock. What planet is in
your Gate of Shock? Are you using shock skillfully in alignment with your
Strategy? Or are you shocking just to be shocking, not taking into account your
impact?

Gate 26 Trickster

What message are you sharing? Are you selling some idea or thing to the tribe out
of lack to fill your coffers? Or are you in integrity, authentically selling a solution
to a real problem that will be of benefit?

Gate 40 Aloneness/ Deliverance

Are you delivering the goods to the tribe that they need? Or that you want to
give? Are you including yourself and your own needs to make sure the agreement
                                         230

is one you will feel good fulfilling? Are you honoring your alone time or are you
feeling victimized by it? With any of these Gates or Channels Defined, take
responsibility for the power you wield and use it wisely.

Helpful Tools

    Cultivate awareness.
    Be vigilant with your power.

Cultivate Awareness

Make awareness your friend. Develop a strong witness. Turn your awareness
within to know when you are overworking or when you are using your Will to
dominate or manipulate. Cultivate your awareness to make sure you are in
integrity with yourself and others. Cultivate your awareness to register when you
are demeaning another because they do not have your capacity. Can you
appreciate what you have without putting someone else down in the process?

Be Vigilant with Your Power

 Imagine you are a linebacker making love to a petite woman. You would need to
be conscious of your differences. Be aware of how powerful you are. Especially
know the Channels and Gates coming off your Will – are you unconsciously
overpowering people? Or maybe even consciously dominating people and
justifying it because you’re in the power position? Be vigilant. Know your strength
and use your power skillfully.



THE OPEN WILL CENTER

Really? I’ve got an Open Will Center? At first blush, it may feel a bit unfair to have
an Open Will Center in your chart. Like something fundamental is missing.
Perhaps akin to the feeling of being born a female in a male privileged world, or
Black in a White privileged world. How could it be right that some people have
consistent access to the Will Center Motor while others don’t?

Actually, something like 67 percent of us have Open Wills. Do you have an Open
Will? If so, what does that mean? What does it look like in the world? I don’t want
to kid you, there are a host of challenges that accompany an Open Will. We are,
                                         231

after all, conditioned to believe that we should have the capacity to say we’re
going to do something and do it. We are conditioned to believe that we should be
able to make a promise and keep it.

With the Open Will, you have the job of cleaning the filters of your conditioning
which bombard you. From an early age, you’re told what you should value. Your
task is to get clarity regarding what you actually do value. This is a formidable task
– one I suggest you wholeheartedly embrace. The daunting challenges of the
Open Will are meaningless in comparison to the potential wealth buried beneath
the crusty conditioning. Let’s take a look at some of the challenges on the way to
unearthing the riches of the Open Will Center.

Grapples of the Open Will Center

Here are some of the main issues you may encounter with your Open Will:

      You question your value.
      You take on and amplify other people’s lack of value.
      You spend a lifetime proving your value.
      You burn yourself out.

You Question Your Value

Because the world is so oriented toward Defined Will Center capacities, it is very
easy to feel deficient when you attempt to act like someone with a Defined Will
and it doesn’t work out. You say you’re going to get a certain number of clients or
make a certain amount of money or get a certain job. You don’t, and then you
feel like a failure. You try and fail enough times that you end up with the distinct
feeling that you’ve got an inner loser.

You don’t trust yourself. You lose faith in yourself. The result? You end up
questioning your value. This becomes a vicious cycle. You question your value, so
you devalue yourself. You charge less than you’re worth, then you don’t generate
the resources you see others are able to generate. You become a chronic under-
earner and you devalue yourself further. You feel shame and have to hide the fact
you feel inadequate. Or you pretend to yourself that you don’t. Maybe you
defensively idealize being impoverished or justify it because you’re an artist or
                                         232

in the service field. You can chronically attack yourself for your apparent lack.
Let’s be clear: This is not a comfortable cycle, and yet it can be hard to extricate
yourself from it.

You Take on and Amplify Other People’s Lack of Value

The nature of the Open Centers is to be receptors, to take in and amplify the
energy of others who are broadcasting the theme of that Center. In this case, you
take on and amplify other people’s lack of value. Here’s an example from my life
of how it can look: I’m contentedly waiting for a therapy client. I love this client.
She’s magnificent, a goddess. When she arrives, I suddenly feel diminished. Like
something is wrong with me. She is not portraying this picture. She is telling me
how incredible things are. Only later in the session do her feelings of lack arise
and I recognize that I have taken in her experience and identified it as my own.

With your Open Will Center, you are vulnerable to walking into a room and taking
in people’s lack of value, their feelings of inadequacy. As you take them in, you
amplify them. If you identify with them, you believe you are less than. This can be
extremely painful. When you don’t recognize what’s happening, your self-esteem
takes a hit. When this pattern happens over and over, you walk around with a
hidden wound that you then have to defend against.

You Spend a Lifetime Proving Your Value

The wound of inadequacy is unbearable and so you set to work proving your
value. You act more like a Defined Will person trying to compensate for your
perceived lack, trying to prove you actually do have worth. You effort more, out
of desperation. Your ego is taking a hit, after all. We can’t have that. You become
depleted, exhausting yourself using energy you don’t have. This is a no-win
situation for you. There is nothing you can do to once and for all prove your value.

You Burn Yourself Out

There can be an endless cycle of questioning your value, taking on other people’s
lack of value and amplifying it, then efforting to prove your value. This can leave
you in a sorry state. As if that wasn’t bad enough, you now have chronic fatigue or
some other autoimmune disorder. On top of everything else, you’re bereft of
energy, unable even to fight to prove yourself.
                                         233

If this sounds dramatic, just think of all the people you know who drive
themselves into the ground in an effort to get the trappings of what looks like
success. It’s a chronic issue in our culture. It makes me wonder, with Covid, how
many people are rethinking the validity of this drive to succeed, to prove
themselves.

Gifts of the Open Will Center

While the challenges of the Open Will can be disconcerting and disheartening, all
is not lost. As with all Open Centers, there are gifts as well. The Will Center
embodies the theme of value. There are three gifts I’m going to explore here. You
may discover others.

    You have the gift of discerning what is valuable.
    You have the gift of exploring what’s valuable.
    You have the gift of not having to prove your value.

You Have the Gift of Discerning What Is Valuable

 The Open Centers are the wisdom Centers. With your Open Will Center, you’re
here to be wise about what’s valuable. You do that by taking in all the different
possibilities. It’s like tasting food to determine what you want to serve at your
wedding. You’re trying all the different flavors to see what you like. You taste
something you don’t like. You don’t keep eating it. You either spit it out (if you’re
able to) or swallow it and don’t take another bite of that!

You’re taking in and discerning who has integrity. Is what that person is selling
(whether it’s an idea or a product) of value or is it questionable? When your filters
are unobstructed, your innate intelligence lets you know clearly. Going back to
the tasting analogy for a moment, if you have a stuffy nose from allergies or a
cold and you’re trying to taste something, you may have difficulty discerning. The
Open Center has to be clear of the inflammation of conditioning to function well.

 So, the gift of the Open Will includes differentiating who is authentic, who has
real self-esteem rather than fabricated self-esteem. Who has integrity concerning
money? Whose shocking behavior is acting out or unconscious as opposed to
being in service of heart-opening transformation? I can remember going to see
Bryon Katie in the early days. What she was saying was so shocking and radical. It
                                        234

was intriguing and disconcerting all at once. My cherished beliefs were being
decimated by the second. At the beginning, I was on alert, looking to see where
she was out of integrity. I was looking to see if she was walking her talk. Was
there a hole in her inquiry process?

In my process of discerning, I fought her, hard. I stood up sobbing and told her I
didn’t want to be like her. I didn’t want to lose the world as I’d known it. She
graciously told me, “Sweetheart, you don’t have to. You can hold onto your
suffering. And how’s that working for you?” My Open Will was checking, checking,
checking. It was testing her, testing The Work: was this process spiritual bypass or
was it revealing truth? I endured shock after shock as I witnessed her work with
people and did my own work. The unraveling through The Work was not
something my head could sort out.

Here’s a Katie story about a time where she demonstrated valuing truth over
making people feel comfortable. At the time, I initially wobbled, preferring safety
over truth.

Back in the late 90s, before Katie’s work had become known, Katie and I were at a
workshop in Ireland. We were in a small hall packed with people new to The
Work. There was an edgy feeling in the room. People were asking Katie questions,
in a testing sort of way, pulling on her to prove something. She said that the best
way to show the impact of The Work was to do it. Nobody wanted to do it.
Nobody wanted to expose themselves.

There was a conversation around how it wasn’t right to put out your dirty laundry
for everyone to see. Finally, a brave young woman stood up with her Work piece.
Clearly distressed, she told an emotional story of being sexually abused. The room
was still as her sobs filled the space. I was uneasy, not at all sure how this was
going to go. I trusted Katie; I had watched her work with probably a thousand
people at that point. But something felt different.

When Katie got to the question, He abused you, is it true? The whole room
erupted in chaos. There was a revolt. Katie was undeterred. She valued truth
more than pleasing people. As the inquiry went on Katie pressed the woman,
“When did you know that if you walked into that room the abuse was going to
happen. How did you abuse yourself?”
                                         235

Just this one time, I was internally willing Katie not to go where she was heading.
Protect the woman, protect these people, I screamed inside. Don’t rattle this
cage! Katie stayed with it. The woman stopped the process. She sat down in
exasperation and disdain. Some people got up and left. She may have even left. I
was mortified. Was this going to be the one time that Katie blew it? Had she
misread the situation? I’d never seen that happen.

I forget where the conversation went from there. Perhaps Katie talked about
some of the things she often talks about in terms of the nature of reality. I don’t
believe anyone else did The Work. Maybe half an hour went by when suddenly
the woman stood up. With a clear and steady voice, she said, “I found it.” The
whole room became still, taking in her honesty as she told another layer of her
story.

It became so clear to me that we can try to prove our innocence as a way to prove
our value. But the attachment to our traumas actually keeps us in the I’m good,
you’re bad, or I’m bad, you’re good dualistic paradigm. Katie held the larger
picture, knowing that real value doesn’t come from hiding or defending, but from
seeing the truth. Your Open Will can be a huge support when it comes to being
clear on value.

You Have the Gift of Exploring What Is Valuable

Not only are you discerning and bringing wisdom in regard to what’s valuable,
with an Open Will Center, you’re also here to explore what’s valuable. You’re not
designed to have fixed values. Your values change and shift as you taste and
explore new values.

Let me give you an example. In Human Design, when you put two charts together,
it’s called a composite chart. When you do that you see which Centers remain
Open. This tells you what those two people are here to explore together. For my
wife and me the Will Center remains Open. And it’s true – we have spent the past
forty years exploring what we value.

We’ve walked the path of exploring the body through movement and bodywork.
We’ve explored our psyches through therapy. We’ve explored our spirituality,
following numerous teachers and teachings. We share some values and others
                                        236

not so much. We have taught each other and learned from each other and shifted
our values.

After all, with Open Wills, we are not designed to hold onto values but to keep
upgrading and updating them. She for example, as a Projector has valued rest,
being, vacation. As a Generator, I have valued doing, mastering things. I’ve
learned to value the power of rest from her, and she’s learned to value the power
of activity from me.

With our Open Wills, we have often chosen a path divergent from mainstream.
Maybe breaking through the pattern of heterosexuality as the only option in the
70s enabled us to look at all of life differently. Neither of us valued working for
other people. I was clear I wanted to work in a beautiful environment, making my
own hours, doing something I valued, someplace where I had control of the
temperature (at that time I got cold very easily).

I also wanted to be able to work shoeless. It was really important to me to feel my
feet on the ground. Many of these things I can now see were in response to my
Open G Center. But that’s a bigger conversation. Above all, I valued frequency:
what the energy felt like in any given situation and within myself. This led me to
explore different kinds of meditations and spiritual paths. Surprisingly, I
discovered that attending deaths was one of my all-time favorite things. As a
person or animal crosses, I experience the entire universe opening, ushering in a
peace beyond measure. What do you value with your Open Will? How has it
changed over time?

You Have the Gift of Not Having to Prove Your Value

Finally, with an Open Will, you have the gift of not having to prove your value.
You’re simply not designed to. That’s not your job. Any more than it would be
your job to manufacture sperm if you’re in a woman’s body or give birth if you’re
in a man’s body.

You’re not here to prove you can do something or be something spectacular.
You’re not here to prove that you have a right to exist. Give it up. Break with the
cultural norm and enjoy the fact that you’re here to discern, explore, and be wise
about what you value. That’s it.
                                          237

The Open Will as a God Portal

 All of the Centers are important, each in their own way, with their own offering
and support, but as we step into the waters of the God Portal of the Will Center, I
feel a particular sobriety. It is as if I’m being told to pay attention. Wake up. This
really matters. This is core. I feel a touch emotional as I write this. The truth is that
there is so much pain around the Open Will Center when that suffering seems so
unnecessary. I mean the suffering is useful and needed to show us where we are
off, to point us to the truth of who we are, but in and of itself? Here is where the
lies we believe bring us to our knees. When we believe there

is something, we have to do in order to get value, we suffer. One thing stands out
as the God Portal for the Open Will Center: You are Value itself.

You Are Value Itself

As you begin to clean your lenses, to clear the debris that blocks your vision, this
obvious and shockingly simple truth is revealed: There is nothing you can do to
diminish your value, nor to increase your value. Think about it this way: An orchid
doesn’t have more inherent value than a daffodil. It’s simply not possible. Your
existence on this planet is your value.

When you open into the openness your Open Will you experience all life as you,
as valuable. You no longer put or project value on top of things. You shift out of
the dualistic perspective of right and wrong, good and bad. In the Oneness, you
see the stunning, almost blinding truth, the value of what is, as it is. This is a
breathtaking revelation.

I can remember sitting in the desert with Byron Katie and a group of friends. She
invited us to look around and show her something that was unnatural that didn’t
belong. Someone pointed out a piece of trash in the distance. Katie turned to that
person and said something like, “Sweetheart. You think that’s unnatural? How
could that possibly be? Here it is. It belongs as much as that rock or that tree.
Who are you to judge it?”

I also remember Katie pointing to the rose on the table next to her asking a
student, “You think this rose has more value than a daffodil? How can that be?
How can you have any less value than anyone else? It’s simply not possible.”
                                         238

There is something so powerful that begins to happen when we shift out of the
judging mind that is busy placing value on everything: We stop going to war with
the Is. We realize that our puzzle piece in the giant picture matters. We’re freed
to offer what we’re here to offer. We’re no longer trying to show that we have
value, to justify our existence. Instead, we’re resting in the value that we are.

From this place, we walk through the world differently. With a sense of
unconditional acceptance, we feel worthy. There’s an unwavering knowing that
the universe has our back. Self-care and including our own needs in any situation
is natural as we respect and honor the needs of others. We’re free to take risks in
our daily life from a place of authentic confidence.

 I never quite understood why, in traditional Human Design, the Will Center is
called the Heart Center. It didn’t make sense to me to have the egoic, materialist
Will Center get the attribute of the heart. But now, as I’m writing this, I feel my
heart. I see the tear in Katie’s eye as she looks out in awe at the desert splendor,
trash and all. I flash back to sitting on a plane with Katie as we’re coming into Los
Angeles. It’s pitch black and Katie makes a gesture with her open hand pointing to
the city below – a network of lights that almost looks like a sci-fi movie. She says
something in her words, in her gesture that stops my mind.

I see the magnificence of all life. Without judgment, the heart is wide open. The
value is revealed.

Working with the Open Will Center

The work you do with your Open Will Center pays off in big dividends. Here are
some ways you might approach it:

      Appreciate your Open Will and trust that you are a priceless jewel.
      Understand how your Open Will functions and what that means for you.
      Become the witness and observe your Open Will in the moment.
      Clean the filter of your Open Will.
      Discover what you do value.

Appreciate Your Open Will and Trust That You Are A Priceless Jewel
                                           239

You have to start with a mindset shift. You have to decide to end the war with
yourself. You have to begin by appreciating your Open Will with all its challenges
and all its gifts. There is a leap of faith – a fake-it-until-you-make-it attitude – that
will support you on the journey with your Open Will. But as long as you’re
pummeling yourself, married to the perception that you are somehow lacking in
value, you will stay entrenched in the cycle of victimhood and suffer. You’ll need
to do the work to actually realize your value. To do the work, you must start with
an attitude of good will toward yourself.

Understand How Your Open Will Functions and What That Means for You

When you know what’s going on, you can begin to work with it. If you’re
unconscious about what’s happening, not so much. So be clear that you are taking
in and amplifying other people’s sense of their value. If you attach to it and
believe it’s yours, you will either devalue yourself or elevate yourself based on
them. This is living a lie. This is being buffeted around by the winds of people’s
ego identities. This is not authentic value. You are not in the picture when you are
not aware that this is what’s happening.

On the other hand, if you are aware, you can see it for what it is, deliberately try
on different values, and consciously choose for yourself what you value. Think
about it as a discovery process, like an infant putting her hands and her feet in her
mouth, discovering what are the possibilities here.

That’s how it works. Do you want to be a slave, mindlessly following other
people’s values? Or do you want to be sovereign? Your choice.

Become the Witness and Observe Your Open Will in the Moment

Using your witnessing capacity to observe what you’re feeling in any given
moment is the key to discovering if you’re being hijacked by someone else’s self-
esteem or value system. Do you, like I did in that therapy session, find yourself
suddenly feeling badly about yourself with no explanation? Look around. Whose
Will Center energy are you picking up on? See it for what it is.

Clean the Filter of Your Open Will

Once you know how the Open Will functions and are able to observe it at work,
you have the vigorous task of deconditioning all the thoughts, beliefs, and values
                                        240

of others that you have unwittingly merged with and identified as your own.
There are numerous tools you can use to do this. All of the tools require
increasing your awareness. Most of them involve some kind of inquiry. However
you do it, you must commit to cleaning the filters of your Open Will Center. This is
key to reclaiming your sovereignty and living the life you were designed to live.
Clearing your Open Will Center enables you to thrive.

Discover What You Do Value

The process of discovering what you value, not living someone else’s values, goes
hand in hand with the deconditioning process. All day long, we are bombarded
with opinions regarding what we should and shouldn’t value. This conditioning
began as infants. We’re taught this is good, that is bad, depending on our parents’
values and preferences. Eventually those values become seamlessly woven into
what we think and how we behave. They become part of our un-investigated
identity.

When I was a freshman in college I fell in love with a woman. It was very scary to
me. At the time, 1976, my mom believed people who were gay belonged in
mental institutions. She valued family. Her dream for me involved marrying a rich
man and living happily ever after. I didn’t want to be gay. Being gay was bad.
What I felt for this woman was not bad, it was beautiful. What to do? I tried to
pretzel myself into my mom’s picture. It was disastrous. Trying to fit into someone
else’s value system rather than live my own led me into a deep depression.
Ultimately, it became a matter of life and death. I had to choose me.

That was a big and obvious claiming of my value that created a whole new world
of possibilities for me. But some of the subtler ones – the more unconscious
beliefs – can be insidious. To know what you value, you have to be awake.

I can remember the first time Byron Katie asked me: Did you ask you? It was like
an earthquake. Values I was sure were mine began to crack. I could ask me! Ask
you. Question yourself and become wise about what is valuable to you.
                                        241

Helpful Tools

When you’re working with the Open Will there are two major tools:

    Awareness
    Inquiry

Awareness

You can’t underestimate the power of awareness. Especially with the Will Center,
it is foundational to any other work. You must turn your focus inward and notice
what you feel. You can do this by noticing sensations in your body. Thoughts that
arise. Be aware of anything that will give you a clue that you are identifying with
someone else’s value system. Some of these systems are inherited, hand-me-
downs from past generations. Others are embedded in cultural norms. Learn to
turn on the light of awareness and observe without judgment what you notice.

Once you are aware of something, you can inquire into it. And, in the process of
inquiry, you increase your awareness. There are a few inquiry tools I’ll mention
here, but there are many more that can be supportive on this path.

Inquiry #1: The Work of Byron Katie

Of course, for me The Work of Byron Katie is always a staple, and I highly
encourage anyone who resonates with it to give yourself the gift of writing your
judgments and using The Four Questions and the Turnaround to clean the debris
you’ve accumulated.

                                        (See Resources for the full inquiry process.)

Inquiry #2: Six Steps to Freedom

The Six Steps to Freedom is an inquiry tool I learned from my friend Pali
Summerlin. It’s taken from Diederik Wolsak, the Program Director for the Centre
for Attitudinal Healing in Vancouver. The intent is to use a current upset to access
the original experience in our early life where we attached to a core belief that we
were not valuable.
                                        242

The Process:

    The first step is to acknowledge we are upset. Hello awareness!
    The second step is to recognize that our upsets are never about the
     situation itself, or the other person; they are about us. The upsets are
     merely tapping into an earlier wound.
    The third step is to focus on the feeling.
    As you focus on the feeling, the fourth step is remember the earliest time
     when you had that feeling.
    The fifth step is to get clear on what judgment you had or belief you
     concluded about yourself at the moment you had that earlier feeling. An
     example would be: I don’t matter. This is the essence of the Open Will –
     feeling you are without value.
    The intention of the sixth step is to embrace the truth about yourself. There
     are two parts to this: First, you realize that your judgment or conclusion at
     the time was wrong. It was understandable, and inevitable with the
     psychological resources you had at that age. Then you forgive yourself for
     believing that lie. In place of the lie, you remember that the truth of who
     you are is unchanging and unchangeable. This is my version of you are
     value itself.

When I worked the process with Pali, she helped me to see that those original
judgments against ourselves, the beliefs we concluded in regard to our value, set
in motion the world we then lived into and created. If I had the belief I don’t
matter, for instance (easy to do with seven children), I would then see through
that lens. I would believe that lie and look to make that lie true in my life. These
value judgments against ourselves are powerful. They’re like weeds that take over
the whole garden with pricker bushes. If you go back and get the weed at the
root, you can have a conscious garden with food that actually nourishes you.

Inquiry #3: Diamond Work

Another tool I want to mention here is the Diamond Work in terms of the
question of value. In this system, at the essential level, the Gold Essence is the
essence of value. Two things can happen to mess with your value. One, the aspect
of the Gold Essence called Merging Gold can be contaminated by other people’s
                                          243

false values or egoic beliefs. You can merge and your value gets mucked up.
Sound familiar?

The other thing, and this is really good information for all the Open Centers, is
that you can go into the hole of no value. This is not a problem in and of itself –
it’s actually the signal to inquire. As you allow yourself to feel the hole of no value
without resisting it, you witness where it is in your body, what it feels like, how
you experience it. You just stay with it. Allowing it. Eventually, the hole opens and
you open into the essential domain. Here you experience the truth who you are.
You experience essential value. This is a beautiful and powerful inquiry if you’re
able to do it.

RECAP

The Will is obviously an important Center in relation to navigating the external
world. It truly is a resource. With a Defined Will, you have superpowers. With an
Open Will, you can over-effort and be flummoxed as to why your efforts don’t pay
off. In either case, this is a Center that requires attention. It’s easy to burn
yourself out through mismanagement of the Will Center. Take a moment and
reflect on your relationship to the Will Center. Do you understand how to best
utilize your Defined or Open Will?

Next we turn to the most powerful Motor in the chart, the Sacral Center. Take
your time to understand and work with your Sacral Center. It’s a major player in
all of our lives….
                                         244


                                         11

               GETTING TO KNOW THE SACRAL CENTER




INTRODUCING THE SACRAL CENTER



We’ve come to the Sacral Center. I know I say each time we talk about a Center
how amazing it is, and how important it is. But the Sacral Center – it’s
monumental. For one, it’s the most powerful Motor in the whole chart. It’s the
Center for activity and sustainable energy. It’s our go-to Motor. It’s also a built-in
inner GPS for the 70 percent of us who have it defined. Designed to be in a dance
with the universe, the Defined Sacral responds to what shows up with a yes or no,
off or on response.

It’s as simple as Yes, I want to eat at that restaurant, or No I don’t want to take
that job. When Defined, it’s the workhorse of the chart. The powerhouse. Having
it Defined is the definition of the Generator and Manifesting Generator Type. This
energetic force impacts the field and sets the norm for how humans should
operate. In her Quantum Human Design™ language, Karen Curry Parker calls the
Sacral Center the Evolution Center.
                                         245

 For the 30 percent who have it Undefined, well, they’ve got the job of learning to
be skillful with their energy. My wife just said she feels like the Defined Sacrals are
like notes in a piece of music and the Open Sacrals are like the pause between the
notes. We need both. But it’s not easy to be a pause when the world expects and
values notes.

This is a major potential burnout center for both Defined and Undefined Sacral
Types, for different reasons, which we’ll discuss when we focus on each one.

If all that wasn’t enough, the Sacral is also the Center for sexuality and vitality.
This is creative life-force energy. Bountiful and exuberant – when we follow our
Strategy and Authority. It is nurturing energy and fertile energy. It powers our
drive to survive.

Unfortunately, it is also a place that most of us have not been taught to honor and
respect. We either take it for granted, don’t listen to it, or disregard its messages.
Not being aware of and knowing how to work with our Sacral Centers, perhaps
more than anything else in the chart, has thrown humanity off track. We’ve been
led down a path of projecting our authority outside of ourselves. We act as if
someone or something other than us knows best how to use and where to put
our energy. Most of us have been taught to go to our heads, rather than check-in
with our inner guidance.

This is an insidious trapped and enslaved mentality that we’ve collectively bought
into. With the coming 2027 Emotional Solar Plexus Evolutionary mutation, that
pattern is being called into question. You can already see it happening in the
world. People are discovering with Covid that they don’t have to work in an office.

They’re realizing that they don’t have to submit to harrowing commutes. They’re
understanding that they can live anywhere. It’s becoming clear that they don’t
have to be tied to a work schedule. Big changes are afoot, and hopefully
understanding your Sacral Center will aid you in the shifts.

Mechanically speaking, the Sacral Center is loaded: It has nine Gates connecting
eleven Channels to Five other Centers. The Five Centers are the Identity Center,
the Emotional Solar Plexus, the Root Center, the Spleen Center, and the Throat
Center. Whichever Gates or Channels you have coming off your Sacral Center will
determine where you focus your energy.
                                         246

Let’s discover how this Center and its Gates and Channels operate in your life and
the lives of those you work with and love. But first, let’s connect directly with the
Sacral Center.

CONNECTING TO THE SACRAL CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

Turning your focus inward, take a moment to feel your sitting bones on the chair.

Let your belly soften. Take a deep breath and slowly exhale.

And again.

Begin to sense your arms and legs.

Give yourself a few moments to allow yourself to come online.

Now allow your awareness to expand to the earth beneath you.

Sink your awareness into the earth, two feet below the earth.

Ten feet below the earth.

Down into the center of the earth.

Let it expand further to the other side of the earth, and to the sky above the land
on the other side of the earth.

Let your awareness reach down into the galaxy below you, out into infinite space.

Now bring your awareness to the top of your head.

 Feel the sky touching your head and allow your body to expand beyond your head
into the sky, into the galaxy, out into infinite space, and beyond.

Feel yourself expanding above and below you into infinite space.

Now bring your awareness to your front body.

Sense your front body as you allow it to expand out in front of you.

Expanding. Expanding. Expanding out beyond the horizon into infinite space.

Bring your awareness to your back body.

Sense your back body and now allow it to expand behind you.
                                          247

Slowly let your awareness fill the space behind you.

Now experience yourself expanding out to the left of you.

Out to the right of you.

Expand in all directions. Feel your quantum body filling all time and space.

Now bring your awareness to your inner space.

Feel the infinite space within you.

Vast open spaciousness.

Between each cell, between each molecule.

Next bring your awareness to your Sacral Center.

Is your Sacral Center Defined or Undefined?

Just notice what you are aware of as your focus rests on your Sacral Center.

Don’t worry about a physical location in your body.

Feel it in your quantum body.

If you have a Defined Sacral, can you feel your motor revving, ready to step into
action?

Can you feel your motor responding to these words?

Begin to get a sense of your sacral yeses and noes.

See if it would be okay to trust them.

Determine whether you trust your yeses and noes or if that is an area that needs
your attention.

If you have an Open Sacral, what is your experience?

Do you feel pressure to do?

Or are you like a cat at rest, alert but relaxed?

Are you ready to take action when you know to?
                                         248

Check to see if you’re doing too much, pressured by others.

Perhaps you need some time away from all the Sacral Motor energy.

What would it be like to give that to yourself?

And what are your thoughts around trusting yourself more?

What are your thoughts around repatterning the Generator conditioning you’ve
taken on?

Regardless of whether your Sacral is Defined or Open, smile into your Sacral
Center.

Appreciate it.

Make an intention to get to know it, to listen to it.

Now, just take a few deep breaths and let yourself sense your arms and legs
again.

Sense your belly.

Thank your Sacral.

Gently begin to bring your awareness back into your belly as you open your eyes.

Take some time to write your experiences in your journal.

What did you discover about yourself?

 Make an intention to become acquainted with your Sacral Center and to work
consciously with it.



THE DEFINED SACRAL CENTER

The square in the lower middle of the chart, colored red, indicates a Defined
Sacral Center. Having a Defined Sacral can be a little like winning the lotto. You
have consistent access to the Sacral Motor, thus to vitality and the creative
sustainable life force energy that accompanies vitality. Your dharma is to find your
                                          249

right work and master it. You are designed to fall asleep exhausted at night and to
get up every morning, your battery recharged, ready to go.

If, that is, you are following your Strategy and Authority. That is to say if you’re
listening to and honoring your Sacral yes and no. This is your inner GPS. A genius
guidance system that will brilliantly direct your life – if you let it. Most of us have
had that cord to our Sacral GPS pulled out. Can you imagine teaching a child to
trust their yeses and noes?

 As a parent, that might not work for you! Especially if your goal is to get the child
to school, or to complete some errand, or to put the food on for dinner. I know I
was taught over and over not to listen to and trust what I knew. I remember
shopping with my mom and picking out a shirt that had mauve colors. My mom
was a bright color person, and she was clear with her preferences saying, “Aw
Honey, you don’t want that one. It’s drab.”

From food choices and clothing to what I wanted to be when I grew up, she had
an opinion. I was probably nine or ten when I declared I wanted to be a writer
when I grew up. Her response, “Aw Honey, you don’t want to be a writer, they
don’t make any money.” Later, when I declared I wanted to be a doctor like my
dad, her response was, “You have to be really smart to be a doctor. Maybe think
about becoming a nurse and marrying a doctor.”

I know I’m not the only one whose parents, in the spirit of goodwill and caring,
innocently overrode our desires. What they didn’t realize is that they were
conditioning us to seek outside approval rather than inside guidance. That is not a
small thing. It’s said in Human Design that the world is such a mess because of all
the Defined Sacrals (Generators and Manifesting Generators) doing the things
they don’t have a yes for. Can you imagine how much creativity, vitality, and
aliveness would flood the planet if people with Defined Sacral Motors were
listening to and following their yes?

Conceptually knowing that you’re designed, with a Defined Sacral, to be
monogamous with your Sacral yes and no, is one thing. Actually, living in holy
matrimony with your Sacral truth is quite another. It requires trust, the kind of
trust that many of us lack. It requires trust in the universe to provide people,
situations, and events to respond to at the right time. This involves first, waiting
                                         250

for something to show up; second, knowing what your response is; and third,
honoring your response.

I was invited earlier this year, along with a small group of author colleagues, to
enter a mentorship program with Marianne Williamson. I got a yes. And then my
mind started talking to me. Or, you could say, I started listening to my mind. I
ended up talking myself out of it. For the first couple of months, hearing the
stories from my friends who had opted to participate, I concluded I’d made the
right choice for myself given where I was on my journey.

As the months passed and I heard how the group was evolving, I had a clear
understanding of where my yes had come from and the sinking feeling that I had
truly abandoned my truth. Of course, I inquired and came to peace with the
whole process. And yet, I’m left with the distinct awareness that there are
consequences for not following my internal guidance system. Perhaps you have a
few stories yourself of talking yourself out of something that your gut was guiding
you to do!

Before we zoom in on the Defined Sacral’s gifts, I want to underscore that this
group has a huge planetary job. We are designed to be the workforce of humanity
– and love it. Not as trapped slaves destined to toil. Instead, as part of the natural
passion of life taking form and creating.

In my book, Understanding Your Clients through Human Design, I go into detail
about the Generator and Manifesting Generator Types. I refer to them as working
dogs. Some people took offense to that. And in my mind’s eye, when I think of
that analogy, I imagine my dog Métier, a French Shepherd called a Beauceron. She
looked like a cross between a Great Dane and a Doberman Pincher. Long legs.
Beautiful sleek body.

She was a working dog. She had tons of energy. She had energy that needed an
outlet, energy that needed a focus. She needed to be mastering some task to
engage her dynamic, creative mind. When I picture her, I see sheer beauty. The
magnificence of her focused movement as she went to catch a ball, for instance,
was a display of pure joy.
                                          251

That, my dears, is the possibility of you with your Sacral on task, doing what you
love, in harmony with the universe. There’s nothing more exhilarating than to
experience or to witness vitality in action.




                            #36 Picture of Me and Métier



The Defined Sacral Gifts

I believe I’ve just given you a picture of the gifts, but let’s break it down.

You have access to sustainable vital life force energy. You have an Inner GPS. You
are in a dance with the universe. You have gifts specific to the gates.

You Have Access to Sustainable Vital Life Force Energy

Oh my gosh. You have this amazing capacity to go and go and go and go – if
you’re on track with yourself. Like the working dog, you are rejuvenated by using
your energy to full capacity. It’s good for you. And what you can create is glorious.
You feel good when you’re being used in alignment.

You Have an Inner GPS

Unlike any of the other Types in Human Design, you’ve been gifted with an
internal GPS, a Global Positioning Positioning System. Your Sacral lets you know if
                                         252

you’re going in the right direction – or not. It is trustworthy. There’s nothing you
have to do but wait to see what your Magnetic Monopole attracts to you and
then let your Sacral respond with a yes or a no. How amazing is that!

You Are in a Dance with the Universe

With the Inner GPS comes the mechanism of the Sacral Motor response, which is
in a dance with the universe. You can trust the universe, along with your Magnetic
Monopole, to bring you the circumstances, situations, people, and events that will
turn on your Sacral yes, light your fire, call you to master a task, and bring
profound satisfaction to your life. It may sound too good to be true, and it’s not
necessarily what we see when we look around, but that has more to do with the
Sacral challenges than what’s possible.

You Have Gifts Specific to Gates

When we look at the gifts specific to Gates, it’s important to note that Gate 34
can go toward either the Identity Center, the Spleen Center, or the Throat Center.
While its focus is to empower, depending on where it is directed, it will either
empower the authenticity of the G, the survival capacities of the Spleen, or the
putting-words-into-action capacity when it connects to the Throat.
                                          253

Sacral to the Throat:

Gate 34 Power

Your energy flows toward empowering your voice.

Sacral to Identity Center:

If your Sacral is connecting to your Identity Center, you will be focused on
direction and authentic action.

Gate 5 Rhythm

You have the energy to create patterns or rhythms for your energy flow. You are
supported by daily rhythms.

Gate 14 Power Skills

You have the amazing gift of energy flowing to generate resources, especially for
others.

Gate 29 Perseverance

Your energy supports you to surrender and persevere to whatever you have a yes
to do.

Gate 34 Power

Your energy empowers your authentic action.

Sacral to the Emotional Solar Plexus:

If you have Gate 59 or the whole Channel 59-6, your Sacral is energy is being
channeled toward the Will Center.

Gate 59 Penetration or Sexuality

This tribal sexual life force energy is powerful. It supports your efforts to create or
bond. This life force could be potent in partnerships or business. My mother and
father both had Gate 59. They created seven children.
                                         254

Sacral to the Root Center:

If your Sacral is directed toward your Root Center, you have what is called
formatting energy. That is powerful as the Root activates the Sacral into action –
or not.

Gate 9 Focus

 With the Gate of Focus, you have the possibility of using energy to concentrate.
But remember, the opposite possibility, a lack of focus, is also there. People with
this gate can easily be diagnosed with ADD, although, in fact, this is their Design.

Gate 3 Ordering or Difficulty at the Beginning

If you have this mutative energy, you are trying to bring order to something new
arising, to bring something new into form.

Gate 42 Finishing Things

If you have the Gate 42, you will be using your energy to complete what has been
started. Sacral to the Spleen:

27 Nourishment

If you have Gate 27 Nourishment, your Sacral energy will be headed toward the
Spleen Center. This is strong tribal, feminine, and nourishing energy. Your energy
will be used to nourish and protect people.

Gate 34 Power

You will use your energy to empower your survival. As you can see there is a lot of
energy coming off the Sacral Center going in a lot of different directions. Which
Hanging Gates or Channels do you have in your chart – in your multi-dimensional
galactic quantum body?

The Defined Sacral Center Grapples

If the Defined Sacral is so great, why aren’t more people fulfilling their dharma
and realizing their dreams? Let’s look at the grapples you might face with your
Defined Sacral.

    Your inner GPS is disconnected.
                                          255

      You burn out.
      People take advantage of your energy.
      You get frustrated and give up.
      You don’t wait to respond.
      Grapples with specific gates.

Your Inner GPS Is Disconnected

Your connection to your Sacral response is key to your health and well-being. If
you are not honoring it, you will have problems. Were you taught to look outside
of yourself for answers? Were you told to go to your head, rather than checking
within? Neither of these options are sound in terms of guidance. You must be
your own sovereign. You came here with a powerful, intelligent quantum vehicle
that is here to support you to live your unique life – not someone else’s. Your
inner GPS is here to help you do that.

You Burn Out

 When you are doing things that you have a no for, you will not have access to
your sustainable energy. Eventually, you will burn out, perhaps surprised that the
energy you’d come to count on is no longer available. The other way you can burn
out is if you don’t use your energy. Use it or lose it. Your Sacral Motor is like a car
battery that dies when your car sits in the driveway without being used. When
you go to drive it, nothing. Nada. There is no juice. Think again about the image of
working dogs. If they are not actively engaged in life, burning their energy sniffing
new smells, running up hills, or learning new skills, they destroy the house or
chew on themselves. Don’t be like that!

People Take Advantage of Your Energy

Another grapple that Defined Sacral Motors encounter is that people see your
energy, and they hijack it. They get you to do things out of guilt or obligation. You
– not being monogamous with your Sacral yeses or noes – override your clarity, or
don’t check in with yourself in the first place and drain your energy that way.
Once everyone gets clear on the importance of supporting Defined Sacrals to
follow their truth, everyone will benefit.
                                          256

You Get Frustrated and Give Up

With the Sacral Motor of the Generator and Manifesting Generator Type, there is
a natural process of being initially excited, jumping in, then hitting a plateau. This
is part of your mastery curve as you integrate and synthesize before taking the
leap to the next level of mastery. In this pause, you must learn discernment. Are
you in fact finished with this project, job, or relationship, and are you getting a
clear yes to abandon it? Or is this a necessary pause that will enable you to
ultimately break through to the next level of mastery?

If you stop short without allowing yourself to work through the frustration, you
will not get that gratification and satisfaction you seek. Writing this book, I
encountered regular bouts of frustration. Not knowing what to say or how to say
it. Caught in a doubt spin, I wondered if I was being clear. Had I stopped writing at
any one of those points and thrown in the towel, I would not have the deep sense
of satisfaction I feel as I come to completing these chapters. I would not have
taken this opportunity to live my dharma and make my unique contribution.

There is also a frustration that Sacral Motors can encounter when they feel like
there is nothing for them to respond to. They don’t know what to focus on so
they can jump in to try to make something happen. This brings us to the next
grapple.

You Don’t Wait to Respond

Perhaps this should have been discussed as the first grapple. It is very easy to
neglect following your Generator Strategy. It’s compelling to act instead of
waiting to respond. Let’s be fair. We’re taught to go for it. We’re taught to go
after what we want. We’re programmed to be like Manifestors. We don’t know
about trusting the Universe. We go to our heads, think something would be a
good idea, jump in, and then things don’t work out. This creates a cycle of
frustration and unfulfilled desires.

On the other hand, we may over-wait and miss opportunities, especially if we’re
not tuned in, or if we’re prone to overriding our Sacral responses.

I can remember playing summer softball in a league as a teenager. I was not a
great hitter. I learned to stand and wait. I tolerated pitch after pitch, not swinging,
                                         257

trusting that more often than not the majority of pitches would not make it into
the strike zone. I became known for someone who consistently got four balls
thrown and walked to first base. Now, there are two sides to this. You could say I
learned to wait with the hopes of a walk, rather than to wait for a pitch that was a
yes for me. That creates its own problematic strategy.

Sometimes being powerful and hitting the ball out of the park with your yes is as
scary as waiting. When I think of this analogy in terms of the Marianne Williamson
mentorship, perhaps I was letting balls go by without swinging instead of going
for the one that could have hit a home run, or at least a base hit. It doesn’t serve
us – or the world – to shut down our Sacral responses, to play small. We have to
wait in anticipation, ready to recognize the opportunities the Universe is offering,
then go for it.

Here I think about this excerpt from Marianne Williamson’s famous quote: Our
Deepest Fear:

                                Your playing small
                            Does not serve the world.
                   There's nothing enlightened about shrinking
               So that other people won't feel insecure around you.

                            We are all meant to shine,
                                  As Children do.
                          We were born to make manifest
                         The glory of God that is within us.

                             It’s not just in some of us;
                                   It’s in everyone.

Grapples with Specific Gates

 I’m going to go through the grapples that can occur with each of the Gates. These
could be true whether or not the whole Channel is defined, and whether or not
the Sacral Center is Defined or Open.

                                        (See Chart #35 Gates off the Sacral Center.)
                                         258

Gate 34 Power

 This is the busiest gate in the chart. If you have a Defined Sacral and are not
following your Sacral yeses or noes, you can be very busy dissipating your energy
and feeling powerless. You can easily burn out. All that powerful life force energy
goes to waste, leaving you very frustrated.

Gate 5 Rhythm

If you are not honoring a daily rhythm, you are undermining a source of support
that can sustain you. If, on the other hand, you are demanding others follow your
rhythm, you can run into problems as well. If you are a mother with the Gate 5
and you have an infant with Gate 15, Extremes of Rhythm, you may run into some
challenges!

Gate 14 Power Skills

You have magical energy to create resources. If you are not, then something is
going on. You need to take a look and see if you are not following your Sacral
yeses.

Gate 29 Perseverance

With this Gate, you tend to say yes to things very easily. You must be diligent with
yourself to follow your Strategy and Authority. If you do not, you might find
yourself trapped into doing something you said yes for but which you actually
don’t have the energy for and burn yourself out. If you are not following your
yeses, your body takes the hit. Your body will rebel. If you are physically not well,
look and see what you have said yes to that you are not in integrity with and do
whatever you can to get out of it.

Gate 59 Penetration

 This powerful tribal energy can get you into trouble if you’re not following your
Strategy and Authority. This is the energy of unwanted pregnancy, or wars. Be
clear before you take actions that might create unwanted results.

Gate 9
                                         259

Focus You have the task of focusing. However, you can be very unfocused. When
you follow your Strategy and Authority, you’ll get help regarding what is in
alignment to focus on. Otherwise, you may dissipate your energy focusing on all
kinds of things that aren’t important. This can have detrimental consequences,
and potentially lead to a diagnosis of ADD.

Gate 3 Ordering, Difficulty at the Beginning

My Conscious Sun is in this Gate. With this energy you are here to bring
something new, but it takes time for that new thing to take root. The analogy I
like to use is that it takes time before a child can be productive in society. During
the waiting time, it’s easy to get discouraged or doubt yourself. This energy
requires confidence and patience. You must make sure you are following your
Strategy and Authority so what you’re bringing in has a chance to come into
fruition.

Gate 42 Finishing Things

This is the energy of Finishing Things – or not. I have this energy and had a terrible
time finishing things as a child. As I look back, I can see that much of what I was
trying to finish, like getting Girl Scout badges, or sewing dresses for 4H, was really
not something I cared about. I didn’t have a yes. I was trying to fit in and please
my mother. I was trying to be a good girl. How terribly exhausting. The problem is
that it set a pattern of resistance that I’ve had to break. If you have this Gate
Defined, you have the gift of coming into the middle of something and finishing it.
You just have to make sure you have a yes for what you’re doing, or risk being
caught in resistance that you then make yourself wrong for.

Gate 27 Nourishment

This gate is tricky. On the one hand it’s so lovely, this desire to support and care
for others. On the other hand, it is a slippery slope into codependency if you’re
taking care of others and not including yourself in the picture. It’s crucial that you
follow your Strategy and Authority to make sure you are on track with yourself.
Otherwise, you can get trapped in situations where you risk burnout and
resentment. You can easily build an identity around being a martyr here and lose
out on truly being a support in the right time and right place.
                                         260

Working with the Defined Sacral Center

    Appreciate what you’ve been given.
    Understand how your Defined Sacral Motor operates.
    Develop trust in your Sacral guidance and in the universe.

Appreciate What You’ve Been Given

When you are working with your Defined Sacral, you first and foremost must
begin with awe and appreciation for the gift you’ve been given. This appreciation
helps you realize the jewel you possess and supports you in honoring and
deepening your relationship with you Sacral Center. You’re asking yourself to
make a turn from a conditioned, obligated, head-guided pattern, to one that
leaves you free to be authentic and tell your truth in the moment. The decision to
honor your truth liberates you from a victim path. It supports your sovereignty.

Understand How Your Defined Sacral Motor Operates

Next, you’ll want to be clear on how the Sacral Center operates. Just as you would
look at a car manual when you get a new car, be clear that you are designed to:

      Be vigilant about waiting to respond.
      Have people ask you yes and no questions. H
      onor your yes and no or uh-huh, uh uhn Motor sounds.
      Work with your frustration cycle.

These are the foundations of your Strategy as a Generator or Manifesting
Generator. Take these seriously. seriously. Just as you would make sure to have
oil, water, and gas in your car, take care of your Sacral Motor. Don't let it burn
out. Don’t let it run out of gas.

Develop Trust in Sacral Guidance and the Universe

To follow this path requires a surrender. There is a letting go and having faith that
things will come when the timing is right that you must come to trust. Think of all
the times something has shown up that you couldn’t, in your wildest dreams,
imagined. Maybe that was a partner, maybe that was a job, maybe it was an
opportunity. This happens all the time, but because we’re so conditioned to
believe we are the doer, our ego feels it must figure everything out. This is an
                                          261

impossible job for the limited Ego. We must catch this insidious propensity and
build the muscle of listening to our Sacral and following its responses.

Helpful Tools

    Come into the present.
    Make a decision.
    Develop a strong witness.

Come into the Present

I’ve written about this in many of the chapters under Helpful Tools. The quickest
and easiest is to sense your arms and legs, to sense your belly. You could also use
the essential oil Mugwort Technique listed in the Resource section to clear
blockages in your arms and legs. This will help ground you in the present. Some
people like to focus on their breath as a way to come to the present. However,
you do it, do it! Make coming into the present a regular practice.

Make a Decision

Decide that you are going to care for yourself and your Sacral Motor. Think about
when you own a car. If the engine light comes on, you take it in to the mechanic.
If the gas light comes on, you make sure to fill it. If the oil light comes on, you put
in more oil. You pay attention to the signs. Make a decision to pay attention to
the signs! Get clear on your agreements with yourself like:

                  The next thing I have a yes for I’m going to do.
       Today I’m following my yeses and will keep track in my journal daily.

The more you follow your yeses, the more confident you become. When I was
starting my Rosen Method Bodywork practice back in the 80s, I made a
commitment to myself. I went inside and asked myself for the amount I was going
to charge. When I got a number, I agreed I would charge that to the next person
who called. It was quite scary at first, because the number that came up was
larger than my mind thought was reasonable.

But I had made the commitment. Almost immediately the phone rang with a
potential client. I said the number. They didn’t skip a beat. I found this to be true
over and over. When I got clear, the universe would respond immediately. If I
                                         262

played small, no one called. You are in a dance with the universe. Be in integrity
with yourself.

Develop a Strong Witness

You need a strong witness to be awake to the signs your Sacral is giving you. Is
your energy low? Pay attention. You don’t drive on a long trip with no gas where
there are no gas stations. Don’t push yourself. Witness your body – is it rebelling?
Are you losing focus? Are you overactive without direction? Are you just being
busy for the sake of filling space? Is there something you said yes to that you
didn’t mean? Did you override your heart’s desire to please someone or fit in?
You cannot afford to squander your energy.

Your Sacral is a beautiful resource; if you use it wisely, you can follow your
dreams.

THE OPEN SACRAL CENTER

The Open Sacral is complex. I feel so much love for people with Open Sacrals, and
so much tenderness toward them. If you have an Open Sacral, the world you face
can be challenging if you don’t understand that you’re constructed differently
than the majority of humans. Like all the Open Centers, you have capacities that
expand beyond the Defined Sacral, but to access those capacities, you must be
skillful. The risk of burnout looms large for you, and challenges abound.

Open Sacral Center Grapples

      You’re vulnerable to overwhelm.
      You’re under pressure to do.
      You’re vulnerable to burn out.
      Timing can be a challenge.
      You don’t know when enough is enough.
      It’s easy for you to merge.
      You need more rest.
      Know the grapples particular to your Hanging Gates.
                                          263

You’re Vulnerable to Overwhelm

With your Open Sacral, you are taking in all the energy of the Defined Sacrals that
surround you. That’s 75 percent of the population bombarding you with energy.
You’re not only taking it in but you’re amplifying it. It’s almost like getting hit by
lightning with so much voltage coming at you. It’s easy to get overwhelmed, not
knowing what’s hitting you. You have to get out of the Generator field to dissipate
all that voltage and come back to yourself. That could be hard to do when you’re
surrounded by Generators in your family.



You’re Under Pressure to Do

Generators are doers. They are here to do. They are here to build things and be
active. Generators are created to work. They need to use their energy in order to
renew it. Remember the working dog analogy? Open Sacral Types are not here to
work in the same way. But we live in a Generator-dominant world where doing is
the norm, and the expectation.

It’s easy to be conditioned to feel that you must do or else you’re not valuable or
you’re lazy. Each of the Open Sacral Types, the Manifestors, the Projectors, and
the Reflectors, have a special task that does not involve exerting energy over time
in a sustainable way. Even so, they are under continuous pressure to act like
Generators and Manifesting Generators. They are pressured to fit in, even though
that is not their highest offering. In fact, it’s detrimental to their health and well-
being in the long run to act like a Defined Sacral person.

You’re Vulnerable to Burn Out

Invariably, Open Sacral Types get inducted into the Generator world and get busy
doing. Remember, they can do more than any Defined Sacral person can, as
they’re taking in and amplifying the energy. They just can’t sustain it. By the time
most Open Sacrals are in their 30s, unless they have been wise with their energy,
they start to burn out. Their bodies give way. They get sick. They lose energy. It’s
really painful to watch, knowing that the gift they have to give is being lost out of
the pressure to conform.
                                         264

Timing Can Be a Challenge

Another challenge Open Sacrals have is timing. With a Defined Sacral, you have an
inner GPS telling you when to act, and when to respond. If you have an Open
Sacral, you do not have this gift. If you want to be successful, if you want to be
heard, if you want to bring your gifts into the world, right timing is key.

This can be really dicey. Who is taught to wait to speak, like our Projectors must
with their Open Sacrals and no Motor to the Throat? How do the Manifestors
know when to time their impact? It’s very challenging to discern. And with
Manifestors’ big energy, they can be like a bull in a china shop, making messes if
they’re not careful.

You Don’t Know When Enough Is Enough

With your Open Sacral, taking in all the energy around you, you are vulnerable to
not knowing when enough is enough. Think of a kid who is overtired and loses it.
You can go, go, go, and then you crash. You must learn to keep an eye on yourself
and your limits or risk going over edges that are not healthy or helpful.

It’s Easy for You to Merge

I’ve said this in a number of ways, but it bears repeating here. It is very easy for
you to merge with the Defined Sacrals and get lost in their world. You can easily
feel like you’re not doing enough. You can believe you are a Generator. You can
make yourself work like a horse until you give out. You can think your dharma is
to find the right work, that that will bring you happiness. You can teach yourself
to have yes or no responses when that is not your way.

You Need More Rest

With your Open Sacral, you need more rest than those with Defined Sacrals. You
need to discharge all the energy you pick up in the day. You need to rest before
you fall asleep. You may need to sleep separately sometimes. You just cannot
underestimate your need for renewal. This is crucial to your health and well-
being.
                                        265

Know the Grapples Specific to Your Hanging Gates

Unless you have a completely Open Sacral, you will have Gates coming off your
Open Sacral Center. Please refer to the Defined Sacral Grapples where I delineate
them. Just know, that where I say the Defined Sacral must have a yes for what
they are doing, replace that with your particular Strategy and Authority. For
instance, if you are a Projector, it must feel good to you. If you have Emotional
Authority, you must wait out your wave.

Open Sacral Gifts

With the bevy of challenges, what gifts does your Open Sacral bring? In part, your
relationship to your Sacral Center will be influenced by your Type (Manifestor,
Projector, or Reflector), but in general, here are some of the gifts you have
available when you have made peace with your Open Sacral.

    The gift of relaxing
    The gift of ease
    The gift of wisdom

The Gift of Relaxing

Liberated from the Sacral Motor, you are not designed to be in action in an
ongoing, sustainable way. With this comes the gift of relaxing. You can witness
the Sacral doing energy without having to partake. You can have a healthy
boundary and know what is yours to do and what is not. You are not driven to
work. This is the pause in between the notes in music. In this pause, you take in
the activity of life and watch in awe. It’s like watching the sunset or watching a
beehive. You bring the inhalation to the Defined Sacrals’ exhalation. You bring
balance.

The Gift of Ease

With that balance, with that pause, you have the capacity to bring ease. No hurry.
No worry. When you’re not hijacked by the pressure to do something, your
presence is calming. It’s almost like you can operate in slow motion. Again, you
don’t have to do the work of the world. You’re more about being than the act of
doing.
                                           266

The Gift of Wisdom

With that said, depending on your Type, you bring a wisdom. Whether it is the
Manifestor’s gift of initiating, the Projector’s gift of guiding, or the Reflector’s gift
of reflecting, you enrich people’s lives with your particular interface with the
world. With your Open Sacral, you can be wise about when to impact, guide, or
reflect, depending on the energy you’re taking in and amplifying. This comes with
a sense of clear boundaries and a knowing who you are and what your limits are.
You are free from being hijacked into the cultural marathon, striving to get
somewhere and accomplish something.

The Sacral as a God Portal

    You rest in Open Awareness.
    All activity arises within you.

You Rest in Open Awareness Once you have cleared your filters of the story that
you are here to be a Generator and need to work to in order to find happiness,
you are free to rest in Open Awareness. There is nothing between you and the
activity of the world, yet you are untouched by it. You can rest in your Beingness.
This is a sought-after state on many spiritual paths, and you have direct access to
it.

All Activity Arises within You

In this state of Openness, all activity arises within you. You witness the activity
and are wise in knowing when to engage it or not. You’re like the sky, with the
birds and the clouds passing through, the planes and the insects, yet you stay
clear and unaffected. There are many spiritual teachers with Open Sacrals who
have or have had incomprehensible activity and productivity around them. It’s as
if they have the capacity to draw people to them to manifest their wisdom and
visions. It seems their presence is the space within which activity happens.
Muktananda, Yogananda, Sri Aurobindo, Ammachi, to name a few, are all spiritual
teachers with Open Sacrals.

Working with the Open Sacral Center

    Appreciate your Open Sacral.
    Honor and respect your Type, Strategy, and Authority.
                                        267

      Clean the Sacral Filter.
      Learn to respect your need for alone time.
      Get rest.
      Connect to your essential self.

Appreciate Your Open Sacral

Your first job when working with the Open Sacral is to appreciate that you are
different than 70 percent of the population. You cannot expect yourself to be like
them. Once you stop fighting your difference and embrace your Design, you start
to value yourself at a new level. Your Open Sacral gives you capacities that are
unavailable to those who are driven with a Defined Sacral. Know that you are
bringing an essential element to humanity, regardless of whether others
recognize it or not.

Honor and Respect your Type, Strategy, and Authority

 To access the gift of your Open Sacral and to ward off burnout, you must get
clear on your Type, Strategy, Strategy, and Authority. What are you here to do?
Impact? Guide? Reflect? How are you designed to do it? Wait? Jump in? That is
unique to you and your design. Your Strategy and Authority will protect you and
support your boundaries with an Open Sacral. Don’t mess with yourself!

Clean the Sacral Filter

I’m not going to kid you; this is a job. The conditioning to be like Generators is
insidious. With a strong witnessing observer and using inquiry, you can sort
through the garbage you’ve taken on that doesn’t belong to you. I’m not sure you
really have a choice if you want to live a healthy, fulfilling, and vibrant life.

Learn to Respect Your Need for Alone Time

With an Open Sacral, you are continuously taking in the energy of the Generator
field. You need time alone to decompress, to dissipate this built-up energy. Get
away. Go to nature. Make sure you get the space you need.

Get Rest

In addition to getting out of the Generator field, you also need more rest than
people with Defined Sacrals. This is essential to your health and well-being. My
                                        268

mom was a Manifestor. I used to think she had a bigger battery pack then all
seven kids put together. She could accomplish so much. Now, I know why. She
was taking in all of our Generator energy. But true to her Type, she initiated
activity. She didn’t do everything herself. She had us doing our own laundry once
we turned nine. She had a revolving list of chores for the kids, and we all made
our own lunches. She was no sluff off by any means. But she did sleep in in the
mornings. My dad was in charge of getting us breakfast. And she regularly took
her afternoon power naps. She intuitively knew she needed that rest time in
order to manage the family of nine.

Connect to Your Essential Self

 Instead of connecting to what you need to be doing, take time to connect to your
Being, to the pause. This is where you tap into your power. It is from this pause
that you take action, guide action, or reflect. Give yourself the gift of you in all
your power and glory!

Helpful Tools

      Develop a witnessing observer.
      Do The Work of Byron Katie.
      Prioritize self-care.
      Prioritize rest.
      Go into nature.
      Practice the inner smile.

Develop a Witnessing Observer

 Begin to watch your thoughts and beliefs, particularly thoughts like I should do
more; I should work more; I should participate more. This will give you a clue that
you are merging. Check to see who you are around. Are they feeling pressure to
do? Can you allow yourself to pause and not act reflexively? Can you be bigger
than the merge? Can you differentiate?

Do The Work of Byron Katie

I’m partial to Byron Katie’s work, but you can do any kind of inquiry that helps you
to question those thoughts and beliefs like: Something is wrong with you. I should
                                             269

be different. I should be able to do what other people do. This will help you to
clean your filters and be more in alignment with the truth of who you are.

                       (See the Resources section for Byron Katie’s full inquiry process.)

Prioritize Self-Care

When you prioritize yourself and put self-care on the front burner, you are setting
yourself up to succeed. Self-care will protect you against burnout, help you to
diffuse the Generator energy, and support you to relax into being.

Prioritize Rest

Going to bed early, taking naps, and meditating are all forms of self-care as well.
They protect your energy and support your clarity. If you are tired, your
witnessing capacity is diminished and your vulnerability to merge with the
Generator field heightens. You don’t have awareness of when enough is enough
and you risk getting depleted, which you can’t afford.

Go to Nature

One of the best ways to diffuse the Generator energy you’ve taken on is to spend
time in nature. Here your Sacral has a chance to merge with the natural activity of
life without engaging in doing. Here you can rest and replenish. Make nature an
integral part of your self-care routine.

Practice the Inner Smile

The Qigong practice of directing the inner smile toward yourself is so simple and
so healing. When you smile at yourself you slow down, you disengage. You
support the pause. You enable yourself to check into your inner experience. You
could also do the exercise of sensing your arms and legs. Connecting with your
perineum. Anything that brings you into your body, into the present moment, will
help you differentiate from the rapid pace set by the Generator Motors.

Pause. Smile. Breath. You are okay just as you are. You don’t have to do anything
but receive the magnificent vitality of the world. Rest in your being. Smile.
                                        270

RECAP

Okay. So now you know just how crucial the Sacral Center is to humanity and the
future of humanity. How we use our energy matters. Being aligned with our doing
energy matters. We can’t afford to have people with Defined Sacral Centers doing
things they don’t have a yes for. It doesn’t serve the individual; it doesn’t serve
the community. And we all lose out when people with Open Sacrals feel they have
to emulate Defined Sacral energy. This is a no-brainer once you see it clearly. We
just need to know who’s who and support each person accordingly. Simple. Right?

Take a few minutes and reflect on your relationship with your Sacral Center. Are
you respecting your energy? Are you tending to it? Are you listening to your inner
GPS? Are you honoring your emotional waves? If you’ve got an Open Emotional
Solar Plexus, are you learning to differentiate what feelings are yours and which
belong to other people? Can you recognize when you’re merging?

Next, we turn to another Motor, the Emotional Solar Plexus. This is big energy. It’s
our emotional power. Get ready for the next dive. Let’s see what you discover
about your emotional self!
                                           271


                                          12

        GETTING TO KNOW THE EMOTIONAL SOLAR PLEXUS




INTRODUCING THE EMOTIONAL SOLAR PLEXUS (ESP)

The Emotional Solar Plexus is a powerful, mysterious, hard-to-get-a-handle-on
Center. It’s not one we have mastered as a species, and it’s mutating so we’re all
in-process with it. I’m going to offer my best hand in talking about it, knowing and
accepting that I am going to fall short. So, walk with me here, with your light
joining mine, and let’s see together what our awareness can reveal.

The Emotional Solar Plexus is the triangle on the lower right of the chart. If it is
Defined, it is colored in brown; if it is Undefined, it is white. This is the only Center
that is both a Motor and an Awareness Center. Through this Center we process,
our, you guessed it, emotions. Here we experience our passions, our desires, our
moods, our sensitivity. Through the Emotional Solar Plexus Center, we connect to
people with social awareness – or not. This is an extremely creative energy. In
fact, in her Quantum Human Design™ language, Karen Curry Parker refers to it as
The Creative Center.
                                          272

Most of us are messed up around our emotions. We’re at the effect of them,
without even realizing we have a choice. In the same way we believe that the
thoughts that arise are ours, we believe that the feelings that arise within us
belong to us. We attach to them and identify with them. We believe we are our
feelings. We typically say, “I’m upset. Or I’m angry. I’m happy.” Karen Curry
Parker points out that the I is the domain of the Identity Center. Not the
Emotional Solar Plexus. You are not actually angry. You’re having the feeling of
anger rising.

So, maybe you’re having some reactions here. Some feelings? Hang with me.
Most of what we identify as feelings are egoic responses. The Emotional Solar
Plexus, ESP for short, is the Center for desire. Desire is an important force for
humans. We create out of desire. In fact, to desire is a sacred, naturally rising
movement. When desire connects with the heart we manifest. So, I am not
dissing desire. I am deeply respecting the desires that are based in our essential
selves and are a natural arising connected to all of life. Ahhhh. I warned you this
was going to be hard to talk about.

Let’s talk about Buddhism. In Buddhism there are the Four Noble Truths:

      There is suffering.
      There is a cause of suffering.
      There is an end to suffering.
      There is a path that leads to the end of suffering.

In the conversation about the G Center, we talked about suffering as a mistaken
identity. Erroneously, we believe that the ego, the I, is who we are. The cause of
that suffering rests in the ESP. It is the desire of the Ego, the I, to want to have a
particular experience or to try to avoid a particular experience. In other words,
when we step into the world of subject/ object duality, we engage in and are run
by the mechanism of attachment and aversion.

The Emotional Solar Plexus is caught in that mechanism of moving away from pain
and toward pleasure. As humans, we are mutating out of that mechanism, to a
spirit-based, heart’s desire orientation. This will ultimately shift how we
experience our feelings, and ourselves as human beings. This is the 2027 Solar
Plexus Mutation that we are just beginning to slam into. All the divisive polarity
                                         273

and unrest that is surfacing is like the last hurrah of the ESP! We are heading
toward manifesting from a new way of creating, where there is nothing between
you and the thing you desire because your desire will be spirit-centered, born
from Oneness.

Currently, we are still caught in a fear-based reality, holding onto our Spleen
Center’s hyper-awareness of the threat of life and death. Our desires then are
born out of fear and lack...wanting something or not wanting to have something.
As we shift from that distorted, distorted, ego-centered orientation, to an
evolved, spirit-based Emotional Solar Plexus orientation, we begin to create not
out of a hole but out of wholeness.

My teacher, Faisal, used to say, “What you have, I give to you; what you don’t
have, I take away.” We are shifting to knowing the truth of who we are. We are
moving toward having and embodying ourselves as the magnificent multi-
dimensional, galactic quantum beings that we are. We will no longer be
manifesting out of lack. Perhaps you’ve already had tastes of this? My wife and
my move to Maui was born in this spirit. In the spring of 2014, she said, “I want to
go to Hawaii.” (Mind you, she has the 55, Gate of Abundance which comes off the
ESP).

I, being the grounded one, refrained from rolling my eyes, while internally that
felt impossible given our current situation. Within a half-hour, I had an email
inviting us to go to Maui that summer. The rest is history. We’ve lived here for the
past six years!

Mostly though, the world has not yet made that shift. We’re in for a recalibration.
At this point, the cultural belief is that we should be happy. Something is wrong if
we’re not, and there are pills for those who aren’t. I don’t know the statistics, but
it’s staggering what portion of the population is on mood regulators. Another
large chunk of humanity is self-medicating with alcohol or street medicine.

Don’t get me wrong. I am not bypassing the fact that people are suffering, and
that they need help. I’ve suffered, obviously. I know it firsthand. It’s real. It’s
painful, and it can be devastating. I think we’ve just gotten a bit confused about
what’s going on. We’re trying to treat one side of the duality stick, doing
everything we can to be happy. It’s never going to work. It’s hopeless. As long as
                                          274

you’re on the stick, as my friend Pali says, the other side – the polarity of
unhappiness – lies in wait.

Einstein roughly quoted: you cannot heal at the level of the problem. You have to
step off the stick, you have to get out of duality. Once we’re off the polarity stick
then there is bliss. My take is that we can work with the Defined Emotional Solar
plexus to witness the movement on the stick, and that the Open Emotional Solar
Plexus is pointing the way to the new normal. More on that in a bit.

 I do not claim to be an expert in this. I cannot say I have stabilized in bliss. I can
say that I’ve been steeped in teachings for forty years that point to this bliss/
emptiness – whether it’s Hinduism, Buddhism, or Christianity. I’ve had my own
experiences of this awareness, which make it undeniable and recognizable. And I
have been around enough high beings who live this. Byron Katie, Ammachi, and
Ram Dass have shown me this bliss. I’ll talk about Katie and my experience of her
non-emotional, stable bliss later in the chapter. For now, let’s stay back with
where we are and the workings of the ESP as we know them.

The ESP connects with the other three Centers that are Motors – the Will Center,
The Sacral Center, and the Root Center – as well as with the Throat Center. The
ESP has seven Gates that come off it; each one has a theme that differentiates the
various facets of desire.

The Themes for Each Gate
                                         275

Gate 6 Friction

The desire for intimacy and the fear of exposing yourself/ being vulnerable

Gate 37 Community, Friendship

The desire to belong and support a tribe and the fear that your needs won’t be
met

Gate 22 Grace

The desire to be heard and the fear of not being heard

Gate 36 Crisis

The desire for new experiences and the fear of inadequacy (especially in regard to
sexuality)

Gate 55 Abundance of Spirit

The desire to experience spirit through your passion as the source of your supply
and the fear of not knowing which passions to follow to tap that source

Gate 30 Desire, Clinging Fire

The desire to feel and the fear of feeling (this is the most intense gate in the
whole chart and amps up everything in the chart.) Gate 49 Revolution The desire
to be in integrity in a relationship and the fear of yourself or others being out of
integrity in relationships

CONNECTING TO THE ESP CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

Let’s take a moment to drop in and connect with your Emotional Solar Plexus.
Begin by settling.
Just relax.
Take a deep breath and let go.
Let go of any thoughts or feelings of the past.
Take another deep breath, and let go of any thoughts, fears, or desires about the
future.
Just rest here now.
Feel your sitz bones on your chair.
                                          276

Let yourself be held and supported.
Sense your arms and legs.
Take a few breaths as you focus on them.
Now sense into your belly
Allow yourself to come into the present moment in your physical body.
Can you gently smile at your physical body?
Can you allow yourself to have gratitude for your precious human birth?
Now expand your awareness.
Let yourself fill all the space above you, below you, to the left of you, to the right
of you, in front of you, and behind you.
Finally, expand into the space within you.
Feel yourself as a multi-dimensional being.
Feel yourself with nine Centers.
Now bring your awareness to your Emotional Solar Plexus.
Is it Defined? Or Undefined?
Don’t worry about a physical location in your body – we’re investigating our
quantum body.
What, if anything, are you feeling?
What are you desiring?
 Is there anything you’re trying to avoid feeling?
 Can you just allow whatever is here.
 Would it be ok to be present to what you want?
See if it would be okay with your ESP to ask it a question.
If yes, ask it if it has any information for you.
Does it have a message for you to help you understand and work with it?
Take your time.
Rest.
Wait.
Allow it to speak.
When you have your message, thank your ESP.
And even if you didn’t get a message, thank your ESP.
Know that this is the beginning of an evolving relationship.
Smile again at your ESP.
Now bring your awareness
Sense your belly.
                                        277

Gently open your eyes.
Take a moment to write down any discoveries.
Make an intention to get to know your Emotional Solar Plexus.

THE DEFINED ESP

A little more than half of us have a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus, 53 percent.
This is where that drive to avoid pain and to get pleasure resides. When we get
what we want, we feel good, for the moment anyway. Then inevitably the feelings
shift, and we either are dissatisfied with what we’ve got, or we want more. It’s
like an infinity pool that keeps going – in this polarity, there is no resting. This
emotional drive is also one of the ways we navigate life – by orienting around
what we want and moving away from what we don’t want. If you have a Defined
Emotional Solar Plexus, this dynamic is at play continuously.

The Emotional Wave

Inherent in the mechanics of the ESP is what’s called an emotional wave. Which
Channel or Channels connect to the ESP determines the kind of wave. The three
kinds of waves correlate to the three Types of Circuits: Individual, Tribal, and
Collective.
                                        278

Individual Emotional Wave

If you have either of the Individual Circuitry Channels 22-12 Openness or 39-55
Emoting, you will have an Individual Emotional Wave that will travel from one end
of the feeling spectrum to the other. This wave is passionate and moody. The
wave formation is basically even with short bursts of emotions

going up or down. The lower end of the wave may have a melancholic quality that
must be honored and respected, not dismissed or repressed. Great wisdom is
housed in the lower portion of the wave, if you can tolerate it and allow it.




Tribal Emotional Wave

If you have any of the three Tribal Channels Defined, the 19-49 Synthesis, the 59-6
Reproduction, or 37-40 Community, then you will have a Tribal Wave to navigate.
This wave is prone to explosions and outbursts following the buildup of upsets.
                                         279




Collective Emotional Wave

If you have one of the Collective Channels Defined, the 36-35 Transitoriness or
the 41-30 Recognition, you will have a Collective Wave to work with. This wave
has high highs and low lows. The lows hit when you have an expectation that isn’t
met – it’s like the bottom of the world falls out and you crash.

Regardless of which kind of wave you have, with a Defined Emotional Solar
Plexus, your Authority is automatically Emotional. This means when you make
decisions, you must wait out your particular emotional wave. You are not
designed to make decisions in the moment, rather over time, once the wave has
leveled out when you’re not in the throes of the emotional winds, and you have
clear knowing. I have a Collective Emotional Wave and am still discovering what
that’s like for me. It’s something you’ll have to play with and explore to find out
for yourself what that means for you.

Gifts of the Defined Emotional Solar Plexus

    You have consistent access to your feelings.
    Through your Defined Channel(s), you have a focus for your feelings.

You Have Consistent Access to Your Feelings
                                          280

When your ESP is Defined, you can have access to what you feel. You may not
respect what you feel or like what you feel, but you have feelings. In that
privileged kind of way, it’s hard to imagine the experiences of someone who
doesn’t have consistent access to their emotions. This is the water you swim in,
the air you breathe. It is the norm. Your feelings are familiar to you, so much so
that you may not even be aware of them.

Just to be clear, this is the theme of feelings, so it is possible to feel the absence
of feelings, which is different from what the Open Emotional Solar Plexus feels.
The absence of feelings could look like numbness or dissociation. It’s more like
trying not to feel by putting defensive structures up.

Through Your Defined Channel(s), You Have Consistent Access to Your Feelings

Look to see which Channel or Channels are Defined off your ESP. Does it make
sense to you that your emotional energy gets focused through that theme?




Channel 41-30 Recognition

 I have the Channel 41-30 and the consistent focus of my feelings is the drive to
see what’s possible for humanity. If you have this Defined, do you relate to that?
                                        281

Channel 39-55 Emoting

My wife has the Channel 39-55. She is continuously provoking or poking at
societal expectations and norms. She naturally defies what we believe we can
have or manifest. That she could think of taking a trip to Hawaii when we were
clearly in a financial dip rattled me. Somehow what I consider reality doesn’t
register for her. It doesn’t stop her from desiring what she desires and expecting
it to come forth.

Channel 37-40 Community

If you’ve got the Channel 37-40, your emotional energy will be guided toward
agreements and serving the tribe. You’ll be focused on whether or not the bargain
is balanced, and if you are being compensated adequately for your efforts.

Channel 19-49 Synthesis

If you’ve got the Channel 19-49, you will be occupied with relationships and the
level of integrity in the relationship. You may be using your emotional energy to
control who gets what resources.

Channel 59-6 Reproduction

If your Defined Channel is the 59-6, your emotional energy will be focused on
intimacy and creating intimacy or building intimacy through sexuality, children,
and businesses.

Channel 22-12 Openness

If your Defined Channel is the 22-12, your focus will be on listening and
articulating the depths of emotions you experience.

Channel 36-35 Transitoriness

If you have Definition in the Channel 36-35, your energy will be focused on new
experiences and using your plethora of skills. Defined Emotional Solar Plexus
Grapples
                                         282

Emotional uncertainty

The belief you should be happy! Emotional Uncertainty When you have a Defined
Emotional Solar Plexus, you live with emotional uncertainty. First of all, you’ve got
the wave to deal with. You never know what you’re going to feel. You never know
where you’re going to be on your wave. You never know what’s going to trigger
you.

If you have an Individual Wave, you never know when melancholy is going to hit.
You never know when you’re not going to be in the mood to be around people
and need to take space.

If you have a Tribal Wave, you can stuff your feelings. You think you’re okay with
something that has happened, then something else happens. You stuff that, too.
You think you’re handling it, but the pressures build, and then someone breaks a
promise or shows up out of integrity and it’s crushing: You lose it.

If you’ve got a Collective Wave, you never know who is going to let you down, or
what you’re going to hear or experience that devastates you. You’re fine one
moment and the next moment you’ve crashed and you’re a wreck. In each of
those scenarios, it’s not just you that’s impacted – it’s the people around you, and
the field. Your emotions fill the field.

One of the grapples is learning to navigate and work with your emotional self,
with your wave.

To complicate matters, with the emotional wave, decision-making is a challenge.
You don’t know what to do. It takes time to know. That’s hard. It takes skill and
awareness to sort it all out. Even those of us who have been studying Human
Design for years are still trying to sort it out. There is no certainty in emotions.
They're mercurial; they come and go. How do you make decisions in the midst of
erratic fluctuation?

The Belief You Should Be Happy!

It’s big business to be happy. Everyone should be. I’m sure you got that memo. If
you’re not, something is wrong with you. That’s the atmosphere the Defined
Emotional Solar Plexus has to contend with. You have waves. You lose it. You’re
not supposed to fluctuate. You can think something is wrong with you. People
                                         283

with a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus can believe they either need medication for
their melancholy, or they need to work on their self-control.

Most of us don’t realize that the emotional wave is a chemical process. It’s part of
our biology. It happens. It comes with the Defined ESP package. It’s not wrong or
bad. In fact, humans are designed to feel the whole range of feelings, but that is
not what we’re taught.

So, we go to war with ourselves. We feel shame. Or we shame others. There is a
pressure not to feel what you feel – and here it comes!

Depending on our adaptive coping mechanisms, we learn tactics to avoid our
feelings. But this ultimately cuts us off from ourselves. So how do we work with
this emotional self that we have no apparent control over? How do we live an
empowered life, not at the effect of our emotional waves?

Working with the Defined ESP Center

      Witness your wave instead of identifying with it.
      Take responsibility for your emotions.
      Wait out your wave before you make decisions.
      Stay in your body and go to your heart.

Witness Your Wave Instead of Identifying with It

The wave happens. It’s a chemical process. You can either identify with it and be
tossed around, at the effect of it, or you can learn to witness it.

Byron Katie used to say something like, “Can you just let the feeling have its life?
Can you not dissipate it or try to get rid of it by putting it on someone? What
happens if you just witness it?”

The first time I experienced letting a feeling have its life was twenty years ago. I
was standing in the kitchen and something my wife said devastated me. I had one
of those crashes where my expectations were dashed, and I went into shock and
fury. I wanted to lash out at her, make her wrong, attack. All of those feelings felt
duly justified. Instead, I heard Katie’s words. I stood there. I wasn’t going to give
the feelings away.
                                        284

I wasn’t going to project them onto her. My face contorted. A sound I could never
have made on my own volition rose through my tightened throat. I watched and
listened with heightened awareness. A haunting sound of excruciating pain and
grief permeated the kitchen. I was not my grief; it was the grief of the world
pressing up and out through me. The air was still. She was motionless. It was
utterly exquisite. It was sacred. And then it was over. I was clear. There was no
entanglement with her. It was all about me. And that was the empowered place.

Research shows that emotions only last a few minutes. They pass through, unless
we hold on to them, make a story about them, store them in our bodies packed in
tension. If we feel them, they pass through. So much trauma stays with us
because we’re not able to feel the feeling in the moment. We leave. We
dissociate. We disembody. To witness the wave, you must stay present to it. You
must be willing to feel the wave. To welcome it.

This is not something most have us have been taught. We’re afraid of our lows.
We’re low-phobic! To recognize that feelings are just feelings – that they’re not
actually who we are – is the work of developing emotional intelligence. To see a
feeling for what it is, a feeling, opens the door to tremendous freedom. The task,
if you’ve got a Defined Emotional Solar Plexus, is to establish a strong witness,
detach from identifying with your feelings, recognize your feelings for what they
are, and allow your feelings to have their life.

Take Responsibility for Your Emotions

With a Defined ESP, you are generating emotions – positive and negative – all the
time. You have to recognize that whether you realize it or not, you’re impacting
the field. You’re affecting everyone around you. Taking responsibility for your
emotions is a kindness to others as well as to yourself. With each of the waves,
this might look slightly different.

If you have an Individual Wave, recognize and respect when you are on the low
end of the wave. Don’t force yourself to be around people. Take down-time.
Connect with your creativity. This is a rich harvest time.

Take time alone when you are on your low end. With an Individual Wave, you
have the energy of a Rilke or a Goethe. Write poetry, play music. You’re designed
to experience the depth and breadth of humanities' feelings and express it. Don’t
                                         285

be afraid of your feelings. Think of it like Rumi’s poem, “The Guest House.” Here
are a few lines:

                        This being human is a guest house.
                            Every morning a new arrival.
                          A joy, a depression, a meanness,
                        some momentary awareness comes
                               As an unexpected visitor.
                         Welcome and entertain them all!
                         Even if they’re a crowd of sorrows,
                          who violently sweep your house
                                 empty of its furniture,
                          still treat each guest honorably.
                             He may be clearing you out
                                 for some new delight.

             — Jalaluddin Rumi, translation by Coleman Barks (The Essential Rumi)

If your wave is Tribal the more, you’re aware of when you’re stuffing your
feelings, the more honest you can be, the more chance you have of alleviating the
stress before it hits a full blowout. If you can be in dialogue with your partner so
there is compassionate awareness of the dynamic, you can work together to build
trust in speaking the truth as it arises. Be clear and let your partner know that
broken agreements are heartbreaking for you.

This way you can consciously set up what the boundaries are and what your
needs are in the relationship. This is necessary whether the partnerships are
personal or business. If you can, share with your partner that if you do lose it, the
best way to de-escalate the situation is through touch. A hand on the shoulder
calms the system down, brings you back to reality.

If you have a Collective Wave, know that your crashes are as jarring to the people
around you as they are to you. One minute everything is fine, the next minute
you’re shut down and furious. Being responsible is recognizing your expectations
have been dashed and that you’re having a chemical response. Stop. Breathe.
Come to your senses. Come to the present. The sky may feel like it’s falling, but
actually, it isn’t. This too shall pass.
                                         286

Wait Out Your Wave before You Make Decisions

 We spoke about this quite a bit. And yet it is one of the big pieces, maybe lifelong
learning, to come into alignment with your Emotional Authority. Learn to wait out
your wave before you make decisions. This is a conscious choice that must be
made over and over until you create a new habit pattern. Eventually, it becomes
standard practice, at least most of the time. The challenge comes when you’re
feeling pressured by others to make a decision. This is especially tricky if you’ve
got an Open Root Center and feel under pressure to act.

Stay in Your Body and Go to Your Heart

When we’re in our bodies, we’re in the present moment. When we’re in our
hearts, we have space for duality to exist in Oneness. In the heart, having
compassion for the full gamut of feelings – the drive for what we want, and the
aversion to what we don’t want – we can allow all of it without identifying with
any of it. In the heart, we recognize truth. The drive to fill a hole with something
external falls away. In the heart, we move toward the new Emotional Solar Plexus
stability that awaits our arrival.

Helpful Tools

There are so many tools that could be helpful with the Emotional Solar Plexus,
depending on where you’re getting glitched. Here are a few you might consider:

    Use inquiry tools.
    Express yourself!
    Use an essential oil protocol to clear the ESP.
    Sense your arms and legs.

Inquiry #1 Leslie Temple Thurston Squares

Divide a page into quarters.
In the top square write: The Desire to have (name what you want).
In the second top square write: The Fear of having (name what you want).
In the bottom square write: The Desire not to have (name what you want)
 In the remaining square write: The Fear of not having (name what you want).
Make a list under each of these.
Usually, we’re unconscious of at least one of the squares.
                                          287

Be sure to fill in all four squares.
Find the piece you may be resisting.
Once you see the whole picture, the duality collapses.

You’re looking for your desires/ aversions. You could do any number of squares.

For example:

The Desire to be happy.
The Fear of being happy.
The Desire not to feel happy.
The Fear of not feeling happy.
Play with it and see what you discover.

Inquiry #2 Five and Five

I love this inquiry practice. It’s a safe and easy way to stop and connect with what
you feel. With a partner, decide who is the Listener, who is the Inquirer. The
listener does just that, listens. They keep their focus on their felt sense while
they’re listening. They are holding space so the Inquirer can hear themselves.
There is no engaging the Inquirer with head nods or supportive grunts. Those
interactive relational expressions expressions pull the attention away from the
Inquirer. Let the Inquirer have their inquiry!

 Set the timer for five minutes. The Inquirer looks within and inquires. You may
have a theme you’re inquiring into, like What am I feeling about a situation or
person? Or you may just see what is present for you now. It is not a performance.
It is not a way to connect with the other person. It is time to meet you where you
are. Time to discover what you haven’t had time to feel and know what’s going on
for you. At the end of five minutes, thank your partner and switch.

You could also do this as a writing assignment. Just free write for ten to twenty
minutes and see what you’re noticing in the moment.

Express Yourself!

A fantastic way to connect with your Emotional Solar Plexus is through expressing
your creativity. Are you called to paint or write or dance? Maybe you’d like to try
an Improv class? The emotions are asking to be heard, to be given voice. When
                                         288

you express your creativity, you allow the energy of the feelings without having to
attach to or identify with them.

Use an Essential Oil Protocol to Clear the Emotional Solar Plexus

To cleanse the Solar Plexus, Greg Toews uses this protocol.

   1. Choose any one of these oils: Juniper, Tea Tree, Eucalyptus Maccarthii, or
      Aura Cleanse.
   2. Begin by thinking of something you’re grappling with emotionally. What
      would you like to feel if that distress was resolved? Can you let yourself feel
      that for a moment? Now let go of all of that.
   3. Take the oil you have chosen, and begin breathing it in through your nose,
      breathing out through your mouth. As you breathe the oil in through your
      nose, focus your awareness for three to five breaths on each of the
      following areas: Start with the front solar plexus (just beneath the rib cage).
      Shift your focus to the back solar (same location on the back). Finally focus
      on the liver (below the rib cage to the right). You can cycle through this
      many times to deepen the cleanse. Now check-in with the situation you
      were grappling with. How does it feel? Do you notice any shifts?

Sense Your Arms and Legs

I’ve spoken of this earlier in the book. When you sense your arms and legs, you
bring yourself into the present. This supports the blood flow to the brain. It’s a
simple process that has a big impact. When you’re present, you have more
capacity to allow your feelings. When you’re present, you can witness what’s
arising without identifying with it.



THE OPEN EMOTIONAL SOLAR PLEXUS

I’m flooded with feelings as I come to write about the Open Emotional Solar
Plexus. It is such a powerful Center to have Open. It’s so complex and so
compelling. When I do a coaching session for someone who has an Open
Emotional Solar Plexus, my curiosity shoots through the roof. What’s it been like
for you? How have you managed to take in and to amplify all the feelings around
you?
                                        289

Roughly 47 percent of you have an Open Emotional Solar Plexus. By definition,
you do not have an emotional wave. You do not have consistent access to your
feelings. Let me clarify that: Where you have Hanging Gates coming off the ESP,
you will have consistent access to those feelings and emotional drives, perhaps
even amplified. You are still emotional even without an emotional wave.

Sometimes I say that to clients, and they protest. They say they were the
emotional ones in their family. They had big feelings. Maybe even out of balance.
I always always find this fascinating. Technically speaking, with an Open ESP, you
don’t have an emotional wave and yet you are taking in and amplifying the
emotions of others. There is a way you go into Oneness with people’s emotions.
What this often looks like is that you express the feelings of those around you,
believing they are yours.

Of course, you’re amplifying them. So, if your brother is mad, you’re going to be
even madder. Again, this is mechanical – not something you’re consciously doing.
You get whacked by big feelings. They hit you and take you over. Not like the
wave. When you leave the auric field of the person/people who were distressed,
unless you grab hold of those feelings and keep them, the feelings dissipate, and
you are left with your stabilized self when you’re alone.

The Grapples of the Open ESP

    You feel everything and everyone.
    You may not tell the truth.
    You may feel something is wrong with you because you’re completely
     unemotional.

You Feel Everything and Everyone

Think of that wide-open Open ESP like a magnetic vortex taking in and attempting
to process all the feelings around it. If people are upset about the election, you
get blasted. You can feel upset and not even know why. You go to a movie and cry
your eyes out – you’re picking up on everyone’s feelings. If Defined ESPs are
batted around by their waves, you are tossed around by people who have a
Defined Emotional Solar Plexus.
                                        290

Growing up you may have expressed the emotions for the whole family, which
sometimes looks like acting out. Your filters can get very clogged up with
emotional garbage that just sits and rots. You’ve got the challenge of sorting
through what’s yours and what belongs to others. Recognize what conditioning
you’ve identified with and what belongs to you.

It’s kind of a mess and requires a lot of work to get it cleaned up and straightened
out.

You May Not Tell the Truth

With an Open Emotional Solar Plexus, unless you have found a way to manage the
intensity of feelings coming your way, you can be nice as a defense against being
blasted. It follows that you may not tell the truth if you’re afraid of upsetting
people and having to process their upset. With this, you can tend to be nice, again
to avoid getting the ire of others.

You May Feel Something Is Wrong with You

You may feel something is wrong with you because you’re completely
unemotional. Sometimes people report feeling like they know they are different
from other people. They don’t have feelings in situations where it’s socially
appropriate, say at someone’s death.

They can have a flatline quality around feelings and think they’ve got Asperger's
or that something is wrong with them. Often it is a tremendous relief to discover
this is how they are designed.

The Gifts of the ESP

    Being unemotional
    Empathy

Being Unemotional

The same quality of being unemotional that can be experienced as a challenge
can also be recognized as a gift. If you have an Open Emotional Solar Plexus, you
may appreciate your even keel, especially if you have learned to witness rather
than identify with the feelings of others. There is a kind of steady peace you can
access when you’re on your own that is lovely.
                                          291

Empathy With the capacity to take in people’s feelings, almost like mainlining, you
can be the ultimate empath. You know what people feel as if they were your
feelings. This is a brilliant skill as a therapist or coach to understand what is going
on with others. Sometimes people with an Open Emotional Solar Plexus feel the
opposite of empathy – like nothing. Somehow, they have found a way to either
process or defend against the onslaught that their ESP must handle daily.

Open Emotional Solar Plexus as a God Portal

 When we come to the ESP as God Portal, my personal feeling is that people with
an Open Emotional Solar Plexus are pointing the way for what is to come. You are
on the edge of a mutation where we are shifting to living without a wave. We’re
moving out of the dualistic drive of feelings into differentiated Oneness with
spirit. The quality is one of deep neutrality and stillness. This is profoundly
creative energy but from a different source. It doesn’t come out of a drive.
Rather, it comes from allowing the function of the IS. Here are the attributes I
witness in the God Portal aspect of the Open Emotional Solar Plexus:

    You are touching into spirit awareness/ Oneness.
    You access the ocean of stability and bliss.

You Are Touching into Spirit Awareness/ Oneness

When you clear your filters of the accumulated garbage that is not yours, you are
left with sheer openness: A purity that is beyond the dualistic drive to gain or
avoid. You are no longer operating out of the attraction/ aversion paradigm. This
is like the ocean beneath the waves. You have the potential to tap into the
dynamic bliss/ emptiness that is the essential aspect of feelings.

This is the quality spoken of in spiritual traditions. It’s a very alive, present, and
unemotional state of being. I witnessed this firsthand with Byron Katie. I was
traveling with her, working with her, sharing hotel rooms with her. I never once
saw her have an emotional reaction. Did she show emotion? Not exactly. I once
saw tears run down her cheeks listening to a song. Was she fierce? Yes. Clear?
Yes. Was she cold? No. The opposite of cold. It just wasn’t warm in the way we
think of feelings. It was warm as in ultimate intimacy. Complete contact. No
separation.
                                         292

At the time, I thought it was inhuman. I was sure she must be from another
planet. Humans don’t act that way. But, through Human Design, I have a context
for it. When you let yourself be free of the need to have emotions to fit in as a
human, you open the door for the rest of us to let go of our attachment to
feelings. Here you become the ocean of stability. Dynamic, alive, present, not
trying to fill a hole. You are complete. From this place, you are available to create
outside of the realm of duality.

I just thought of another Byron Katie story I can share here that I think will speak
to the creation from stillness possibility (rather than going after something from
an egoic desire to create). It’s kind of out there.

It was 1998. I had just finished taking her first-ever School for The Work, which at
that point was a three-week intensive. I’d arranged for Katie to go to Fairfield,
Iowa, the Transcendental Meditation Mecca of the US to give a workshop. My
brother lived there, and he and his wife hosted us in their home. They were
steeped in Eastern spiritual traditions, followers of Ammachi, and immersed in
stories of saints. When we got there, my sister-in-law explained that it was a boon
to share a bed with saints and asked if she could spend a night with Katie in their
large king bed. I was astounded by the audacity of the request, but with Katie,
everything goes. Of course, if there was a boon to be had, I wanted to partake!

The night I shared the bed with her I was so intimidated and freaked out that I
could scarcely move. Her energy was so powerful. I’m a super-sensitive energy
person anyway, and this was almost unbearable. Remember, she wasn’t new to
me, I’d been hanging out with her day and night for three weeks. I lay there just
watching her.

What I saw I will never forget. It may sound crazy as I say it, but it was 100
percent real. With each breath, I watched as the entire universe, like a vortex,
gathered and came into her. With each exhalation, the entire universe was
created. And the wild thing was, it was created out of numbers. Numbers poured
out with her breath! Katie inhabits her galactic quantum body. I believe this is
where we are headed.

You Access the Ocean of Stability and Bliss
                                         293

 I touched on this above but let me speak directly about it. When your filters are
clear, you are not at the effect of other people’s emotions. You are not identifying
identifying with the emotions arising in the field. You are thus stable, like the
ocean beneath the waves. As you touch into this, there is a dynamic aliveness, a
shimmering. We could say it is an emotion not touched by the Ego. It is sheer
bliss. The bliss of the universe that has no beginning and no end. This is a quality
you emanate.

It’s a quality of unshakable peace. When you are stabilized here, you bring this
emanation to the rest of us. In this grounded, shimmering bliss, all feelings are
allowed and welcomed. The curious thing is the emotional wave can’t sustain
itself in this field. It’s as if the emotional wave is absorbed and transformed
instantaneously in this light. Your presence through your Open Emotional Solar
Plexus becomes a big alchemical transmuter.

Working with the Open ESP Center

Okay, coming back to earth here. How do you pragmatically work with your Open
Emotional Solar Plexus?

      Appreciate your amazing openness.
      Understand how it functions.
      Clean the filters.
      Don’t identify with others’ feelings.

Appreciate Your Amazing Openness

First off, recognize that you operate differently than people with a Defined
Emotional Solar Plexus, which is considered the norm. Appreciate the possibilities
your Openness holds for tapping into a new paradigm.

Understand How Your Open ESP Functions

To access the full possibility of the Open Emotional Solar Plexus, you need to be
clear about how it functions. Your Open ESP is taking in everyone. It absorbs all
the feelings around you and amplifies them. Be clear on this. The feelings are
arising in the ocean of feelings and are not personal to you. If you identify with
the feelings, you will be tossed around by them. If you don’t identify with them,
but rather let the feelings flow through you, they can be met not as objects to
                                         294

defend against but rather with humanizing compassion. This requires anchoring in
your witnessing observer.

Take a few minutes to look and see which Gates you have Defined off your ESP.
Read about them in the section on Themes for Each Gate. Get familiar with what
feelings you do have consistent access to. That will help you begin to differentiate
what’s yours, and what you’re merging with in others.

Clean the Filters

 Your job is to get clear on what is yours and what is not. Whether it’s
conditioning from the past or people in the present that you are merging with,
you need unobstructed filters. To accomplish this, you need a strong witness and
a willingness to let go into openness. It requires letting go of the
victim/tyrant/savior identity. It also requires doing some deep inquiry and truth-
telling. The Open Emotional Solar Plexus can be a place where trauma is stored.
Don’t be discouraged if this takes time and support from someone who can
midwife you in your process.

Don’t Identify with Other People’s Feelings

The bottom line is you must learn to be the screen door and let other people’s
feelings pass through you. You’ll need to stop merging with people and identifying
with their feelings. This may put you into a kind of freefall. These feelings have
been placeholders for identity, and there will be a sense of loss of identity as they
fall away. What is left is your shining, bright, essential self.

Helpful Tools

      Witnessing Observer
      Inquiry
      Be in your body S
      omatic therapy and bodywork
      Movement and exercise

Witnessing Observer

Maybe you’re getting tired of hearing me talk about developing a witnessing
observer. The witnessing observer creates the stability to look at the pain. The
                                        295

witnessing observer examines the causes of pain, the patterns that drive the pain,
as well as the attachment to the pain. The whole picture needs to be seen, and
the witnessing observer – or you could call it The Diamond Body – is key. Once
you see something, you have options. If you can’t see it, you’re at the effect of
whatever is being played out.

Inquiry

Inquire into your feelings and the story you may have about your feelings. Have
you attached to the belief that you are the emotional one in your family? Use
Byron Katie’s work to investigate if that is actually true. Who would you be
without the story that you are emotional? What would it be like to stand still and
let emotions move through you rather than jumping on the wave? Try different
inquiry techniques to see if one works particularly well for you.

Sense Your Arms and Legs

This, of course, is the call to be in your body which keeps you grounded in the
present moment. When we are in our body, we can tolerate the feelings that we
had to dissociate from when we couldn’t tolerate them. This is huge. What we
can feel, we can digest. When we are out of our bodies, there is no chance of
doing the work necessary to unravel past patterns that keep us locked in pain and
trauma.

Somatic Therapy and Bodywork

If you find yourself cut off from yourself and unable to connect to your body, you
might consider going to get either bodywork or working with a Somatic therapist.
There are many kinds of bodywork and healing modalities including acupuncture,
Ayurvedic treatments, qigong, etc. In terms of bodywork, I’m partial to Rosen
Method Bodywork, Anat Baniel Method (or Feldenkrais), or cranial-sacral work.

Anything that compassionately brings you back online works. As for Somatic
therapies, Somatic Experiencing or NARM (Neuro Affective Relational Model) are
good choices. For many people, this journey into the Emotional Solar Plexus is
scary. Our emotions are a place where we broke the connection in order to
protect ourselves. To have support can be deeply healing, allowing us to
reconnect to ourselves and others.
                                         296

Movement and Exercise You set things in motion when you move. You tap into
the biophysical patterns where trauma and emotions are held. Taking a walk,
going for a run, dancing, and martial arts all open the inner flow, releasing
trapped emotional energy.

RECAP

So you’ve explored the waters of the Emotional Solar Plexus. What did you
discover? Maybe something surprised you. Maybe something makes sense in a
new way. For many of us, the Emotional Solar Plexus is a big learning ground. On
the one hand, we’ve been taught not to listen and pay attention to what we feel.
Seeing as feelings are central to manifestation, this makes it really hard to call
forth and create our heart’s desires. On the other hand, we easily over-privilege
our feelings. We identify with them as in I am sad.

I am hurt. I am afraid. When, in fact, feelings flow through us. We have them. We
are not our feelings. There’s a lot to explore here. I hope you take the time to get
to develop a relationship with your Emotional Solar Plexus. It’s well worth the
effort.

Our next exploration is the last Motor, the Root Center. This powerful energy is
the driver of the chart. It’s raw adrenalized energy. Let’s see what your chart
reveals about your Root Center!
                                         297


                                        13

                GETTING TO KNOW THE ROOT CENTER




NTRODUCING THE ROOT CENTER

We’ve come to the eighth Center in our exploration – the Root Center. It is square
at the bottom of the bodygraph. If it is colored brown, it is considered Defined. If
it is white, it is Undefined, or Open. This Center functions as the adrenalized spark
that drives us to take action. One of the Four Motors, the Root Center is
connected to two other Motors – the Sacral Center and the Emotional Solar
Plexus – as well as to the Spleen Center. The Root Center is a powerful force to be
respected and worked with skillfully.

Depending on which Gate or Gates are activated, you will experience different
kinds of pressures. Channels connecting to the Sacral Center from the Root Center
fuel sustainable action; thus, you will feel the drive to act. Channels connecting to
the Emotional Solar Plexus fuel powerful feelings and emotional responses,
driving you to connect with what you feel. Channels connecting to the Spleen
Center fuel the drive to survive and thrive. As you deepen your study into Human
                                         298

Design, you come to appreciate and respect this energy and the various ways it
manifests.

Like the Head Center, this is also a pressure Center, a raw, adrenalized, stress-
pumping station. Whether your Root Center is Defined or Open will determine
how you process and navigate the potent stress energy that is looking for an
outlet for its drive. Each of us has the task of discovering how to use that stress
for our benefit rather than be used and abused by it.

The key to this Center is timing. Appropriately, Karen Curry Parker’s Quantum
Human Design™ name is The Divine Timing Center. Can we align with divine
timing to drive us in our quest to spark life and bring it into form?

Before we look more closely at the Defined and Open Root Centers, let’s take a
moment to connect with this powerful force.



CONNECTING WITH YOUR ROOT CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

Take a breath.
Let out a Sigh.

Feel your sitz bones resting on the surface of your chair.
What do you notice?
Are you sinking into the chair?
Or is your body pulled up away from it?
See if you can let yourself take another deep breath and sink onto the chair, letting
it fully support you.
From this place begin to sense your arms and legs.
Feel into them.
Are they tense?
Can you let them be heavy?
 Now relax.
Give yourself some time to be present with them.
Notice what happens as you do.
Do you drop more deeply into your body?
 Relax. Breathe.
                                         299

Now bring your awareness to your belly.
Take a few deep breaths as you focus on your belly.
From your belly, expand your awareness out to the entirety of your bodygraph –
including all the Centers we have covered to this point.
Smile into your quantum body.
The whole of you.
Now turn your focus to your Root Center.
Many of us avoid feeling this area; others are obsessed with it.
Can you allow yourself to be present to whatever sensation, feelings, thoughts you
have in the present moment when you focus on your Root Center?
Take another big breath. Sigh.
Do you have a Defined Root Center? Or an Open one?
Does that mean anything to you at this point?
Are you available to dive into the mystery of your Root Center to see what you
might discover about yourself?
Set the intention to befriend your Root Center – regardless of what you discover.
Send love to your Root Center. Take one more deep breath.
Sense your arms and legs.
Open your eyes.
Gently bring your awareness back to the room.
Take a few moments to journal about your experience.
How do you feel about your Root Center?
What is your relationship to it?
Set an intention to understand and befriend your Root Center.



THE DEFINED ROOT CENTER

The majority of people have a Defined Root Center: 60 percent of us. If you have a
Defined Root, it is truly a boon. You have consistent access to adrenalized,
initiating energy that drives life. You’re designed to tolerate pressure, focus it, and
use it in the service of empowering humanity. Of course, there are challenges as
well, so you will want to be aware of how to best utilize this gift you’ve been
given.
                                         300

The Defined Root Center Gifts

When we look at the Defined Root there are three major gifts:

    You have consistent access to your adrenalized drive.
    You have tolerance for pressure.
    You have the ability to focus your drive.

You Have Consistent Access to Your Adrenalized Drive

With a Defined Root Center, you have access to your Root Motor. This
adrenalized drive enables you to take action, to initiate. There are two things to
be aware of here. The first is that this Motor is not always on, rather it pulses on
and off. So, while you have consistent access, you rely on timing, like the spark of
the timing belt in your car, to activate the Motor. The second thing to realize is
that your adrenalized drive is specific to the Channel that is Defined and
determines the nature of that drive. Nine Channels come off the root, creating
the Root Center Definition. Let’s take some time and tease apart those apart, so
you’re clear on the gifts each of these adrenalized drives brings.

Three Channels Connecting the Root Center to the Spleen Center:
                                          301

Channel of Judgment 58-18

If you have both Gate 58 Joy and Gate 18 Correction Defined in your chart, it
creates a Channel connecting the Root to the Spleen Center. You bring the gift of
joy and vitality to humanity by upgrading whatever is in front of you. You
understand that our

vitality is key to our survival and from this conviction, you are driven to bring joy
to humanity.

Channel of Struggle 38-28

If you have Gate 38 The Fighter and Gate 28 Struggle Defined in your chart, your
Root Center connects to your Spleen Center through the Channel of Struggle. You
are here to discover which struggles are yours to take hold of and resolve. This is
a powerful energy that enables you to enter entanglements and find solutions.

 I have this in my chart, and I am constantly taking on and working with struggles.
Some of those struggles are mine alone, like writing this book or figuring out how
to put together the shelving for our garage. Ask my wife;

I have an inordinate amount of patience for these projects! Some of those
struggles involve other people. I have a lifetime of helping people with their
struggles. First with their bodies, as a bodyworker, then as a therapist, with their
emotions, and finally, as a spiritual mentor, with their soul connection. The
current iteration is helping people learn about their Human Design as a way to
work with their struggles and align more deeply with themselves. This is a gift I
am driven to bring. When you are in alignment with your Channel of Struggle,
your struggles are deeply rewarding and pleasurable adventures.

Channel of Transformation 54-32

 The final Channel from the Root Center to the Spleen Center is activated when
you have Gate 54 Drive Defined and connecting with a Defined Gate 32 Big
Dreams, or Duration. With this fortunate configuration, you have the gift of
ambition and the motivation to improve your life. This is the fuel for
transformation, whether it is in business or on the path of awakening. Driven by
survival, you have a serious capacity to go for what you want and transform your
life. I consider it great good fortune to have Definition here.
                                         302

Three Channels Connecting the Root Center to the Sacral Center:

The following three Channels are called format Channels. They are particularly
impactful as they connect the spark of initiating activity with sustainable action in
a particular pattern. This is a powerful creative force since the Root and the Sacral
Motors are designed to move energy.




Channel of Maturation 53-42

 If you have this Channel, you have the gift of cycles – the capacity to start
something and bring it to full completion. Your life is one that has a theme of
cycles with marked beginnings, middles, and endings. To use this gift well, you
must start the cycle in alignment with your Strategy and make sure you fully bring
a cycle to resolution before beginning the next cycle.

Channel of Mutation 60-3

As the Root Center pumps energy in this powerfully Individual Channel from Gate
60 Limitation to Gate 3 Difficulty at the Beginning, or Innovation, there are bursts
of unpredictable mutative energy, attempting to birth something new. If you have
this Channel, you have the gift of creating a lotus out of the mud, bringing a
                                        303

unique offering into form for the evolution of humanity. Charity has this channel.
She is driven to work within limitations to bring something new. In this case, she
is working within the limitation of tragedy, the death of a spouse, and bringing
new ways to understand and work with devastating and life-altering loss.

Channel of Concentration 52-9

If Gate 52, the Gate of Stillness, is Defined in your chart and connects with the
Defined Gate 9, Focus, you have the gift of a very logical, detailed Focus drive.
There is a powerful groundedness here as the root pulses are translated in a
methodical energetic pattern. It requires a certain level of dynamic stillness as
you allow your Sacral response to find your correct focus. Once you do, you are in
the groove, and your concentrated focus can be powerfully influential.

Three Channels Connecting the Root to the ESP:

The final three Channels connect the Root Center to the Emotional Solar Plexus.
Here the pulse of the Root Center is driving toward feelings. There is a pressure to
have emotional awareness. If you have any of these Channels Defined, you have a
particular way of dealing with emotional pressure and stress.
                                        304

Channel of Synthesis 19-49

 If you have Gate 19 Sensitivity Defined and Gate 49 Revolution, you have deeply
emotional tribal energy and are driven to connect relationally in integrity in order
to bring joy.

Chanel of Emoting 39-55

If you have the Individual Channel of Emoting with Gate 39 Provocation and Gate
55 Abundance, you are driven and driving others to realize that Spirit is the source
of our supply. You do this by being provocative – sometimes in a playful teasing
way, sometimes in a more intense way. This is mutative energy that is meant to
empower.

Channel of Recognition 41-30

This Channel marks the beginning of the Human Design New Year. It is the energy
of the restless Root Center fantasizing what’s possible for humanity and then the
emotional Gate 30 reaching to have that experience. With this Channel Defined –
you have Gate 41 Fantasy and Gate 30 Clinging Fire Defined in your chart – you
are driven by this desire to follow your dreams. This is intensely potent energy.
You bring the gift of visions and the passion to carry them out.

I have this Channel in my chart. Along with the theme of struggle, this driving
force to see what’s possible for humanity and the passion to bring it to fruition
has been a central stream running through my life.

You Have a Tolerance for Pressure

With a Defined Root, you are comfortable with a certain kind of pressure. You
may not even realize it, it’s so familiar to you. For example, with the Defined
Channel of Struggle, I’m comfortable with a certain level of stress or pressure
while I work with some challenges. It comes with the territory. If you have the 54-
32 The Channel of Transformation, you’re comfortable with doing the work it
takes, the stress involved to fulfill your dreams.

When you follow your Strategy, you have the capacity to know what action to
initiate and are solid in that. You’re not easily pushed around by other people’s
                                         305

pressure to initiate an action that you don’t resonate with. You likely won’t do it.
Unlike the Open Root Center, in general, you are not daunted by stress.

However, in order to maintain this sense of ease with adrenalized pressure, you
must follow your Strategy or risk initiating action that is not in alignment for you
and so creating a stress response that can lead to health issues.

You Have the Ability to Focus Your Drive

I think we pretty well covered this when we went through the drives in the nine
Channels. The important thing to recognize here is that with the Defined Root,
you have the gift of focusing that raw, driving force. We could say channeling it in
a consistent stream. You have an outlet for it. You’re broadcasting this focused,
creative energy that inspires others to act. Just realize the gift you have – the
Open Root can be at a loss when it comes to accessing that initiating energy and
focusing the Root Drives into usable forces.

The Defined Root Grapples

The Defined Root Motor is powerful energy impacting the whole of the chart. It is
a pressure Center, pushing us to create. If we are off track with our Defined
Channels, it can be equivalent to a train wreck. Let’s just say it’s not pretty.
Actually, it can be really bad. There are a few things that you may grapple with
given your Defined Root.

    You are at the mercy of timing.
    You didn’t follow your strategy and you’ve gone off track.
    You risk burning yourself out.

You Are at the Mercy of Timing

Yeah, the Defined Root Center is a Motor that pulses on and off. When it is off,
you may feel like the rug’s been pulled out from under you. You simply can’t
make yourself do something you know you need to do and that you’re capable of
doing. I felt that as I started writing this book. It took me a month before my Root
Center activated, and I was able to engage my Gate of Struggle and my Gate of
Fantasy to initiate writing.
                                         306

All the while, pressure was building as my timeline shortened. You most likely will
encounter this phenomenon in some way if you have a Defined Root. You can
easily lose patience. It can be very frustrating. And, if you don’t have perspective
and awareness about what’s going on, you can attack yourself or think something
is wrong with you.

You Didn’t Follow Your Strategy and You’ve Gone Off Track

 We looked at the gifts of the nine Gates that define the Root Center. Let’s now
take a brief look at the specific challenges that can arise when you’ve neglected to
follow your strategy. (See Charts #45 - 47.)

Channel of Judgment 58-18

If you have the Channel of Judgment, you are committed to sharing what needs to
be corrected in order to bring more joy to humanity. Your intent is so good. If you
speak your corrections before they are asked, they will most likely be experienced
as criticism and resisted. This can leave you feeling misunderstood, frustrated,
and unappreciated. Your gift is rejected, and it can feel like you are the one being
rejected.

Channel of Struggle 28-38

There’s nothing more gratifying than a good struggle. There is nothing more
draining and depressing than a bad struggle. If you don’t follow your Strategy and
instead end up entering struggles that are out of alignment – you will suffer. You
can feel victimized and trapped, caught in a situation, feeling there is no way out.
This is downward spiral material. If you have clients in this space, help them get
out!

Channel of Transformation 54-32

Although you are designed to succeed, you can get lost in ambition, allowing the
fear of failure to drive you to overwork. If you stop listening to your intuition and
aren’t following your Strategy, you will burn out, and the success that you know is
yours for the taking will elude you. This can be devastating.
                                          307

Channel of Maturation 53-42

If you do not enter a cycle following your Strategy, you will be caught in a pattern
of dissatisfaction and struggle. Likewise, if you don’t fully complete a cycle,
resolving any issues, you won’t be able to move on to the next cycle. There will be
a feeling of stagnation and frustration.

Channel of Mutation 60-3

 If this individual and deeply mutative Channel is Defined in your chart, you are
called upon to have patience. There is continual pressure to work within
limitations to bring something new into the world. If you try to force it or are
unable to see that the seed under the ground is actually growing but not yet
visible, and there’s nothing you can do to push it, you can end up frustrated. You
can feel like something is wrong with you when you can’t make something
happen. You are easily prone to depression and moodiness when the pulse is off.

Channel of Concentration 52-9

This is a tricky one. If you have this Channel Defined in your chart, you can feel
rattled and uneasy. You can be agitated and dissatisfied when you have not yet
landed on the thing you’re to focus on. Not finding your focus could simply be a
timing issue. Or it could be a result of not following your Strategy. In this case, you
may be trying to force that Root Center energy into a Channel to relieve the
pressure. Either way, it’s not comfortable or gratifying.

Channel of Synthesis 19-49

This Channel can be a bit dodgy. If you are not feeling integrity in your
relationship you can be a bit dominant and rejecting – either of yourself or others.
This is the divorce channel. If someone crosses the line they’re out. Unless, that is,
you have the tools to see a bigger picture and find a way to bring the relationship
back into integrity.

Channel of Emoting 39-55

If you are not on track with your Strategy, your provocations can fall short and
end up being irritating or ignored. This is a deeply moody channel, sloshing
between the glass half-empty, glass half-full feeling. You can be a victim of your
                                         308

feelings of lack and bring everyone down with you. Or you can witness your range
of feelings, respect them, and use them to deepen your creativity and mutative
power.

Channel of Recognition 41-30

With the Collective Channel of Fantasy which has an emotional wave with
crashes, you are grappling with two challenges. The first is the challenge of
following your Strategy to determine which experiences you are going to go after.
If you jump in without the guidance of your Strategy, you can follow an impulsive
desire. It’s easy for you to create messes for yourself and end up dissipating your
passion. You’ve got to take your time to allow your fantasies without acting on
the urges until you know they are right for you.

The second challenge is the low side of your emotional wave. When the root
energy is off, when your passion is fizzled, when the wind is out of your sails, you
can hit skid row. If you’re not clear what is happening, you’ll believe the distress
and be victimized by your emotional intensity. If you’re not using your awareness
to lovingly embrace the crash, without identifying with it, you’ll enter hell realms.
This can be experienced as excruciating pain, like bone hitting bone.

You Risk Burning Yourself

Out The final grapple with the Defined Root is the direct result of not following
your Strategy: You burn yourself out. You get caught in a cycle of trying to offer
corrections that nobody receives. You take on struggles that do not belong to you.
You try to get ahead out of fear but end up driving yourself to exhaustion. You
don’t start and complete cycles according to your Strategy and end up exhausting
yourself by spinning in circles.

You try to birth new projects or ideas but exhaust yourself by pushing instead of
allowing. You don’t listen to where it would serve you to put your focus, so you
end up with Root Pressure that has no outlet. You become so rigid about
relationships that you end up in conflict or alone. You don’t follow your clarity
about when and how to provoke people and end up trying to impact people to no
avail. You follow one fantasy after another without direction and end up with
nothing to show but a depleted system.
                                         309

In all these cases, you are facing the possibility of a health crisis. Adrenalized
stress is nothing to mess with. You do not want to misuse it. It’s crucial to be on
track with it.

Working with the Defined Root

    Appreciate your Defined Root.
    Respect your Defined Root.
    Utilize your Strategy and Authority to stay on track!

Appreciate the Defined Root As with the other Centers, you must appreciate the
gift you’ve been given with the Defined Root. Your Definition here provides a
consistent way for the raw, powerful Root Center energy to initiate action to
move through the chart. This is not a small thing. Be in awe that you have this
support. Get to know which Channels you have off your Root Center. Befriend
them. Work with them. Allow them to support you rather than deplete you.

Respect Your Defined Root

 Your Defined Root is powerful energy. It’s like a class five rapid on a river with
crashing water pushing its way to the ocean. Respect the river. Respect the Root
Center current. Be conscious that it has a pulse. It ebbs and flows. Learn to
respect the pause in the pulse. Do not push when the support isn’t there. Learn to
rest and wait. Be patient with yourself. Trust.

Utilize Your Strategy and Authority to Stay on Track!

Part of trusting is learning to follow your Strategy and Authority. Just because you
have the urge to act, to speak, to share, to start something, don’t. Don’t send the
text when you’re angry. Don’t walk out on the marriage the moment you perceive
you’ve been wronged. Don’t leap at the next experience. Wait. Learn to tolerate
the pressure and stress even more. Be disciplined. Deepen into your Strategy. If
you have a Sacral Motor, listen deeply for the yeses and noes. Don’t betray
yourself for an urge.

Helpful Tools

There are three tools I think about with the Defined Root Center, though I am
sure there are many more. And any of you who have had the experience of being
                                          310

off track and burning out will no doubt have been pressed to find skillful ways to
manage this pressured, adrenalized stress.

    Cultivate Awareness.
    Relax your perineum.
    Unwind.

Cultivate Awareness

The first thing required in order to optimize this force and avoid burnout is
Awareness. It sounds so simple but is something we so often neglect. You have
got to know yourself. You have got to know what’s going on inside of you. You
have got to understand first and foremost how your energy works.

Begin by being clear on how your Type functions – what is your Strategy? This is
not conceptual. It’s serious stuff. I’m a Generator. Let’s say I have an urge to act.
Am I responding to a Sacral yes or no? Or am I bypassing that guidance system?
Next, look at the Definition in your Channels. I know I’m designed to struggle.
Okay. I don’t have to fight or resist struggle. I can work with it. Use it. Is this a
good urge? A good struggle? I have Emotional Authority – I have to wait out my
wave to make sure.

No jumping in the moment and following the urges as they arise. With my passion
and penchant for struggle, I can easily dissipate my energy in a thousand
directions and end up empty-handed and exhausted. I can push send on that
email in a moment of heated desire to get something or avoid something. This
creates messes that then take time to clean up. Exhausting.

How are you designed? Be clear with yourself. Are you designed to be moody? If
so, own it. Get to know it. Embrace it. Learn to recognize the low end of your
wave and how to navigate it. If you’re designed to be ambitious, go for it. Just
make sure it’s aligned with your Type, Strategy, and Authority. Don’t bypass how
you’re designed. Don’t mess with yourself. It’s costly



to burn out your body. Just ask anyone who’s ended up trying to be someone
they’re not or neglected who they are. They’ll tell you how they ended up with
                                           311

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome or Fibromyalgia. Listen to yourself. Know yourself. Love
and respect who you are as you are. Awareness is the ultimate self-care.

Relax Your Perineum

This might seem like an odd tool, but in fact, it is one everyone can and should
utilize on a regular basis. It’s like a stress cure-all. If you’re not clear, the perineum
is the muscle between your sex organs and your anus. Take a moment. Is your
perineum tight or relaxed? It may take some time to discern. The first step is
simply bringing your awareness to that part of your body, breathing, and relaxing
into it. Send your perineum a gentle inward smile.

I learned about the potency of the perineum and the power of relaxing it in my
Diamond training with Faisal Muqaddam. He explained that when you are afraid,
the perineum grabs, impacting the entire body. It’s like an octopus with arms that
reach up the spine to the head, contracting the whole body. Many times,
headaches can be relieved by relaxing the perineum. If your perineum is tight, you
go on automatic pilot. You abandon your awareness.

You become survival driven. Just because the Root has an urge does not mean it’s
a good one for you in the moment. But you don’t know that because you’ve left
the scene – you’re not there to discern. Before you act, make a habit of checking
your perineum. Bring your awareness to your perineum right now. Use this tool
and see how your life changes.

Unwind

Well, what does it mean to unwind and how do you do it? I think more than how
do you do it is the understanding that it is vital. You must have the intention to
unwind. Then you can follow your Type, Strategy, and Authority to determine the
how. The way for you to best unwind at any given time will become clear.

Open to discover what helps to lessen your stress – what enables you to relax and
let go. Maybe you unwind through the body, getting bodywork, having an
acupuncture treatment, running, swimming, dancing, yoga, qigong. Maybe you
unwind through emotional release work, or expressing yourself in art, listening to
music, watching a movie. Maybe you unwind by looking at your mind, doing
Byron Katie’s work, or meditation. Maybe you take a frequency approach and use
                                          312

essential oils or Reiki. Or maybe you go to the beach and put your feet in the
sand.

However, you do it, make unwinding a daily part of your self-care.

THE OPEN ROOT CENTER

Are you one of the 40 percent of the population with an Open Root? My sister
Heidi, who has been in my Human Design training, sent me her thoughts on her
Open Root Center. She writes how she never realized just how influential it was in
her life. She's lived at the effect of the pressures that overwhelm her daily. Only
now, by understanding what’s happening through the Human Design lens, is she
able to use her Open Root as a resource rather than be overrun by it.

Having an Open Root is a Big Deal

The minute I see an Open Root Center in a chart, my curiosity shoots up and I
wonder how the person is navigating the bombardment of pressure and stress
that they inevitably face. I could easily jump right into all the grapples of the Open
Root – they are so compelling – but I don’t want to overwhelm you out of the
gate. I don’t want to sugar coat it either. The truth is, no, it is not easy to have an
Open Root. You are driven by other people’s adrenalized energy without even
knowing it. However, once you see that the pressure is not yours, you can find
skillful ways to work with it. Discover, as Heidi did, the remarkable support your
Open Root offers.

All the Centers require attention or awareness to use them optimally, although
you have a bit of fudge-room with the Defined Centers. The Open Centers, not so
much. They demand integrity, or you suffer big time. This is crash and burn
territory. as you read the grapples of the Open Root, hold the knowing that this is
not the end of the story. There is help. You are not screwed.

The Open Root Center Grapples

Here we go. Take a breath and just sit back for a moment as you read this. Keep in
mind that the Root Center, like the Head Center, is a pressure center. That gives
you a clue about the potentially treacherous waters you’re stepping into. I’m
going to talk about three major grapples that come with the Open Root:
                                        313

    You take in stress from the environment.
    You’re vulnerable to burnout.
    You have trouble starting things.

You Take in Stress from the Environment Open Centers are receptor sites. They
take in the energy around them and amplify it. In this case, with your Open Root,
you’re taking in all the adrenalized pressure from the people around you. People
with Defined Root Centers are blasting their stress consciously or unconsciously,
like raw, loud, rock and roll music.

The result: You’re like a pressure cooker. Always stressed about what you need to
do or what needs to be done. Unless they have learned to work skillfully with it,
people with Open Root Centers are not fond of pressure. That is an
understatement. People with Open Roots tend to be pressure adverse. Is this
you? Do you feel bombarded with the mere mention that something needs to be
done?

What typically happens is that you try to dissipate the pressure by doing. The
kitchen needs cleaning – you do it. Your system is searching for ways to alleviate
this pressure, to get the stress out of your body. Only it never works. No sooner
than you complete a task than the next task appears as a pressure to be relieved.
It’s an endless cycle which, in and of itself, can lead to burnout.

The real kicker is that those pressures are most likely not even yours. That Open
Root Center merges – becomes one with – takes in the field. Who needs the
laundry sorted? Is that what you need to do in this moment?

Often people with Open Root Centers report feeling pressured by their partners.
More often than not, the partner/ parent/ colleague is merely stating what needs
to be done – not that they expect you to do it. But, that’s not how your body
registers it. And, in an almost automatic pilot way, you set to the task.

The other option you might take is to go to overwhelm and do nothing. The
adrenalized energy is too much for your system to handle and you go completely
into off mode. In the bigger picture, going offline has its own detrimental fallout
as you don’t show up for what is yours to do either. One interesting way this
energy can manifest is by acting out. This can look like becoming a daredevil,
using other people’s impulses to do things that may not be safe for you.
                                         314

You’re Vulnerable to Burnout

 Is what is occurring a result of overreacting? Is it a matter of not discerning what
is yours to do from what others might want to be done? Is it that you are doing
whatever you can to try to dissipate the pressure? Burnout. You hit the place
where you’re confused, overwhelmed, drained, and you can’t go on. You don’t
understand that you’re responding to everyone else’s pressure. You don’t get why
you never get a break – the work is never done.

Picture Sisyphus pushing the rock up the hill only to have it roll back down again.
Over and over, he is relentless. And the rock never gets up the hill to a resting
place. Does this sound like you? If so, you are seriously vulnerable to stress
disorders. And they are not fun. I’ve watched clients struggle with their health,
honestly to no avail, until they get clear what’s going on. As a side note, with this
bombarding energy, there can be panic attacks as you leave your body and flip
into fear – feeling what needs to be done and knowing it isn’t going to be.

You Have Trouble Starting Things

Those are big enough challenges, right? The next one can be a daily conundrum.
Let’s face it, you’re in a Catch-22 situation. On the one hand, you’re feeling
everyone’s pressure and are trying to dissipate it by running around pushing that
rock up the hill. On the other hand, with that Open Root Center, you are not
designed to initiate action.

Okay, let me say that another way. You don’t have a Defined Channel that allows
the pressurized raw Root Center energy to flow through you in a consistent way
(on and off though it may be) to initiate action. WTF?

I have a Defined Root. I can only imagine what that is like. The daily challenges
that are givens for the Open Root Center are a bit daunting from where I stand.

Most of you will have one or more Hanging Gates coming off the Root Center.
These give you something to hold onto. Some direction for your pressure. When
we talk about working with the Open Root Center, you’ll see how you can set
yourself up to make initiating more doable. Believe me, it’s not a lost cause. As
with all Open Centers, it simply requires more skill.
                                        315

The Open Root Gifts

Finally, we can talk about the gifts of the Open Root Center! There are a few
worth noting:

    You’re here to be wise about which activities to do.
    You have the whole palette of options to work with stress.
    You can get a lot done.

You’re Here to Be Wise about which Activities to Do

Open Centers are the wisdom Centers. You’re here to be wise about how to direct
and use pressurized energy, a.k.a. stress. Stress hormones can debilitate us, or
they can activate us into action. When you are in alignment with your Root
Center, following your Strategy and Authority, you have the capacity to use the
pressure to your benefit. But you must be clear on what’s yours to do, and what
the pressures are that you’re taking on from others. You must also be clear about
the correct timing,

I was looking at a chart with an Open Root recently and was exploding with
curiosity as to how that was working for this MD. Turns out he’s a surgeon, and all
that highly adrenalized energy is well-used in his work. How are you using your
Open Root to your benefit?

You Have the Whole Palette of Options to Work with Stress

Not only can you use pressure to your benefit, you’re also not relegated to a
particular pathway to deal with stress. You have a whole range of options: Will
you manage your stress through an emotional response by connecting the Root
through the Emotional Solar Plexus? You could manage stress through a survival
response, calling on the support of the Spleen Center energies. Or do you want to
turn to the Sacral Center and guide your stress toward how you want to operate
in the world? You have options. When you have enough clarity, you can use them,
rather than being tossed around by the pressurized influx of adrenalized energies.

You Can Get a Lot Done!

I am always astonished when I hear my sister has cleared out her cellar or had a
big garage sale. How does she do that? She can go from couch potato to cat-in-
                                        316

the-hat. It’s incomprehensible. If you have the Open Root Center, one of the
possibilities is that you can take in all that adrenalized energy, focus it, and
achieve crazy results. Wow. Again, I think of Karen Curry Parker with her Open
Root and all she accomplishes. I know she’s a Manifesting Generator, but it’s
almost as if she’s housing more than one person!

The Open Root as a God Portal

So, what happens when you clear your Open Root Center from conditioned
beliefs? What happens when you stop buying into the pressure to initiate? What
happens when you’re clear about whose pressure you’re responding to? What
happens when your pressurized pain shifts and your Open Root Center becomes a
God Portal?

These openings are by far my favorite explorations when it comes to Human
Design. The question could be reframed to something like this: What happens
when you shift from identifying with your egoic patterns and instead identify with
the openness of the Open Root? What happens when you allow the energy of
creation to move naturally from an essential knowing place?

Not being someone with an Open Root, here are some of my thoughts; see how
they resonate with you.

    You allow yourself to be moved.
    You have a natural ease in the midst of pressure.
    You ground on the Openness.

You Allow Yourself to Be Moved

Instead of trying to figure out what to do, or reacting to pressure or resisting
overwhelm, in the God Portal of the Open Root, you allow yourself to be moved.
You enter a state of Oneness, and like a plant that naturally turns to the sun, or a
river that shifts direction when it floods, you are surrendered at the moment. You
trust the movement and the pauses. You are without an egoic agenda. You are
the pulse of vitality itself.

I saw this in Byron Katie. She did not need to do anything. And yet, there was
always some new thing being initiated and so much got done. It was as if her work
– her program – had its own life force that she was merely not interfering with.
                                       317

Whatever pressure we experienced was transformed to life force energy itself,
flourishing on its own accord.

You Have a Natural Ease in the Midst of Pressure

When you are the God Portal of the Open Root, pressure is no longer an issue.
Actually, it’s not even a thing to contend with. You are so comfortable with the
flow of energy in its myriad of forms that you become the delighted witnessing
observer to all of it. What we call pressure becomes the life force hum that calls
the hummingbird to the flower. I have the thought about being in the God Portal,
in unimpeded Oneness. Perhaps that raw, vital energy of the Root Center is itself
transformed and no longer needs to flow through specific channels. There’s a
wholeness that is vitality itself.

You Ground on the Openness

When I studied qigong with Ming Tong Gu, he began each session with a
meditation where we merged with the quantum field. We first brought our
awareness to the top of our head, allowing our awareness expands to encompass
all space above us. Next, we brought our awareness to feel our feet touching the
earth, allowing our feet to expand down into the infinite space beneath us. The
meditation continued in all directions until we were filling all space. From this
place, we began the practice.

I share this because I think we can easily imagine stabilizing our Head Center by
grounding on the space within which thoughts arise. I’m suggesting the same
thing is possible here: With your Open Root Center, you can use your witnessing
mind to ground on space, on the Openness of your Root. You can witness the
movement of pressure and remain unmoved. You can be free from the ego’s
attempts to avoid stress or its efforts to make something happen. In the midst of
the stress storm, which we’re currently experiencing at a heightened level, you
can be at peace. That is the possibility of an unimpeded Open Root Center.

Working with the Open Root Center

Powerful medicine. How do you get there? How do you, in the least, work with
the challenges of your Open Root and optimize the gifts? Here are some
possibilities:
                                          318

      Appreciate your Open Root.
      Understand how your Open Root operates.
      Work with the specific Gates off the Open Root Center.
      Discern what’s yours.
      Make friends with the pressure and Ground on your openness.

Appreciate Your Open Root

First and foremost, you need to understand and appreciate the opportunities
your Open Root offers. Even the challenges are ultimately in the service of
accessing your Open Root Center genius. After all, without the pain, you’d be
content to live someone else’s urges and dreams. We need you, as you, living you,
bringing your contribution! Watch out for the tendency to diss yourself for the
Open Root challenges that you come by naturally. Shift your mindset to one of
wonder and awe, and unabashed curiosity about your Open Root Center. Send it
love. Smile at it. Decide to get to know and make friends with your Open Root.
Discover what mysteries lay in wait as you honor and care for your Open Root.

Understand How Your Open Root Center Operates

In order to optimize your Open Root Center, you must understand it. You have
the job of recognizing and coming to terms with the fact that you naturally take
on people’s stress and pressure, and that you must discern what’s yours. Your
work is to clear your filters so that you are not at the effect of others, nor acting
out unconsciously to avoid or relieve stress.

With your Open Root Center, you are vulnerable to burnout. Your job is to be
diligent about your self-care, recognizing when you are at risk for burnout, and
coming into alignment with yourself. This is serious business. It takes effort. You
matter. It would serve you to learn about the Gates you have coming off your
Root Center. Those are energies you lean toward and, with an Open Root, can
take on even bigger significance than they do with a Defined Root. These Defined
Gates can give you some semblance of ground as you’re tossed about.

Work with the Specific Gates off the Open Root Center

Part of understanding how the Open Root operates is understanding the Gates
that come off your Open Root. On the one hand, each of these Defined Hanging
                                        319

Gates gives you something to ground on. On the other hand, they act as a funnel
for the Open Root and can intensify the theme of that Gate. Each one of these
Hanging Gates is searching for its electromagnetic hookup so that the Root energy
has a place to flow, like rushing water looking for a riverbed.

If your Root is completely Open, the need to follow your Strategy and Authority is
heightened. You need to increase your awareness to discern whose pressure
you’re picking up on. You will do well to spend time in nature to dissipate built-up
pressure in order come back into balance.




Gate 58 Joy

With the Gate of Joy, you have a grounded understanding that what brings joy is
good for all of humanity. You’re searching for people with Gate 18, the Gate of
Correction, who can help you to logically upgrade things. You know that
something can always be better. Trust your joie de vivre and your logical
sensibility. You know when something is unhealthy or when patterns are off. Your
love of beauty is a beacon, guiding humanity to the next level of vitality.

Gate 38

Fighter With the Gate of the Fighter, you are under pressure to figure out what is
worth fighting for. What is your purpose? This is Individual Knowing Energy so you
                                        320

are committed to standing up for the rights of the individual. Be clear which fights
are yours to fight! You’re looking for people with Gate 28, the Gate of Struggle, to
bring awareness to what struggles are worth engaging in. Pay attention to your
Strategy and Authority. Let them guide you. Beware of picking fights just to
dissipate this pressure. This is one of the Gates of deafness – meaning you are
designed to tune out other people’s opinions so you can do your mutative work.

Gate 54 Ambition

With the Gate of Ambition, you have big aspirations and dreams that you are
under pressure to manifest. This is Tribal energy so your focus is typically on
business, though it could also be on enlightenment. You could be frustrated with
an Open Root trying to push and make your dreams happen. You’re searching to
hook up with Gate 32 Continuity. That will help you focus on which big dreams to
follow. Use your Strategy and Authority to help guide your focus and right timing.
Be alert. You can tend toward trying to make your dreams happen. That’s just not
going to work with an Open Root!

Gate 53 Starting Things

Gate 53 is under pressure to start things. This can be a little challenging with an
Open Root. How are you supposed to do that? You also can be flummoxed when
you do start things and don’t finish them. Head’s up – you’re not designed to
finish everything you start. Follow your Strategy and Authority to help you out.
Look for someone with the Gate 43, Finishing Things, to help you out. Give
yourself a break. Don’t think you should be able to do it all.

Gate 60 Limitation

With Gate 60, you’re under pressure to bring something into form. You’re
working with limitations. You’re working within a structure. This is Individual
Knowing circuitry. It’s mutative energy. You’re bringing something new. But
you’re not throwing the baby out with the bathwater. This is the lotus coming out
of the mud. You’re looking to Gate 3 to help you create order out of the mess
you’re working with. This is intense pressure, and you can get depressed when
you’re not seeing the results you’re under pressure to produce.
                                         321

Gate 52 Stillness

The Gate of Stillness is sometimes called The Mountain. Think of the mountain
pose in yoga. It is a dynamic stillness. You are under pressure to discover where to
focus the powerful energy of the Root Center. I think of the bow pulled back
searching for the target. You’re looking for Gate 9 Focus to help you guide your
attention. This can take some strength on your part. You have that Open Root
amplifying everyone’s energy and you’re looking for some outlet for it. You have
to wait. Use your Strategy and Authority to know when and where to focus!

Gate 19 Sensitivity or Wanting

 With Gate 19, you can be exquisitely sensitive. This could show up in any number
of ways. Perhaps you can’t tolerate the seams on socks so have to wear them
inside out. Perhaps you can’t tolerate being touched in certain ways. Maybe it’s a
sensitivity to foods. You’re under pressure to have your needs and your wants
met as well as the needs of the tribe. You’re longing for intimacy but may have a
hard time getting it if you’re not hooking up with the Gate 49. Follow your
Strategy and Authority to inform you where and how to get your needs met.

Gate 39 Provocation

With the Gate of Provocation, you are designed to provoke people. Funny right?
Actually, it’s kind of serious. You’re provoking people to connect with Spirit.
You’re helping people understand that Spirit is the source of our supply. This is
Individual Knowing energy, so it’s deeply mutative. You are here to transform the
world with your mutative provocations. Be clear that you need to be provoking
the right people in the right timing. When you do, it’s like an infectious spark that
wakes everyone up.

On the other hand, if you are provoking just to relieve the pressure, it’s not fun
for anyone. There can be a vulnerability to eating disorders or hoarding with the
39. You’re looking to connect with Gate 55 Abundance of Spirit in order to relieve
the pressure through feelings. This is another one of the Gates of deafness,
indicating that you are not designed to be easily influenced. Be clear on following
your Strategy and Authority and enjoy the ride!
                                        322

Gate 41 Fantasy

The Gate of Fantasy marks the beginning of the Human Design New Year. You are
under pressure to fulfill your desires. With this Collective Sensing energy, you are
imagining what’s possible for humanity. You want to experience it. You want to
feel it. You’re looking to Gate 30 Desire to help you focus what you want.
Otherwise, you can be lost in the wanting without Focus. Let yourself daydream.
Do vision boards. Let go of attaching to an outcome and rest in the delight of
imagining possibilities.

When you understand that your Open Root isn’t designed to start things, you
must learn how to navigate life when you cannot get going – and need to. Your
Hanging Gates can help you out a bit here as they point to where you are
electromagnetically drawn. Say, for instance, if you have an Open Root with the
Gate 52 Stillness, you will be drawn to someone with the Gate 9 Focus. Your Root
Center then gets activated. While you are with this person, you will have access to
the energy of Focus and will have the energy to put your stillness in action
through Focus.

This is no small thing. One of the things to keep in mind when you are struggling
to start something (like a writing project) is to deliberately be around someone
who activates your Hanging Gates, or who has a Defined Root. If it is your child or
your partner, sit in the room with them while you write, for instance. If you don’t
have anyone who fits that picture, or if you have no Hanging Gates whatsoever,
go to a cafe. There you will undoubtedly either be in the presence of someone
with a Defined Root, which will give you access to initiating energy, or you will
connect electromagnetically with someone and access that spark to start.

Discern What’s Yours

Developing a strong witnessing observer will help you begin to differentiate
what’s yours and what stress belongs to someone else. The pressure may come
from someone in the present moment, but it could also be a pressure you grew
up with and merged with. Say your mom always felt under pressure to care for
people. You may now have that wired into your system that you have to care for
others before you can care for yourself.
                                           323

Your first task is to recognize if the urge is not yours. Your second task is
recognizing what pressures are yours. What is yours to do? Commit to only doing
those. That is the clear path to avoiding burnout.

How you know what is yours to do goes back to your Type, Strategy, and
Authority. Maybe you’re a Generator, like my sister, who had spread herself thin
feeling the pressure to be in numerous groups. She had to find which group she
had a yes to and where she had a no. Heidi could easily stay with the things she
had a Sacral yes for, but she was threatened by her Sacral noes – riddled with
guilt and the fear of rejection if she honored them. In her note to me, she wrote
that with her Open Root, All those pressures were coming at me, all the time.
However, when I differentiated the pressures by examining and inquiring about
my motives for allowing them to run me into the ground with overwhelm, they
weren’t so intimidating, especially after I had cleaned out some of the pressures
by using my Sacral. In fact, I could make use of the pressures which were still there
because they were necessary pressures. Useful, even.

To sum it up: Discern what pressures are not yours and honor what is yours to
do. This is ongoing work until you no longer are tossed around by other people's
pressures!

Make Friends with the Pressure and Ground on Your Openness

 I know this is a tall order. I’m asking you to learn to tolerate the pressure without
acting on it. Wait. Feel it. Allow it. Stop making the futile effort of trying to relieve
it. Shift your mindset around pressure. Practice grounding on the Openness as a
refuge. Watch the urges come and go. Learn to honor your Strategy above the
pressure. Then you have a chance to protect yourself from burnout and actually
be in alignment with yourself. Go for it!

Helpful Tools

Here are some tools that may help you make the shift away from identifying with
the pressure to identifying the space within which the pressure arises:

    Develop your witnessing observer.
    Separate yourself from the pressurized field.
    Make use of deconditioning tools.
                                         324

    Relax your perineum.
    Unwind.
    Seek people and places to support you in starting things.

Develop Your Witnessing Observer

This is foundational to clearing your Root Center filter. You must have the
awareness to know, first off, when or if you’re stressed. This may not be obvious
at first because you’ve been so conditioned, and the stress has become so
familiar. Once you recognize that you are stressed, you can begin the inquiry
process: Is this mine? Is this a conditioned stress? Or is it stress from the present
moment? Once you have the answers to those questions, you can take the next
steps to work with it. If you’re picking up stress in the present moment…

Separate Yourself from the Pressurized Field

Take a break from the situation. Get out of the field where the pressure is
occurring. Give your system a break. It’s particularly helpful to go to nature where
you can let go with more ease. Tell your husband or your wife you need a time
out. Ask them if they mean to pressure you.

If, in your inquiry, you discover the stress is something conditioned, something
you carry around with you from the past…

Make Use of Deconditioning Tools We’ve talked about a number of tools that are
good for cleaning the filters of the Open Centers. Choose a tool that works for
you. You may find it changes over time, but just start. Here are some possibilities:

Deconditioning Tool #1

Make a list of the ways you feel pressure. You could do it from a Byron Katie
standpoint, writing:

I need to___ .
Or,______ needs me to ____.
If I don’t do ____, _____ will happen.
 Then ask the four questions and do the turnaround.

                                                                     (See Resources.)
                                          325

Deconditioning Tool #2

Use Leslie Temple-Thurston’s Square technique:

Divide a page into quarters.
In the top square, write: The Desire to feel pressure.
In the second top square, write: The Fear of feeling pressure.
In the bottom square, write: The Desire not to feel pressure.
In the remaining square, write: The Fear of not feeling pressure.
Make a list under each of these.
Usually, we’re unconscious of at least one of the squares.
Be sure to fill in all four squares.
Once you see the whole picture, the duality collapses.

You’re looking for your motivation. You could do any number of squares. For
example:
The Desire to burn out.
The Fear of burning out.
The Desire not to burn out.
The Fear of not burning out.

Play with it and see what you discover.

Deconditioning Tool #3
You can work with deconditioning your patterns by doing Vajrayana Meditation
practices with the guidance of a teacher.

Deconditioning Tool #4
Do private work with someone. If you need support, you could do in-depth
inquiry work with a Diamond teacher, a therapist, or a coach.

Deconditioning Tool #5
You can decondition your patterns at a frequency level with essential oils or with
healers who do this clearing work.

It doesn’t really matter how you do it. Just do it!
                                           326

Relax Your Perineum

I spoke about this as a tool for the Defined Root. I can’t overemphasize this
enough. I’m going to repeat the two paragraphs I previously wrote, to make sure
you get it here as well:

This might seem like an odd tool, but in fact, it is one everyone can and should
utilize on a regular basis. It’s like a stress cure-all. If you’re not clear, the perineum
is the muscle between your sex organs and your anus. Take a moment and feel it.
Is your perineum tight or relaxed? It may take some time to discern. The first step
is simply bringing your awareness to that part of your body, breathing, and
relaxing into it. Send your perineum a gentle inward smile.

My teacher, Faisal, explained that when you are afraid, the perineum grabs,
impacting the entire body. It’s like an octopus with arms that reach all the way up
the spine to the head, contracting the whole body.

In fact, many times headaches can be relieved by relaxing the perineum. If your
perineum is tight, you go on automatic pilot. You abandon your awareness. You
become survival-driven, which in this case is urge-driven. Just because the Root
has an urge does not mean it’s a good one for you in the moment. But you don’t
know that because you’ve left the scene – you’re not there to discern. Before you
act, make a habit of checking your perineum. Bring your awareness to your
perineum right now. Use this tool and see how your life changes.

Add to this practice sensing your arms and legs. We need you to be in your body.
Sensing your arms and legs is your best defense against dissociation.

Unwind

Let’s just add here, anything you can do for self-care to relax will be of great
benefit for you: Meditate, get bodywork, drink relaxing tea, take an Epsom salt
bath, go for a run, do yoga or qigong, dance, walk barefoot on the earth, garden,
or swim in the ocean. Consider doing things that support you to release tension
and give your nervous system a break. You’re looking to shift from a hyper-
aroused, turned-on, sympathetic nervous system mode to a resting,
parasympathetic mode where your ego can take a break.
                                        327

Seek People and Places to Support You Starting Things

Finally, when you need to start things, don’t be victimized by your Open Root
Center. Take action! Make a conscious effort to be with people who will activate
your sacral – either because they have a Defined Sacral Center or because they
create an electromagnetic hook-up. You’ve got this. Take care of yourself!

RECAP

I hope you’ve gotten a taste of the power of the Root Center. It’s definitely an
energy to pay attention to, whether you’ve got a Defined Root or Open Root.
What have you discovered? Were you surprised by any of the information? Did it
help you make sense of yourself and your ability or lack of ability to get things
done?

Did looking at the Hanging Gates and Channels off your Root help you
differentiate yourself or the people you’re working with? Take some time and
write down your revelations. The Root Center is worth getting to know and
working with on a regular basis. Becoming skillful with your Root energy can have
a big impact on your relationships, your work, and your health.

Next we turn to the last of the Centers, The Spleen Center. Here you’ll look at fear
in the chart as well as time, intuition, and well-being. Enjoy!
                                          328

                                          14

                      GETTING TO KNOW THE SPLEEN CENTER




INTRODUCING THE SPLEEN CENTER

The Spleen Center is the immune center for our quantum body. It has the job of
making sure we are safe and healthy. It is on the alert for possible danger and is
ready to protect us if need be. It is the Center for intuition, time, health, and well-
being. This Center houses our survival fears. Karen Curry Parker calls this The
Mastery Center.

The Spleen Center operates in the moment. It is an Awareness Center that is
tuned in to what is happening now. It utilizes our senses – taste, touch, sound,
sight, and smell – to alert us to what’s going on in the environment, ever ready to
act spontaneously. It’s the triangle on the bottom left of the chart and is colored
in brown when it’s Defined. It has seven Gates with nine Channels going to five
Centers: The Throat Center, the Identity Center, the Will Center, the Sacral
Center, and the Root Center. Before we delineate the

Defined and Open Spleen Centers, let’s take a deeper look at the four major
themes: fear, intuition, well-being, and time.
                                         329

The Theme of Fear and Survival

Think of an animal in the wild. Think of the level of alertness that is required to
keep it safe. Think of the caveman. He is constantly listening, sensing, and on
guard. His system is on high alert, poised to face the ever-present threat of an
unknown danger. Is there a saber-toothed tiger lying in wait outside his cave?

The truth is, we are not animals living in the wild, nor are we cavemen with saber-
toothed tigers lurking around the bend. While there are real threats, most of us
do not live moment to moment under siege with the ever-present threat of
death. But our brains have not caught up to this fact. I remember when I had a
brain injury, and I was living in terror. Every sound, sight, and smell was an
assault. My neurologist explained explained that my amygdala, that part of my
brain that was wired for survival, was switched on. I was back in caveman time,
reacting as if those tigers really were lurking and out to get me.

That’s an extreme example, but I’ve spent my life living under a perceived threat.
From a Human Design perspective, most of us have. It’s as if our collective
amygdala has been chronically switched on and we are all conditioned to operate
in response to the fear of survival.

In the evolutionary process and the Emotional Solar Plexus Mutation of 2027, we
are collectively shifting from orienting around the survival fear of the Spleen
Center to the well-being desire of the Emotional Solar Plexus Center. That means,
as I understand it, that we will not be motivated by fear in the same way we have
been but by what feels good to us – or not. I see this in kids who are already
showing this shift. They just can’t be hijacked by the fear of survival in the same
way I was as a child. They’re more concerned about how things feel to them.

While fear has played an important role in keeping us safe, we’ve perhaps been
caught in a trauma pattern and gone overboard with it. We’ve left the moment,
the now, where we are safe. “Just at this moment, except for your thinking, are
you fine?” Byron Katie would ask. She would often have us bring up the scariest
scenarios we could imagine and have us inquire into them.

Katie had numerous ways to guide us to meet our fears face to face. Some of
them were terrifying! Later I would study the Tibetan Buddhist master Machig
Lobdrön who lived in the early 1100s. Machig did a similar thing, taking students
                                        330

to meditate in charnel grounds, where dead bodies were being eaten by vultures.
She was also helping people liberate themselves from the clutches of their fears.

The Spleen Center is here to alert us through intuition that there is a real danger
that must be addressed in the moment. But most of our daily fears are not real in-
the-moment threats. They are from the past or projections onto the future. Our
ego attaches to those fears, feeding them, keeping them alive, and scaring us with
them. The Ego, after all, prefers the scary perceived known to the threat of the
unknown. As we clear those fears, we are liberated from a fear-based structure
and step into the spontaneous present that is our true nature.

As an Awareness Center, the Spleen Center shows us where we have consistent
access to specific fears depending on which Gates are Defined. With each of these
fears, the antidote is to come into the present moment, see the fear for what it is,
thank it for sharing, and move on.

 The best way to understand this is by remembering the story about the rope and
the snake:

A man was walking down a path and saw a poisonous snake in the middle of the
road. He stopped in his tracks terrified, fearing for his life. Another fellow was
walking toward him, unaware of the danger he was stepping into. The first man
tried to alert him: “Watch out! There’s a poisonous snake. Don’t go any further.”
The second fellow looked at him and said, “That’s not a snake; it’s a rope.” And
continued to walk by.

You see, we respond to these fears as snakes with a flight/ flight/ freeze reaction.
They are fears in the moment, but we get hijacked by them and stop our forward
motion. The Spleen Center holds the energy for spontaneity, joie de vivre, health,
and well-being. But when we’re fearful, those life-giving states elude us.

The Fear Gates of the Spleen Center

Here are the Fear Gates of the Spleen Center. Look and see which ones you have
Defined in your chart. Begin to recognize that what you perceive at the moment
as real threats are actually harmless ropes. Don’t be stopped by them. Thank
them for sharing, take action, and move forward.
                                         331




Gate 48 Depth

The Fear of Not Knowing Enough and the Fear of Inadequacy

If you have this Gate Defined, you are deep. You are driven to gather knowledge
in order to be safe. If you can get enough knowledge, you’ll be able to assuage
your fear. The problem is, the more knowledge you have, the more you’re aware
of what you don’t know. This can lead to insecurity and a need to continuously
learn more – even though, in reality, you know more than anyone.

Gate 57 Intuition

The Fear of the Future

If you have Gate 57 Defined in your chart, you have consistent access to your
intuition (or not!). You can hear the truth in the moment. It is a powerful, glorious
superpower. The problem is because you intuit so much, you project onto the
future and scare yourself. You could be right, but fear has a way of clouding your
vision.

Fifteen years into our relationship, my wife left me. I called Katie sobbing:

Me: She’s gone, Katie. She’s left, and she’s never coming back.
                                         332

Katie: Oh, sweetheart, is it true?

Me: (sobbing harder, barely able to get the words out) Yes, it’s true. This one is
true.

Katie: Can you absolutely know it’s true she’s not coming back?

Me: Yes! She’s gone! I know it’s the end. (More sobbing)

Katie: Oh. So, you know the future?

Me: No. I don’t know the future.

Katie: We zero percent know the future.

That stopped me in my tracks. Brought me out of my future story, back to the
present moment. No, we don’t know the future, but we can sure scare ourselves
with it. Just so you know, that was almost twenty-five years ago. My wife and I
are still together.

Gate 44 Alertness, Coming to Meet

The Fear of the Past Repeating If you have Gate 44, you have the gift of looking at
past patterns and sensing what worked and what caused pain. Your goal is to
support the survival of the tribe by bringing awareness to what past patterns
didn’t serve and help bring new patterns that do. The fear is that the past
patterns will repeat themselves without the necessary transformation.

Gate 50 Values

The Fear of Not Taking Enough Responsibility for Your Loved Ones, Not Caring
Well Enough for the Survival of the Tribe

If you have this Gate, you feel responsible for others’ survival and well-being. You
may take on more responsibility than you should out of fear. There can be a pull
to be a martyr or to be co-dependent. I have this Gate. The whole Channel,
actually. I know this tendency well.

One of my many sobering revelations with Katie came around my feeling that I
was responsible for my clients’ well-being. She pointed out how arrogant that was
of me. How demeaning and untrusting of them for me to think they needed me.
                                         333

This may sound odd, but it was a powerful revelation. In fact, it freed me to
support my clients to turn and trust themselves rather than be dependent on me
as the source of their well-being.

Gate 32 Continuity

The Fear of Not Realizing Your Big Dreams and the Fear of Failure

 If you have Gate 32, you intuitively know what can be transformed – which big
dreams to follow. But the fear of not realizing those dreams can hamper you,
stopping you from even trying.

Gate 28 Struggle

Fear of Life Being without Purpose or Meaning

 With this Gate, you can feel the utter purposeless of life. In Chapter 2, I spoke
about my experience of Neptune in Gate 28, the Gate of Struggle. My spiritual
path is to struggle. When I got caught in the fear that life has no purpose, I went
through a dark night of the soul. This fear of no purpose can be disheartening to
the point of despair until it’s met and seen for what it is.

I tell Katie I need a purpose in life.
She asks: Is it true?
Me: Yes. Katie: Can you absolutely know it’s true?
Me: No.

I realize I am fine in the moment without a story that I need a purpose. She tells
me her purpose is to sit in her chair, noticing her hand waves as she talks to me.
She always knows her purpose – it’s exactly whatever she is doing/ being in the
moment.

Gate 18 Correction

Fear of Being Judged and the Fear of Things Not Being Correct

If you have this Gate, you have the superpower of seeing what patterns need to
be corrected or upgraded. You also have the challenge of not speaking what you
know unless you are invited or recognized. If you do speak what you know before
it’s invited, what you say is perceived as criticism and not received. People can
                                         334

feel judged by you, and you are vulnerable to feeling judged for what you’re
offering. This can be a dodgy Gate in relationships until you understand the
dynamic and can work consciously with it.

I’ve spent a lot of time introducing the fear aspect of the Spleen Center. Let me
introduce the other three themes and then go into more depth with them in the
Defined and Open Spleen sections.

The Theme of Intuition

The Spleen Center is the home of intuition in Human Design. If you have a Defined
Spleen, you have consistent access to your intuition. If you have an Open Spleen,
not so much. How your intuition shows up will depend on which Gates or
Channels you have defined. Also, in Chapter 15, you’ll find an introduction to
electromagnetics between charts/ people. For example, if you have a Hanging
Gate coming off the Spleen Center and you’re with someone else who has the
opposite end of that Channel Defined, you will both have access to intuition while
you’re together.

The Spleen Center is one of the Authorities, one of the decision-making Centers. If
you have Splenic Authority, it’s crucial that you listen to and follow your intuition.
Some people say that intuition only speaks once and in a soft voice. If you miss it
or don’t follow it, you lose the guidance. My teacher Faisal used to say he waits to
hear it three times. That way, he knows it’s not the ego speaking. In any case, we
each have the task of discovering how our intuition operates and learning to trust
and follow it.

The Theme of Well-being

With the immune system playing such a big part in the Spleen Center, it stands to
reason that well-being is a function of the Spleen as well. When we are aligned
with our Spleen Center, we have an aliveness, an in-the-moment presence that is
compelling and invigorating. There is a natural vitality, different from the Sacral
Center. It’s the vitality of an alert, healthy body that is joyful and free of fear.
There is lightheartedness and ease as we handle survival issues. When we are not
aligned – when our bodies are stressed with fear – we suffer immune disorders
and body failure.
                                        335

The Theme of Time

The Spleen is the Center of time. It is naturally spontaneous as its intuition is
meeting every moment fresh and making moment by moment adjustments to
what’s needed for well-being and ease. The question becomes for the Defined
Spleen: Are you free to be spontaneous? The issue of time shows up differently
for the Open Spleen, which can tend to lose track of time.

The Spleen Center has many aspects and has a big impact on our lives. Taking the
time to come into alignment with this Center makes a lot of sense, especially if we
want to be healthy and happy! Let’s take a few minutes to introduce you, in an
embodied way, to your Spleen Center.



CONNECTING TO THE SPLEEN CENTER – GUIDED MEDITATION

 We begin, as always, feeling the weight of our body as our sitz bones rest on the
chair.

Let yourself sink in.
 Take a breath.
Just relax.
Sense your arms and legs.
Breath into your belly.
Feel your skin sensing the air around you.
Is there a breeze, or is the air still?
Take a deep breath and come into this moment now.
Let go of the past and the future.
Rest.
Feel your feet touching the floor.
 Allow them to expand down beneath you.
Keep expanding your awareness beneath you, allowing it to extend to the center
of the earth and beyond, out into infinite space.
Now feel the crown of your head touching the sky.
Allow your awareness to expand above you, up into the milky way and beyond.
 Allow it to fill the entire galaxy into infinite space.
Now bring your awareness to your front body.
                                         336

Sense the front of your body as you allow it to expand to fill the space in front of
you.
Now sense the back of your body.
With awareness, expand your back body into the space behind you.
Allow it to fill the space behind you, reaching into infinity.
Turning your attention to the left side of your body, allow your awareness to
expand out into endless space; the right side of your body, allow it, likewise, to
expand out into infinite space.
Allow your entire body to expand in all directions into infinite space.
Take a breath. Smile inward.
Acknowledge that you are a quantum being in a multi-faceted holographic
quantum body.
Welcome the whole of you.
 Turning your awareness to your Spleen Center, what do you notice?
If your Spleen Center is Defined, do you feel any substance in your awareness?
If it is Open, what do your notice when you place your awareness on your Spleen
Center?
 Perhaps you know the Hanging Gates coming off the Spleen.
 If you have them, can you sense into them?
Is your Spleen Center filter gummed up with fears?
If so, are they yours?
Or someone else’s you’ve merged with?
Do you recognize them?
Are they familiar?
Just for now, can you let them arise and pass without identifying with them?
Check in with yourself.
Note your level of health and well-being.
 Where would you place yourself on a scale of one to ten, with one being
unhealthy and ten being healthy?
Check your joie de vivre.
How do you feel about it?
Wherever you are, can you just welcome yourself, recognizing that you are an
ever-evolving mystery, worthy of knowing?
Taking one last moment to connect consciously with your Spleen Center, ask if
there are any intuitive hits, anything you should know?
                                        337

Then listen. Just listen.
And wait.
Watch the tendency to want to rush and fill the space with thought.
Listen.
My Spleen says, “Spend more time with me.”
I can feel the comfort of resting in and with it.
The ground it brings.
Now take a few deep breaths.
Invite yourself to come back into body awareness.
Sense your arms and legs. Breathe into your belly.
 With a gentle smile, open your eyes.
Notice the room around you.
 Take it in.
 Hear the sounds (for me, it is the birds cooing).
Allow your senses to be awake and receptive.
And, as Ram Dass would say, Be Here Now.
Take a moment to write what you noticed in your journal.
Commit to get to know your Spleen Center.
Decide to be in alignment with it.



THE DEFINED SPLEEN CENTER

If you are one of the 55 percent of people with a Defined Spleen, you have
consistent access to your intuition. You are designed to use your body awareness
to be awake to what’s happening in your environment. You are designed to
spontaneously respond as needed to the situation at hand. If you are listening to
your intuition and following your Strategy and Authority, you can have a vibrantly
healthy body with a strong immune system. If, on the other hand, you are not
following your intuition nor following your Strategy and Authority, you risk
burning out.

Depending on which Channels are Defined to which Centers, your intuition flows
in that theme. We’ll look more closely at these in the gift section, as consistent
access to these energies empowers you to recognize and use your intuition.
                                        338

Defined Spleen Center Gifts

    You have consistent access to your intuition.
    You use your senses to be aware and alert in the now.
    You have a strong healthy immune system and a feel-good glow.

You Have Consistent Access to Your Intuition

When you have a Defined Spleen Center, you have consistent access to your
intuition. This is a gift, as long as you are listening to your inner guidance and
following it. The Channel or Channels Defined from your Spleen determine your
particular connection to your intuition. Look at your chart and see which of the
Channels below are defined in your chart. Contemplate how the themes resonate
with you.

Spleen Center Connecting to the Throat Center: (See Chart #25.)

48-16

57-20

48-16 Talent

If your Spleen Center connects to the Throat Center through the 48-16, you will
have access to bringing your talents into form.

57-20 The Brainwave

If your Spleen Center connects to the Throat Center through the 57-20, your
intuition will be geared to the Throat, and you will have the capacity to speak
your intuition.

Spleen Center Connecting to Identity Center: (See Chart #29.)

The Channel of Perfected Form 57-10

If your Spleen Center connects to the Identity Center, Channel 57-10 Perfected
Form, you will have intuitive awareness regarding loving yourself. You know what
feels good to you and are here to live true to yourself, in the moment. In doing so,
you empower others to live true to themselves.
                                          339




Spleen connecting to the Sacral Center:

57-34 Power

27-50 Preservation

The Channel of Power 57-34

With the 57- 34, the energy of the intuition is connecting with the Sacral Center.
You are using your intuition in response, connecting your gut yeses and noes with
your intuition. This is a powerfully grounded survival response in the moment.
You are using your keen sense of inner hearing, almost like a radar to scan the
environment for danger, keeping you alert to anything that might pose a threat to
either your physical survival or your survival as a unique individual. Your focus is
strictly on your survival without concern for others. You model for others how to
survive and thrive through paying attention to your body awareness.

We could say this is the Be Here Now channel. It is the only Channel that Ram
Dass has Defined in his chart!

The Channel of Preservation 27-50

On the other hand, if you have the 27-50 the Channel of Preservation Defined,
you are concerned with the preservation of the tribe. Your intuition will guide you
                                         340

to share and teach values that will ensure the tribe’s well-being and sustainability.
You will know what will be nourishing, in terms of both food and education.




Spleen Center Connecting to the Will Center:

The Channel of Surrender 44-26

The Channel of Surrender is Tribal energy, with the intuition moving toward
surviving in the material world. This is the energy of sales. Your intuition will guide
you in looking at the past to see what’s been beneficial for the tribe, and what no
longer serves. With that, you will use your will to convince the tribe that what you
have is worthwhile for their survival and well-being. If you have this Channel, you
have the uncanny capacity to get things accomplished in a short time.

Spleen Connecting to the Root Center: (See Chart #45.)

The Channel of Transformation 54-32

The Channel of Struggle 38-28

The Channel of Judgment 58-18
                                          341

 These three Channels combine the raw, adrenalized Root energy with the
intuition and survival-in-the-moment energy of the Spleen. This is a powerful,
intense pressurized combination.

The Channel of Transformation 54-32

 If you have Gate 32 Big Dreams or Duration Defined and connected to a Defined
Gate 54 The Drive, you have the Channel of Transformation. You have the
intuition to know what big dreams to follow with the ambition and drive to make
those dreams come to fruition. Driven by survival, you can go for what you want
and transform your life, whether it is in business or in the arena of awakening.

The Channel of Struggle 38-28

 If you have Gate 28 Struggle Defined and Gate 38 The Fighter Defined, you have
the intuition to know what struggles are worthy of fighting for. Is it a struggle for
survival? This could look like physical survival or the survival of yourself as an
individual. Is it a health struggle? Is it a struggle around how to use your time? Is it
a struggle for you personally? Or are you called to help others with their
struggles? If you tap into your intuition and follow your Strategy and Authority,
you will be guided to worthwhile struggles and to fight for the rights of individuals
in ways that revitalize you rather than drain you.

The Channel of Judgment 58-18

 If you have both Gate 18 Correction, and Gate 58 Joy Defined in your chart, it
creates a Channel connecting the Spleen Center to the Root Center. You are using
your intuition to see what needs to be corrected or upgraded to bring the gift of
joy and vitality to humanity. You understand that our vitality is key to our survival,
and from this conviction, you are driven to bring Joy.

You Use Your Senses to Be Aware and Alert in the Now With a Defined Spleen
Center, your intuitive Spleen is awake and turned on, giving you an awareness of
your environment through your senses. Imagine a cat relaxing on the porch in the
sun. She may look like she’s sleeping, but you’ll see her ears twitch, or an eye
open. You’ll see her tail swish. She is relaxed but totally alert, ready to move at a
moment’s notice. You have access to this animal-like sensitivity.
                                         342

Actually, because of it you can relax, trusting that your awareness will alert you.
This is not only true for danger, but for positive things as well. The cat hears the
can opener and runs to the kitchen to be fed. You can use this in any situation. It’s
an under-the-radar gift, and it gives you a groundedness that Open Spleens are
drawn to and want to be around.

You Have a Strong, Healthy Immune System and Feel-Good Glow

This is a really beautiful gift to have, especially in this day and age of pandemics,
viruses, and autoimmune diseases. Of course, it’s not a given – you have to follow
your Strategy and Authority. But the vitality that you can consistently radiate is
lovely and heartwarming. It validates the vitality of life. It’s like looking at a
garden of thriving flowers. It’s relaxing and brings a sense of ease into the
environment. The message is all: All is well; you’re safe.

Defined Spleen Center Grapples

There are a couple of grapples worthy of noting here:

    You can take your health for granted.
    Your mind can override and distract your intuition.
    You can shut down your intuition and live the polarity.

You Can Take Your Health for Granted

You are endowed with a strong immune system. Because of that, you have the
capacity to push past feeling unwell. You may end up really sick before you
recognize you’ve ignored your body’s messages. This is a challenge for the
Defined Spleen. You take your health for granted and don’t listen to intuitive
messages that tell you it’s time to take care of yourself. I know this one personally
– it’s the sheer denial of symptoms.

Your Mind Can Override and Distract Your Intuition

Yes, you have consistent access to your intuition. However, are you listening to it?
Are you following its alerts? Our minds are so loud, and the superhighway bundles
of neuropathways all seem to lead to the brain. We listen to what’s in our heads,
rather than putting our ears to our intuition. The challenge here
                                        343

is to really honor your intuition and reorient your focus from your brain back into
your body where this awareness lives.

You Can Shut Down Your Intuition and Live the Polarity

We have discussed that where you have Definition, the theme shows up in a
polarity. With the Spleen Center, you can either have access to your intuition, or
you can cut off access to your intuition. It’s easy enough to cut off from your
intuition when you are dissociated – when you are not grounded in your sense
perceptions. If you want the gift of your Defined Spleen, you must do the work of
being and staying present in your body!

Working with the Defined Spleen Center

    Appreciate your Defined Spleen.
    Commit to being in your body.
    Shift your mindset away from fear to relaxed alertness.

Appreciate Your Defined Spleen

When you’re working with your Defined Spleen Center, begin by appreciating the
gift you’ve been given. You have a strong immune system and the potential for
vitality and well-being if you’re on track with yourself. You have access to your
intuition. You can be grounded in the now, with an awareness that serves to keep
you safe. Remember, do not take these for granted! Care for your natural riches.

Commit to Being in Your Body

When you are in your body, you are in the present. In the present, you have
access to your intuition and body awareness. You’re awake and alert. You have a
natural safety. However, being in our bodies is not as easy as it sounds in this day
and age. We live in a mental culture and are bombarded by electronic devices and
stimulation from every direction. Commit to yourself to honor and embrace your
precious body. Our bodies are a gift that can easily be neglected. Get bodywork,
do qigong, exercise, eat well, get enough rest. Do whatever you need to do to
calm your system and make it safe for you to be at home in your body.

One thing to remember is that fear sends us out of our bodies. So yes, you’ll need
to wake up to your fears and work with them consciously.
                                        344

Shift Your Mindset from Fear to Alertness

None of these things are easy. But there are big rewards if you can meet your ego
and take charge of the fear and trauma. Shift your mindset away from fear into
that natural, alive alertness. Your relaxed alertness is more effective than fear in
protecting you. Come into the present. One way to do that is to get into your
body. Another way is to meet your fears and see them for what they are.
Remember the story of the snake and rope? Don’t buy these fears. They are not
your friends. At one point, they served to protect you. They’re committed to
keeping you safe by keeping you small.

Having fear arise does not mean you have to identify with it and give it center
stage. You can acknowledge it, thank it for sharing, and move on. You can have
compassion for your fear in the same way you have compassion for a child who
has fallen and skinned their knee. One thing to note: With a Defined Spleen
Center, you are broadcasting your fears into the field. Be clear on this. Take
responsibility for your fears. Clean them up. They’re like a virus. Don’t expose
others to your fear.

I mentioned earlier that following my car accident, I had a head injury. My
amygdala was stuck in the on position. I was continuously barraged by light,
sound, and movement. I tried using my cognitive mind to liberate my fears. I went
to my cure-all, The Work of Byron Katie. But my mind wasn’t working right.

I couldn’t touch the level of trauma that had been activated by using my mind.
Homeopathy helped. High doses of arnica walked me off the ledge on many
occasions. The only problem was that it didn’t stick. Anat Baniel’s Method of using
awareness combined with gentle movement and touch was phenomenal in
bringing my brain back online and bringing me into the present. But again, I kept
getting triggered. It wasn’t until I did a Medical Qigong Intensive with Ming Tong
Gu that the switch flipped.

I was terrified I was never going to get my life back. When was I going to be able
to work again? When was I going to be able to go into a restaurant? In the first
circle of the workshop, I made a clear intention to heal. I remember the moment
it happened. I was doing the Lift Chi Up, Pour Chi Down practice with the group. I
was facing a thangka, a cloth image of the Tibetan Bodhisattva of Compassion, the
                                         345

Thousand-Armed Avalokiteshvara. I imagined I was Avalokiteshvara, lifting my
thousand arms, pulling in through the palm of each hand the healing I needed. As
I pressed my palms outward, I imagined all the pain and trauma trapped within
leaving. I was consciously receiving healing, releasing pain. At the end of practice,
we laid down to integrate. A wave of healing blue light poured through my body. I
experienced myself as larger than my body. The pain in my head was a dot
compared to the expanse of who I was. The switch flipped. I was no longer
identifying as my head in pain. The fear dissipated. I could have pain, but I wasn’t
the pain. That truth – that awareness – has never left me.

Helpful Tools

      Do anything that helps you get in your body.
      Meditate.
      Inquire into your fears.
      Incorporate Tapping.

Do Anything that Helps You Get into Your Body

There are numerous ways to help you get into your body, from bodywork to
body-based modalities: yoga, qigong, conscious breathing. Any movement with
awareness will be helpful. Discover what works for you and commit to being
connected to your body. Sensing your arms and legs is always a good tool to help
you come into your body. The essential oil Mugwort Technique works well, too.
(See Resources.)

Meditate

Meditation is a sure way to help you calm your mind and guide you into the
present. You might try Katie’s meditation, where you put your fears on a cloud
one at a time and watch them pass. See other meditations in the Resources.
Choose the meditation that is best for you.

Inquire into Your Fears

Inquiry #1:
Make a list of your fears daily – are they real?
Look them in the eye.
                                        346

Inquiry #2:
The Work of Byron Katie (See Resources.)

Inquiry #3
Use the Squares Technique (See Resources.)

Inquiry #4
Do the Five and Five inquiry into your fears (See Resources.)

Tapping

Tapping helps get the body energies flowing, clearing stagnation. This can be very
helpful with fear. (See Resources.)

THE OPEN SPLEEN CENTER

If you are one of the 45 percent of the population with an Open Spleen Center,
you’re likely to have a more sensitive body. You tend to be more aware of when
you’re getting sick than people with a Defined Spleen. You are taking in and
amplifying the fears of people around you. You have to learn which fears belong
to you and which fears you’re taking on that don’t belong to you. Take a moment
to go back to the section above on the Theme of Fear and Survival to see which
Gates you may have Defined off your Open Spleen. Those are the fears you will
have consistent access to and will need to recognize as they arrive. You’ll need to
see them for what they are and meet them head-on. Let’s look more closely at
your grapples, gifts, and God Portals.

Open Spleen Center Grapples

      You tend to be vulnerable to illness and have a sensitive immune system.
      You can take in other people’s ill health and identify with it.
      You tend to lose time or be pressured by time.
      You can take in and amplify everyone’s fears and anxiety.
      You can feel like you don’t have what it takes to survive.
      You tend to hold onto things longer than you should.
      You shouldn’t try to be spontaneous.
      You can’t rely on your Spleen for decisions.
                                        347

You Tend to Be Vulnerable to Illness and Have a Sensitive Immune System

With your Open Spleen, you may have a more sensitive immune system. This
could look like being aware that you’re starting to get sick long before symptoms
show up. You may be more affected by medicines. You may need a lower dose of
supplements than someone with a Defined Spleen. Often people with Open
Spleens do better with energy medicine because of their heightened sensitivity.
Do you recognize this in yourself? My wife has an Open Spleen, and she’s got a
delicate ecosystem. If she eats something that’s not right, it impacts her whole
body: Her sleep will be off, her system feels under attack. She can only take one
or two supplements at a time, and they have a strong effect on her.

If we think of cars for a moment, my first car was a little yellow VW Bug, which
took very little maintenance. Even when it had issues, I could do hacks to keep it
running. At one point, I had to cover the engine with plastic when it rained to
make sure it started. When my wife had a BMW, there was no wiggle room. She
had to take it to a particular auto shop, and it needed a higher level of tuning and
care. When torrential torrential rains caused a rising creek to flood the engine,
the electrical system was damaged beyond repair. The moral: If you have an Open
Spleen, take good care of yourself. Respond to the signals that something is off
and honor your needs. Also, don’t park your BMW by a creek!

You Can Take in Other People’s Ill Health and Identify with It

This is a tricky one. Not only are you sensitive regarding your immune system, you
also can feel poor health in others and misidentify it as your own lack of health or
well-being. It’s almost like a bug you pick up simply from feeling it in someone
else. Knowing this can help you begin to differentiate and be on guard for that
tendency. Good boundaries are important for you.

You Tend to Lose Time or Be Pressured by Time

Have you noticed that you tend to lose track of time? Maybe you’re one of those
people who are perpetually late? Or maybe, you’re overly concerned about time
and experience it as pressure? I used to take it personally when certain friends
would be chronically late. I couldn’t understand it. It seemed so insensitive and
disrespectful. Then I learned about the Open Spleen. With that Open Spleen, you
tend to operate out of time. You don’t have access to time in the same way
                                          348

someone with a Defined Spleen does. Or you could be hyperaware of time. My
wife is compelled to be early to everything. If we are running late there is a life or
death feeling about it. She’ll go sit in the car with the motor running while she
waits for me. It’s quite serious for her. The point is that there will be, most likely,
a marked relationship to time.

You Can Take in and Amplify Everyone’s Fears and Anxiety

With your Open Spleen Center, you are taking in and amplifying the fears and
anxiety of the world around you. As I write this book, the world is in the midst of a
fear attack. We are in the middle of a global pandemic with massive economic
consequences. In the United States, there is growing social unrest. The insidious
racism we’ve pushed under the carpet is bursting into the light.

At the same time, a political crisis with our presidential elections threatens our
democracy. You are taking in all this energy and trying to process it through your
Open Spleen. Not to mention the fears of anyone you’re in a room with at any
given time. This is no small thing and requires you to look directly at the fears that
arise. Your health and well-being are at stake if you attach to the fears that
surround you. This is the sea you swim in. Once you’re aware of it, you can make
more conscious choices.

You Can Feel Like You Don’t Have What It Takes to Survive

When you come into the world with an Open Spleen Center, you may feel like the
world doesn’t have your back and that you don’t have the resources it takes to
survive. This is not the case, but it has a bit of the flavor of a girl being born into
the patriarchy. What happens is that you tend to be attracted to people with
Defined Spleens in an effort to feel some stability, some safety. My wife tells the
story of her mom taking her to kindergarten. On the first day, my wife had a
terrible panic attack. She was filled with so much anxiety that her mother kept her
home that year. Often people with Open Spleens are attracted to Defined Spleens
as they naturally long to feel safe.

You Tend to Hold on to Things Longer than You Should

As a result of the insecure feeling that people with Open Spleens can have, they
tend to attach to people and things longer than is safe for them. A job or a
                                         349

relationship can give a sense of security even if you know it is not healthy for you.
That distorted intuitive sense latches on and convinces you that you must stay or
something dire will happen.

You Shouldn’t Try to Be Spontaneous

With an Open Spleen, you’re not designed to be spontaneous. I know that sounds
funny, but if you think about it, you’re influenced by the people around you. This
is especially true for people with Open Spleens when they’re around people with
Defined Spleens. Let’s say you’re with someone, and you feel safe. You make a
decision based on that feeling of safety. That person leaves the field, and
suddenly, you don’t feel safe with that decision. Your Open Spleen is variable. It’s
in this context that it’s better to take time before you leap into a decision that
might not be the best for you. Let me use an example of going to see a doctor.
The doctor recommends a standard dose of ibuprofen for your headaches. You
know that you’re sensitive to medications, but you feel safe with the doctor and
so you take the dose recommended. It’s too much for your system. Your stomach
flares up, and you have a huge reaction.

While it’s true for everyone, with an Open Spleen, you have to remember that
you know better than anyone what’s good for you. Don’t let yourself be pushed
into something because it feels safe in the moment. This feeling of unsafety is so
unconscious that it’s crucial to recognize when you feel unsafe and to stay
present in your body rather than check out.

You Can’t Rely on Your Open Spleen to Make Decisions

This brings me to the last grapple: You can’t rely on your Open Spleen to make
decisions. And it’s not because you don’t have intuition. You can be more intuitive
than any Defined Spleen person. It’s just that your intuition can be variable. You
never know when it’s going to come or how it’s going to show up. Will you have a
vision? Maybe you’ll just know something. Maybe a smell will trigger a download
of information. Then again, maybe you’re picking up on someone much for your
system. Your stomach flares up, and you have a huge reaction. While it’s true for
everyone, with an Open Spleen, you have to remember that you know better
than anyone what’s good for you. Don’t let yourself be pushed into something
because it feels safe in the moment. This feeling of unsafety is so unconscious
                                        350

that it’s crucial to recognize when you feel unsafe and to stay present in your
body rather than check out.

You Can’t Rely on Your Open Spleen to Make Decisions

 This brings me to the last grapple: You can’t rely on your Open Spleen to make
decisions. And it’s not because you don’t have intuition. You can be more intuitive
than any Defined Spleen person. It’s just that your intuition can be variable. You
never know when it’s going to come or how it’s going to show up. Will you have a
vision? Maybe you’ll just know something. Maybe a smell will trigger a download
of information. Then again, maybe you’re picking up on someone else’s intuitive
hit that’s not yours at all. You’re better off using your Strategy and Authority to
make your decisions if you want to be in alignment with yourself.

    Open Spleen Center Gifts When healthy, you discern what is yours and
     what is not yours.
    You have a fine-tuned sense of what’s healthy for others.
    You can be a deep wisdom healer.
    You can be exquisitely intuitive.

When Healthy, You Discern What Is Yours and What is Not Yours

I spoke at length regarding the challenges of your sensitive system, but there is an
upside. If you are healthy, not merging with others, you can discern what is yours
and what is someone else’s. This protects you from taking on their fears, their ill
health, their lack of well-being; however, that might show up. You are capable of
having a clear boundary.

You Have a Fine-Tuned Sense of What’s Healthy for Others

With that clear boundary, you can allow the energy of people to flow through you
without attaching to it. As you do, you get large amounts of information about
them and what’s going on with them. You can know what would or would not be
healthy for someone. When I get absorbed, say while I’m writing this book, I can
forget my body and just go without stopping. My wife feels me going out of
balance and tells me it’s time for a break or it’s time to go to the beach. If she
merges with me, she can go to exhaustion.
                                        351

You Can Be a Deep Wisdom Healer

With your clear boundary and your clarity about what is happening for another,
you have the potential to be a deep wisdom healer. You’ll need to follow your
Strategy and Authority to know when and with whom to share your wisdom. You
can be an extraordinary bodyworker, therapist, psychic healer – anything that
requires tuning in deeply to someone’s system.

You Can Be Exquisitely Intuitive

When you feel safe, when you’re not tossed around by the fears and anxieties of
others, you can take in and amplify the well-being of the world. From that ground,
you can be alert from a wise and open place. Here I picture the cat again, at rest,
yet aware of its surroundings. This is a lovely quality that opens you to what is
present and what is needed in the present. We call this intuition.

The Open Spleen Center as a God Portal

    You open to the space of awake awareness, non-reactive alertness.
    You ground in clarity.
    You understand there is no death.

You Open to the Space of Awake Awareness, Non-Reactive Alertness

When you have cleared your filters of fear and anxiety and are no longer
identifying as a fear-based person, something magical happens – you open into a
state of awake awareness. This is a place where you are no longer reacting to
threats and can move from a place of clarity. There is a heightened alertness that
responds naturally to what is arising. Byron Katie used to ask us if our child was
drowning, would we rather have someone who is gripped by terror, or someone
who is at peace, clear, and unafraid to save our child? Obviously, when you’re
freed from fear, you act with more ease and clarity. You’re not clouded by the
fear distortions. You have more intuitive capacities available to you. When you’re
not reactive, you can take in the full picture and respond from clarity and wisdom.

I remember Katie telling the story of being in what we would consider a bad part
of Los Angeles. A fellow came up to her with a gun. He pointed it at her, and said,
“I’m going to kill you.” Katie, fearless, told him she didn’t think that was a good
idea. She explained that he would feel badly afterward. I can’t remember what
                                          352

else she said, but basically, it wasn’t about her at all. Of course, she is alive today.
He put the gun down and they hung out together.

You Ground in Clarity

When there is nothing between you and the world, through your Open Spleen
Center, you open into a clarity that is beyond the mind. It is a Oneness that
understands that fear is a wave, not a particle. When you grab hold of fear and
identify with fear, it shifts into duality and becomes a particle, a thing, an object.
It looks real. With clarity, you understand the workings of the immune system, of
time, of intuition. You comprehend true well-being.

You realize that there is no self (person) to be attacked, so there is nothing to
attack. There is no time so there is no pressure around time. There is only the
present moment. You stabilize in wellness, vitality, joy. With your clarity, you
naturally know when and how to move in the world from an intuitive knowing.
I’ve watched people with this awake awareness.

It’s like watching a sunrise in action. The question of safety doesn’t even arise.
The past, the future is non-existent. I remember Katie saying something like,
“Even the present is a past story.” This is a radical portal that is almost
inconceivable from where most of us sit. And yet, the wisps of possibility touch
us.

You Understand there Is No Death

Here is another portal that may seem out of reach, but it is quite real. When you
have transcended the fight/ flight/ freeze response and are liberated from the
story of time – from the experience of a past and future – there is only the safety
of the now. In this space, there is no death. I can remember some of the most
shocking pieces of The Work people did with Katie were around death. Especially
the death of a loved one.

Katie would ask, “Is it true that they’re dead?” I’d watch over and over as she led
people through this passage. Except for your story, can you know they’re dead?
I’m not going to walk you through this one, but instead, refer you to her website
where she has numerous videos of working with the death of loved ones. Here
                                         353

you can do the work alongside her and come to know the truth for yourself.
www.thework.org

Meanwhile, I’ve watched Charity, with her Open Spleen, be clear about her
husband Ollie’s death. Before his death, she says she was always afraid. With his
death, her fear evaporated. She became crystal clear that death wasn’t the end.
Her clarity informs her work with widows. It guides her in her life. Charity has an
awakened awareness that is beautiful to behold.

Working with the Open Spleen Center

      Appreciate it, don’t fight it.
      Know how it works.
      Clean the filter.
      Witness fear without identifying with it.

Appreciate It, Don’t Fight It

I know there are a lot of challenges that come with an Open Spleen. But if you can
come to peace with your Design, you’re going to be better placed to use your
Open Spleen for your well-being rather than being used by it and risking burnout
and poor health. What happens if you appreciate your Open Spleen?

What would your world look like if you saw its gifts and understood it as an asset?
When you stop fighting and instead appreciate your Open Spleen, it becomes a
superpower, an asset. Instead of being in the world fearfully, you’re in the world
open. It’s quite a shift.

Know How It Works

Appreciating your Open Spleen is a start. But to access its superpower potentials,
you must be clear on how it works. Remember, the Open Spleen is taking in the
fears, anxieties, and health (both ill health and well-being) of others. You’ll need
to be aware of what’s yours and what belongs to other people. Without this
knowledge, you cannot experience the gift of ease and joie de vivre.

Keep in mind as well that with an Open Spleen, you are more sensitive in your
body. You must pay extra attention to how you feel, what works for you, and
what doesn’t. You do not do well with toxic food or environments.
                                           354

With your sensitivity to others, and your vulnerability around safety, be aware
that you may be attracted to people that will give you a sense of ground.
Remember, that doesn’t mean they are good for you. Keep your eye on the part
of you that may hold onto people and things longer than you should.

Also, keep in mind that you may try to make spontaneous decisions in order to
relieve the pressure of fear. This will inevitably backfire. Take your time. Refrain
from being impulsive. Ground on your Strategy and Authority when making
decisions rather than what feels right in the moment.

Clean the Filter

When working with any Open Center, there is always the issue of cleaning the
filters. The filter of the Open Spleen gets clogged with past fears, current fears,
future fears, collective fears, and ancestral fears. We look to fear to keep us safe.
This is an old pattern that we are shifting. As you work with your

Open Spleen, remember that the present moment is the safest place to be. We
become unsafe when we leave our bodies. At that moment, we abandon our
sense faculties and awareness. We left our bodies as an adaptive strategy when
we couldn’t tolerate what we were experiencing. We didn’t have the capacity as
young people to make sense of and process the challenges that permeated our
world. But now, with a witnessing observer, you can allow yourself to witness the
fear or anxiety without identifying with it, without becoming one with it. This is a
huge step toward liberating ourselves from out-of-date patterns.

Witness Fear without Identifying with It

Yes. I just spoke to this. The big task in working with the Open Spleen is
witnessing without identifying. Let’s say you’re with a friend who is having a
meltdown. They’re terrified about having mandated vaccines, for example. Are
you going to merge with that fear? Are you going to scare yourself with a future
story? Or can you allow your friend to have their experience while you maintain
your boundary? Maintaining a boundary doesn’t mean you sit back and don’t take
action. When you’re not afraid, you know what action to take, if any. But if you
fall into the fear soup, you can only react; you've lost the awareness to respond.
When you have a strong witnessing observer, you can see the fear loops for what
they are and disrupt the trance of terror.
                                         355

Helpful Tools

      Develop a strong witness.
      Get help.
      Utilize energy medicine.
      Do what you can to stay in your body!
      Enjoy variation.
      Meditate.
      Do inquiry.

Develop a Strong Witness Make an intention to note when you get triggered,
anxious, or afraid. Write down what happened and what triggered you. Make an
intention to step into your witness. This simple act will begin to shift your
perspective from being the victim of your fear to witnessing your fear. You can do
this.

Get Help

Fear is tricky. It seems so real. And even to approach fear or anxiety can be scary
to do alone. The last thing you want to do is activate more fear without the
means to process it. If this is your situation, get help. Look up a NARM therapist in
your area. A NARM therapist can help you ground in the present and look at
what’s scaring you. Or listen to Joe Dispenza meditations. My wife finds these
extremely helpful. There are numerous great resources, including hiring a coach
to help you with Tapping. Explore what you need and give yourself the medicine
you need.

Utilize Energy Medicine

There are many forms of energy medicine available today, and you’ll need to see
what resonates with you. Perhaps you could benefit, as I did, from homeopathy.
Maybe acupuncture or ayurvedic treatments and herbs could help balance your
doshas. Or perhaps you’re drawn to do Reiki or some other form of energy
healing. Again, find your medicine. Don’t give up until you know what works to
support you to be in balance with yourself.

Do What You Can to Stay in Your Body!
                                         356

Never underestimate the power of being conscious in your body. Do whatever
works for you. Is it movement? Getting bodywork? Qigong? Running?
Breathwork?

Breathwork? Yoga? Sense your arms and legs. Sense your belly and your
perineum. Your body is your friend. You need it for your survival, for your health
and well-being. Treat it well. If you find yourself unable to stay present in your
body, get help. The body is the storage unit for our fears. They lodge inside our
muscles, our organs, our fascia. You cannot just cognitively think past traumas
away. Our habit is to bury our fears or shame ourselves for not being more
mature. From your witnessing observer, you can see that the fears need to be
held, welcomed, and allowed in order to be liberated. You have to be in your
body to do the work of clearing the filters.

Enjoy Variation

When I asked my wife what tools she would recommend, she talked about
variation. She goes to well-being, to pleasurable experiences to dissipate fear and
anxiety, to foster her boundary. She suggests going to nature, listening to music,
taking baths. I like these suggestions. They point to the well-being aspect of
honoring and working with your Open Spleen Center. Maybe you have some
favorite things you do to relax your nervous system.

Meditate

It’s probably obvious by now that this is one of my go-to choices for just about
everything. When you give yourself the gift of meditation, you begin to develop
the witnessing observer. You also begin to dissipate the electromagnetic charge of
your thoughts, your feelings, and your encounters. You begin to make a turn
toward yourself. Leslie Temple Thurston has some incredible guided meditations
that you might consider. You might also consider doing Byron Katie’s meditation
of putting your fears on a cloud and watching them pass.

Do Inquiry

Like Meditation, inquiry is a staple in my toolbox. Inquire into your fears. See
what you discover. Here is a list of possible inquires:
                                         357

Inquiry #1:
Make a list of your fears daily – are they real?
Look them in the eye.

Inquiry #2:
The Work of Byron Katie
Who or what are you afraid of?
Write a worksheet on your fears.
(See Resources.)

Inquiry #3
Use the Squares Technique
(See Resources.)


Here are some ideas for squares:

The desire to be afraid
The fear of being afraid
The desire to be courageous
The fear of being courageous

The desire to be healthy
The fear of being healthy
The desire to be unhealthy
The fear of being unhealthy

The desire to listen to your intuition
The fear of listening to your intuition
The desire to shut down your intuition
The fear of shutting down your intuition

The desire to be in your body
The fear of being in your body
The desire to dissociate
The fear of dissociating
                                        358

Inquiry #4
Do the Five and Five inquiry into your fears.
(See Resources.)

Take time to allow your fears to arise. Be present to them. Can you just be with
them?

RECAP

Okay. You’ve taken time to learn about your Spleen Center. By now you are
hopefully more aware of your relationship to fear, time, your health and well-
being, and your intuition. You’ve gotten clear on the difference between an Open
Spleen and a Defined Spleen. You’ve looked at which Channels or Hanging Gates
you have coming off the Spleen.

Maybe you’ve had some revelations about yourself. Take some time to reflect and
consider how the information impacts you. Is it helpful? Do you have new ways to
understand and work with your fear? Take some time to journal about your
awareness. Stay connected to your Spleen Center. Continue the exploration.

 With the Spleen Center, we conclude our foray into the nine Centers. I hope you
have a better sense of your relationship to the Centers in your Design and how
best to work with them, with yourself or, with others. Understanding the power
and the value of the Centers in our lives, we can now turn to look briefly at how
the Centers interact electromagnetically between people. This is the next level of
complexity and an intriguing aspect of Human Design. In the following chapter,
we’ll begin to see how the puzzle pieces fit together. This is where we begin to
discover how our quantum bodies impact each other.
      359


      IV

LOOKING FORWARD
                                         360


                                         15

                            ELECTROMAGNETICS
LOOKING AT YOUR CHART IN RELATION TO OTHERS

Understanding ourselves through Human Design is incredible, but some of the
biggest revelations come when we look at our charts in relation to others. That
was the case for me when I first found out that my wife, as a Projector, had a
fundamentally different operating system than I, as a Generator, had. That gave
us and continues to give us insight into our relationship. As I’ve learned more
about Human Design, the exploration of our differences has deepened to include
our differences in Definition and Openness and to explore how that manifests in
our relationship. This is like having a key to the treasury.

 I recently asked a group of students who were completing their training what
their biggest takeaways were. One coach, an amazing intuitive, said that in her
case, it was realizing that her husband has an Open Head and she’s got a Defined
Head. She said, “I’ve been married forty years, we have a good marriage, and I
can see the frustration I’ve had in my marriage has been around this difference. I
don’t understand why he can’t answer a question.

I ask him what he wants for dinner, and he doesn’t have an answer. He doesn’t
know. It drives me crazy.” Her husband happens to be a Manifesting Generator,
and this is where the complexity comes in. She’s learned that when she asks him
yes/ no questions, he can respond, but when she asks him an open-ended
question, he’s lost. It’s like the light has dawned for her. She said, “He’s walking
around holding his head and saying, ‘I have an Open

Head! I have an Open Head!’” Now instead of frustration, they’re having great fun
teasing each other about it.

There is so much to play with here, and there are a few things I want to make sure
to at least introduce you to before I send you off into the world. We’ve explored
the meaning of the Centers and how to work with them. Now we need to put
some pieces together and see how Openness and Definition in the Centers
interact in an interpersonal way. We should also examine some of the
ramifications.
                                         361

Honestly, this could easily be an entire book in and of itself, but for now, we’ll
touch on some of the fundamentals to get you started. This is where you learn
about yourself in relation to your partner, your children, and your clients. In
addition, you’ll begin to understand the impact of the transiting planets on your
quantum body.

DEFINITION TRUMPS OPENNESS

One thing to remember is that Definition trumps Openness. What do I mean by
that? Where you have Definition in your chart, you will be impacting people who
are Open in the places you have Definition. You’re providing them access to that
Definition, and the theme of that Definition. They’re taking you in and amplifying
what you’re bringing to the field. Your Definition empowers other people. For
example, all of my Defined Centers are in the lower Centers: the Sacral, ESP,
Spleen, and Root. I bring ground wherever I go. I don’t have to try, I just do. That
is the feedback I consistently get from people.

If you’re a Manifestor or a Manifesting Generator, you have a Motor to your
Throat Center. You automatically, electromagnetically empower people. Everyone
around you has access to a Motor to the Throat. You are a walking gift.
Remember in Chapter 8, on the Throat Center, I said that if Human Design were a
game, you would win the game by getting a Motor to the Throat Center. That
enables you to create and to have your communication heard. In effect,
Manifestors

Manifestors and Manifesting Generators help everyone win the game. They offer
invaluable assistance. So, your Definition empowers the people around you.
When I’m around my wife, her Defined G Center gives me a more solid sense of
identity. My Defined Spleen Center gives her a sense of security. As a Projector,
when she’s around me, she can tap into my abundant Sacral energy and take
action that would not have been available to her on her own.

Your Definition can also do the opposite. Remember that Definition works in
polarities, in duality. With my Definition in my lower Centers, I am capable of
losing my ground and impacting people with my lack of ground. Likewise,
someone with a Defined Will Center can have low self-esteem because they are
not exercising power in a way that is invigorating and enlivening. People with
                                         362

Open Will Centers can take in and amplify that negative self-esteem. They’re
vulnerable to mistaking it for their own.

Where you have Definition in your chart gives you privilege. How are you going to
use that access to power? You have natural resources that someone with an Open
Center doesn’t have consistent access to. You can find yourself, like my student,
getting frustrated with or not understanding why people can’t do things that are
natural to you. You can be ignorant about their experience, judge them, think
they’re inept, and more.

For example, if you have a Defined Will Center, you can say you’re going to do
something and go do it. Someone with an Open Will Center doesn’t have that
luxury. As a coach, when people are around you, they can break through personal
limits and accomplish things they just can’t sustain when they’re out of your auric
field. If you’re thinking they should be able to, you’re not seeing them or able to
work with them skillfully. You’re not differentiating.

Openness Can Get Overwhelmed and Burned Out by Definition

There is another side to this equation. When Definition meets Openness, the
person with the Open

Center is, as you’ll recall, taking in and amplifying the Definition. A few things can
happen: If the person with the Open Center is not following their Strategy and
Authority, they can take in the Defined energy and feel overwhelmed by it. If they
are not discerning in their witness, they can burn themselves out. For example,
with my Defined Sacral, I can go, go, go, go. I like to take my wife on my go ride.
She can easily get overwhelmed by all that I am doing, and instead of accessing
that Sacral energy, she can go offline into a collapse. Or she can push and go, not
discerning or claiming her limits and burn out. This doesn’t serve either of us.

Get Out of the Rain!

When you think of your Open Centers, think about being impacted by rain. When
I lived in a rainforest in Upcountry Maui, the backside of our home had a
continual mist of rain, while the front side was often rain-free. If you have an
Open Emotional Solar Plexus, you can be taking in someone’s emotional distress
(the backside of the house), then step to the front of the house for a break. Once
                                          363

you step out of the rain, you can be completely free of distress. We often tell
people who have an Open Emotional Solar Plexus to get out of the emotional field
– to take a walk.

So, if you’re in the presence of someone who is upset, it’s like being in a torrential
rainstorm. You have to decide if you want to stay out in the rain, and if so, what
kind of rain protection you are going to use. When you’re in the presence of
someone’s Definition, you’re in their rain, and they are in yours. It can be a gentle
mist or a full-on storm. In either case, it will be impacting you.

It’s Complex

The Definition in a person can manipulate and dominate the Openness in a
person, either knowingly or unknowing. If a person isn’t honoring the Openness
of their puzzle piece and following their Strategy and Authority, they can feel
victimized by another person’s Definition.

It’s not as simple as Definition equals dominance though. The Open Centers have
access to huge amounts of energy – much more than the Defined Centers have –
limitless, actually. It’s just not sustainable. I have this image of Karen Curry Parker
describing Thanksgiving dinner at her house where she’s the only one with a
Defined Throat and she can’t get a word in edgewise. The Open Throats are so
busy vying for attention and escalating their voices to be heard that there’s no
space for her to speak.

I’ve had numerous clients with Open Emotional Solar Plexuses say they were the
emotional one in the family. Imagine taking in the feelings for the family and
amplifying them – believing they were yours. Open Centers that are not operating
in alignment with their Strategy and Authority can unknowingly overwhelm
Defined Centers.

On the other hand, someone with Definition may have some wounding due to
having shown up in the world with their Definition. They may shut down their
power to be safe. I’m thinking of Manifestors with Motors to the Throat Center
who are afraid of impacting people, so they shut down. This is a real loss for
everyone.
                                        364

Coming to know and respect both your Openness and Definition is helpful when it
comes to understanding yourself, your family, your friends, and your clients. It’s
really amazing.



THE WAYS OPEN CENTERS ACCESS DEFINITION

There are a few ways that Open Centers access definition:

    Being in the presence of someone who has Definition where you are
    Open Having an electromagnetic hookup with someone
    Connection with the planetary transits

Being in the Presence of Someone’s Definition

 If someone has Definition where you have Openness, you are automatically
taking in their Definition, whether it is a Hanging Gate, Channel, or Center. You
have access to those energies and will be impacted by those themes. When I’m
around my wife, I have access to her Defined Head, Ajna, Throat, and G Center.
When she’s around me, she has access to my Defined Sacral and Spleen Center.

Having an Electromagnetic Hookup

When you and another person have the same Center Open, there is another way
you can access Definition in those Centers, Gates, or Channels. This is through an
electromagnetic hookup. So, say I have the Gate 20 In the Now, and you have the
Gate 57 Intuition. When we come together, our Hanging Gates create a Channel.
The Centers on either side of that Channel – in this case, the Throat Center and
Spleen Center – become Defined during the time we’re in contact with one
another. Each of us then is granted access to speak our intuition. This is a hookup
I often attract and love in my work with people.

I have this with my wife, as well. It’s lovely. Some of these hookups are a little
more challenging. For instance, if you have the Gate of Rhythm, Gate 5 and you’re
married to someone with the Gate of Extremes, Gate 15, you may have some
challenges working out your schedule. I worked with one couple who had this
configuration. The husband had a job that took him away for weeks at a time. He
loved his job, but his wife needed rhythm and a routine she could count on. Once
                                        365

they discovered this difference, they were able to stop blaming each other and
instead respect and support each other's needs.




Connection with Planetary Transits

 Wherever the planets are transiting, you're picking up on those energies as well –
and amplifying them if they land where you’re Open. For example, as I’m writing
this, Saturn is in Gate 61, and Uranus is in Gate 24, completing a Channel from the
Head Center to the Ajna Center. So, around the world, everyone who has an Open
Head and Open Ajna and/ or is Open in the Channel – or any part of the Channel
61-24 – is experiencing an amplification of thinking and processing energy. We
are all attempting to reach into the mystery.

We are trying to process what we discover in a way that can be understood. This
is mutative, Individual Knowing Circuit energy which can have a touch of
melancholy. It is an active mind! Your response to these planetary transits that
give you access to Definition in those themes will depend on how much Openness
you have in your chart. Where you are Open will impact what’s being bombarded,
and how well you are able to process the energy.

I was working with a client who was feeling overwhelmed. We looked at the
transits and she was being blasted by the planetary energy. All but one of her
                                         366

Centers was being experienced as Defined. This brings a new level of
understanding as to what might be influencing you at any given time.




Electromagnetic hookups can also happen between your chart and planetary
transit. Right now, for instance, Venus is transiting Gate 46 Love of Body. I have
Pluto in my Conscious Gate 29 Perseverance. The two of them form a Channel
and the Centers on either side become Defined. My Sacral Center is already
Defined, so it’s minimally impacted, but my Identity Center gets impacted during
this transit. And remember, it’s a theme and it works in duality. With this transit I
can either feel more solid in my identity or I can feel less solid. Each person will
experience Definition due to a transit differently. This is for you to discover for
yourself and to learn about your clients.



OPEN CENTER TO DEFINED CENTER DYNAMICS



Open Head – Defined Head Dynamics

The Open Head
                                         367

You may find yourself full of questions and pressured to find answers. Or you may
find yourself overstimulated with ideas. You may also judge the Defined Head as
inflexible or unwilling to look at the full range of possibilities.

My wife has a Defined Head. I have an Open Head. When I’m around her, my
Head is constantly working to figure things out and come up with answers. (She
has the Gate of Answers.) If she says she’d like to ____ (whatever it is, go on
vacation, get a new car, fix something) it’s like she’s pushed a computer button,
and my mind starts spinning, I’m under pressure, searching for the answer. She’s
not thinking I have to come up with the answer, but I am. Sometimes I have to go
into the other room to sleep at night because my mind can’t stop working around
her. I also have to take her certainty with a grain of salt sometimes. If I know how
the furniture will work in our new home and she tells me it absolutely will not
work, I just put it there, and she’s shocked at how well it works. She wouldn’t
have thought of that configuration.

The Defined Head

You may get frustrated with what you perceive as idiocy, especially when the
Open Heads aren’t able to remember things or know what they want. You may
find them flaky. You may be overwhelmed by their geysers of thought.

Again, my wife. She cannot believe I don’t remember the amount of the internet
bill or the zip code of the last place we lived. It baffles her that I don’t remember
movies or names of actors. If something isn’t important to me, it’s gone. At this
point, we have a lot of fun with this difference, but it used to be quite challenging.

Open Ajna – Defined Ajna Dynamics

Open Ajna

You may be in awe of the grounded, clear thinking of the Defined Ajna and judge
yourself. You may be wondering why your thinking is so hit and miss. Around a
Defined Ajna, you may find you have more capacity to process information than
when you’re on your own. You may question the Defined Ajna’s certainty but
have no luck in convincing them they are being rigid, or not allowing in enough
information to make a wise decision.
                                        368

Defined Ajna

You take for granted that you have a brain that you can count on. It’s so natural to
you. You are baffled by the inconsistency you find with the Open Ajna and may
not trust the conclusions they draw, realizing that they may change what they
think at any time. On the other hand, you may envy the flexibility of the Open
Ajna, acutely aware of the limitations of your Defined Ajna.

Open Throat – Defined Throat Dynamics

Open Throat

You can be amazed at how a Defined Throat seems to be able to know what they
have to say and say it. You may find yourself talking more around Defined
Throats. Especially in a group, you may find you feel the pressure to speak. When
you do, it’s almost like you’re hearing what you’re saying as you speak.
Sometimes you talk to try to be seen.

You can feel like your voice doesn’t have a chance. You have to learn to not speak
until you’re invited, or the timing is right. Then you may be shocked by the
sophistication of what comes through. You don’t get why people with Defined
Throats aren’t more nuanced in their language or tone of voice. You may take for
granted your capacity to connect with people through your tone and words.

Defined Throat

You can’t believe what comes out of some of the people who have Open Throats.
What are they saying? Why would they be saying it? Do they need to be so loud
and emphatic? On the other hand, you can be in awe of what they say, and
wonder how they can speak with such grace and ease. The quality of their voices
can be impressive. You take for granted that you have access to your voice, and
don’t appreciate the struggle people with an Open Throat can have in speaking
and being heard.

Open G – Defined G Dynamics

Open G

You may feel more grounded around people with Defined G Centers. You’re in
awe of how solid they are with themselves. They have something you don’t. This
                                         369

can trigger a feeling of inadequacy. You are compelled to search out a variety of
experiences. You can feel like you’re always a bit lost, looking for direction. You’re
open to a wide swath of society, interested and curious how different people live
and operate. You’re a bit like a chameleon, shifting who you are with each person
you meet. If you’re not in a physical location that feels good to you, nothing
seems to go right. You’re constantly looking to prove you’re lovable, which
doesn’t easily come to fruition.

Defined G

 You watch in amazement at what someone with an Open G will do to have an
identity. The teachers they follow, the classes they’ll take. The sheer volume and
variety of what they are interested in is astonishing. You’re curious about things
but you don’t feel the need to pursue such a variety of endeavors. You feel solid
in yourself. You are connected to a stream of loving. Whether you feel loved or
you feel loving toward others, either people or animals, the connection is there.
You may struggle with wanting to feel loved for your authentic self, but you have
no clue what it’s like for people with Open Gs.



Open Will – Defined Will Dynamics

Open Will

 You watch in awe at the capacity people have with Defined Wills. They say
they’re going to do something, and they do it. Their stamina and one-pointedness
are things to behold. You feel insufficient in relation to them. You know you could
never do all that they do. It can be a little hard to feel equal to them. Their
competence can be a bit intimidating.

Defined Will

You can’t understand how people with Open Wills can be so inept. Why can’t they
do what they say they’re going to do? Why can’t they figure out how to do
things? They constantly let you down. You can’t rely on people to do things, so
you’d rather do them yourself. You can struggle to support them. They’re baffling
to you.
                                       370

Open Sacral – Defined Sacral Dynamics

Open Sacral

You feel like you come from a different planet. You feel like other. You may get
tired just by being around Defined Sacrals. You feel like they can’t possibly have
the consistent energy they’re exhibiting. You can feel that you are different than
that. You look at Defined Sacrals and see people who are on a treadmill. They’ve
forgotten how to just be. When you were younger, you tried to be like them and
may have burned out. You have to watch your energy now. You need more rest
than your Defined Sacral friends, colleagues, and loved ones. Some of you with
Open Sacrals feel you have more energy than the people around you. You actually
can overwhelm people with Defined Sacrals.

Defined Sacral

You may judge the Open Sacral people for their inconsistent energy. You can’t
count on them to have energy for things. On the other hand, they may have more
energy than you could ever imagine. They can wear you out. You may not
understand their need to be away from you to get their equilibrium. You might
think some of them are unmotivated. Their capacity for pleasure may confound
you. You may feel rejected when they need space from you or need to sleep
separately from you.



Open ESP – Defined ESP Dynamics

Open ESP

You may be taking in and amplifying the Defined ESP’s feelings without realizing
it. You may think you’re more emotional than everyone else. You may even be the
identified patient in the family. Sometimes you feel you have to fake feelings
because you want to fit in with the cultural norm. You may not be feeling sad in a
situation that you know you should. You can feel like something is wrong with
you. You don’t have emotional waves as Defined Sacral people do. When you’re
away from people, you’re pretty stable emotionally. It’s just when you get around
people that you never know what feeling is going to whack you. You can be very
nice and not always tell the truth because you don’t want to upset people.
                                        371

Defined ESP

You may appreciate the evenness of the Open Emotional Solar Plexus. It can elicit
a kind of trust. On the other hand, if someone with an Open ESP hasn’t done their
work and is volatile, that can make you feel on edge. This engenders feelings of
mistrust. You may not realize that they’re taking in and amplifying your feelings.
You may see them as more emotional than you are.

Open Root – Defined Root Dynamics

Open Root

You watch people with Defined Roots. They can begin projects and you think you
should be able to do the same. You feel pressured all the time to do things. If
someone suggests something needs to be done, you feel like they’re telling you to
do it. You do things to try to relieve the pressure but nothing works. You can take
in the energy of the Defined Root and do more than anybody but it’s not
sustainable. You can easily burn out.

Defined Root

You operate on a pulse, which can be on or off. You can get frustrated when it’s
off. You don’t understand why people with Open Roots think you’re expecting
them to do something the moment you acknowledge something needs to be
done. You don’t understand why people with Open Roots feel so pressured. You
also don’t understand why they can be so anxious. It’s frustrating when they burn
out and can’t accomplish anything.

Open Spleen – Defined Spleen Dynamics

Open Spleen

 You have a sensitive system. You know you’re getting sick before people with a
Defined Spleen do. You have to be careful about what you eat, what vitamins or
medication you take. You can either lose time or be very aware of time. You’re
taking in everyone’s fears and amplifying them. It’s like you feel the fear in the
room and can’t get away from it. You may feel a constant stream of worry
without cause, especially when you’re around Defined Spleens.
                                        372

On the other hand, you get some relief from being around Defined Spleens. It’s as
if you’re safe. You don’t have to worry about the world. You may end up staying
in relationships or jobs with Defined Spleens even when you know they’re not
good for you. It’s this feeling of safety. You crave it.

Defined Spleen

You may feel frustrated with Open Spleen people. The way they can lose track of
time astounds you. They always seem to be late. Or some of them feel hyper-
pressured around time. Either way, they’re not in reality. You don’t understand
how they can be so sensitive. They take one vitamin pill, and they feel it. Their
systems can get thrown off so easily. It’s like you have to treat them with kid
gloves.



COMPOSITE CHARTS: PUTTING TWO CHARTES TOGETHER

When you put two charts together, you’re looking to see how many Open and
Defined Centers make up the joint chart. If you have a program to do this, great. I
recommend getting the Genetic Matrix Pro program www.geneticmatrix.com. If
you don’t have a computer program, just look at the two charts and see which
Centers are Defined. For example, my wife has Defined Head, Ajna, G, ESP, and
Root Centers. I have the Sacral, ESP, Root, and Spleen. Together that leaves the
Will Center Open in our joint chart. You’ll also have to look to the leftover Open
Centers to see if any of them have an electromagnetic hookup. If they do,
consider them Defined.

Open and Defined Centers in Composite Charts

Now that you know how many Centers are Defined and Open, what do you do?
The Centers that are left Open are the places you will be exploring in the
relationship. For example, with the Will Center remaining Open, my wife and I are
designed to explore the theme of value. What do we value? It’s our frontier.
We’re here to discover and become wise about what we value.

Turns out we value time, connecting to our essential selves, and authenticity. Our
lives have looked quite different from the mainstream culture. Together we have
had to sort through conditioning to find out what matters to us. The thing about
                                         373

the Open Centers is that it’s continuous exploration. It’s where the juice, the fun,
and the excitement are in the relationship.

There is a ditty that goes along with the composite Centers. It goes: Nine and O
nowhere to go. Eight and One have some fun. Seven and Two what to do? It’s
saying if your composite has all nine Centers Defined, there is no interpersonal
frontier. What I’ve seen is that couples who have Nine Defined Centers together
often are not here to work out their issues between themselves, but rather to
look outward together, toward some project.

Eight and One have some fun, reflects that from a Human Design perspective, it’s
the ideal composite between two people. You are focused together on what to
explore. With Seven and two what to do…there may be a challenge deciding
which Center to explore. If the Head and the ESP are both Open, do you explore
your feelings together? Or your thoughts? The more Centers Open between you
and another person, the more to explore – and perhaps more confusion as well.



EXTREMES IN DEFINITION AND OPENNESS WITH A CHART

Finally, let me close with a brief discussion on what happens when a person has
all Defined Centers or all Open Centers. Or, what is it like when someone has
eight Defined Centers and one Open Center. Or seven Open Centers and two
Defined Centers. It’s helpful to know what that means for you if you’re mostly

Undefined or mostly Defined. It may give you some understanding of your
vulnerabilities or strengths. It’s also helpful to know that information when you’re
living or working with people, as their amount of Openness or Definition will
impact you and how you understand and interact with them. Let’s take a closer
look at the charts that have more or less Definition or Openness.

An Abundance of Openness in the Chart

If you or someone you’re working with has all nine Centers Open, they’re in the 1
percent of the population called the Reflector Type. You can read in-depth about
Reflectors in my book Understanding Your Clients through Human Design. For this
conversation, know that these are unusual beings indeed. They reflect the health
and well-being, or lack of health and well-being, in the community they live.
                                         374

It’s hard to describe Reflectors, they are so open and so fluid, so at one with
nature and their environment. They amplify everyone around them. Just know
that they have this chart, this quantum body design for a reason. With their huge
Openness, they have an uncanny capacity to work with the Openness. In some
ways, Reflectors are more equipped to deal with their Openness than people who
have only a few Defined Centers.

I’ve watched people who have seven Centers Open and two Centers Defined
struggle. Remember, the more Openness you have, the more you’re taking in, the
more you have to work to clean your filters. The people I know with a
preponderance of Open Centers are destined to do a lot of inner work to navigate
their worlds. If you look at Marianne Williamson’s chart, she has two Defined
Centers and seven Open.

She has spent a lifetime working the Course in Miracles, coming into alignment,
and surrendering her ego to serve the will of spirit. When you have two Defined
Channels, and seven Open, the Channel that creates the Defined Centers
becomes more potent. In this case, Marianne has the Channel of Cycles. She is
here to go through various cycles in her life. She just completed completed the
cycle of running for president of the United States. She’s also looking at the cycles
of oppression. For example, she’s committed to ending the cycle of systemic
racism in our culture.
                                         375

An Abundance of Definition in the Chart

9 and 0

If on the other hand, a person’s bodygraph has nine Defined Centers and zero
Open Centers, that’s its own curious phenomenon. I have only met or worked
with a few people with this configuration. What I’ve noticed is that they are who
they are. There is stability in them. There is not a lot of flexibility. They are not
receiving the world through their Centers, rather through their Open Gates and
Channels.

Therefore, when you’re coaching them, their progress will be slower and more
incremental. The more Openness, typically the less grounded they will be and the
bigger and faster the changes. The more Defined, the more grounded, and the
slower and more incremental the shifts. It’s like turning around a motorboat
versus a barge. Of course, where someone is on their path – how much work
they’ve done – will impact how their Openness or Definition shows up.




8 and 1
                                        376

I know many people who have eight Centers Defined and one open. I find this to
be a powerful configuration. These people tend to be very stable in who they are,
and the Open Center becomes a portal for flexibility. It’s as if the one Open
Center becomes even more amplified. In this case, you look to see which Center
remains Open. Is it the Head Center? Maybe the Throat or the G? What happens
if it’s the Root? You can begin to feel the complexity the one Open Center creates
depending on where it is.

My father had eight Centers Defined with an Open Identity Center. He was
completely secure in who he was. He didn’t need to be anybody. He didn’t need
to be seen or recognized. I think his healthy humility and openness to all kinds of
people came from his Open G. That’s where he took people in. He was known for
his bedside manner, which I think came from his Open G. Another coach I know
has all her Centers Defined except her Open Throat. Her grounded presence is
magnificent. She’s here to take in and articulate the voices of the world.
                                         377




RECAP

In this chapter, we've covered a lot of territory. We looked at electromagnetics in
the chart. We touched on your chart in relation to others. We looked at how
Definition trumps Openness. We explored the different ways to access Definition,
including electromagnetic hookups and planetary transits. We also looked more
specifically at each of the Centers and the dynamics between Open and Defined
Centers. We looked briefly at composite charts and ended by looking at extremes
in Openness or Definition.

This is a beginning introduction. A taste. Don’t worry if all of it doesn’t make sense
at this point. This concludes the teaching portion of this book. Hopefully, it has
helped you get a deeper understanding of the Centers and how they impact your
life and the lives of those you work with and love. With this knowledge, you have
the basis to engage with the Centers at the next level, to actively work with them
to transform your life and the lives of others. In the next chapter, we’ll look at
what you might encounter as you embrace your relationship to the Centers and
your unique Human Design.
                                        378


                                        16

                         DEEPENING THE INQUIRY


WHAT ARE YOUR TAKEAWAY?

 As we come to the end of our journey, take a moment and think back. What have
you learned? What are your takeaways? No doubt you’ve gotten a ton of
information about yourself by coming to understand the Centers in your Human
Design Chart. Perhaps you understand your struggles and have begun the process
of dis-identifying with them. Or maybe you’re not taking them so personally.
Hopefully, you are clearer about the gifts your chart holds. Perhaps you are in the
process of claiming your gifts and aligning with them, working to unearth the
riches that are your birthright. In any event, whatever information you’ve let
touch you and move you is truly just the beginning. Now the real work begins.

Take time to deepen your experience with your Centers. See which tools are
helpful for you and give you more of you. Begin to embody your chart, your
design, your blueprint. As you begin to recognize that your physical body is a
small part of who you are – and that you are indeed a multifaceted, holographic
quantum being – your world will begin to change. Your perceptions of others will
shift. The belief that you are separate will begin to fall away.

If you are anything like me, you will be compelled to understand others through
this lens. You’ll run the charts of your spouse, your children, your family, your
friends. You’ll want to know where your clients are Open or Defined. You’ll want
to know where your coaches or therapists are Open or Defined. A ravenous
hunger to know people will overtake you. This is as

it should be. Just know there are challenges ahead as well. This is not one of those
things where you get the download and you’re complete. Nothing like that. You
have initiated a lifelong exploration for yourself and in relation to others.

There Will Be Bumps along the Path

When you go to share this knowledge with others, you may find that people don’t
resonate with what you’re saying. Maybe, someone will be like my student who
                                         379

has a Defined G but didn’t feel solid in his lovability. Maybe you found something
that didn’t fully resonate with you. Does that mean the system is wrong?

You have to understand that we’re shining a light on a piece of the chart when in
fact we must ultimately see the chart as a whole. The student I mentioned has
Gate 10, Self-Love in his chart. With this energy, you are either self-loving or not.
If you are not self-loving, you can easily go to blame and shame. This pattern
could cloud your awareness of feeling solid in yourself. So sometimes you need to
look from a bigger lens. Other times you may have to relook at the information
itself and see how it might be tweaked to meet the person.

There’s a paradox here. I’m saying go forth. Explore. Share what you’ve learned.
I’m also saying there’s more complexity ahead that, when you’re ready to explore
further, will bring more clarity to your understanding. There are questions we
haven’t touched on, like, what’s the influence of a Hanging Gate off of an Open
Center? What about the Channels that connect the Centers?

How important are they and how do they impact the chart? How do the planets
influence the energy of the Hanging Gates or the Channels? For instance, if
someone had their Sun in Gate 1 coming off an Open G Center – what would that
imply? How does Type influence the Open or Defined Centers? You’ll find a
Projector with a Defined Will Center will be very different than a Projector with an
Open Will Center. You’ll find a Projector who is very Defined in their chart will
walk a different path than a Projector who is very Open.

Then there is the whole question of Strategy and Authority. What happens when
you or your clients follow or don’t follow their Strategy and Authority. Let’s say,
like my wife, that you have a Defined Head, Ajna, and Throat Center, but you’re a
Projector. You know what you want to say and how you would say it. You’re
grounded in your Head and speech.

You just can’t share your wisdom, you can’t do your job of guiding people, until
you’re invited. You have to sit with your knowing and wait. So, much of what we
have to learn is discernment. As you can see, there is a lot more to take into
account that will enrich your understanding. But don’t take that to mean you
have to know all of it before you can benefit from what you’ve been given here.
Not at all!
                                         380

So, yes, go forth! There is a world of rich complexity waiting for you when you’re
ready. But first ground, embrace, and embody the truth of who you are. Do the
work of letting go of the shackles that have kept you suffering and living a life that
is not yours to live. Deepen your study of Human Design if you’re called to –
either on your own or with others. But I implore you to include your body and
your being. Don’t stop with conceptual knowledge. Instead, bring what you’ve
learned into your lived life.

The Enneagram as an Example

 In the early 80s in Berkeley, the Enneagram was in vogue. I’ve been an avid
student of the Enneagram for the last thirty-five years. It’s been helpful, and I love
using it with Human Design. But that’s not the point. At that time, there were
weekly panels where people would share their experience of being a certain
Enneatype. This helped take the Enneagram out of a conceptual domain into a
lived experience. From there, I spent fifteen years watching Faisal in my Diamond
Training work with people and their issues in the context of Enneagram. With that
knowledge in my bones, I brought a depth and a wisdom to the work with my
clients I could not have gotten from reading books. And I did read all the
Enneagram books I could get my hands on!

When you are ready to deepen your knowledge of Human Design, if you can be
part of a group or training that allows people to share their experiences and work
the issues of their charts, you will find a deeper understanding of yourself and
others through Human Design. If not, do your best to stay close to your
experience. When you look at your chart or someone else’s chart, be curious. Be a
listener, not a knower. Imagine you are a ginormous quantum being sitting with
another ginormous quantum being.
                                         381


                                         17

                                 TAKE THE GIFT


Iwrote this book because I wanted to open the doors to people’s minds and
hearts. I wanted people to be able to look at a chart and, by seeing the Centers,
know what a person’s vulnerabilities might be, what their strengths might be. I
also wanted people to not be afraid of the Open Centers. I wanted them to see
that the Open Centers are amazing. They are a part of ourselves that is way bigger
than who we take ourselves to be – they are the connection to the absolute. To
emptiness. The all of life.

I don’t have all the answers about the Open and Defined Centers. That is an
ongoing exploration and something for you to continue to discover for yourself.
But there are many ways to look at a chart, and the observer will impact what is
seen. We are each translators of the Human Design transmission. This is my
translation.

I wrote this book because I wanted to transmit love and acceptance of who we
are. I wanted to transmit how incredible we are. I wanted to introduce the idea
that we are more than our physical body. We inhabit these magnificent quantum
holographic bodies. We are as much the space of who we are as the form. We are
nothing and we are everything. The Middle way – not only the absolute nor only
the relative. We misidentify as being our bodies, as being a false self. Not Self.

We are not an object. Who we are is Beingness.

I wrote this book because I wanted to show how much pain there is in the Centers
and how devastating it is to identify with something that is not who we are. How
misunderstanding ourselves can lead to dire consequences. I wanted to show how
much suffering comes with the Open Centers and with the low side of the Defined
Centers.

I’m calling the suffering grapples. Not to diminish the pain, which is very real. This
is not a spiritual bypass. My intent is to acknowledge the pain without elevating it.
Without making the challenges currency in the way Carolyn Myss speaks of how
                                         382

we have made our suffering currency. Rather, my hope is to shine light on the
suffering so we can see it for what it is – a misidentification.

I wrote this book to bring a spiritual dimension into the story. One that shows
that the Open Centers operate like filters. Once they are cleaned and cleared of
conditioning, then the doorway to the galaxy opens.

I wrote this book to wake people up to appreciate difference. I wrote this book as
a kind of pointing out instructions. A path to bring an end to suffering.

I wrote this book in response to Charity’s question. She wanted to understand
more deeply how she could use the Open Centers as opportunities for growth
with her clients, her family, and in her own life. Charity asked, “Could you talk
more about the Open Centers as God Portals?”

Hopefully I answered your question. Hopefully, by reading this book you learned
about each of the nine Centers. You discovered the gifts and the grapples that
accompany them. You were introduced to the God Portal for each Center. You got
ideas of how to work with each Center. And, you have some tools to begin to
work with them at a deeper level. Hopefully, you have a clear understanding of
the Centers as opportunities for growth. Hopefully, you feel confident about using
the Centers as you work with people to support them on their path.

My wish for you is that you take this knowledge and embody it. Use it for
yourself. Use it with your clients. Use it with your family and friends. Don’t put it
away on a shelf or tuck it away in the recesses of your mind. Let it inspire you to
see the depth and breadth of humanity. Let it open your heart and flood you with
compassion – for yourself and all beings. Human Design was transmitted for these
times. Take the gift.
                                     383


                         RESOURCES: HELPFUL TOOLS
INQUIRY TOOLS

*Five and Five Inquiry

*The Work of Byron Katie www.thework.com

*Leslie Temple-Thurston Squares Technique www.Corelight.org

*Six Steps to Freedom* www.choose-again.com/philosphy

*Lester Levenson’s Release Technique/ Sedona Method
www.releasetechnique.com or www.sedona.com



MEDITATION

Tibetan Buddhist (includes Vipassana) www.sukhasiddhi.org

Transcendental Meditation TM www.tm.org

Essential Oils Meditations with Greg Toews www.plantpranaoils.com

Tapping www.humandesignforeveryone.com/eftforeveryone.html.

Wisdom Healing Qigong www.chicenter.com



*Inner smile

*Relax your perineum

*Sense your arms and legs

*Ho Oponopono Prayer for Healing and Forgiveness

*Byron Katie Thoughts on a Cloud Meditation

*Mugwort Technique
                                         384

WORK WITH A PRATITIONER

Somatic therapy or bodywork – here are some suggestions:

Rosen Method www.rosenmethod.com

Anat Baniel Method www.anatbanielmethod.com

NARM www.narmtraining.com

Somatic Experiencing www.somaticexperiencing.com

Diamond Logos www.diamondlogos.com



CREATIVE EXPRESSION

CCESF Center for Creative Expression San Francisco

Speaking Circles www.speakingcircles.com

Megan Jo Wilson’s Rockstar Rising www.meganjowilson.com



*INQUIRY

*Five and Five

I learned this Inquiry from the Faisal Muqaddam in the Diamond Training. This is
a safe and easy way to stop and connect with what you feel.

With a partner, decide who is the Listener, who is the Inquirer. The Listener does
just that, listens. They keep their focus on their felt sense while they’re listening.
They are holding space so the Inquirer can hear themselves. There is no engaging
the Inquirer with head nods or supportive grunts. Those interactive relational
expressions pull the attention away from the Inquirer. Let the Inquirer have their
inquiry! Set the timer for five minutes. The Inquirer looks within and inquires. You
may have a theme you’re inquiring into, like what am I feeling about a situation or
person? Or you may just see what is present for you now. It is not a performance.
It is not a way to connect with the other person. It is time to meet you where you
                                         385

are. Time to discover what you haven’t had time to feel and know what’s going on
for you. At the end of five minutes, thank your partner and switch.

You could also do this as a writing assignment. Just free write for ten to twenty
minutes and see what you’re noticing in the moment.

*The Work of Byron Katie

Katie’s work is genius when it comes to cleaning up the mind, seeing thoughts for
what they are, and getting aligned at a higher level. In her inquiry process, you
begin by writing your judgments on what she calls a worksheet.

The Worksheet:

1. I’m angry at ____ because ____.
2. I want ___ to ___.
3. I need ___ to ___.
4. _____ should/shouldn’t ___.
5. ______ is ____ (make a list).
6. I never want to experience ____ again. And, I’m willing to experience ___ again

Once you have completed the worksheet, take your thoughts to inquiry with four
simple questions and something that’s called a Turnaround.

The Questions:

1. Is it true?
2. Can I absolutely know it’s true?
3. How do I react when I believe that thought?
4. Who would I be without that thought?

The Turnaround:

The Turnaround is merely taking your sentence, for example, I want my husband
to answer my questions, and turning the sentence around by putting your name
where you’ve got their name. So, I want me to answer my questions. Or I want me
to answer my husband’s questions.

Ask yourself if that is as true or truer than your original sentence. See what you
discover.
                                         386

*Leslie Temple Thurston Squares

This is one of the tools Leslie teaches in her book Marriage of Spirit. She calls her
techniques Unification of Opposites. Here is an excerpt from her intro in Chapter
2 followed by the Squares Technique. The unification of opposites techniques are
mental tools to help us unravel the knots of the mind.

They offer a very fast way to balance our lives and wake up and were given for
this particularly accelerated time we are living in. In fact, speed is perhaps one of
the most defining characteristics of these methods. They enormously accelerate
spiritual growth and transformation. They are age-old principles, truths from the
ancient mystery schools and traditions, and have been revamped and streamlined
for the modern era.

Divide a page into quarters.
In the top square write: The Desire to have (name what you want).
In the second top square write: The Fear of having (name what you want).
In the bottom square write: The Desire not to have (name what you want)
 In the remaining square write: The Fear of not having (name what you want).
Make a list under each of these.

Usually, we’re unconscious of at least one of the squares.
Be sure to fill in all four squares.
Find the piece you may be resisting.
Once you see the whole picture, the duality collapses.

You’re looking for your desires/ aversions.
You could do any number of squares.
For example:
The Desire to be happy.
The Fear of being happy.
The Desire not to feel happy.
The Fear of not feeling happy.
Play with it and see what you discover. You could also do this as a writing
assignment. Just free write for ten to twenty minutes and see what you’re
noticing in the moment.
                                         387

*The Six Steps to Freedom

This inquiry tool is taken from Diederik Wolsak, the Program Director for the
Centre for Attitudinal Healing in Vancouver. The intent is to use a current upset to
access the original experience in our early life where we attached to a core belief
that we were not valuable.

The Process:
1. Acknowledge you are upset.
2. Recognize that your upsets are never about the situation itself, or the other
person; they are about you. The upsets are merely tapping into an earlier wound.
3. Focus on the feeling.
4. Remember the earliest time when you had that feeling.
5. Get clear on what judgment you had or belief you concluded about yourself at
the moment you had that earlier feeling. An example would be: I don’t matter.
6. Remember the truth about yourself. There are two parts to this. First, you
realize that your judgment or conclusion at the time was wrong. It was
understandable, and inevitable with the psychological resources you had at that
age. Then you forgive yourself for believing that lie. In place of the lie, you
remember the truth of who you are is unchanging and unchangeable.

*Lester Levenson’s The Sedona Method

There is a simple specific pattern of inquiry:

Step 1: Focus on an issue you would like to feel better about.
Step 2: Ask yourself one of the following questions: Could I let this feeling go?
Could I allow this feeling to be here? Could I welcome these feelings?
Step 3: Ask yourself the basic question: Would I? Am I willing to let go?
Step 4: Ask yourself this simpler question: When?



MEDITATION:

*Inner Smile

The qigong practice of directing the inner smile toward yourself is simple and
healing. When you smile at yourself, you slow down, you disengage. You support
                                         388

the pause. You enable yourself to check in to your inner experience. Gently curl
your lips upward. Smile inwardly. You can direct your smile to one of your Centers
or to your whole bodygraph.

*Relax Your Perineum

This is a tool everyone can and should utilize on a regular basis. It’s like a stress
cure all. If you’re not clear, the perineum is the muscle between your sex organs
and your anus. Take a moment and sense it. Is your perineum tight or relaxed? It
may take some time to discern. The first step is simply bringing your awareness to
that part of your body, breathing and relaxing into it. Send your perineum a
gentle inward smile.

When you are afraid, the perineum grabs, impacting the entire body. It’s like an
octopus with arms that reach all the way up the spine to the head, contracting the
whole body. Many times, headaches can be relieved by relaxing the perineum. If
your perineum is tight, you go on automatic pilot. You abandon your awareness.

*Sense Your Arms and Legs, Drop into Your Belly

This is as simple as bringing your awareness to your arms and legs. Feel them.
Notice what you feel.

As you do you, they start to relax. It’s as if they come online. Next, drop your
awareness into your belly. This will ground you and bring you into the present
moment.

*Ho Oponopono Prayer for Healing and Forgiveness

I love you, I’m sorry, forgive me, thank you.

Use this powerful prayer to release any debris caught in your filter.

This prayer is like a natural cleanse for past trauma.

Use it free yourself from any places you might feel less than loving.

*Byron Katie Thoughts on a Cloud Meditation

First, you put your thoughts on a cloud, one at a time as they arise. Next you let
the thought pass with the cloud. You can do this anytime or anyplace.
                                       389

*Mugwort Technique: Regeneration of the Immune Response/ Opening the
Channels

 Mix the essential oil Mugwort with a lotion or massage oil and place on the areas
below. Mix 20 drops of mugwort to one ounce of base oil or lotion and then
apply. And/ or breathe Mugwort (or substitutes listed below) focusing on each of
the body parts below for three to fifteen breaths each. Repeat numerous times
for a deeper experience.

Single Oils: Artemisia, Mugwort
Blends: Artemisia Complex, Mugwort Supreme

1. Soles
2. Ankles
3.Knees
4. Hips
5. Palms
6. Wrists
7. Elbows
8. Armpits
9. Navel
10. Navel Minor
                                         390


                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Thank you, Karen Curry Parker. Thank you for all the riches you have so
generously shared. Like a mama bird, you took the Human Design transmission
and chewed it into bite-sized pieces, offering them in a stream of love that
enabled me and so many others to assimilate this obscure, complex, crazy weird
system into usable nourishment. Your continuous up leveling of this work is an
inspiration. Thank you for modeling, living, and embodying your design. This book
would not exist without your clarity and commitment. Thank you for your trust
and encouragement to walk my differentiated path. I celebrate the gift that you
are and the gifts that you bring.

Thank you, Angelia Lauria, for almost falling asleep on me while I was giving you a
Human Design Session. I so wanted to wow you – and that did not happen!
Instead, your authenticity splashed cold water on my story, and called me to show
up in ways I could not have imagined. Your spark lights my world. I look forward
to more high play and more cold water when needed!

Writing and publishing a book is not a solitary project. It’s a partnership. This book
is graced with many eyes and much care:

Huge thanks to my editor extraordinaire, Erika Parsons. You’ve had my back all
the way. Little did you know that you were assigned to work with the long-
winded, run-on sentence queen! Your love, care, and light is woven throughout
this book.

Thank you doesn’t speak loudly enough. Thank you to the proofreaders who
made a quantum upgrade to my string of words. Especially Anna Paradox, and
Deborah Levering who read this whole long book! Thanks also to Sue Perley,
Michelle Ezra Jacoby, Marla Mac, Rita Morgin and everyone from the Quantum
Human Design™ community that either looked at or offered to look over my
book.

Thank you to the Jennifer Stimson for the incredible book cover design, and to
Troy Ziel for resizing the graphics.
                                         391

Deep thanks to the Quill staff for your continuous support, encouragement, and
inspiration this past year: Cheyenne Giesecke, Ramses Rodriguez, Lesley
Mathews, Amari Ice, Tami Stackelhouse, Meredith Holley, Cara Heilmann,
Shaunna Menard, Aicha Bascaro, and Megan Jo Wilson. There are many staff
behind the scenes I’m not in touch with, but I know my book wouldn’t come into
form without you.

Thank you! Thank you to my Quill Family, my fellow authors who are a brilliant,
inspiring group of people. Your passion, your commitment, your capacities
astonish me. How did I get so lucky to walk the path with you? I cherish your
friendship and support.

Heartfelt thanks to Deborah Sudarsky, Pat Huss, Melissa Lopez, Lyndsay Toensing,
Petra Frese, Shelia Craig Whiteman, Denise Anderson, Jill McAbe, Shawna Robins,
Janet Farnsworth, Kate LaBrosse, Po-Hung Yu, Jennifer Powter, Donna Marie
Cozine, Cheryl Stelte, KristaLyn Montrose, Charlotte Friborg, Kat Mulvaney, Karen
Wade, Lisa Nichols, Tammy Babinchak, Natalie Pereman, Tonya Crombie, Amy
Carpenter, Jennifer Stebbing, Jelena Spasovski, Karen Lorre, Chelsea Liebowitz,
Rosine Kushnick, Karinne Finely, Xuemei Zhong, and Sara Shisler Goff.

Especial thanks to my Quill author cohort, Together We Rise: Charity Pimentel-
Hyams, Ana Red, Sarah Jane Patton, Veronica Anderson, Robin Theiss, Vera LaRee,
Debra Menke, Megan Day, Tanya Trevett, Vandy Verma, Jessie Wei, Pam Reid,
and Jennifer Seeno. Love and appreciate each of you.

At the tail end of this journey, through The Quill, I was invited into a mentorship
group with Marianne Williamson. It’s one of those synchronistic things – I’ve had
her chart on my desktop for a year. As I looked at the different Gates and
Channels connected to the Centers, her chart was the one I pulled up. Listening to
her coach the women in the mentorship, I am humbled and realigned. Her clarity
has an element of warm shock. When I read a passage from this book to her, I
was struck by the quality of her listening. I’m calling on her prayers to shower this
book that it might, like so many of her books have, reach the people who need it
most. Thank you, Marianne, for your unabashed pristine truth. I look forward to
high play with you.
                                         392

Thank you to my Women Within Circle who have listened with compassion to my
freak-outs, as I hit one glass ceiling after another. You’ve stood by me as I found
my way. You call out the Queen in me and inspire me to see the Queen in each of
you. Thank you, Sheri, Letty, Patricia, Jen, Laura, and Mary.

Thank you to my Rockstar sisters: Rosine, Karinne, Charlotte, Jo, Barrie, Jodi –
Heartwise Goddesses. It’s an honor to walk the path with you! To my friends who
have tolerated my absence as I’ve been in the rabbit hole writing this book: By the
time the whales are here I’ll be ready to play again! Thank you for your patience.

Thank you to John at Genetic Matrix for creating the absolute best program for
running charts, for always being available to help, for making it so easy to create
charts for this book, and for letting me use your chart for the front cover and
throughout this book. www.Geneticmatrix.com.

A special thank you to all the people who’ve had Human Design coaching sessions
with me, and all the coaches, therapists, and students who have taken my Human
Design training. Looking at your puzzle piece and seeing the magnificence of who
you are is nectar for the soul. Sharing the light of this system, knowing you will
take it and help light the way for others, is the greatest gift of all. Thank you for
stepping onto the path with me.

Heartfelt appreciation for Greg Toews. I cherished and relied on spending the
weekends smelling oils under your guidance. Your transmission coupled with the
oils enabled me to consistently drop into the openness of my Being. Your work
helped remove my egoic obstacles and gave me the deep rest I needed to do the
big job of writing this book. Spraying Cedar and Marjoram on my aching hands,
arms, neck and shoulders was a lifesaver. As were Mugwort baths which took me
out of the stress zone into ease. Thank you.

Thank you, beloved Jane and Gary. For seeing me from the beginning. Knowing
and trusting that what I had to offer would come to fruition. Your reflections are
manna to my soul. I love and cherish you.

Deepest gratitude to the guides known and unknown who have brought me to
where I am today and continue to light my way. To name a few: Amma, Lama
Palden, Tara, Ram Dass, Faisal Muqaddam, Leslie Temple-Thurston, Karen Saeger,
                                        393

Ellen Zucker, Anat Baniel, Ming Tong Gu, Barbara Kaufman, Eileen Poole, Charlene
Tschirhart, Vicki Noble, Marion Rosen, Claire Zammit, and Pali Summerlin.

And of course, my heart, Byron Katie.

Ginormous love and gratitude to my mom and dad, Dean and Shirley; my five
older brothers, Peter, David, Michael, Steven, and Chris; and my soul sister Heidi
and her husband Jean. What an adventure we’ve shared!

Finally, from the well of infinite gratitude, and with boundless love, thank you
Yarrow (and our feline companion, Kali Ma!). We did this together. Over the last
forty years, your steady stream of kindness, support, and generosity has watered
the garden of my being. Thank you, beloved.
                                        394

                                About the Author




Robin Winn is a paradigm shifter. She has the capacity to open people to
possibilities that are not readily apparent. Her passion is to help coaches,
therapists, and transformational businesses work more effectively with their
clients.

With an extensive background as psychotherapist, somatic practitioner, Diamond
Logos teacher, dharma leader, and Human Design coach, Robin uses an innovative
approach to help people understand who their clients are, how they function, and
how to connect them with their inner guidance.

Always on a learning edge, Robin has trained extensively with some of the great
teachers of our time: Byron Katie, Marion Rosen, Lama Palden Drolma, Faisal
Muqaddam, Anat Baniel, Ming Tong Gu, Barbara Kaufman, Karen Curry Parker,
Pali Summerlin, and Greg Toews. Through her own life experience and through
four decades of working intensively with people, Robin brings a unique and
empowering perspective.

Her superpower is helping people get perspective by zooming out for the large
view, recognizing the distorted thinking and the wounding that creates suffering,
then zooming in to transform that suffering. Ultimately, it’s about recognizing the
Truth of who we are.
                                       395

Robin is the author of Understanding Your Clients Through Human Design: The
Breakthrough Technology, and the founder and director of the training programs:
Understanding Yourself through Human Design and Understanding Your Clients
through Human Design.

Robin lives on Maui with her Projector wife Yarrow and their cat Kali Ma.
                                       396

                                   THANK YOU



Thank you for taking this journey with me. Thank you for daring to enter the wild
world of Human Design.

In taking the time to see and recognize yourself, your pain, your possibility, you
begin the process of claiming more of you. As you do, your puzzle piece gets more
differentiated, brighter. Your spark provides light for others, inspiring them to
recognize and claim more of themselves. As you facilitate others on the journey
the light becomes even brighter.

Together we light up the world. Together we claim our rightful place in the puzzle
of humanity.

If Human Design is knocking on your door and you are called to a deeper dive,
please contact me at: info@clientsandhumandesign.com.

Blessing on your way,

Robin
