 DOWNLOAD YOUR FREE SOFTWARE NOW TO
       DRAW UP CHARTS FROM:

  WWW.HUMANDESIGNFORUSALL.COM/FREE-
             SOFTWARE

    This software is for Windows-based computers and can be

run on Apple/Mac computers with crossover software (Like Parallels
                         or Fusion),

or in the Mac "Basecamp" with a Windows software (98, Me, XP, 7 or
                                8)

  Download the mobile App for smartphones, ipads and tablets for

            Reports and Human Design Updates from:

               www.HumanDesignForUsAll.mobi


       Get your Free, or Full Personal Report including your

                  Human Design Life Chart from:

               www.HumanDesignForUsAll.com
  THE BOOK OF LINES
A 21st Century View of the

         IChing,
the Chinese Book of Changes
CHETAN PARKYN
         COPYRIGHT © 2012 CHETAN PARKYN.
Chetan Parkyn asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this work.
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced mechanically,
electronically, or by any other means, including photocopying, without written
permission of the author except for brief quotations embodied in literary articles or
reviews. It is illegal to copy this book, post it to a website, or distribute it by any
other means without permission from the author.
ISBN–978-1-4675-2745-3
Cover design by Sally Taylor – Represented by Artist Partners
www.artistpartners.com
Interior design by Alex Roberts and The Set Up Graphics,
www.thesetugraphics.com
Also by this author:
Human Design, Discover the Person You Were Born To Be
Harper Collins UK www.HarperCollins.co.uk (ISBN 978-0-00-728124-4)
New World Library USA www.NewWorldLibrary.com (ISBN 978-1-57731-941-2)
Butik Yayincilik Turkey www.butikyayincilik.com
Natural Spirit, Japan www.naturalspirit.co.jp (ISBN 978-4-86451-003-5
Milenium Publishers , Bulgaria (ISBN 978-954-515-188-0)
Acorn International, Taiwan (ISBN 978-986-6362-74-3)
Also available in Korean and Romanian as of Spring 2014.
This book is dedicated to Carola Eastwood (Deva Nishtha),

  whose Divine Trust has extended most generously to

     loving, supporting and traveling with me in this

                wonder-filled life journey.
            There is a music which has no sound;
             The soul is restless for such music.
            There is love in which the body is not;
          The soul longs for such unembodied love.
             There is a truth which has no form;

            The soul longs for this formless truth.
              Therefore melodies do not satisfy;

                    Bodies do not satisfy
               And forms cannot fulfill the soul
                  But this lack of fulfillment,
                     This dissatisfaction,
               Has to be understood properly,
For such understanding ultimately brings about transcendence.

       Then sound becomes the door to the soundless,
       The body becomes the path to the unembodied,

              And form becomes the formless.

                            Osho,
                from the book, A Cup of Tea.
                       CONTENTS
Foreword by Carola Eastwood


Acknowledgements


Outline


Introduction


How to Use This Book


Hexagrams 1–64 and the 384 Lines


Hexagrams 1


Hexagrams 2


Hexagrams 3


Hexagrams 4


Hexagrams 5


Hexagrams 6


Hexagrams 7
Hexagrams 8


Hexagrams 9


Hexagrams 10


Hexagrams 11


Hexagrams 12


Hexagrams 13


Hexagrams 14


Hexagrams 15


Hexagrams 16


Hexagrams 17


Hexagrams 18


Hexagrams 19


Hexagrams 20


Hexagrams 21
Hexagrams 22


Hexagrams 23


Hexagrams 24


Hexagrams 25


Hexagrams 26


Hexagrams 27


Hexagrams 28


Hexagrams 29


Hexagrams 30


Hexagrams 31


Hexagrams 32


Hexagrams 33


Hexagrams 34


Hexagrams 35
Hexagrams 36


Hexagrams 37


Hexagrams 38


Hexagrams 39


Hexagrams 40


Hexagrams 41


Hexagrams 42


Hexagrams 43


Hexagrams 44


Hexagrams 45


Hexagrams 46


Hexagrams 47


Hexagrams 48


Hexagrams 49
Hexagrams 50


Hexagrams 51


Hexagrams 52


Hexagrams 53


Hexagrams 54


Hexagrams 55


Hexagrams 56


Hexagrams 57


Hexagrams 58


Hexagrams 59


Hexagrams 60


Hexagrams 61


Hexagrams 62


Hexagrams 63
Hexagrams 64


Using the Book of Lines as an Oracle
                           FOREWORD
Having enjoyed the privilege of traveling through life with Chetan
Parkyn as his business partner and wife, but most importantly, as his
friend, my soul has been deeply touched by the huge heart, wit, and
wisdom, of this beautiful and talented man. Over the years, I
discovered more and more the authentic love he has for everyone,
and the depth of spiritual insight and wisdom he is capable of
conveying to us all. The huge gift that Chetan has is his ability to
speak through the symbols reflected in one’s life, to address your
heart and soul in a way that leaves one forever, “touched” by his
clear reflection and startling insights.

For more than a decade, Chetan daily spent hours and hours and
hours, pouring over all the elements he knew of Human Design. It
was through this process of testing, discovering, and refining the
work, that he identified the specific key elements of Human Design
that emerged as the central most important factors to share with
others; those elements that would assist in awakening one’s
authentic self. My enthusiasm for his work with Human Design grew
as I watched him gain greater and greater mastery over the art of
delivering a highly impactful personal reading, and as I watched him
for years, developing and refining his teaching materials for those
seeking to learn about Human Design.

More and more people’s lives began changing significantly as we
refined our understanding of Human Design and he refined his
methods of conveying the multi-layered nuances of meaning in a
Human Design Life Chart. Having had a long career giving astrology
readings, I was amazed at the depth, accuracy, and reach of Human
Design, with its profound ability to awaken people to their authentic
self and help us move through life with clarity and effectiveness in all
that we do. I was fascinated to find that not only the conscious self,
but the unconscious, inherited patterns from generations past, were
also contained within ones’ Human Design, and could be read and
understood! But my greatest learning, and highest benefit came as I
began incorporating Human Design into my way of daily living and
relating.

A central part of Chetan’s research was into one of the elements
contained within Human Design, the I Ching, from which is drawn a
symbolic understanding of the message contained within each of the
64 Hexagrams, which relate to the 64 genetic codons in our human
make-up. As you may imagine, the nuances of meaning derived from
the encoded information passed down from previous generations is
complex. Chetan was inspired to interpret these symbols for us in
ways that would shed the greatest light on our journey. I’ve lost count
of how many revisions he has written, but over the course of twelve
years, I watched him evolve the language, bringing deeper insight
and refining it with each re-write. His dedication to getting his Book
of Lines to the point where it would most fully reflect the authentic
meaning of each of the Hexagrams, and indeed, each of the 384
lines within the hexagrams seemed inexhaustible; so much so that I
was truly surprised one day when he announced it completed.

In his first book, Human Design, Discover the Person You Were Born
to Be, Chetan introduced us to the art and science of self-discovery
that is revealed by knowing your Human Design. The Book of Lines
is written both as a companion to his Human Design book, but also,
as a stand-alone modern-day interpretation of the ancient Chinese
text, the I Ching. Levels and levels of personal insight are contained
within the symbolic language of The Book of Lines. Use it to read
through all of the 26 activations in your Human Design Life Chart to
get a profound and coherent symbolic picture of the person you were
born to be and life you were born to live. Use it also, to consult about
any area of your life that you wish to shed more light upon, and you
will be given answers that uncannily speak to the heart of your
question, giving you broader insight into your life journey. Let The
Book of Lines become one of those treasures on your bookshelf that
you refer to frequently over the years.

Carola Eastwood,
Professional Astrologer and Success Coach
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to acknowledge all those who have trusted me to read for
them, and who have provided insights that have been woven into
this book.

Without the presence of Osho in my life, it is hard for me to imagine
what an alternative would be.

My great thanks and acknowledgement go to Ra Uru Hu as the one
who had the tenacity to withstand downloading Human Design, and
who opened the doorway to introduce Human Design as the first
International Language to the world.

Sincere thanks go to Alexander Roberts
(www.thesetupgraphics.com) who has helped me to maintain the
vision for this book, and also patiently, and again more patiently
produced the extraordinary graphics and layout.

In the many years of playing with the IChing, I have read and reread
many different interpretations of this remarkable Book of Changes in
an attempt to distill the inner meanings hidden within the codes and
images of our lives. I do not consider myself a scholar of the IChing,
but someone who has received great support, encouragement and
guidance from the wisdom contained within it, and I am grateful for
everyone who has gone before me in exploring and giving color and
interpretation to this amazing body of knowledge.

For those who have an expansive appetite to explore more deeply
into this knowledge and the realms of the IChing, I direct your
attention to my great friend, Richard Rudd’s book: Gene Keys (ISBN
: 978-0578038551)
                             OUTLINE
The Book of Lines gives access to the IChing, the Chinese Book of
Changes, in Twenty-first Century language that is specifically tailored
towards Human Design. This book is written as a companion to my
first book: Human Design, Discover the Person You Were Born To
Be.

The Book of Lines can also be employed by those seeking to use it
as a divination device, to foresee or get greater appreciation in their
life journey at any particular moment in time.

Additionally, it also can be used by Astrologers seeking to find more
specific meaning to particular parts of the Heavens around us and
how the planets of our Solar system behave there.

Truth cannot be expressed in words, but words can lead you towards
the truth….if you let them …… and then leave them.
                        INTRODUCTION
In 1979, in India, in my early days with the Enlightened Spiritual
Master Osho in Poona, I was given an English language version of
Richard Wilhelm’s German translation of the Chinese IChing. I found
myself watching my “unconscious” become apparent as it was
described in abstract language from an ancient culture that saw life
in a very different way than what I was accustomed to experiencing. I
was riveted, and started an erratic study of the implications of
“throwing” the IChing and watching its predictions “unfold” in my life.
It was an extraordinary experience as anyone who has studied or
“played with” the IChing will have found.

Inspired to know more about myself, and the world I found myself in,
I visited a celebrated Chhayashastri (Shadow Reader) in Mumbai,
who among many things, predicted that I would spend my life
reading for people. After he had invited me to come study with him,
and I had innocently declined having no idea that I was being given
an extraordinary invitation by a world authority, he told me that a
system was going to come into my life, that I would introduce to
people all over the world, and affect their lives in a profound way. He
advised me to start practicing reading for people, to choose any
means to find out how to introduce people to themselves through
what I saw. He suggested I look into any and all esoteric and other
ways of reading people so I would be ready for when the “new
system” would appear in my life.

Life with the Enlightened Master Osho always brings transformation
in full measure, and within a week, I was approached by a
celebrated Indian Psychic Palmist who showed me how to start
reading hands… and so the doors opened into many years of
reading hands, faces, tarot, astrology, runes, tealeaves and many
other means of looking into everyone’s lives. Through the ensuing
years, the IChing was always very close to my heart because it
provided a means to put an array of sensations and experiences into
words.

In 1993, I was sent my Human Design chart by an old friend… and I
had the immediate recognition that this was the system the Master
Chhayashastri had foretold. All the pieces of my study and practice
with esoteric systems fell into place, and I started practicing
earnestly getting to grips with Human Design.
Human Design
Human Design had been “downloaded” by a Canadian man called
Ra Uru Hu (now deceased) in January 1987, in very arduous
circumstances. I use the word “downloaded” rather than “channeled”
because Ra was forced to absorb the system by what he described
as the “Voice.” Ra’s “download” experience continued for 8 days and
nights, and did not sound like fun. Ra described the intelligence that
gave him the information of the Human Design as being far beyond
anything he had imagined to be possible. At the end of the
“download” he found himself with an amazing system but without any
instructions of what to do with it!

Human Design is composed, or synthesized from four ancient
wisdom traditions as well as two modern-day sciences. The ancient
wisdoms are (Western) Astrology as the means to find the
placements and meaning of heavenly bodies around us; the
Kaballah and particular an understanding of the branches of Tree of
Life; the Chakras or energy centers in the body; and the IChing, The
Chinese Book of Changes. The modern-day sciences are an
understanding of neutrinos as the tiny “messengers” of the Universe,
and the Human Genetic coding and how we describe our experience
of life in human form.

A direct link between the 64 Hexagrams of the IChing and the 64
Human Genetic codons was established by the German physician,
Dr Martin Schonberger in 1973 (IChing and the Genetic Code: The
Hidden Key to Life). So, if you are able to comprehend what the
Hexagrams of the IChing represent and how to describe them, you
can also comprehend and actually “read” what the psychological
genetic makeup is in any individual. Contained within the codes of
your Human Design are ancestral streams of experiences and
distilled wisdom which are embedded in your “psycho-spiritual DNA.”
By understanding your unique genetic makeup expressed in clear
language, you have access to the keys to your life.
This book is the result of many years practice with the IChing, many
re-writes and fine-tunings to find clear language that expresses
many of the nuances of the IChing and hence our inherent genetic
tendencies!
                 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
The Book of Lines has been deliberately written as a sequence of
“sutras,” or “koans,” or “threads of concepts” becoming sequences of
words that are tied to particular parts of our human makeup. If you
can be receptive and allow the knowledge to “land” in your
awareness, these “threads of concepts” are sequences of words that
lead you into profound understanding of yourself and those around
you.

The 64 hexagrams are found to align exactly with the 64 “codons” of
Human Genetics. The Book of Lines offers the possibility to have an
experience of each particular aspect of our personal genetics
through finding a personal resonance with the language used to
describe them.

Please consider these written lines to be “triggers” or “keys” as
guidance for introspection, contemplation or meditation, rather than,
or at least as a combination with, just pieces of information.

We are here to live life in all its shapes and forms, and the Book of
Lines can give you access to intrinsic parts of your nature as a
personal experiencing of who you are, and what you are here living
out, and how you are evolving. You will notice that the Lines, for the
most part, have been deliberately written in present tense, and
directly to you.

If you do not have your Human Design Life Chart, you may access
yours, free of charge, by going to www.HDFUA.com or
www.HumanDesignForUsAll.com and either download the free
software, or put in your Birth information (Date, Place and Time of
Birth) and have your Personal Report containing your Life Chart,
delivered to you by email.
How to read the Lines in a Life Chart
If the details below appear at first glance too complex, please rest
assured that you can derive meaning about the process of your life
without understanding each of the nuances described here. As you
read further, you will find a simple explanation about how to use this
book as a guide to understanding the broader scope of your life
experience.

Here is an example of two facing pages and the items on them:
Each Gate has a Number,       , and a Hexagram,         , that is made up
of “Chop marks.” The xi

Chop Marks are either “solid” marks,            that are described as
“Yang,” Male, Outgoing, Creative energy, or “broken” marks,
    , that are described as “Yin,” Female, Ingoing, or Receptive.

Each Hexagram has a Chinese Character, or Pictogram that relates
to it, .

Each Gate has a Name, , a Meaning, , that gives a brief
description of how it operates, and a Commentary, , that describes
its broader effect in the world.

Each Gate has a specific place in the Life Chart,   .

Each Hexagram has a specific place in the Wheel, , and has the
potential correspondence with another Hexagram, . When these
two Hexagrams are activated, they make up a “defined” Channel in
the Life Chart, .

Each Gate is in one of the      Centers, , and is placed in one of
the major Circuits that run through the Life Chart, .
Each Gate corresponds to a Hexagram that has a specific placement
in the sky, or the starfields around us that can be shown by exact
degrees, minutes and seconds of arc in Astrological terms, .

There are 6 Lines in each Gate, and each has a specific description
and role to play in life, . Ultimately, each Line in a Gate relates to
the Hexagram, portion of Starfield and Genetic Codon within our
makeup of consciousness in form.
How to apply the descriptions of Gates and Lines to
a Life Chart
Each Life Chart has two calculations for placements in the sky
around us of the Sun, the Moon, the Nodes and each of the Planets
in our Solar System. The calculations are recorded in Hexagram and
Line Number. Here is an example for the “conscious” and
“unconscious” Sun, , and Earth,       :




One calculation is made for the moment of birth, and the Hexagram
and Line Numbers are recorded in black, indicating that these are
“conscious” aspects of our nature that we will recognize in ourselves.

The second calculation is made for a moment 88 degrees of Solar
Arc, or approximately 3 months before birth while we are still in the
womb. These Hexagram and Line Numbers are recorded in pink,
indicating that they are an “unconscious” part of our makeup.
Premature or late births use this same calculation.xii

“Traditionally” this “unconscious” aspect has been explored through
psycho-analysis, hypnotism and other forms of therapy. The
significance of the “unconscious” pink information is that it relates to
our genetic inheritance that comes from parents, their parents and at
least 4 generations of input, and through Human Design becomes
immediately apparent. What can be deduced from examining Human
Design is that we are given direct access to our “genetic
inheritance.” This is not to say that any gifts or poor personal
attitudes are “due to my ancestors,” but it does give us a new level of
understanding of our journey to be more conscious about how we
are in our life.
Reading the Gates and Lines
In the example above for the Conscious Sun,       35 we would read
Gate 3, and then Line 5.

This following passages are from The Book of Lines, first the gate
meaning and commentary, and then Line 5 :

Gate 3. Beginnings: Implementing the New: In breaking with old
ways, clear perspective, perseverance and some principles of
organizing are needed. Tradition does not easily give way to the
new, the unknown and untried.

The Gate 3 meaning informs you that you are living a life in which
you are breaking with traditions and establishing new and previously
untried ways. Below is the entire text for Gate 3, Line 5, not all of
which may erlate to your life.

3.5 Interpreting: Detaching from anticipated results when
implementing a new order.

  In organizing anything new, there is the possibility of your
  intentions being misinterpreted.

   : Your assured individual stance withstands any disagreements
  and establishes order.

     : You can easily become confused in your attempts to reconcile
  others’ problems.

Since the Line is activated by the Sun, , we read the first two lines
and not those that are particular to Mars, , or the Earth, .

3.5 Interpreting: Detaching from anticipated results when
implementing a new order.

In organizing anything new, there is the possibility of your intentions
being misinterpreted.
The Gate 3, Line 5 meaning indicates that you cannot expect to
know exactly how things are going to turn out when implementing
your new approaches to life, nor can you expect everyone to
appreciate exactly what you are doing. You might find yourself
“making things up as you go along,” and hoping you “get away with
it.”

In this same example, for the Conscious Earth,      , we read from The
Book of Lines Gate 50, Line 5.

First: Gate 50 : Values: Stability: Honoring the wisdom and being
responsible for values that enrich both local community and society
at large. Spiritual and earthly powers are joined by taking
responsibility to hold and promote values of merit that are traditional
or novel, but which are relevant to the essential needs of any
moment.

The Gate 50 meaning indicates that you are responsible to uphold
values for the people around you according to what is actually
needed.

Then :

50.5 Enhancing: Maintaining alertness to recognize which
values serve best.

  You recognize or disregard a correlation between the values and
  actions that serve everyone.

   : You grow wise enough to uphold appropriate values when
  pressured to change them.

    : In a rush to get on in life, you can disregard the real values that
  serve yourself and others.

Since the Line is activated by the Earth, , we read the first two
lines and not those that are particular to Saturn, , or Mars, .
The Gate 50, Line 5 meaning indicates that you are alert to
changing values, and might have to shift from what you consider are
“right” values, to those that are actually serving people in any
particular instance.

For the Unconscious Sun,       , we read Gate 41, Line 1,

First, Gate 41, Imagination: Evaluating Potentials: Living within
limiting resources gives occasion for dreams and fantasies to arise.
In the search to be fulfilled you look into any potential experiences
that might move your through a cycle from emptiness to
accomplishment. Dreaming opens doorways to experiences that
bring satisfaction and completion, or endless fantasies that are self-
sustaining. Existence was created when we fell in love with
emptiness.

Then :

41.1 Moderating: Finding the balance between giving and
receiving.

  Being either centered and clear, or headstrong in your handling of
  how you use your energies.

   : Your creative imagination streams resources in ways that
  benefit yourself and others.

   : Confusion with your role and resources leads you into
  difficulties at the outset of endeavors.

The unconscious Gate 41 meaning indicates that as an
unconscious undercurrent, you have a vivid imagination that
explores many possibilities in life…some of which might become a
reality, and some just a fantasy.

The unconscious Gate 41, Line 1 indicates that as an unconscious
undercurrent, you need to find the happy medium between what you
can realistically expect to offer to, and receive from life.
And for the Unconscious Earth,         , we read Gate 31, Line 1

First, Gate 31, Influence: “I lead….because….” : Mutual attractions
and your readiness to interrelate allow you to express your natural
influence. The potential to provide guidance and instruction align you
and others with future prospects. It is important to relate from your
own independent vision of reality.

Then :

31.1 Opening: Finding the sincerity to allow yourself to be
influential.

  You either offer your ideals in simple ways or through contrived
  means.

    : You express leadership through clear alignment with your
  inherent aims.

     : Attempting to establish influential roles you might align with
  status rather than ideals.

The unconscious Gate 31 meaning indicates that as an
unconscious undercurrent you have an air around you that affects
others to want to pay attention to you…..if you will allow for it, and
stay true to your own nature.

The unconscious Gate 31, Line 1 has a part that relates
particularly to the Earth,    so we are going to read the top line (in
blue) and then the line that is next to the Earth,   symbol :

The top (blue) line indicates that you have an unconscious
undercurrent that grows over time when you recognize more and
more that everyone pays attention to you because what you say and
do is influencing them.

The Earth, , activation indicates that as an unconscious
undercurrent you tend to be inter- ested in influencing or upholding
the apparent ordering of a class structure around you.

.and so on through all the Gates and Lines in the Life Chart.

When a Line has blue writing, it is an indication that the potential
wisdom inherent in

the Line develops and grows during the lifetime.

When a Line has black writing, it indicates that the quality of the
meaning is set from birth.

Some lines are highlighted pink with either Pluto ( ) or Neptune (
), the two slowest orbiting planets, indicating that no one alive now,
in 2012, (in a “normal” lifespan) has that particular activation in their
chart........ These activations would apply to past or future
generations, and "generational influences" relating to those times.

Some lines are highlighted yellow , indicating that either Neptune
or Pluto has recently, or is very close to, activating that line for the
first time in an aeon. (248 years for Pluto, 165 years for Neptune)…
Further study
The words colored in green in the Gate Commentary are from
Richard Rudd’s book GeneKeys, Unlocking the Higher Purpose
Hidden in Your DNA (www.Genekeys.co.uk).

Richard examines what he calls “The Gifts.”… and describes the
range of consciousness from a low-level frequency (Introvert <>
Extrovert) to a high level frequency (: Gift :: Realization) associated
with each Hexagram/Genekey.

The “Gift” or trigger recognition that takes us from low-level
frequency to realization is the third word along in each row of words.

Hovering over the “Introvert” <> “Extrovert” low-level range of
frequencies of each Key is what Richard calls the “Shadow” element
that holds us back in our wish to grow and evolve in consciousness.

For Example :

Gate 2. Receptivity




From low-level frequencies of (introvert) Lost or (extrovert)
Regimented, with the sense of Dislocation overshadowing… and
by activating the Gift of Orientation you come to the realization of
Oneness.
The Planets’ glyphs and their energetic influences.
You do not have to know astrology, just be aware of the glyphs
for the planets.

    : The Sun (A Star): Dynamic life force, identity, sense of
  purpose.

    : The Earth: Grounding, receptivity, the body.

    : The Moon (A Satellite): Reflection, feeling memory, the past.

    : North Node: Your new direction and current life purpose.
  (These Nodes are calculated points in Space, and not planets)

    : South Node: Your past-life direction and lessons to assimilate

   : Mercury: Connection to the environment, communication.

   : Venus: Love, beauty, comfort, relationship, yin nature, morals.

    : Mars: Activity, war, aggression, progress, the urge to survive,
  sex.

    : Jupiter: Expansion, higher learning, philosophic nature.

   : Saturn: Life’s lessons, structure, cause/effect, Shadow side.

   : Uranus: Awakening, dramatic change, higher consciousness.

    : Neptune: Unconditional love/confusion/delusion, mystical
  planes.

    : Pluto: Transformation, death and rebirth at higher levels.
THE

LINES
    How to use the Book of Lines as a modern

       day oracle, or contemporary version of

                            the IChing
Your first step: Assemble necessary materials
For this process, you will need:

    A notebook or your journal and an ink pen

    Three coins of the same type (whatever coins you use, just
    make sure they are the same size and same weight)

    A comfortable and quiet place to sit

    A surface to write on
Your second step: The Question
Tune into your question, to get to the essence of it. Expressing it
clearly at the onset is as important as receiving the answer with
equanimity. For instance, if you are inclined to ask, “When will I ever
meet my soulmate?”, and you take a little time to go deeper with that
question, you will see it is full of nuances that could go in many
directions…

“Why have I not met my soulmate thus far in life?”

“Am I actually meant to have a soulmate, or not?”

“Will the fact that I meet my soulmate at some point in the future
ensure that we will recognize each other?”

Asking a more focused question that gets to the real heart of the
matter will result in better chances of your receiving an answer that
resonates with you and provides valuable guidance.

In our example, if you ask instead, “What do I need to know, learn or
do, to draw my soulmate to me within the next 12 months?” You will
receive a more focused and empowering answer.

“Yes” or “no” questions, those too broad in scope, and “either/or”
questions are not productive. If you keep your questions focused on
the result of a particular choice or course of action on your part, or
the outcome of reaching toward a particular goal or relationship, the
answers you receive will be much more relevant and useful.

Once you have clearly formulated your question, write it down. This
will further help you focus your intent upon receiving an answer that
is specific as possible.

Your third step: Set your Intention and Remain Open
Now that you have clearly formulated your question, use whatever
ritual resonates with you, whether that be prayer, meditation,
symbols, calling in the Light, or a specific ritual like, candle-lighting,
to align your intent to receive the highest and clearest guidance
possible. Ask to receive only that which will be for your Highest Good
and the Highest Good of all concerned.

It is important to remain open to universal wisdom, rather than being
attached to receiving a specific answer or outcome that you may
wish… who knows, something much better may be on the way to
you.

Relax into the process, trusting your ability to tap into universal
wisdom and guidance.
Your fourth step: Throwing the coins
We use the coins to represent the binary nature of life on earth, yin
and yang. “Heads” (the side of the coin that typically has the picture
of someone’s head on it) is a yang coin, while “Tails” (the other side
of the coin that has an image with nothing remotely like a picture of a
head on it) is a yin coin. For each time you consult The Book of
Lines on a specific issue, you will be doing a total of six throwings of
the three coins to yield your answer. This will come to be interpreted
in the form of a hexagram.

Keeping your question in mind, place the coins in your hands, cup
your hands together covering the coins completely, shake your
cupped hands and then throw the coins onto a hard surface. This
first roll of the coins indicates the first, or bottom line, of the
hexagram. (see illustration below) When the coins land, notice and
write down the combinations of yin and yang, as such:

A “yang” coin is “heads.” A “yin” coin is “tails.”

If you throw two heads and one tail, the line is yang, or solid :
           . If you throw two tails and one head, the line is yin, or
broken :             .

If you throw all three of the same type of coin, this is called a
“changing line”, and you proceeds thus:

If you throw three heads, the line starts as yang, marked:          o
      “changing” to yin            .

If you throw three tails, the line start as yin, marked:       x
 “changing” to yang              .

Whether you have changing lines or not, the first part of the reading
is the same:

Throw six times, and after each throw, write down, from the bottom
up, the combination of lines thrown. Here’s an example:
What do I need to know or do, to ensure my new project will be
successful?




In this example, there were no changing lines, so you will simply go
directly to the text for the answer.
Your fifth step: Finding the hexagram, and consulting
the text
Look inside the back cover (the last page) at the colored square
diagram containing hexagram numbers.

Each hexagram is divided into a two groups of three: the “Lower
Lines” and the “Upper Lines.” The Lower Lines run in the column
down the side of the square diagram, and the “Upper Lines” across
the top.

Find the “Lower Lines” from your first three throws of the coins, (from
the bottom, up). Make a note of the row (or the name) of that
Trigram. Then, find the corresponding upper Trigram on the top row,
across the page. Draw an imaginary line from the Trigram in the top
row, down to meet the imaginary line extended horizontally from the
Trigram in the left side row. The box at the intersection will contain
the Hexagram number which holds your answer.

In the case of our example question, (Ken in the left column
combines with Ken in the top row), where the two rows intersect in
the diagram, it shows that the answer is contained within Hexagram
52.

52 is called Mountain, Keeping Still. You read the Meaning and the
Commentary on Pages 52 in the Book of Lines.

With this answer, you are being told that it is recommended to take
time to refine your project, gain greater clarity, or further inspiration,
and that some contemplation is needed before further action can
successfully be taken… and to enjoy overseeing the whole process!
Changing Lines
In the case where one or several of the coin throws yields either
three yang or three yin coins, we have what is called, “Changing
Lines.” In this case, the hexagram formed by the original six throws
of the coins is read first, to understand the situation as is, then a
second step is taken, to read how the situation in question, or the
outcome one is inquiring about, may be unfolding. Here’s an
example of how to proceed when you throw one or more “changing
lines”:




In this example, the third line changes from yin to yang, revealing the
new hexagram to read after you have read and digested the first
one. So, in this case:

  1st : Read the first hexagram, which in this example is: Hexagram
    6, Conflict Resolution, Emotional Balance. Read the Meaning
    and Commentary as usual, to get the overall reflection on your
    question, then, because the changing line is the third line, read
    that line: Hexagram 6, Line 3: “Having Reservations :
    Resolutions often happen by playing a passive role.
    Achieving emotional clarity comes by making and breaking
    commitments with alertness.”
  Then : Next, read the new hexagram produced by the changing
    line, in this case, Hexagram 6, with the changing line in the third
    place, becomes, Hexagram 44 : Patterns, Meeting Together.
     Read the general text to understand how the situation in
     question is unfolding. This text contains the final answer, or
     outcome, to your question.

  (In this example, it might point towards situations in your life
     that are causing you concern...that when you adjust your
     personal attachment or involvement with them show you
     what caused the conflicts/concerns in your life in the first
     place, and how some small attitude changes in yourself
     can modify their significance in your life altogether).

If there is more than one changing line in your hexagram, be sure to
read each of those changing lines in the original hexagram, along
with its general commentary, then proceed to the next hexagram. For
example, if in the above example of arriving at the original
hexagram, you had an additional changing line, because you threw:

In this example, we begin with the same hexagram, but in addition to
the third line changing from yin to yang, we also have the fifth line
changing from yang to yin, revealing an entirely different next
hexagram to read after reading the first one thrown.




In this case, you would first read Hexagram 6 and its commentary,
then read the 6.3 line commentary and the 6.5 line commentary,
before moving on to read the new hexagram created by the two
changing lines, which is: Hexagram 50.
Your sixth step: Interpreting the Answer
The Book of Lines was written both as a guide for use in interpreting
your Human Design Life Chart, as well as a stand-alone modern day
oracle which can serve as a clear reflection from the perspective of
Universal Wisdom, as it applies to our modern day circumstances
and more highly developed personal awareness. That said, it retains
its original function as an oracle, and as such, its answers are given
in symbolic form, designed to stimulate your unconscious,
subconscious and superconscious mind, to bring a broader
perspective in your life.

To benefit fully from the answers supplied by The Book of Lines,
begin the process as suggested, by “setting space”, opening to
divine wisdom, and becoming receptive to universal language, and
the meaning of the text will then “dawn upon you” as you read and
may continue to reveal more nuances in the days following your
question. Sometimes it may seem that your question has not directly
been answered, but if you remain open, you will discover that the
Book of Lines has given you a look into a deeper level of
understanding, or a “heads-up” about a situation that you may have
otherwise entirely missed.
