The Magician’s I Ching
  Swami Anand Nisarg
       Aeon Books
      
      
      
    First published 2015 by

Aeon Books

London NW3
    Copyright © 2015 by Swami Anand Nisarg
    The right of Swami Anand Nisarg to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with §§ 77 and 78 of the Copyright Design and Patents Act 1988.
    All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
    British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
    A C.I.P. for this book is available from the British Library
    ISBN-978-1-90465-865-8
    Typeset by Alexandra Thornton, London
    Printed in Great Britain
    www.aeonbooks.co.uk
I declare my word: YI–FA, as the law of the universe
Table of Contents
 Acknowledgements
 About the Author
 Preface
 The Unfolding of the Changes
 Note I: If You Are An Absolute Beginner at I Ching
 Note II: If You Are A Western Magician
 Introduction
 Chapter One: The Esoteric Foundations of the I Ching
  Tao, Yin, and Yang
  The Trigrams
  The I Ching, Taoism, and Confucian Thought (or True Will and the Great Work
      Transformation Through Symbols (Taoist Study of Nature)
          Fu Xi
      Confucius: Seeking the Superior Individual (Philosophy of the Will)
          Shao Yung
          Zhang Shi, Zhu Xi, and the Law of Change
      The Map of Time
      “The I Ching is Not About You”
 Chapter Two: How to Use the I Ching
  I Ching Reading Methods
      Method I: The “Four Stave” Method
      Method II: The “Three Coin” Method
      Method III: The “Six Coin” Method
      Method IV: The Intuitive Methods
      A Note On Probabilities
  How to Read the Hexagrams
  A Guide to Common Phrases and Words in I Ching Hexagrams
  Reference Table for the Hexagrams
  General Notes on Interpreting A Reading
      Rule 0: Look At What is Being Said, Don’t Look For What You Want to Hear
      A Case Study on the Subject—The Fall of the Shang
      Further Guidelines
 Chapter Three: The Text of the I Ching
  Outline
  A Note on Notes
  The Core Text of the I Ching
 Chapter Four: Advanced I Ching Studies
  Permutations of the Hexagrams
          Overturned Hexagrams and Opposite Hexagrams
          Nuclear Hexagrams
          Reversed Hexagrams
  Directional Theories of the I Ching
      Correspondences
      I Ching Trigrams and Magical Elements
          The Trigrams and Court Cards of the Tarot
          The “Double Element” and “Big Element” Hexagrams
        Planetary Correspondences
    The I Ching and the Qabalistic Tree of Life
 Yi-Fa as a Magical Word and Current
Chapter Five: The Shao Yung “Plum Blossom Method” of I Ching Numerology
 Fate Trigram
 Summary of the Plum Blossom Method Standard Procedure
Appendix I: Setting up a Daily I Ching Practice
Appendix II: Aleister Crowley and the I Ching
Appendix III: Reference Tables
 A: Hexagram Table
 B: The Trigrams
 C: A Quick Look-up of Nuclear Hexagrams
 D: Plum Blossom Method
    Summary of Plum Blossom Method Standard Procedure
 Plum Blossom Trigram Comparison Table: Fate Trigram
    Explanation of Codes
References
                    Acknowledgements
                         Artistic Credit
   Six-Dimensional Boolean Lattice Image artwork: Dr. Andreas
Schöter (printed with permission).

    Reprinted from www.yijing.co.uk.
    Originally published in “The Yijing as a Symbolic Language for
Abstraction”, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on I-Ching
(Yijing) Studies and Contemporary Civilization, 2005, pp. 291-305.
    Nuclear Hexagram Image artwork: Ma Deva Kalika.

   The “King Wen later heaven bagua” image (BenduKiwi) and “Tree
of Life with Tarot attributions” image (by Alan SyncBook Press) are
kindly reprinted from Wikipedia under its Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 3.0 Unreported license.
                       About the Author




    Swami Anand Nisarg is a Tantrist Guru and teacher of the Mystery
School, with a rebellious expectation-challenging style that has earned him
the nickname of “the Anti-Swami”. He has also been a student of the
western esoteric tradition for over twenty years, and a practitioner of the I
Ching for just as long (a period he barely considers enough to scratch the
surface of its mysteries). An unexpected spiritual experience caused him to
leave behind graduate-level university studies in Religious History in order
to receive initiation under a Guru, and subsequent Enlightenment
experiences led him to begin to offer initiation and teach techniques of
Awareness to anyone who sought him out. Putting emphasis on the
individual teacher-student relationship, and on making use of what works to
unlock Awareness (be it western magick or eastern mysticism) his present
school takes the form of dozens of dedicated initiates, hundreds who have
participated in his workshops and online programs, and many thousands
who have watched his YouTube lecture series. In addition to this book, he is
the author of “Three Paths of Ecstasy” (a guide to mysticism), “Song of the
Blessed One” (a translation and commentary on the Bhagavad Gita), and
several online books (most freely available, some reserved for students of
his Intensive Mysticism Program one-on-one program; or the “Magick for
Mystics” or “Tantra for Transcending” courses).
                                 Preface
    This work is not an academic work. It is not the product of a
professional sinologist. Those who are engaged with serious Chinese
historical study or have studied the historical context of the I Ching will no
doubt find that while this book delves far more into the Chinese context of
the I Ching than many others on the popular market, there will be a number
of things missing from what would constitute a properly “academic” work.
Likewise, they may find that some of the concepts and choices in the
material seem unusual, that certain things may seem presented or
emphasized in ways that do not fit the traditions, that some of the work
appears radical, if not to say “wrong”.
    In order to clarify: this book is written from the point of view of a
mystic and magician. While what meagre training I have as an historian has
been put to some use in the development of this book, its central source is
the hidden wisdom that is revealed through actual practice and intense
experimentation with the material. The first priority in the writing of The
Magician’s I Ching is to create a book that will be of great practical utility
to the western practitioner of the I Ching, whether novice or already
experienced. The historical information in this book is slanted toward the
promotion of the teaching of universal mysticism. The I Ching’s text is not
intended to be a literal translation but rather an interpretation based on
decades of esoteric practice with both the I Ching and mysticism in general
(in both eastern and western traditions). It is an interpretation, with the goal
of demonstrating how the I Ching can be used authentically but with ease
by western practitioners (and any eastern practitioners interested in the
western perspective). First and foremost, it is a text to be used, not treated
as an academic work for study or the affirmation of academic theories.
    It is my hope that academics and non-academics alike will be able to
find the perspective of this book refreshing and useful, and that it will not
only make them think about the I Ching, but also encourage them to engage
in practice (or in deeper practice) with it; possibly incorporating it further
into their overall agenda of spiritual/esoteric exercises. However, if there
are any who read this book and take offence to its approach, or wish to get
stuck in righteous indignation of its no-doubt significant gaps of historical
exposition or lack of academic rigour, I will quote the Great Beast in his
suggestion that such people are free to “absorb their Yang into their own
Yin, as the Americans say”. Whatever modern academia may have
concluded rightly or wrongly about the I Ching, this book represents what I
have concluded about it, thus far.
           The Unfolding of the Changes
   
  In the beginning, there is nothing.
  Nothing creates Nothingness.
  Nothingness creates a Nothingness impregnated with potential.
  This Pregnant Nothingness gives birth to All.
  The All divides itself into the One and the Two.
  These give way to Enlightenment.
  Enlightenment expands into the Sun, Fire, Water, Air, Earth, and the
Moon.
  These various elements contract into The World.

                                           Swami Anand Nisarg
                                 Note I
     If You Are An Absolute Beginner at I Ching
    If you have no familiarity with the I Ching at all before reading this
book, don’t despair! You will find everything you need to work with the I
Ching here. This is not just a beginner’s book, however, so you shouldn’t
try to do everything at once or allow yourself to be overwhelmed by all the
material here.
    I would suggest that you start by reading the introduction. You may
wish to quickly review Chapter One (though you will likely find some of its
concepts to be quite heavy; do not worry if you do not understand all of
them yet; re-reading this chapter once you have learned the basics of the I
Ching system will be more fruitful). Read Chapter Two to learn how to
perform I Ching castings, and then review the main text of the I Ching
(Chapter Three). Then even before looking into the rest of the material, start
trying to work with the I Ching. Try out the divination system, see what it
does for you. As you work, then you can keep reading the rest of the book
and taking a closer look at the rest of the material at your own pace. You
will find that the I Ching (and the material in this book) is not just
something that’s read in a single sitting and then put aside; it is something
to look over repeatedly, while you actually work on it. Don’t get frustrated
if there are parts that seem incomprehensible at first; the main thing is to
keep practising with the I Ching; and as you go along you’ll develop your
own insights. Then, as you keep reviewing the instructional material, this
will open up new ideas and perspectives, which will in turn strengthen your
practice. At this time you will want to try to adopt some of the guidelines in
Appendix I as to how to methodically study the I Ching. In this way you’ll
develop into a practitioner of the Yi-Fa. The I Ching rewards those who
learn by practicing.
                                 Note II
              If You Are A Western Magician
    You don’t have to be a practitioner of Magick to make use of this
version of the I Ching; the material is set up so that it is self-contained, so
that it can enhance a magical practice. However such a practice is not a
requirement for the book’s use.
    If you are a western magician, and are new to working with the I Ching,
I would suggest you follow the same guidelines as in “note 1” above. If,
however, you are quite familiar with magical theory, you will likely find
Chapter One (and the section on correspondences in Chapter Four) more
enlightening than a raw beginner would.
    The I Ching has a long tradition in western magical practice, beginning
with Aleister Crowley who used it for decades as his primary method of
divination. Its practice increased in popularity in the 1960s; and while some
modern authors have included material on the I Ching in books on western
magick, I believe this is the first attempt at creating a version of the I Ching
that is specifically meant to lend itself to the western esoteric practitioner.
In addition to the main text being specifically organized and worded to
focus on utility for practice, for being used in actual divination, I have
structured the philosophy of the I Ching in such a way as to make clear its
parallels to concepts in western Magick. In particular, the ideas about the
“Superior Individual” have strong parallels with the Thelemic teachings on
True Will, and the concept of the Yi-Fa is here treated as a magical word
and current. I have also chosen to place in a primary position those
elemental titles for the eight trigrams that most easily correspond to the
western elemental system (and in the main text, I refer to them by their
elemental names, rather than their Chinese names).
    I trust that whether you have already ventured into the I Ching, or are
starting on it now to complement your other magical studies, you will find
this edition particularly useful to adding new tools to your magical arsenal
in the performance of the Great Work.
                             Introduction
    In one of the Commentaries on the I Ching, the great Chinese scholar
Confucius, master of the I Ching, was asked “Can the thoughts of the great
ancient sages not be recorded in full?” He answered: “Writing cannot
contain such profound insights in full; language cannot communicate it in
full. But this is why the sages created Symbols to express their concepts in
full: the sixty-four hexagrams (of the I Ching) are made to represent all the
true and false states of Reality in full, the oracles and line descriptions of
the same express what the Sages wished to explain in full; and the lines (of
the I Ching) can change to their opposite to benefit all people, so that
anyone can come to understand Reality”.
    The I Ching is an ancient and profound system of divination comparable
to the Tarot or the Runes; and like these, it is much more than the simple
fortune-telling device that most use it for today. Its success is indicated by
the fact that it is one of the most ancient sacred texts to continue in
uninterrupted use to this day; it is at least 3,000 years old.
    It is, in its essence, a system of classification for self-analysis, that
allows its student to obtain a greater understanding of the nature of external
reality and his interior self. When adequately studied, the I Ching allows
one to engage in deep contemplation and to receive practical advice to the
challenges of the moment.
    In spite of this, there are certain challenges faced by the student of the I
Ching, particularly the western student; whether he is a beginner, someone
versed in western esoteric practices, or someone who has attempted to study
eastern mysticism. Issues of time, distance, and translation have all acted as
barriers to many would-be students of this worthwhile system.
    The I Ching is in fact the oldest known occult teaching in continual
common usage in human history; in its most primitive forms it may have
been used as long as 5,000 years ago. The Tarot, by contrast, is only about
500 years old. The I Ching book itself is the world’s oldest book still in
common use. Scholars generally agree that the oracle system has existed in
written form since 1100 BCE, though some theories suggest that earlier
written copies could have been even older in more prototypical forms, as
other manuals for the same system of divination as the I Ching. The
surviving version, which we use to this day, was the manual devised by the
Zhou, but some records of Chinese history suggest that at one point this was
only one of various manuals, created in different regions for this divination
system.
     The system of the I Ching contains within it complex mathematical
concepts: the I Ching system is the oldest known example of a binary code
(4,500 years before Liebnitz, who found himself stunned when a Jesuit
missionary priest showed him a translation of the I Ching, and he realized
the Chinese had developed binary code thousands of years earlier). Its sixty
four different hexagrams can be combined into different logical
progressions that contain surprisingly sophisticated mathematical ideas:
besides the binary, it was only recently discovered that the standard format
of the 64-hexagram sequence (the “King Wen” sequence) in fact expresses
a projection of a “six-dimensional hyper-lattice”. In terms of what it says
about the nature of change, the implications of the I Ching has fascinated
scholars in the West since its introduction. One group of particular note that
was heavily influenced by the I Ching and its philosophy were the early
quantum physicists: Neils Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and Erwin Schrodinger
were all students of the I Ching. It was so influential on Bohr that when he
was granted a coat of arms by his grateful government he placed the Tao at
its centre.
     The original eight elemental trigrams from which the entire I Ching
system is derived were said by Chinese tradition to have been discovered on
the back of a turtle shell by the (mythological) Chinese emperor Fu Xi (who
would have ruled sometime around 3100bce). Fu Xi was also said in varied
legendary accounts to have invented writing, fishing and marriage.
According to traditional historical accounts, it was another (this time
definitively non-mythological) monarch, King Wen of Zhou, who first
provided the detailed explanation of the hexagrams that became the core
text of the I Ching (thus, the core of the I Ching is called the “Zhou Yi”).
The title of “king” was posthumously given to Wen by his son, who became
the first true King of Zhou; in his own time Wen was a vassal ruler of the
Zhou province of the mighty (but decadent) Shang Kingdom. The Shang
were so concerned with the possibility of Wen leading the Zhou into open
rebellion that they imprisoned him; and legend holds that Wen wrote the I
Ching while he was jailed. After his death, his sons led the rebellion and
overthrew the Shang, whose kingdom collapsed, and the Zhou grew to
become the dominant kingdom of ancient China at that time. One of King
Wen’s sons, the Duke of Zhou, was also credited with completing his
father’s work on the I Ching.




 Six-Dimensional Boolean Lattice of Hexagrams; http://www.yijing.co.uk

    The rest of the I Ching, here termed the “Commentaries”, is attributed
to Confucius. However, from a point of view of academic history, it seems
highly likely that the Commentaries were not written by Confucius as such,
but rather collected (again probably posthumously) by his students. This
does not necessarily imply some kind of falsification; the Commentaries
were certainly written by Confucians, and likely contained in them accounts
of his teachings on the I Ching over many years and different occasions. In
either case, there’s no question that Confucius was a great admirer of the I
Ching and declared it one of the “Five Classics” of Chinese knowledge;
Confucius was said to have once said as an old man “If I could live just a
few more years, I would have dedicated sixty of them to the study of the I
Ching”. After Confucius’ time, the I Ching became a central part of the
mainstream Chinese intellectual and spiritual world (unlike the Tarot, which
is unfortunately relegated to the fringes of our culture); it continued to be
studied by the brightest thinkers and deepest mystics of Chinese history,
and many of these provided new concepts and innovations, which added to
the I Ching system.
    One significant challenge with the I Ching from a western perspective is
the straightforward issue of translations. There are a great many translations
of the I Ching, and while many are quite good, some have of course been
better or more notable than others. Of particular note in the early period of
the I Ching’s popularization in the West are the translations by Legge
(published in 1882, and deeply flawed due to issues with correct
translations of the time), one of the earliest for public consumption;
Wilhelm (published in German in 1923, translated to English in 1951,
which suffered from being a translation of a translation and being
excessively academic); Aleister Crowley (not published in his lifetime,
suffering from translation issues due to the limitations of his time, and
remade in a poetic format not original to the I Ching), and Blofeld (1965,
perhaps the best early mystical translation though still lacking in sufficient
practical context). In recent years there has been a plethora of new
translations, some of which benefited from more accurate attention to the
original text, while others were less regular interpretations that incorporated
new age thought, significantly rewrote the text, or fused the I Ching with
particular thematic agendas.
    In general, these and other translations tend to have one of two
problems: either they have a serious academic focus, leading to versions
that put more emphasis on literal translation and on providing the full
Confucian commentaries (which can be very rewarding to read but can also
be intimidating to the beginner and are not designed to be practical for
actual use), or they tend to be watered-down or diluted versions of the I
Ching with the addition of concepts from pop-psychology or new-age
thinking, perhaps “made simple”, but not made more useful for it.
    Many of the more literal or scholarly translations will tend to corral the
mind into one particular direction of understanding the written verses,
sometimes causing the would-be I Ching user to avoid opening up his
awareness to receive a more intuitive application of his reading to his own
use. If one gets too caught up in intellectual analysis of a line of the I
Ching, it reduces the likelihood that comes from being open to
understanding its possible implications, in a way more open to one’s own
situation, in the context of the moment of the reading. On the other hand, a
translation that fails to maintain sufficient accuracy to transmit the
underlying philosophical and esoteric concepts will make it difficult for
deeper spiritual reception to occur, and risks reducing the I Ching to the
status of a common oracle.
    Many lines in the I Ching are unintentionally rendered more obscure or
incomprehensible than they should be, due to a sometimes too-literal
translation of the text. While there are several truly good literal and
technical translations of the I Ching, there are few if any that do a good job
of what could be called the “symbolic translation”. Likewise, many
attempts at “simplifying” or “westernizing” the I Ching lose all of the
sophistication of the system, and reduce the hexagrams and lines to one-
dimensional oracles of little more worth than a fortune cookie.
    The symbolism of the I Ching is a language that is sometimes foreign to
the western experience. While symbols in terms of esoteric understanding
are universal, coming all from the common source of the human experience,
the way different cultures express and order these symbols are variable, and
this can create difficulties in comprehension. On the most superficial level
of this phenomenon, there are a number of verses in the literal translation of
the I Ching that are in fact figures of speech, common and understandable
to someone familiar with Chinese culture at the time they were recorded
(and some of which have gone on to become modern aphorisms), but that
would not automatically be understandable to someone who is not.
    At a more fundamental level, the usual translations of the most basic
elemental symbolism of the I Ching are framed in the historical “ordering”
of the elements in Chinese mysticism; which are not quite the same as those
of western mysticism. This is not to say that both cultures use different
symbols, rather it is that the way they express this symbolism is different;
and if you translate these expressions literally, you end up confusing the
clarity of the symbolic intention or ordering of the elements. To give one
particularly egregious example, the trigrams Chien            and Kun        ,
which are the basic positive/negative trigrams, are usually translated as
“Heaven” and “Earth” respectively. Now, “heaven” is not a poor choice of
word for the Chien trigram (you could use “celestial”, or “sky”, or even
“phallus” in its function as the symbolic masculine). The use of “Earth” for
Kun, on the other hand, creates a number of problems; thinking about it
makes it clear that the “Earth” referred to is “the world” (juxtaposed with
Chien’s “heaven”), but using the word “earth” confuses this trigram with
the concept of the “Earth Element”, one of the four basic elements.
Complicating matters further, the four elements are a part of the trigrams as
well, and the trigram that would represent the “Earth Element”, Ken
is usually translated as “Mountain”. A student of western mysticism who is
familiar with western alchemy, astrology, the Tarot, the Qabalah or other
western systems of metaphysics might not realize that the trigram for
“Mountain” is supposed to represent the same symbolic concept as the
“Earth element”; as found in the hermetic earth element, the Taurus sign,
the suit of coins, etc. The situation becomes much simpler for western
practitioners if they come to understand the eight trigrams as representing
the four elements in two sets: the four basic elements (Earth, Air, Water,
Fire) in their “terrestrial” form, and their equivalent in the “celestial” form
(as Moon, Sun, The World, and Heaven).
    This version of the I Ching is not meant to be a new literal translation;
rather, it is a re-writing of the I Ching, based on the goal of creating a
version of that sacred book that focuses on the fundamental core of the I
Ching text, with all details and commentaries presented in such a way as to
assist in the application of the I Ching as a mystical and divination text.
Likewise, it will remain true to the essential spirit of the “system for
organizing reality” that the I Ching expresses, but will present the text and
components of the I Ching in a way that is more directly related to the
language in which western mysticism expresses these symbols. A sincere
effort has been made to keep only the most essential expression of each line
of the text, never adding any material that isn’t absolutely necessary for
understanding, but when possible rephrasing verses that make reference to
“figures of speech” into plain English. In this way, it is my hope that this
version of the I Ching will be ideal for use to the actual practitioner
(particularly westerners who may be engaged in a western magical or
mystical tradition), and to the individuals who actually want to use the I
Ching for contemplation and self-enquiry (as part of the process western
esotericism calls “The Great Work”), as well as divination practice.
                            Chapter One
        The Esoteric Foundations of the I Ching
     Tao, Yin, and Yang
    To start with, understand that the I Ching is a model of reality, of space
and time.
    So imagine that out of the primordial nothingness there comes a
“something”.
    That “something” is the Tao.
    The Tao is oneness, it is completely alone, and thus cannot comprehend
itself.
    So it separates into two parts which are contained within it; thus from
nothing, to oneness, you now have “twoness” (duality): Yang and Yin.
    So first there is a complete oneness that can’t really be comprehended
intellectually at all; but within it, there are two basic and “opposite” forces:
a strong and weak force, or positive and negative, or masculine and
feminine.
    Those are Yang and Yin.
    These, in turn, continue to break down into more complex forms,
representing the right elements (the four higher or “celestial” elements, and
the four worldly or “terrestrial” elements).
    You can think of these as the building blocks of the universe.
     
    These sets of elements combine with each other, forming the sixty-four
Hexagrams; which are combinations of two elements each (including those
hexagrams that consist of two of the same element). Now, how do these
elements form and reform? Through the process of time: as time goes by,
strong forces break down into weak forces and weak forces build up into
strong forces.
    So the I Ching teaches the nature of time/change, and also allows us,
inasmuch as we study and understand it, to predict the patterns of how
changes happen over time.
    The structure for understanding the I Ching begins with the Tao. The
Tao is the term for the pure force of the universe. It is whole, eternal, and
ineffable. It is said in the Tao Te Ching, the great teaching on the subject
written by the master Lao Tzu, that “whatever can be described is not the
Tao”.
    The basic way to conceive of the Tao is to think of it as the concept of
zero. It is emptiness, but also eternity.
    The Tao itself can be seen at a variety of levels: as pure emptiness, as an
emptiness that has a quality of emptiness, as an emptiness that has the
quality of fullness (that is, an emptiness that is “pregnant with potential”),
or as a vast fullness.
    At that final level of understanding, of a vast fullness, one can at first
understand this Tao as a completely undefined fullness, just full with a pure
energy.
    Beyond that, one can understand this “full Tao” as containing within it
the forces of all opposites; that is the Tao as the “union of opposites”.
    It is from this Tao that actual opposites emerge, emanating from the will
to express emptiness as form; and at their most basic, they are the positive
and negative, the yes and the no, the black and white, light and dark, male
and female, up and down, strong and weak, creative and receptive. In other
words, they are the primordial opposites.
    In the metaphysics of the I Ching, the term for these two forces are
“Yang” and “Yin”. The “Yang” is the basic positive force. It is represented
in the I Ching by a single straight unbroken line; thus, it is the “one”.
    The “Yin” is the basic negative force. It is represented in the I Ching by
a single line broken into two parts by a gap, space, or void in the middle;
thus, it is the “two”.
    It is these lines, the solid Yang and broken Yin lines, that make up all
the trigrams of the I Ching.

     The Trigrams
    “Trigram” is the basic term for the symbols that represent the disparate
elements that form the building blocks of the universe (as organized in the I
Ching). They are called “trigrams” because they consist of three lines, each
line being either a “Yin” or “Yang”.
    As the Yang is “one”, and Yin is “two”, the subsequent elements that are
composed of combinations of these must have three parts. This is because
two lines of pure Yin would just be Yin extended, two lines of pure Yang
would just be Yang extended, and the two lines composed of Yin and Yang
would be just “Yin and Yang”, annihilating each other but not really adding
anything new. Thus, the two-line combinations of Yin and Yang are only
intermediate states; by definition they must proceed to a further state, which
creates something truly new and stable. In order for there to be something
truly new that is born of the mixture of Yin and Yang, it is necessary for
there to be a synthesis, a mix of three parts, that (excepting the two
extremes of three pure Yin lines or three pure Yang lines) consist of an
unequal mixture of the two forces. Every mixed trigram will have either
more Yin or more Yang, representing this mixture. Likewise, the presence
of three lines means that the location of the Yin or Yang lines (which is on
top, which is on the bottom, and which is in the middle) becomes important
and creates difference between the forms.
    The end result is the creation of eight trigrams, which represent eight
fundamental forces in the alchemical universe of the I Ching. They are as
follows:

            “Chien”: Heaven
     Chien is the trigram traditionally translated as “Heaven”. It is pure
Yang, solid and unbroken. It is the celestial power, all the energy of
creating, strong, the cold force, the masculine, the phallus, light, the father.
It is the quality of forcefulness. Its key spiritual concept is “Creative”.

            “Kun”: The World
    Kun is the trigram traditionally translated as “earth”, but its meaning is
“The World” (the opposite of Chien, which is “Heaven”). Kun is pure Yin,
broken lines. It is the worldly power, all the content of creation, weak, the
hot force, the feminine, the yoni, darkness, the mother. It is the quality of
spaciousness; as Heaven is the “force”, so is World the “field”. Its key
spiritual concept is “Receptive”.

            “Li”: The Sun
    Li has traditionally been translated as “fire”, but this is the concept of
pure primordial fire, not the lesser elemental fire. Thus, the best translation
for this trigram is another historical attribution, which would put it in line
with what “Li” is meant to represent in western esotericism: “The Sun”. It
is sometimes also referred to as “lightning”. It is the trigram associated with
summer (when the sun is at its strongest), beauty, and the power of clinging.
Because it is a single weak line between two strong ones, it is referred to as
the “middle daughter”. Its quality is radiance. Its key spiritual concept is
“Elegance”.

            “Kan”: The Moon
     Kan has been traditionally translated as “water”, but in the same way
that Li represents primordial fire, Kan represents primordial water, thus
another traditional attribution is a more appropriate one for western
correspondence: “The Moon”. It is also referred to sometimes as the cloud,
or the pit. It can represent “danger”, because of its hidden power (a strong
line surrounded by weak lines). It is associated with winter (when the sun is
at its weakest), the characteristic of enveloping; and because of the strong
line in the middle it is called the “middle son”. Its quality is depth. Its key
spiritual concept is “Abysmal” (i.e., “Deep”).

            “Chen”: The Fire Element
    The trigram “Chen” is traditionally translated as “thunder”, but its
quality is that of the hermetic element of Fire. It is the active and moving
force, the force of dynamic power, the arousing or energetic force. It is
correspondent to springtime, the time of rising force. Because of its single
strong line at the bottom (the first line of the trigram, because in the I Ching
the lines are always read from the bottom to the top), it is called the “eldest
son”. Its quality is vibration. Its key spiritual concept is “Arousing” (i.e.,
“Exciting”).

            “Tui”: The Water Element
    The trigram “Tui” is traditionally translated as “lake”, but its quality is
that of the hermetic element of Water. It is the deep and still force. It
corresponds to autumn, when nature is slowing down. It is also sometimes
translated as “a marsh”, or even a “swamp” (but this is somewhat
inaccurate, as it is not meant to have any of the negative connotations
westerners associate with swamps). It has the quality of the rain, of joy and
relaxed pleasure. Because of its broken line at the top, it is called the
“youngest daughter”. Its quality is openness. Its key spiritual concept is
“Pleasant” (or “Complacent”).

            “Sun”: The Air Element
     The trigram “Sun” is traditionally translated as “wind”, but its quality is
that of the hermetic element of Air, which is also part of its traditional
attributions. It is sometimes also translated as “wood”, which is
correspondent in Taoist alchemy to some of the concepts of the Air element,
and like the hermetic air element corresponds to the intellect. It has a gentle
but insistent quality. Because of its weak line at the bottom, it is called the
“eldest daughter”. Its quality is consideration. Its key spiritual concept is
“Flexible”.

            “Ken”: The Earth Element
    The trigram “Ken” is traditionally translated as “mountain”, but its
quality is that of the hermetic element of Earth, which attribution is clearly
included in its traditional symbolism. It is the immovable solid power, and
has the quality of stubbornness and stuckness. Because of its strong line at
the top, it is called the “youngest son”. Its quality is attachment. Its key
spiritual concept is “Solid”.
     Thus it can be understood that the unfolding of the trigrams follows
logical patterns, which are worthy of countless hours of contemplation, and
have important similarities to systems found in the West (such as the
Qabalah). The zero of the Tao becomes the one and two of the Yang and
Yin lines; these lines in their purest form express as the forces of Heaven
and The World (the creative power and the creation). Mingling, these forces
become the Sun and the Moon (the balance of the weak in the strong, and
the balance of the strong in the weak). Then they express themselves as the
four elements, representing less balanced mixtures of weak and strong
forces. Fire is the “eldest son”, a strong base with weak middle and top.
Water is the “eldest daughter”, a weak top with a strong base and middle.
Air is the “youngest daughter”, a weak bottom with a strong middle and
top; and Earth is the “youngest son”, a strong top with a weak base and
middle.
     These eight forces, the trigrams, combine with each other, mingling to
form sixty four different combinations (hexagrams) representing different
states. Here is where the expression of the I Ching reaches its peak and
most practical function: it describes any situation or state of the moment as
a combination of two main influences, one below and the other above,
interacting with one another to create the particular conditions in a person’s
life.

   The I Ching, Taoism, and Confucian Thought (or
True Will and the Great Work)
    In western esotericism there is a term: “The Great Work”. It refers to the
overall goals of the practitioner. These goals are no less than to rectify the
universe, to restore harmony between opposing forces by uniting them, and
in that way reaching to the absolute. On a more practical level, the “Great
Work” can be understood to be what in Sanskrit is called “Sadhana”, your
entire spiritual discipline. It is everything you do to lead to that ultimate
transformation; first of your own being, and then of the Universe itself. As I
will elaborate in the following sections, there is a clear parallel to this
teaching found in the philosophy and structure of the I Ching, and thus the I
Ching can be invaluable both as a guide and an aid to accomplishing the
Great Work.
   Transformation Through Symbols (Taoist
Study of Nature)
    In the West, there are certain schools of esoteric practice that could be
considered to be falling under the umbrella term of “magick”. Far from
involving the mere casting of spells or curses as is popularly imagined,
magick (written with a “k” to distinguish it from the stagecraft of “magic
tricks” and illusions) is primarily concerned with the same ideas of
transformation and divine union as the often equally misrepresented and
maligned eastern traditions like Tantra or Taoist Alchemy; indeed magick
can be considered the western parallel to these esoteric traditions. In
western magick, students are advised to direct their attention to divination
as a subject of lifelong study; this being one of the earliest steps in their
occult training. In part, this is because divination both requires and develops
the understanding of the self in order to work, and understanding the self is
a crucial stage in being able to transcend the self.
    But more importantly, it is because any divination system that actually
works must of necessity involve the interaction on an experiential (and not
just intellectual) level with primordial symbols. And there is no better tool
than an actual interactive practice by which to learn the “language” of
symbols; it allows one to understand the nature and qualities of those
primordial forces that will need to be effectively manipulated (at subsequent
stages of training) to create change in accordance with one’s true Will. For
example, in a western esoteric school, students might be encouraged from
the very earliest stages of training to familiarize themselves with the Tarot
in order to both better understand their own subconscious, and to be
exposed in an interactive and organic way to the constituent symbols and
concepts of the Qabalistic Tree of Life. In this way, they will be able to
refer to the rich tapestry of Tarot imagery when subsequently learning the
structure of the Hermetic Qabalah. Diligent students who experience
interacting with the Tarot cards and relating their readings to elements of
their own life will later on find it much easier to learn how to likewise
interact with those primordial forces (the elements, the planets, etc.) that are
found on the Tree of Life, and create a similar “‘magical link” when trying
to tap into these forces in rituals of invocation for the purpose of
transforming one’s life or creating radical shifts in one’s perspective.
    So when we are studying symbols we are really meant to be studying
reality. Now, the symbol is not in itself the “thing”: the Taoists made this
plain in their saying “the Tao which can be described is not the Tao”. This is
like saying that the word “fire”, or the letters F-I-R-E, do not in themselves
constitute a real fire. So great caution must be taken to avoid confusing the
symbolic language, which is a kind of filing system for reality, for reality
itself. At the same time, the Tao teaches that the “symbol” also cannot be
truly divorced from the “thing” itself. What is above is like that which is
below. The word “fire” is not in and of itself a fire, but it is also inextricably
connected in our consciousness to capital-f Fire as a concept; it is a part of
fire, it has a correspondence to it, though it is not the thing itself.
    Thus, to study the I Ching correctly we must also study nature; which is
to say everything in the ordinary reality that surrounds us. At the same time
we must understand correspondence; observing nature, we can uncover
secrets through symbols, like the legendary King Fu Xi did.

     Fu Xi
    In I Ching legend, before Confucius or the later philosophers, before
King Wen, there was King Fu Xi. Unlike those other figures, everything we
know about Fu Xi comes from ancient myth, and it is even possible that no
such person ever actually existed.
    According to some legends, Fu Xi and his sister were the last survivors
of the human race after a great flood swept the earth. They survived by
going to Kunlun Mountain, the great mountain at the centre of the world
(the Chinese version of the “Holy Mountain” that exists as a symbol in most
cultures). The previous civilization, a matriarchal culture that existed in a
primitive state, was completely destroyed. The Celestial Emperor bade Fu
Xi and his sister to wed and they produced the new human race, which was
patriarchal, and began to develop civilization.
    In this sense, the legend of Fu Xi is both the Chinese version of the
archetypal flood-myth and of the story of the “Culture Hero”, the equivalent
of Prometheus, who brings humanity out of an animal-like state and starts
the path to civilization. Before Fu Xi, human beings ate meat raw; he taught
them how to cook with fire. He taught them how to fish with nets and lay
traps, and how to forge hunting weapons. He taught them how to make
musical instruments. He showed them the secret of the Word, and of how to
record language. It is said he even uncovered the most fundamental
biological and occult truth of humanity: before Fu Xi, people believed that
babies were produced spontaneously in a woman’s womb. It was Fu Xi who
revealed that the male was required to inseminate a woman in order to
produce offspring.
    It is notable that although Fu Xi has miraculous powers in many of the
stories about him, he is a human being. He also discovers civilization not
through the Gods (although certainly supernatural elements are involved)
but via the study of natural phenomena. While he is attributed with having
made a number of specific inventions and discoveries (including the
institution of marriage!) his greatest teaching is the power of observation, of
learning (and potentially learning anything) by careful study of nature and
the cycles of the world. In magical terms, Fu Xi represents the transition
between what is sometimes referred to as the “Aeon of Isis” into the “Aeon
of Osiris”; from the state of humanity-as-infants, acting through instinct and
feeling alone, to the state of humanity-as-thinkers, able to build up
civilizations by “obedience to the will of heaven” and observing and
interacting with their environment.
    (We are now at the start of a new aeon, the “Aeon of Horus”, where we
are discovering how to create our own environment, rather than being
helpless to it, or having to work within its limits.)
    The discovery of the trigrams of the I Ching is universally considered
Fu Xi’s greatest and most fundamental revelation; because it was through
the understanding of the Trigrams, the symbolic building-blocks and the
programming language of the universe, that Fu Xi was able to understand
the nature around him and make all of his other innovations.
    According to legend, Fu Xi first saw the trigrams of the I Ching on the
shell of a turtle that emerged from the Luo River; as in other cultures, the
great rivers of China were considered sacred (goddesses in themselves,
much like the Ganges and other Indian rivers are goddesses), and so this
story can be understood to represent the emergence of Symbol from the
primordial Divine Feminine. Indeed, in Taoist mysticism this river is
associated with the cosmos, so the emergence of the turtle from the river is
equivalent to the reception of these symbols from the universe itself. It was
the “birth” of Symbol, of the Word from deep silence, of structure from
flowing chaos. Deciphering these symbols (which were also mathematics,
the mysteries of number, and geometry), Fu Xi then dedicated himself to
look for their qualities in nature, and discovered that by applying them to
nature, he could see how to work with nature to create change. In other
words, Fu Xi was the first true Chinese practitioner of high Magick. If
Magick is understood as the “art or science of causing change to occur in
conformity to the Will” (Aleister Crowley’s definition), then it was through
the “magick” of the eight trigrams that Fu Xi understood that by applying
fire to meat you could prepare food; and that when masculine and feminine
converge in intercourse they produce offspring (thus allowing not only the
creation of social institutions but also the raising of livestock).
    Today, the I Ching invites us to do the same. And just as all of Fu Xi’s
discoveries have a symbolic esoteric significance, so too can we apply the
study of the I Ching to giving us tools to observe, understand, and adapt to
reality (or indeed, adapt reality, by predicting the flow of change over time)
in our material world; and likewise to achieve breakthroughs in
comprehending those other dimensions of reality that exist within our
consciousness, learning how to manipulate the inner elements (terrestrial
and celestial) within our own nature in order to harmonize and transform
ourselves.

   Confucius: Seeking the Superior Individual
(Philosophy of the Will)
     While Taoism, or perhaps the even older tradition of “Wu” witchcraft
that preceded it, was the foundational source of the I Ching, the I Ching as
it exists today is impregnated with Confucian philosophy. This is largely to
its benefit, as the development of Confucian thought transforms the already
valuable divinatory tool and mystical text into a fully realized guide to self-
transformation.
     If you were to remove the Confucian philosophy from the I Ching, you
would still have a text of significant mystical and symbolic worth, far more
than most mere “fortune-telling” types of oracles. However, the mysticism
of the core-text I Ching (the oldest part of the book, called the Zhou Yi)
would amount to a guide to right action in accord with nature; how to react
to situations and adapt to them. It is the Confucian philosophy that adds to it
the element of profound instruction in personal alchemy.
    In the West, Confucianism has been largely ignored in comparison to
other eastern religions that have become highly popular (perhaps because of
how wrapped up Confucianism is with Chinese culture). Taoism, largely
misinterpreted as a lackadaisical “do whatever you feel like” hippie-
religion, has become quite popular; while Confucianism is erroneously
thought of as a stuffy system dedicated largely to government bureaucracy
and social control. This is in fact a serious misinterpretation; however it is
understandable why people might think that way. The popular image many
in the West have of Confucianism is actually closer to the philosophy
known as “Legalism”, which was an ideology strictly interested in the
structuring of a stable society. In fact, Confucianism was a historical
opponent of legalism (and the Legalists at one point attempted to persecute
and destroy Confucianism, making it a capital offence during the Qin
dynasty). However, over time much of Legalism’s mentality has crept into
mainstream Confucianism, and late/modern Confucianism is fairly stiff, its
original mystical underpinnings having had few advocates as it became
more materialistic in response to the mystical elements of its chief
competitors: Taoism and Buddhism.
    Nevertheless, the Confucianism of ancient China, over the course of
more than a millennium, was profound; producing some truly astounding
mystical thinkers and dedicated to no less than seeking to comprehend the
Universe and one’s place in it. Yet it was dedicated not only to adapting to
the ways of nature, but also to the transformation of the individual.
    The Confucian commentaries of the I Ching add a vital element to its
structure: the emphasis on the “Superior Individual”. Confucianism was
radical in its time in suggesting that human beings were not merely helpless
at the whim of either gods/spirits or unbending fate; they did not have to act
as helpless infants pleading to the gods for succour. Instead, human beings
had an active role to play in their own spiritual growth and could develop
Virtue (which is not just “good morals” but rather qualities of magical
power) that would allow them to play an active role in deciding their own
destinies. In short, human beings are not just reactive to the universe, but
can be proactive; they can guide their own transformation.
    This book is not intended to be a guide to Confucian philosophy, and is
only really concerned with its relationship to the I Ching, but suffice it to
say that the core concept of significance relating to the I Ching is this idea
of the “Superior Individual”. It is the idea that a human being can choose, in
the context of their surroundings, how to bring out the qualities of their
“Superior” self, or alternately succumb to the qualities of their baser nature
(the “Inferior Person”). These are not just ethical qualities; it was another
great understanding of Confucianism that our lives are not just spiritual
lives superimposed on a material shell, nor are they material lives separate
from some out-there spiritual state, but rather that the Secular is Sacred.
Thus, the qualities of the Superior Individual have an effect not only in the
ethical sense in the conduct of our material lives (and how we shape our
society) but also in the spiritual sense. Individuals who wish to experience
true spiritual growth (and not just “blissed-out” deadends or delusions)
must strive to become their best, to be as total as possible at whatever role
they are meant to play in regular life. In so doing they bring their individual
Will into harmony with the Will of Heaven. The true expansion of
consciousness depends upon how capably and boldly one engages with
one’s life in the physical world.
    Those who are familiar with the western-originated philosophy of
Thelema and the elaboration on the subject of the True Will (embodied by
the Law of Thelema: “Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the
Law/Love is the law, love under will”) will no doubt take notice that there
are certain strong similarities. This is unlikely to be a coincidence: Aleister
Crowley (the “prophet” of Thelema) was a known Sinophile, and had
travelled across China in 1905-1906 (where he may have first seen the I
Ching in use; although there is some possibility he may have seen it earlier,
in 1900 in San Francisco). He described the atmosphere of China as having
“soaked into his soul”. He also studied the translations that were available
in his time of the “Sacred Writings of the East”.
    From a magical perspective, Confucian doctrine on the subject of the
“Superior Individual” and the sacredness of the secular can be understood
as Aeon of Osiris precursors to the core principles of the Aeon of Horus.
This is part of why the I Ching remains exceedingly relevant to this day,
and of particular interest to our own times and culture, where we are
increasingly favourable to the idea of combining the sacred and the secular
and in a spiritual path that calls on personal responsibility (rather than
receiving “salvation” through either human or divine intercessors).
    It is thus through the concept of the Superior Individual that the I Ching
becomes a powerful tool for the development of the “Great Work” of
discovering and doing our Will. Through this understanding, each hexagram
of the I Ching not only describes a particular situation in time and space and
how we can adapt to it, but also how in each of these situations we can best
try to embody the virtues of the Superior Individual. With all due respect to
Jung in his admiration of the I Ching, its primary purpose is not, in the style
of psychology, to seek coincidental “synchronicity” to help us ease our
mental well-being; but, in the style of true alchemy, to ultimately master
Time and causality in order to transform ourselves into full embodiments of
our human birthright. The Superior Individual is coterminous with the
concept of Zarathustra’s “Super-man”; that is, the next step in human
evolution: what we are “becoming”.

     Shao Yung
    A thousand years after Confucius’ time, a blossoming of new Confucian
thought began to emerge through a series of magnificent Chinese
philosophers and mystics, for whom the I Ching was of particular
significance in different ways. They elaborated on the already existing
systems and developed new concepts; and while their work is not part of the
direct canonical text of the I Ching in the way Confucius’ commentaries
are, they represent some of the last truly great breakthroughs in I Ching
studies prior to the modern era.
    The first, and greatest of these was Shao Yung. Like Confucius, he was
famous in his own time as a great sage, and was attributed with great
esoteric/magical power. Also like Confucius, he was unusual in that in spite
of his fame he didn’t have any kind of meaningful career in public office.
He was a rebel in other ways as well: while most mainstream Confucians of
his time were strong advocates of reading the I Ching only as a literal text
on governance and rejected its use for divination, Shao Yung became the
greatest advocate of studying the I Ching as a set of symbols that revealed
mysteries of universal cosmology, and made almost-constant use of its
divination techniques.
    Most significantly, it was Shao Yung who began the process of
revealing the numerological and mathematical mysteries inherent in the I
Ching, and connected it to the five-element system of Chinese Astrology.
He elaborated what came to be known as the “Earlier Heaven arrangement”
of the trigrams, and demonstrated how the hexagrams of the I Ching formed
a binary code. Based on these principles, he designed a system for utilizing
the I Ching to cast hexagrams based on significant dates (one’s “natal
hexagrams” for an I Ching “birth chart”, for example). This system is called
the Plum Blossom Method (because it was revealed to Shao Yung under a
plum tree), and it is explained further in Chapter Five. This is particularly
relevant for the magical practitioner because it allows us to establish
measurements of fixed moments in time, to utilize for the study of the self
or the forecasting of auspicious moments for action in much the same way
that we apply western astrology (but, in my own experience, with less
hassle and more specific results).

     Zhang Shi, Zhu Xi, and the Law of Change
    In the century that followed Shao Yung’s time, two other great
Confucian masters had a dialogue that was significant to how we should
understand the philosophy of the I Ching.
    Zhang Shi was a Confucian philosopher who had given up an early
career in the public service to become a hermit. He was renowned for his
wisdom, and because of his fame, Zhu Xi, another Confucian philosopher
who was about the same age but not yet as famous (though he would go on
to become considerably more renowned) came to visit him. Legend has it
they spent three days and three nights debating on the subject of “The
Doctrine of the Mean”, Confucius’ teachings on harmony. Zhu Xi’s
previous teacher had strongly advocated the idea of “Wei-Fa”, the
“unmanifested mind” as being the most important aspect of reality; that is,
that a mystic should focus more on the “unmanifested world”, on
contemplation of the metaphysical, and ignore the material world around
him or view it only from the perspective of being a by-product of that
metaphysical world. Zhang Shi, however, repudiated this idea. He explained
that the idea of “Wei-Fa” was “the law of unchanging”, the idea of trying to
keep things separate; and that in isolation from the world this was
impossible. Instead, he advocated “Yi-Fa”, the “manifested state”, as “the
Law of Change”.
    Stillness, he argued, was impossible. You are always doing something,
even when you are “doing” nothing. And any notion of equilibrium (as in
wei-fa) was only a fantasy if it was not harmonized within the manifested
world. To put it more simply: if your spiritual practice divorces you from
the physical, then you are engaging in a kind of make-believe. If your
practice is found within the physical and is enhanced by the physical, then it
is productive and leads to growth. We are in a constant state of Change, and
by accepting this and living it out in a meditative way, we gain awareness
and transformation. Rather than trying to separate from Change to achieve
meditation or stillness, we must seek to manifest “stillness in doing”.
    Zhu Xi was convinced, and went on to elaborate this understanding:
Wei-Fa is the “life force” and Yi-Fa is our manifestation, how we operate in
time and space. Of these, he concludes, we have to venerate Wei-Fa by
expressing it within Yi-Fa. His great synthesis was to understand that in
fact, the true path to wisdom is not in rejecting the Wei-Fa but in
understanding that the Wei-Fa exists incipient within the Yi-Fa; these forces
are constantly recreating one another. “In a flash,” he expressed, “the
manifest is just gone (that is, changes) and the unmanifest is coming forth.
There is no break between the two” (Ching, 2000). Human beings can only
find the Wei-Fa in harmony with the Yi-Fa, they are the same Reality.
    Students of western magick, and particularly Thelema, can perhaps
understand the relationship between these ideas and the philosophy
described in the Liber AL vel Legis, the Book of the Law; a profoundly
significant spiritual text received by Aleister Crowley in 1904, dictated to
him by his Augoeides (“higher self”, or “Holy Guardian Angel”), Aiwass.
There, we are informed that “The Khabs is in the Khu, not the Khu in the
Khabs” (AL I:8); wherein “khabs” is an Egyptian term for “star” (the
source of light) while “khu” is our manifest being. Thus the message is
similar: contrary to the Manichean line of thought present in so many
religions and philosophies, where we are called upon to either reject the
body and the material world, or, at best, treat it as nothing more than a
meaningless by-product or unimportant shell of some faraway spiritual
reality, we are being told (by the Liber AL and by the Law of Change
alike!) that our physical reality is the only valid field of action through
which we are able to discover ourselves as “stars”. Enlightenment, Magick,
or Spirituality are not things that we can connect to by ignoring reality; they
depend upon the discovery of reality, and this begins with working with
what is directly in front of us. Our bodies, our minds, our emotions, our
physical surroundings, our relationships, our actions of all types, are the
very magical “working tools” through which we can uncover, connect to,
and express our True Will.
     Zhang Shi was so inspired by his meeting with Zhu Xi that he gave up
his hermit life and returned to public service. By the time of his death he
was a provincial governor. Zhu Xi’s public life was not as glamorous: he
made the mistake of openly denouncing incompetence and corruption in the
imperial bureaucracy, was denied promotions, eventually stripped of office,
and executed. However, after his death his writings went on to be so
influential that his figure was officially rehabilitated. He was made into one
of the philosophers venerated at the Confucian Temple, and is revered as
one of the “Twelve Eminent Philosophers” of Confucian thought; the only
one, in fact, not to have been a direct disciple of Confucius. Thus he is
considered the greatest teacher of “Neo-Confucianism” (the post eighth-
century renaissance/reformation of Confucian teaching).
     Curiously, Zhu Xi is known for having chosen to focus and comment
upon Confucius’ other teachings rather than the I Ching, which in his own
time was the central text of Confucian interest. But while he wrote less on
that subject than any of the other Confucian classics, what he did have to
say about it was of extreme importance. In fact, it is his description of how
to perform divination that became the accepted standard, the instructions
still used in most books and translations to this day.
     In surviving letters to Zhang Shi, Zhu Xi commented that the central
way to learn from the I Ching is by its practice in actual divination, rather
than just the study of its symbolism; this idea was in direct contradiction to
what the mainstream scholars of the time advocated, as they tended to treat
divination with the suspicion of being mere superstition. Zhu Xi took this
same attitude to the other Confucian teachings, that they were not just a
philosophy to be thought about, but something that had to be applied in
one’s actions. This is clearly a result of his revelation about the nature of
Yi-Fa and Wei-Fa (it also hearkened back to Shao Yung, who was likewise
a rebellious advocate of divination practice, and who Zhu Xi greatly
admired). The cultivation of Virtue (“Te”, the magical power of the
conscious individual) was more important to create social progress than
knowledge alone. He also firmly expressed that all individuals could
cultivate Virtue through practice, regardless of their background, as they all
had the unmanifest life force within them. In other words, “Every man and
every woman is a star” (AL I:3). He expressly stated that the practice of
divination was essential for individuals to be able to understand how to
develop their particular Virtue in response to their own situations.
    He stated, in accordance with his view on the Law of Change, that the
nature of I Ching divination worked not by “fortune-telling” in the sense of
seeing some intractable vision of a future event (which is indeed how
common fortune-tellers, both then and now, often wish to see it), nor by
some kind of supernatural gift available only to a chosen few (which again,
was the claim of some “Taoist masters” then, and is the assertion of some
“psychics” now), but rather by being able to give a careful and precise
measurement of Time in this present space. Within the present, future
directions were already “incipient” and could thus be examined the way one
could examine the map of a territory to know where he could choose to go.
He also stated that this meant that the ability to skilfully interpret the result
of an I Ching casting depended neither on one’s erudite knowledge of
Confucian philosophy (fortunately for us), nor on some kind of supernatural
boon, but on one’s level of “integrity”. All divinations show patterns, he
stated, but one will only be able to plainly judge the incipiencies found
therein to the degree to which one has perfected his own integrity, removing
the selfish fantasies of his mind’s eye; someone who has not cultivated
sincerity will be unable to accurately judge even the clearest oracle.

     The Map of Time
    The I Ching is thus a map of time. It is not surprising that it fascinated
the great innovators in quantum physics. Likewise, the psychedelic thinker
Terrence McKenna was correct in understanding that the I Ching works by
mapping what he called “novelty”, though his claim to have been able to
somehow definitively chart it proved to be nothing more than a fantasy of
his own “mind’s eye”. Perhaps the most impressive discoveries in the I
Ching since at least Shao Yung’s time have come from western
mathematicians, who have applied Boolean algebra to the I Ching, and
discovered that the sixty four hexagrams of the I Ching map out into a
“Boolean lattice” (Schoter, 2005). This demonstrates how the I Ching can
be mathematically projected into a sixth dimensional hyper-geometrical
prismatic figure. That is to say, some of the hexagrams existing within other
hexagrams are meant to reflect hyper-dimensionality. The I Ching is a way
of taking a measurement of time and its projected course, through a six-
dimensional mathematical code projected into our four-dimensional range
of perception of space and time.
    So together, the hexagrams are a conceptual “drawing” of time itself in
the same way we might draw distance. From the point of view of a sixth-
dimensional universe, time would look like a physical object (just like,
conversely, if we existed in a second-dimensional universe depth would not
have solid form). Imagine if someone could take a picture of you, doing
everything you’ve ever done, but all at once: from that perspective all those
different “yous” would look like a single solid object, a long winding string
weaving along the other dimensions of depth, height, and width in relative
space. This is difficult even now to wrap our heads around, but it means that
the hexagrams of the I Ching collectively are as much a “physical map” of
Time as one could have a physical map of, say, Norway.
    While the mathematical/scientific understandings expressed here are
very modern, this same concept was already present in the doctrine of Yi-
Fa, and Zhu Xi’s understanding of it; he said that “incipience” is “the
imperceptible beginning of a movement”. What he is describing is a
waveform of potential futures, about to collapse into the present. He said
“between activity and stillness, substance and function, suddenly in the
space of an instant there is the beginning of the actual pattern, and the
auspicious and inauspicious omens of the multitudinous phenomena”
(Smith, K., et al. 1990).
    This is the importance of the concept of Yi-Fa, the Law of Change, and
how it makes the difference in practice that allows us to become skillful at
understanding reality and our own Will (as the expression of how we must
act within reality at this moment in time). It is only by avoiding the
temptations of the “Inferior Person”, by getting out of our own way, that we
will be able to capture that instant of incipience, and obtain a clear vision of
where the map of time is directing us.

     “The I Ching is Not About You”
    When you look at the weather report to see if it is going to rain so that
you know whether to go to the park or not, you are “consulting” the weather
report, but that doesn’t mean that the weather report is about you.
    So let’s look at this concept from the perspective of I Ching practice. If
you are acting as what Confucius would call “the superior man” (what in
western practice could be called the “True Will”; the Individuality, and thus
I have termed it the “Superior Individual”), then an I Ching casting can
certainly be done to ask about anything: money, romance, work, whether a
meeting will go well, anything at all. But whatever you are asking, the
underlying question the Superior Individual asks is not “what should I do”
but “what is the best thing to do?”
    So in that sense, also, it is not about “you”. It is not about your lesser
nature, or about doing what you want or getting what you want, but about
trying to get a “weather forecast” of reality itself (time and space), and then
ascertain from that what is truly the best thing that can be done in
conformity to your Will, regardless of pettier concepts or notions. Every I
Ching casting is, in that sense, a readout of how close the consultant is to
his Will, and what needs to be done next to continue to perform the “Great
Work” of embodying the “Superior Individual”. This is the way of Yi-Fa.
                            Chapter Two
                     How to Use the I Ching
    The first and most crucial piece of advice for “using” the I Ching is
ridiculously commonsensical, but is nevertheless something many would-be
I Ching practitioners seem to fail to consider: if you want to develop a good
working relationship with the I Ching, you should read the entire I Ching.
    It is surprising how many people have tried to make regular use of the I
Ching, performing I Ching divination, without actually having read the text
from cover-to-cover. This is just as ill-advised as trying to use the Tarot for
Tarot readings without first looking at all of the cards and getting to know
them!
    It may be that the excess of commentaries and the sometimes-
complicated language used in other versions of the I Ching have acted as a
barrier, causing some practitioners to experience some intimidation when it
comes to actually reading the whole of the text. Nevertheless, this is an
essential condition to getting to know and understand the I Ching.
    In addition to this, it is a good idea for a practitioner to spend time
considering the trigrams, and how they interact with each other. Look at the
lines that make up a trigram: observe whether it has two broken lines, or
two solid lines (or is completely broken or solid), and how this compares to
the other trigrams. When you compare two trigrams, is only one line
different, or two, or are all three different (making the trigrams direct
opposites to each other)? How does this relate to the symbolism associated
with that trigram? Consider how those symbols interact: what images do
they evoke in you to imagine Air in the bottom and Earth on the top (or
vice-versa); or Sun on the top and The World on the bottom? Do the two
constituent forces together sound complementary or oppositional? Do they
look complementary side-by-side, or not so much? All of these are things to
consider and keep coming back to.
    Even as you continue to read the I Ching, and contemplate the trigrams
(and you should continue to come back to these practices for as long as you
intend to keep using the I Ching), you can begin to perform divination with
the I Ching.
    Like all divination, the I Ching does not so much predict the future, as it
takes a really good look at the present: understanding the present, what
forces affect it, allows one to get a good idea not only of where one is, but
of where one is going. It is important while performing I Ching readings to
remember that the reading is a kind of diagnosis of your current space-time;
the relationship between your being in this moment and existence.
    The literal translation of the word “I Ching” is “The Book of Changes”.
This is because the I Ching system recognizes that existence is a constant
state of flow and flux, nothing is ever static for very long; you are always
moving, life is always moving around you. So just as two three-line
trigrams unite into a six-line hexagram, that hexagram is in the process of
changing, slowly or quickly, into another hexagram. Most readings will
have one or more “changing lines”, points of particular importance in the
current situation because they represent where change is happening. These
are lines that are presently weak but about to become strong, or presently
strong but about to become weak; they will change the trigram they belong
to into a different trigram, one element becomes another, and the overall
situation evolves into a new hexagram. Thus any I Ching reading will
(usually) involve three stages of interpretation: first, of the hexagram that
represents the situation as it currently stands; second, of the changing lines
and those specific details that are most important in the present situation;
and third, the “future” hexagram that represents where the situation is
moving toward.
    It is possible for a hexagram to have no “changing lines”; this is a sign
of a situation that is particularly stable for the moment, with little motion in
the short term or opportunity to change.

     I Ching Reading Methods
    There are several methods for creating an I Ching hexagram. In the
oldest methods of generating a hexagram, turtle shells or bones of various
kinds were used to divine the component lines. These were cast over a fire
and the lines interpreted based on the cracks which formed. This was the
main form of divination used by the Shang Dynasty, prior to the time of
King Wen.
    King Wen, and the new Zhou Dynasty that descended from him, mainly
used a counting system utilizing bunches of yarrow stalks. This system is
complex by modern standards, but it was revolutionary at the time because
of its precision, its uses of probability, and because it meant that there was
no ambiguity about the hexagram cast (unlike the turtle-shell method,
where often the hexagram had to be guessed at from vague sets of cracks).
It removed the need for excessively complex ritual; the yarrow-stalk
method and the setting down of the I Ching in a text format removing the
need for secondhand intervention from professional augurs. It was an
example of a leap forward in “magical technology”.
     Later, an even simpler method developed, making use of coins. This is
considerably quicker than the yarrow-stalk method, but it removes the
sophistication of probability (the odds of getting lines of either type, or
changing lines of either type, are equal), and is generally less accurate as a
measurement of the precise moment in time and space (though clearly still
functional enough that many people have used it to their benefit). Both in
different historical periods, and in modern times, some practitioners have
made use of more intuitive methods to create an I Ching reading.
     For the purpose of this text, I will describe a new method that is simple
but allows one to generate hexagrams using the same probabilities for lines
as the ancient “yarrow stalk” method. I will also include the popular “three
coin” method, and an even simpler very quick “six coin” method (similar to
the method used by Aleister Crowley; who derived his own way of
generating a hexagram due to his lack of access to any information about
the traditional methods). I will also include an example of how to generate
hexagrams intuitively. Finally, in Chapter Five I will include eleventh-
century philosopher Shao Yung’s “Plum Blossom Method” for generating
hexagrams based on dates and numbers.
     All methods begin with the same essential process: in the first place, it
is strongly advised to present a question to the I Ching. This question can be
almost anything, but it is often advisable (especially for beginners) to
present the question in the form of a question answerable as “yes/no” or
“good/bad”: “Should I do x” or “is it a good idea to do y” are good ways to
frame a question. Generally it is better to ask this way than to present the
question in a garbled way with conflicting options (e.g., “should I do x or
y”?), because this divided attention can sometimes lead to muddled
answers. In fact, more than half the battle of learning how to use the I Ching
effectively involves knowing how to formulate the right question.
     It is a very good idea to make a “ritual” out of an I Ching casting, as
making a ritual out of the process will put you into a particular kind of
perceptual state that assists clarity in experiencing and understanding the
casting. At the same time, you should also take care not to make this ritual
excessively complicated; the I Ching is meant to be practical and workable.
    The traditional ritual involved with the I Ching involves first washing
your hands before you begin, as a purification. Then light a stick of incense
and take out your divination devices: your sticks or coins or whatever other
instruments you use should be kept in some kind of simple but special
container; wrapped in cloth or kept in a small box. There is a ritualistic
element to freeing the devices, setting you in a frame of mind that you are
now starting to enter a “ritual space” in your consciousness. You then take
the instruments in hand, and perform three brief bows (what were once
called “Kow-tows”), as a sign of reverence and to further the mental and
intuitive preparation; then circle the instruments around the smoke of the
incense stick three times.
    After this, you should breathe into the divination devices as you speak
your question out loud; creating a magical connection, a link between
yourself, through the question, to your tools. Then cast the devices and
begin to record the results.
    Note that none of these steps have any essential power; they are all
meant simply to help you to get into the proper mental state of attention, to
send a message to yourself that you are about to do something important
that requires you to show up and be aware. None of them are strictly
required; if you wished to, you could do a reading in a busy street with dirty
hands while smoking a cigarette. The essential part is to put one’s self into
the proper inner space. For that reason, what is very strongly recommended
is at the very least to pause and spend a few moments in silent meditation,
paying attention to your posture and breathing, before beginning the
reading. If you wish, you could incorporate elements of your personal
practice into this preparation: you could perform a brief invocation in the
way you are accustomed, or you can bring your guru to mind, or visualize a
mandala, or vibrate sacred words, before you begin.

     Method I: The “Four Stave” Method
    This is a new method, in print here for the first time that I know of
(though I have also shared it with private discussion groups). I have devised
this method myself, after having felt dissatisfaction with the imperfect
mirroring of change from the more popular “three coin” method; while at
the same time finding the complexities of the traditional counting method
(using fifty yarrow stalks) to often be too impractical. While it is called
“four staves” and my own preference is to use four wooden sticks, you
could in fact use any four two-sided objects; these can be coins, or flat
sticks, or anything else, where the two sides are distinguishable from one
another (coins with a “head” and “tail”, for example, or sticks that have a
mark on one side). In my own case, I use four carpenter’s pencils (which
are two-sided) and have marked one side of each with a black line to
delineate the “Yang” side.
    If you are a western magician, you might wish to “consecrate” these
staves before you use them for the first time, by performing an invocation
of Mercurial energy and anointing the staves with Oil of Abramelin, or
some other sacred substance.
    To perform a reading, begin with the ritual procedure delineated above.
    You should be prepared with paper and pen (to note the results), and
then toss the devices. For simplicity’s sake, assume one side of the device is
the “Yang” side, and the other is the “Yin” side; If you are using something
other than coins, it’s a good idea to mark only one side to allow for quick
and easy distinction as to which side is which.
    When you throw the devices, you have to see how they each come up:
     if all four come up Yin, the result is a broken changing line. Draw a
     split line and put a mark or an “x” next to it, to note it is a changing
     line.
     if three come up Yin (and one Yang): the result is a broken line. Draw
     a split line.
     if they are tied (2 and 2) you have to look at the one that fell furthest to
     your left:
          —if that symbol is a Yin: the result is a broken line (draw a split
          line);
          —if that symbol is a Yang: the result is a solid changing line
          (draw it and put a mark or an ‘x’ next to it, to note that it is a
          changing line);
           —if three come up Yang (and one Yin), OR if all four come up
           Yang: the result is a solid line. Draw a straight line on your page;
     As usual, you do this six times to generate the hexagram. The lines are
drawn from bottom to top, so the first line you generate should be the
lowest (first) of the six, the last one you generate will be the highest.
     The reason this method is preferable to the “three coin method” is that
in that latter method there is an equal chance of getting a solid or broken
line; and an equal (lesser) chance of getting a solid changing or broken
changing line. But in the “Four Staves” method it is most rare to get a
broken changing line (1/16 chance); slightly less rare to get a solid
changing line (3/16); less rare still to get a solid line (5/16), and most
common of all to get a broken line (7/16). These odds match those of the
oldest method of I Ching divination, the complicated counting method of
fifty yarrow stalks. The odds with that method are almost exactly the same
as in this method, and this is important because this method more accurately
reflects the probabilities of Change. It is more probable in reality that
something will be in a state of weakness than in a state of strength; and
more probable that something strong will weaken, than that something
weak will be strengthening.
     This is the nature of reality; so by using this method you get the most
accurate approximation of the laws of nature.

     Method II: The “Three Coin” Method
    Perhaps the most popular method for creating an I Ching casting
involves using three coins. Any three coins can be used, but these should if
at all possible be special coins that you have permanently set aside to use
for I Ching readings. For the sake of balance, it is strongly advised that all
three coins be the same type of coin (the same size and shape). Each coin
should have two clearly distinct sides, which for the purpose of description
will here be described as “heads” and “tails” (if the coin you use is not
clearly identifiable as such, you should designate one side as the “head” and
the other as the “tail”).
     With paper and writing implement ready, you should hold all three
     coins in your hands for a moment, then drop or gently toss them in
     front of you:
          —if two out of three coins come up “heads”, that is a regular
          “Yang” (solid) line;
          —if two out of three coins come up “tails”, that is a regular “Yin”
          (broken) line;
          —if all three coins come up “heads”, that is a “changing Yang”
          line (this is a solid line with an “x” drawn beside it, to note that it
          is changing);
          —if all three coins come up “tails”, that is a “changing Yin” line
          (this is a broken line with an “x” drawn beside it, to note that it is
          changing).
     Repeat this process five more times, to finish drawing six lines, one
     above the other, until you’ve drawn a full six-line hexagram
     (consisting of two trigrams, one above the other).

     Method III: The “Six Coin” Method
    This method is less sophisticated than the first method, but can be used
if one wants a faster drawing or to answer a simpler question:
     take six coins (or alternately, six flat sticks with one side marked
     somehow to differentiate the “Yang” side from the “Yin” side);
     toss the coins (or sticks) in front of you, and then line them up in order
     of distance: the coin that fell closest to you is the “base” of the
     hexagram, the next-closest is the second line, the next one after that
     the third line, etc. until you have created a hexagram of six lines,
     giving you a simple hexagram to refer to your question.
    This method does not inherently produce a hexagram with any changing
lines; you can include one or more changing lines by making one of the six
coins different from the others (meaning that coin will mark the “changing
line”), or by putting a mark on one of the coins or sticks to indicate the
same. Alternately, you can use an intuitive method to determine the
changing line(s) if necessary.

     Method IV: The Intuitive Methods
     There are several less structured methods to perform an I Ching casting.
One simple way is to have sixty-four cards with a hexagram drawn on each;
drawing one at random will provide you with the hexagram to answer your
question (optionally, a second card drawn can represent the “future”
hexagram, with the differences between the two hexagrams revealing which
lines from the original hexagram drawn are the changing lines). This system
will be very far from reflecting the nature of the Changes, but it is a
favourite of fortune-tellers in both Asia and the West.
     If you have neither coins nor sticks nor cards, you can use less orthodox
methods of determining a hexagram. If you are in a crowded area, you
could observe the people that pass by you: if a man walks by, it indicates a
Yang (solid) line; while a woman walking by indicates a Yin (broken) line.
You can make use of some particular characteristic predetermined at the
start of the reading to ascertain if any of the lines are changing lines (for
example, if instead of an adult man or woman, it’s a boy or girl who walks
past you). Alternately, look at a watch: use the first digit of the “minutes” of
the present time to determine the changing line, wherein each ten-minute
block after the hour would represent a value of 1 (so for example, 9:45 pm
would mean the changing line is 5).
     If you have great confidence in your intuition, you could simply choose
to empty your thoughts until the image of a solid or a broken line appears to
you, and draw that as your first line; then repeat the process for the second
to sixth lines; likewise using your intuition to envision the changing line or
lines.
     In addition to his numerological “plum blossom” method, the I Ching
master Shao Yung often favoured the pure observation of nature to select
his component trigrams. He would look around and choose for his
hexagram the trigrams that the vision before him intuitively provided. For
example, you might be sitting outside and when you begin to meditate the
first sensation you take note of is someone lighting a cigarette; thus you
select the Fire trigram for the lower part of your hexagram; then you feel a
light breeze on your face, and thus select Air for your second trigram.
Alternately you might see someone unloading a crate, and this reminds you
of the Earth trigram, then you see someone almost stumble as he walks
down a step, and this reminds you of the pit-like quality of the Moon
trigram. This type of exercise requires both a strong level of meditative
intuition (trance) and significant familiarity with the correspondences of the
various trigrams; however, it can also prove to be a very useful way of
familiarizing yourself with the trigrams and their elemental qualities in
action.

     A Note On Probabilities
    It is my position that the differences in the above methods for casting a
hexagram are significant, in terms of probability for determining both lines
and changing lines. It is my feeling that Method I is the most trustworthy
system, because these probabilities most accurately reflect the nature of
change in reality (which is what the I Ching attempts to reflect). In nature, it
is more common for the strong to weaken than for the weak to strengthen,
and this power of entropy is what is reflected in the mathematical odds of
the Four Stave method (indeed, as in the ancient Yarrow Stalk method). In
the Three-coin and Six-coin methods, it is equally possible to get Yin or
Yang; it is a randomness that is less reflective of reality.
    Nevertheless, the I Ching is trustworthy enough in its symbolic strength
that whichever method you use, you will be able to obtain wisdom that
reflects some kind of insight, assuming that you allow your mind and your
fears to get out of the way. This will of course have some degree of
imperfection (regardless of the method used) relative to how well, or how
poorly, you get out of your own way.

     How to Read the Hexagrams
    Each I Ching hexagram corresponds to a single chapter of the I Ching
text.
    Once you have determined the hexagram (and changing lines), look up
the appropriate chapter of the I Ching that matches this hexagram (a table is
provided below for quick reference to the chapters, by cross-referencing the
component trigrams).
    Once you have found the appropriate section, the first step is to look at
the title of the section, and consider the nature of the trigrams that make up
that hexagram: which trigrams are involved, which is below and which
above. After that, read the basic description of the hexagram. You may also
wish to study the Commentary and the advice provided regarding how this
hexagram relates to the performance of the “Great Work”.
     After the basic description, six oracles are provided, which correspond
to the six lines (remember: they are read from bottom-to-top, so that “line
1” is the line at the very bottom of the hexagram, and “line 6” is the line at
the very top of the hexagram). For the purpose of the reading, you should
read and consider only those individual lines that were marked as “changing
lines” in your reading. These changing lines are usually the most essential
part of the reading; while the general description explains your present
situation, the “changing lines” describe the specific interaction of yourself
and the situation. In other words, what you should be particularly careful to
do or to avoid, or how the general situation affects you. Sometimes, the
meaning of the main text of the hexagram, and the meaning of the changing
lines seem to be opposite to each other; in these cases, you should consider
the main text line as referring to the overall situation, while the changing
line to your particular situation. After all, there could be times when the
overall situation around you is bad and yet things are going to be beneficial
to you in particular, or where the situation in general is prosperous and yet
through accident or error you cannot gain from it.
     You may have more than one changing line, or you may have none at
all. You can generally visualize the overall reading as going in a kind of
chronological order, where the main hexagram represents the foundation of
the situation, the changing line or lines the step or steps you are going
through in the situation, and the “future hexagram” the further development
of the situation. At times, castings with multiple changing lines might also
seem to have contradictory changing lines. In these cases, it is important to
remember that the lines are not describing things that are happening all at
once; the lower lines represent earlier events, and the higher lines later
events.
     After studying the changing lines, draw a new hexagram from the old
one, where any line in the old hexagram that was marked as a “changing
line” is now changed into its new form. For example, if the lower trigram of
your hexagram was the “Moon” trigram             where the second line was a
“changing line”, in the new hexagram you draw that trigram will now be
changed into a “World” trigram.
     Looking up the section for this new hexagram, read its title and consider
its component elements. After this, you would typically read its general
description and commentary only (though there are some situations where
you might also be called on to read specific changing lines; see below).
This “future” hexagram describes where the situation is going, giving you
an impression of the longer term developments that will arise, and possibly
a general idea of the ultimate resolution of your question.
    In I Ching tradition, the number of changing lines you have affects what
should be read, and allows you to determine which particular part of the
overall reading represents the “centre”, that part of the casting that marks
the present or the most urgent thing to attend to (with all that comes before
that “centre” being previous developments, and all that comes after being
later developments).
    In the reading, if you have:

  No Moving line:      then read the Main Hexagram Text only.

  1 Moving Line:       then read the Main Hexagram Text, the
                       Moving Line, and the Future Hexagram Text;
                       and the Moving Line is the “centre”.

  2 Moving Lines:      then read the Main Hexagram Text, both
                       Moving Lines, and the Future Hexagram Text;
                       and the UPPER Moving Line is the “centre”.

  3 Moving Lines:      then read the Main Hexagram Text, all three
                       Moving Lines, and the Future Hexagram Text;
                       and the MIDDLE Moving Line is the
                       “centre”.

  4 Moving Lines:      then read the Main Hexagram Text, the four
                       Moving Lines, the Future Hexagram Text, and
                       the two lines from the Future Hexagram that
                       were unmoving (for example, if you get a
                       hexagram with lines 1-4 moving; then you
                       will read lines 5 and 6 of the Future
                       Hexagram). Of these, the LOWER Future
                       Hexagram Line is the “centre”.

  5 Moving Lines:      then read the Main Hexagram Text, all five
                       Moving Lines, the Future Hexagram Text, and
                       the unmoving Future Hexagram Line; and the
                       single unmoving Future Hexagram Line is the
                       “centre”.

  6 Moving Lines:      then read the Main Hexagram Text, all six
                       Moving Lines, and the Future Hexagram Text;
                       and the Future Hexagram Text is the “centre”.
    (Note that in all cases, as well as the main text description of a
hexagram, one can also read the image description, the commentary, and the
instructions on the Superior Individual, here titled “the Great Work”).
    All of the above describes the basic way you would read an I Ching
casting, and it is how you begin. As you develop there are other aspects to
what you are doing that you’ll want to look at, however, it is not good to
overburden yourself at the beginning. Make certain that you have a firm
grasp of the fundamental method before delving into other details. Later on,
you may want to contemplate the structure of the hexagrams you cast: look
at the lines, which line is where, understand why that makes certain things
good or bad. Look at and contemplate the image evoked by the component
trigrams (both the “official” one described in the book and other ways you
could imagine those two elements combining to create an image). You will
also want to look at the “nuclear hexagrams” involved, as well as the
“opposite”, “overturned” and “reversed” hexagrams; you will find more
information on this in the later chapters of the book.

   A Guide to Common Phrases and Words in I
Ching Hexagrams
    There are several words or phrases that are repeated in multiple I Ching
Hexagrams. These have particular meanings, and the following is an
attempt to list and explain some of them:
    “Abyss”: A profound pit. The Abyss symbolizes darkness, and being
    stuck or lost. It can be literal but also has the symbolic connotation of
    having become trapped in a place of profound ignorance, blocked off
    from the Great Work. It is the negative aspect of the subconscious, the
    mental fears and conditioning that block our ability to hear our True
    Will.
    “Base (people)”: The opposite of “Superior men” or “the Good”, the
    “Base” refers to the class of people who are of poor moral quality (the
    “Inferior Person”); vile or ignorant people, people who are
    treacherous, crude or violent. From the perspective of the Great Work,
    it can also relate to one’s own inferior and limited self.
    “Beasts”: The term “beasts” (which could also be translated as
    “animals”) refers literally to wild animals. In several hexagrams there
are references to generic “beasts” being hunted, or hunting someone,
or lurking dangerously (for example, in the battlefields, in line 5 of
hexagram #7, “the Army”). However, these “beasts” are often also an
allegory for uncultured, untrustworthy people. Spiritually, they can be
understood to represent those who operate on base instinct and
ignorance.
“Blame/Fault/Error”: When misfortune occurs, it is usually a
product of your own choices leading directly or inadvertently to that
misfortune. “Blame”, “Fault”, or “Error” appearing in a reading refers
to a situation where your actions were particularly and directly
responsible for the misfortune that has come to pass. On the other hand
“No blame” or “no fault” means that the misfortune was unavoidable
as part of the flow of things and could not be helped.
Sometimes, “no blame” implies that if you take a particular course,
you will be able to avoid being badly judged by others. From a
Confucian perspective, the question of “blame” or “fault” is
particularly important, because “blame” is considered to be a kind of
karma; the purpose of life in Confucian thought is to accumulate much
“Virtue” while accruing as little “blame” (both of which are seen as
measurable substances); the ratio of one’s Virtue vs. Blame will affect
the condition of one’s afterlife.
“Blessed/Blessing”: Being “blessed” or receiving a “blessing” refers
to good fortune that comes along unexpectedly, or is not due to your
own direct actions.
“Carriage”: On a literal level this relates to the standard mode of
transporting people and goods. But usually this has a metaphorical
sense of being the “vehicle” for one’s efforts. In some hexagrams of
the I Ching, we are warned that the wheel or axle of the carriage will
be broken; this implies lesser or greater crises which halt progress.
In some cases, the Carriage is related to the notion of public office; a
Superior Individual may gain a position which allows him to travel the
land in a carriage and do good. In at least one line (line 1 of hexagram
22), we are advised to step out of our carriage and walk for ourselves;
implying that we don’t need to rely (in that situation) on an outer
vehicle or method.
Mystically, the “Carriage” relates to the concept of the “vehicle” as a
“dharma”, as a system of practice that can be used to make change in
accordance to the Will. It is reminiscent to the trump card of the Tarot
known as the Chariot.
“Courtship”: In a literal sense, the elaborate social rituals undertaken
when seeking a wife or husband. In a mystical sense, this term in a
hexagram can refer to the practice of magical ritual for the purpose of
uniting to one’s True Will. It is in a similar fashion that in western
magick we see the practice of the “knowledge and conversation of the
Holy Guardian Angel” referred to in the context of a love affair.
“Criminals”/“Rebels”/“Evil-doers”: In the I Ching, these terms refer
to those who are generically acting against either the natural course of
things, or opposing your own Will if you are acting naturally.
“Cross the (great) River”: Crossing the river generally refers to a
journey, going somewhere as part of trying to achieve your goals.
“Cross the River” can refer to a short journey, while “Cross the Great
River” will usually refer to a longer journey. “Don’t cross the river” or
similar phrases suggest that you should not go anywhere, and usually
that it will be better to wait and bide your time, or to let the solution
come to you. Such a description can be in reference to a symbolic
journey as well.
“Dragon”: In Chinese Mythology, Dragons were celestial beings, sky-
spirits of tremendous power. They were symbolic of the creative force,
and a powerful masculine symbol. They were generally benevolent,
but could be ferocious. They represent a force that is bound only by
itself, that can only stop itself but cannot be stopped by anything else
in nature; thus the Dragon is symbolic of the True Will.
It appears that in ancient Chinese religious practices, Dragons were
thought to reside inside caves deep in the earth; and when they awoke
and chose to emerge, the heavens thundered at their presence and thus
caused rain to fall. Ancient rituals were performed to seek to call forth
the Dragons, to awaken them at the right time, and for the rains to
assist in causing abundant crops (the line descriptions of hexagram #1
refers directly to this tradition). In this way, the Dragon is connected to
fertility rights, and (from the symbolic interpretation of the same) to
sexual alchemy.
“Foreign/Foreigners/Outsiders”: This refers to people or groups
outside of your normal circle. It can mean someone who is literally
foreign, but it can also signify someone who is merely a stranger or
from some other social group, or even someone who represents a set of
interests outside your own.
“Gain”: The term “Gain” in the I Ching means that you advance in
your goals.
“Gentle Success”: This means things will go well, but either slowly or
only in relatively moderate measure.
“Goal”: Having a goal means having some kind of organized plan or
destination. If it is “good to have a goal”, that means that it is a good
policy to be organized and have a plan for where you want to go. If it
is “bad to have a goal”, or “no goals are possible”, it means that at this
time trying to make plans is ill-advised because the situation is either
too stuck or too chaotic.
“Good Luck/Bad Luck”: Having “luck” or “good luck” means that
there is good fortune due to your own actions being natural and going
with the flow of existence; it is lucky, but because of your choices.
“Bad luck” (or the more extreme “disaster”) refers to misfortune, that
sometimes appears to be unexpected or not your fault, and is
sometimes unavoidable, but is ultimately a result of the path you are
taking. “Bad luck” is connected to the concept of “blame” or “Error”;
some lines will explicitly state that a situation is “bad luck, but no
blame”, suggesting that the unlucky situation is not due to any
deviation on your part from your true Will. If this is not explicitly
stated, it can be assumed that the bad luck is in some way related to
such a deviation.
“Hunter”/“prey”: This terminology appears in several hexagrams; it
can sometimes refer to a hunt (possibly a Royal hunt), or at other times
it is a metaphor for a military campaign, where the hunter is a general
and the prey an enemy or rebel force. In esoteric terms, the “hunter”
represents one who is seeking to direct his Will to a certain effect. If
the prey is “lost”, then it is a sign that what he sought to accomplish
doesn’t come to pass, usually because he did not concentrate his Will
sufficiently.
“Law”: There are many references to “law” or “laws” in the I Ching.
In some cases, it talks about the “Law of Heaven”, in others, the law of
the King or “rulers of old”. In some hexagrams we are told that it is a
“good time for legal processes”.
From a magical context, Law here refers to the concept of dharma, the
teaching; not in the sense of some specific teaching designed by
human beings, but to the fundamental laws of Reality that govern all
things and that all specific teachings based on Truth draw upon. To
engage in legal processes can be a reference to using the dharma to
rectify problems, most often problems related to the “Inferior Person”
within yourself.
“King”: See “Superior Individual”.
“Marriage”: The word marriage might refer to literal marriage, but it
can also refer to any kind of union: romance, a partnership, people
coming together. Many I Ching hexagrams refer to a “damsel” (or
“virgin”), that is, an unmarried woman; usually in reference to
courtship and potential marriage. In this case, the damsel can also
metaphorically represent the object of one’s desires, including the
mystical longing for a transcendent experience of reintegrating matter
with spirit.
“Official”: Someone in a position of official authority. See also,
“public office”.
“Ox/Ox-hide”: The ox is seen as a sign of both strength and
prosperity. Gaining or losing an ox means gaining or losing prosperity.
Something made of “ox hide” is particularly strong and resistant.
“Prince”: See “Superior Individual”.
“Public Office”: There are several lines in the hexagrams that refer to
“public office”; at times warning you not to seek it out, at times
suggesting you will receive said office, or at times instructing you on
how to conduct yourself in it. At the literal level, this refers to
positions of authority and recognition. In a deeper sense, it refers to
how “public” you make yourself in terms of your expression of your
Will. To “misuse” public office is to squander or corrupt what you had
at first accomplished through your true Will; that is, to lose sight of
what constitutes right conduct in your current situation.
“Pushing”: This word refers to making a continued effort. It means to
act with concentration.
“Rain”: In the symbolism of the I Ching, rain was brought by Dragons
flying through the sky. The Dragon is associated with the Heaven
trigram and the solid Yang line. The esoteric symbolism of “rain” is
that of Change, of transformation. Thus, there are times, when “rain
falls” or “rain pours” at suitable moments, where the rain presages
great prosperity. At other times, rain can represent change in the sense
of “crisis”, potential danger or difficulty that destabilizes order. But
even in those circumstances, in the longer term “rain” provides
opportunities for renewal and growth.
“Right Pushing”/“Pushing Rightly”/etc.: This phrase means making
a continued effort, but in a “right” direction. Generally this means
acting in harmony with the natural flow of things, and also pushing for
a noble or proper purpose, acting in accordance with the true Will.
“Sacrifice”: The term “sacrifice” in the I Ching has two meanings. In
the first case, it refers to performing proper rituals; this can include
engaging in meditation, divination, or spiritual/magical rituals, but it
can also mean going through the right and correct processes or taking
proper steps. Second, “sacrifice” usually also means having to give
something up. In ancient China, ritual practices usually involved some
serious costs and expenditures. The oracle may not necessarily refer to
money, however. It could be a sacrifice of time, or of more abstract
things. To “sacrifice blood” means to make a particularly serious
“sacrifice”, getting involved in very serious processes or giving up
something very important.
“Seek the Superior Individual”/“See a Great Man”: This can refer
to literally going to, or seeking advice or help from, a “Great Man”.
However, it can also be an injunction to seek out the Superior
Individual within yourself (see the entry on “Superior Individual” for
more information).
“Shame/Shameful”: In the I Ching, when something brings “shame”
or is “shameful” it implies public embarrassment, usually because
some socially improper behaviour will become too visible to others.
However, the I Ching often implies that this is not a very serious
problem, and often it may be worth the embarrassing situation if what
you are doing is right or helpful, or for the sake of the Great Work.
“Superior Individual”/“Great Man”: The “Superior Individual” in
the I Ching can refer to two things: a man of great importance or
powerful position in relation to the question asked, or a man of great
moral quality and wisdom, someone who is at one with the Tao, and
follows their True Will. Often it means both at the same time.
In a reading, “seeing a great man” means going to get help or advice
from someone who matches this description. In standard translation,
the I Ching actually says “the Superior Man” (or more accurately in a
technically literal sense “the (male) royal heir”), but it is evident that
by no means does a “Superior Man” have to be of the male gender. As
such and in accordance with the times, I have chosen to use the non-
gendered “Superior Individual”. This was done not only to be inclusive
to those not of the male gender, but also because it expresses the
concept of the “Individuality” (the “higher self”, one’s true Nature) as
opposed to the “Personality” (the hodgepodge of influences,
sometimes referred to as “the ego” by western meditation practitioners,
that blinds us to our True Will).
The term “King” or “Prince” usually refers to people of power or
influence in the matter at hand; and these usually (but not always) also
have good and virtuous qualities. Like the “Great Man”, the “King” or
“Prince” can refer to people of either gender; and when mentioned in
reference to the caster, it is a reference to aspects of one’s own being at
higher levels of consciousness. Esoterically, the King is also a parallel
to the “Celestial Emperor”, that is, to the supreme Divine Force.
The Prince is thus representative of the subordinate force; in terms of
qabalistic correspondences, these would be to Chokmah (the King) and
Tiphareth (the Prince), respectively. There is also the term “Queen” or
“Queen Mother”, which is as above but would most usually refer to a
female individual (or again, to the Divine Feminine Principle within
one’s self), corresponding to Binah on the Tree of Life. Likewise the
“General” or “Commander” could be understood as corresponding to
Yesod (as evidenced by the term being referred to frequently in
connection to hexagrams where the Moon is one of the component
trigrams), as representing the force of inspiration.
“Superiors”: Anyone who would be in a position of authority over
you, particularly regarding the question presented. The term “Lord” is
essentially the same in this case.
“Virtue”: At the basic level, this term refers to the core Confucian
virtues of love, right conduct, justice, and wisdom, and the cultivation
of the same. But these cannot be understood as mere ethics, feelings or
attitudes, much less good manners. Virtue in this case is synonymous
with “power”; that means that these are magical virtues, qualities that
are cultivated because they increase the force of our Will, and thus
grant us the ability to create change.
“Will”: Your true inner will; this refers not to what you merely may
want at any given time, but to your true sense of inner purpose. It is the
force that connects your individual being to the Great Work. The Great
Work itself is referred to as the “Will of Heaven”.
“Women”: there are several lines in the I Ching which suggest that a
given oracle has different meanings depending on whether the person
making the question is male or female. In some cases, the I Ching
suggests that something is “good luck for women, bad luck for men”;
in others it may say “right pushing is good for women”. This generally
implies that under the circumstances of the reading, the situation may
be better for a woman than a man. However, the reason why this would
be so must be considered: in the Chinese culture, what was “good
luck” (or “bad luck”) for women would have to do with matters related
to the home, to stable relationships, and to the security brought about
by social contracts. Thus if people, regardless of gender, would find
themselves benefited by the conditions that the I Ching is describing
that would create this good (or bad) luck, they should assume it applies
to them.
In some cases, there are certain social activities (like gossip) that in
Chinese culture was considered tolerable when practised by women
     (though still unbecoming) but that would be intolerable if practised by
     men. People in our society receiving a reading related to these sorts of
     activities will need to consider how it would apply to their situation
     based on the social conventions of our time. There is also an esoteric
     dimension to this meaning; “women” here is understood as the Yin
     quality, “men” as the Yang. So the idea of “women” in these verses can
     be taken esoterically to mean those who are energetically passive,
     receptive, yielding; while “men” are those who act with the Yang
     qualities of force and direct effort.

     Reference Table for the Hexagrams
    The table on the following page simplifies the process of looking up
which section or chapter of the I Ching corresponds to the hexagram drawn
from a reading. In the table, the top row corresponds to the trigram of three
lines at the top places of your hexagram, while the left-hand row
corresponds to the bottom trigram. The number on the table where the rows
intersect is the number corresponding to the section of the I Ching where
the resulting hexagram is found.
    For example, if your I Ching reading generates three solid lines at the
bottom (the “Heaven” trigram) and three broken lines at the top (the
“World” trigram), the chapter of the I Ching where the hexagram formed by
these lines can be found is Chapter Eleven.

     General Notes on Interpreting A Reading
   Rule 0: Look At What is Being Said, Don’t
Look For What You Want to Hear.
    This is not just a rule for I Ching casting, it is the central rule for
effective divination of any kind, and indeed for the cultivation of the
“Superior Individual” (the True Will) in general. If you are projecting your
own wishful thinking, instead of engaging in being receptive to the message
presented, then all opportunity for change is lost. Transformation and
harmony with one’s Will, and the subsequent magical power this generates,
comes from the steadfast determination to dare to face the Truth naked of
adornment.
     Reference Table for the Hexagrams




   Likewise, if someone tries to use the I Ching as a mere “answer
machine”, as a substitute for their own intuition rather than as an aid to the
growth of their awareness and virtue (the cultivation of the “Superior
Individual”), then what results from using it will be at best gibberish, and at
worst one’s own deceptive fantasies.

   A Case Study on the Subject—The Fall of the
Shang
    In the era of the Shang dynasty, when the I Ching was already in use but
not yet quantified into a book, the great Shang wizard-kings were expected
to make regular auguries. At that time, the Shang used bones thrown in fire
for their divination; specifically turtle shells and ox bones (the cracks the
fire caused in the bone or shell would reveal the lines of Yin and Yang).
    In the earlier Shang archaeological records, you see auguries about all
sorts of subjects, and auguries where the King proclaimed good luck or bad:
“we should attack this country”, “if we attack now it will be disaster”, “the
king’s second wife will have a child”, “the queen will have a stillborn son”.
Prosperity and famine, bounty and disaster are both predicted.
    However, by the later period of the Shang dynasty something interesting
happens: the oracles the wizard-king declares become quite different,
suddenly they are all very vague and generally good, one after another.
There are thousands of declarations that say something like “the next period
will be truly auspicious, with no misfortune”.
    The notable difference is that the earlier era was one where the Shang
were the mightiest kingdom in their known world. The latter era, however,
was one where the Shang had become corrupt: their last king was tyrannical
toward his outlying provinces while engaging in decadent behaviour at
home (legends hold that near the end he had built an artificial lake of wine
with a paradisiacal island filled with deer meat at its centre, and sumptuous
palaces where he held degenerate orgies that included the sadistic torture of
commoners). Rival powers were emerging and the Shang dynasty would
soon be overthrown, their kingdom over-run by the Zhou (including the
great King Wen, who wrote the text of the I Ching and thus proved he had
superior magical power and wisdom than the decadent kings of Shang).
    It seems that in the earlier era, the people were willing to hear, and thus
the king to declare, bad news as well as good. But in the latter era, when
things had gone bad, the people didn’t want to hear anything realistic from
their government, they just wanted to keep being told everything was going
to be great and there wouldn’t be any problems; they wanted to be given
reassuring lies. These oracles were the equivalent of “campaign promises”
in modern elections; and by the end time of the Shang dynasty no ruler
dared demand “blood, sweat or tears” from the people, or ask them to make
sacrifices; instead he had to constantly repeat the story that everything was
great, that they were the best country in the world, that every problem
would be solved and no sacrifice would be needed. And of course, on the
same note, the rulers were lying to themselves. Thus, the last Shang king
was blinded by his own lesser nature, to the extent of executing wise
counsellors who attempted to warn him of the dangers his kingdom faced.
    This is what the Confucian commentaries of the I Ching would describe
as the preponderance of the Inferior Person: a time of decadence that has
spread to the moral, intellectual and vital faculties. At that point, only
revolution (by the Zhou) could restore society. And indeed, King Wen’s son
fulfilled his father’s dreams by uniting eleven of the border territories
against the Shang, defeating their armies and conquering the kingdom. The
last King of the Shang committed suicide on his deer meat island while his
palaces burned.
    In this little piece of I Ching history, there is a very interesting example
of the kind of teaching the I Ching promulgates (and explanation of the
context of the times in which the actual text of the I Ching was written).
Likewise, it demonstrates the ways someone can use it effectively, or fail to
apply it correctly. It is also an interesting message for our modern era,
showing just how relevant the I Ching continues to be, 3,000+ years after
the time of its writing, because the same problems keep happening.
    The I Ching has, for thousands of years, warned us what happens to
those individuals, as well as societies as a whole, who are fat and
complacent, only wanting to hear “good oracles”.

     Further Guidelines
  1. The structure of a hexagram is based on the combination of the two
     elemental trigrams, but the individual oracle is also based on the
     location of each line in the hexagram.
2. Generally speaking, a Yang (solid) line is well-placed if it is in an odd-
   numbered line (1,3,5), while a Yin (broken) line is well placed in an
   even-numbered line (2,4,6). The lines’ significance is also affected by
   those lines around it: for example, a weak (Yin) line in the fifth place
   is generally bad, and a strong (Yang) line in the fourth place is
   generally undesirable; but if you have a Yin line in the fifth place
   surrounded (and thus “supported”) by strong lines in 4 and 6, this
   improves the situation greatly. A weak (Yin) line in position 2 is going
   to be more auspicious if there is a strong (Yang) line in position 5 to
   mirror it. A weak (Yin) line in position 1 usually means that the
   hexagram’s process is off to a bad start, it can’t maintain the weight of
   the other lines; while a strong (Yang) line at the top (sixth) line often
   means things have been pushed too far.
3. Each line of a hexagram represents a development in the overall theme
   of the hexagram; thus the lines (from line 1 at the bottom to line 6 at
   the top) can be seen as marking an overall “timeline”. If you have, for
   example, lines 4 and 6 as changing lines, you can usually assume that
   line 4 indicates an earlier development in the situation, and line 6
   represents a later development.
4. The significance of each line in a hexagram is based on its position as
   well. Line 1 symbolizes the “lowest rank”, the least important person,
   the outsider. Line 2 is the “common subject” (in the Confucian context,
   a “lowly official”); it is thus auspicious as a rule because the common
   subject has nothing to prove; where it is problematic is if it is left to its
   own devices without guidance. Line 3 is the “social climber”, the
   person or situation in a state of transition; thus it usually means
   difficulties and challenges in order to achieve things. Line 4 is the
   “minister” line; someone in a position of important subservience;
   meant to assist the “ruler” of the fifth line. Line 5 is generally the
   “ruler”; it is often the most important line of the hexagram. When it
   isn’t, it is a sign that the hexagram represents a situation of disorder or
   instability; if the ruler is weak, or poorly supported, then problems are
   very likely. Line 6 represents the situation “after ending”; it is like an
   old retired man who has no place, or a situation that has gone on for
   too long or stretched too far. It can be positive only if things are
   overwhelmingly good overall, or if the line takes on the attitude of a
  “sage”, removing itself voluntarily from the situation. There is one
  other situation where the sixth line can be positive: if the overall
  hexagram is relatively negative, then the last line often symbolizes an
  end to the bad situation and the first glimpse of positive changes.
5. It is particularly useful, when beginning to interpret the hexagram cast,
   to look at the component trigrams. These trigrams have a wealth of
   symbolism of their own (as already expressed above); and it is
   worthwhile to consider their significance separately and together in the
   hexagram. The “image” description in each hexagram text presents the
   traditional portrait of what the two hexagrams combined look like
   (e.g., hexagram #16, Certainty, composed of Fire above and World
   below, has the image of “signal fires lit over the world”), and this can
   often give great insight into the rest of the hexagram’s meaning (the
   imagery of hexagram #16 connects to the idea of sending the signal
   because one is ready to march, hence it is related to the central text of
   this being “the time for sending out armies”; however these fires can
   also be an alarm, as per line 1 of the hexagram, or a sign that it is time
   to make offerings and sacrifices, as per the Confucian commentary).
6. Certainly, the image presented is only one possible way of considering
   the combination of elements. It can be a very worthwhile exercise to
   think of other possible images formed by the elements in combination,
   including images that come to mind as applicable to the question being
   asked.
7. Remember that “The I Ching is Not About You”. An I Ching reading
   where you are using only your “active intellect”, casting the staves or
   coins in an ordinary state of mind and then just reciting the text from
   the book and thinking hard about it, is likely to be a very sub-optimal
   reading. Just as with any system of divination, the I Ching’s success
   depends on your ability to “get out of your own way”, to momentarily
   step out of ordinary consciousness into a light trance consciousness. In
   the case of the I Ching, it is a very light pattern of altered perceptions,
   so that you are engaging both mind and intuition together, in harmony
   (in keeping with the formula of Yi-Fa). When you first recite the lines
   of your casting, do so without trying to analyze: write them down,
   even if you already know them by heart, let yourself connect to them
   in a way that doesn’t deconstruct them immediately. Then start looking
  carefully at each part of the casting and rather than forcing analysis,
  seek out insight.
8. Ask yourself what the words of the oracle mean in the context of your
   question. There is a famous story that Shao Yung was training his son
   in using the I Ching. One evening, a neighbour knocked on the family
   door and before their guest could explain his presence, Shao Yung told
   his son: “Quickly, consult the I Ching and guess from it what our
   neighbour wants”. The younger man generated a hexagram and noted
   from only the image itself that it involved the combination of wood
   and metal, and declared to Shao Yung “Father, our visitor will ask to
   borrow a shovel!”
       Shao Yung shook his head, “you are close, my son, but incorrect:
       he will ask for an axe.” When they finally enquired, the neighbour
       had indeed come to borrow an axe. Shao Yung’s son, surprised,
       asked him how he knew it was an axe and not a shovel. Shao
       Yung answered: “Because you observed the hexagram, but I
       observed both the hexagram and the nature that surrounds us: it is
       evening, and it is cold, and a man will not come looking for a
       shovel to dig for something when the sun is setting. But he may
       ask to borrow an axe to chop wood for a fire”.
       Make a point to observe nature, and to consider the application of
       the oracle to the environment that surrounds your question.
9. Finally, it will be essential for your development in the study of the I
   Ching that you study the text carefully. Read the descriptions of the
   hexagrams regularly, and consider their relationships to one another. In
   my experience, it makes a significant difference in one’s ability to read
   the entire text through at least one time; and to regularly study the text
   and commentaries after that.
       The other side of the equation to become a talented
       “Changeologist” is to keep track of the castings you perform, and
       verify whether your interpretations were accurate or not. It is
       important to be honest with yourself and with the results, to judge
       if the castings were on the mark, if the oracle itself was accurate
       but your interpretation flawed, or if the oracle did not appear to
make sense. It is important to be able to study this over time; and
the only sure way to accomplish this is to keep a record of all
your castings, as well as notes on insights you receive from
studying and contemplating the text. As such, I would very
strongly urge that you keep a diary of your I Ching work, and be
meticulous in recording your study and practice. This will lead to
significant and swift progress.
                        Chapter Three
                  The Text of the I Ching
  Outline
 For each hexagram the information is presented in the following format:
a. Hexagram number, Chinese name (where appropriate with phonetic
   pronunciation), and English name.
b. Illustration of the hexagram.
c. List of the two trigram elements that constitute the hexagram.
d. A note on the hexagram’s “Ruling and Governing Line(s)”, if
   applicable. Each hexagram will have certain lines of particular
   importance, that are most central in the essence of the hexagram.
   These were traditionally called “ruling” or “governing” lines. The
   main difference being that the ruling lines tended to be lines that
   instructed on the central attitude of the individual, while the governing
   lines revealed the central nature of the situation.
       While not applicable to divination as such, these can be most
       useful in the study and interpretation of the I Ching and are
       worthy of at least a couple of decades worth of contemplation to
       help understand the I Ching. Ruling or governing lines are also
       marked by a “*” (for ruling lines) or a “^” (for governing lines) in
       the line-description section.
e. A description of the Image evoked by the hexagram.
f. The Description of the main hexagram text.
g. Advice for what the Superior Individual is meant to do in the situation
   described by the hexagram to propitiate the Great Work.
h. A Commentary on the hexagram, based on the original Confucian
   commentary but rewritten for ease of study, with my own additional
   clarifications.
   i. The Line descriptions. Remember that the lines are counted from
      bottom to top; thus “line 1” is the lowest line in the hexagram, while
      “line 6” is the top line.

     A Note on Notes
    You will find that there are several areas of blank spaces interspersed
amidst the entries of the hexagrams. This is in order that the I Ching student
may have room to write notes within the book itself. I strongly encourage
the reader to do this if they wish to study the I Ching seriously.
    I hope this book will not be left languishing on a shelf, untarnished by
any markings, but rather that it will be used by serious students who will
carry this book with them, and who will refer to it daily, going back and
forth through its pages and taking notice of lines, words, imagery or
comments that they had not noticed on previous readings. That they will get
insights or ideas or questions about the I Ching text, and in the urge not to
forget these insights will need to jot them down immediately! The spaces in
the book will allow them to do so, close to the source material that inspired
the insight in the first place.
    And should it ever come up, I will only ever sign a well-worn copy with
many mad scribblings between its pages…
    

       The Core Text of the I Ching
    

       Hexagram 1: Chien (pr. “chee-en”)—Creation




   Heaven and Heaven make Creation.

    Image: Sublime Celestial Forces in Motion. (Note: in the original text
these are literally four words: “Sublime”, “Accomplishment”,
“Beneficence”, “Determination”; Confucius notes that these are the four
virtues of the Superior Individual: Love, Right Conduct, Justice, and
Wisdom).
    Ruling Line: 5
    Description: Success! Pushing brings reward, if in a right course.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual must strengthen his
development in the four virtues.
    Commentary: The creative mind works through change. The Ruler,
towering above the masses, brings peace to all peoples. Heaven and
Heaven: clouds come forth, and bring rain at the right time for crops to
grow and bring abundance. The imagery of this Hexagram is that of the
Dragon, the supreme Creative power, choosing the right moment to come
out of his cave. (The imagery of the Dragon in the I Ching is the pure
masculine force, equivalent to the qabalistic Chokmah and the image of
“Therion” or the “Great Beast”)
    The Six Lines of this first hexagram of the I Ching are archetypes; they
summarize in the purest form the six phases of all Process of Change in the
Universe.
    The Lines:

  1. The Dragon is hidden, avoid acting!
2. The Dragon comes out of his cave, it is time to seek the Superior
   Individual.
3. Keep busy all day, and watchful at night! There is danger—but harm is
   (thus) avoided.
4. The Dragon tries to jump high, he may fly over the abyss, or fall—no
   error! (The Superior Individual can accept either, without lust of result
   —this is a test, of one’s ability to overcome limitations and persevere
   even facing failure, in order to grow).
5. * The Dragon Soars! He seeks the Superior Individual. (Clouds follow
   the dragon and bring good rains; to find the Great, be Great).
6. The proud Dragon will regret. (Because he reaches too far).
       If all the Dragons are changing, in motion, the Universe is
       blessed. (This means that if all six lines are changing, it is
       considered a particularly great augury).
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 2: Kun (pr. “kwn”)—Passive




   The World and The World are passive.

    Image: Passive is all of The World.
    Ruling Line: 2
    Description: Passive is gentle success. The mare is a sign of good luck,
peaceful and rightly pushing. If the Superior Individual has a goal, he may
go wrong, but will find his way, with friends in the Southwest. Friends in
the Northeast will be lost.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual embraces all!
    Commentary: The Passive is an all-embracing vessel. If one pushes
ahead roughly, he may be lost, it is good to have a guide. “Friends in the
Southwest” means to seek friends among your own kind (from the context
of the original writing, the southwest was civilized territory, while to the
northeast were barbarians and enemies).
    The Lines:

  1. Frost on the ground means ice later.
  2. * Straight and wide, prosperity comes without effort.
  3. Hide talent and beauty: early failures, but victory in the end, assisting
     the King in the Great Work.
  4. Stoic and quiet, prudent. No blame, no praise.
  5. The (rich) golden robe brings gentle good luck.
  6. Warring dragons spill black and yellow blood in the wilderness. The
     Passive way has come to an end. (black is the colour of Heaven,
     yellow of The World).
If all The World is changing, in motion, then do not give up: your
Will shall be made constant. (This is again in reference to a good
augury if all six lines are changing lines).
                         Notes
    

       Hexagram 3: Chun (pr. “jwn”)—Challenge




   The Moon and Fire make challenge.

     Image: Fire + Moon, lightning falls from the clouds at night.
     Ruling Lines: 1 & 5.
     Description: Challenge, then gentle success. Continue pushing your
right path, do not look for new goals or locales. Consolidate things as they
are.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual keeps busy getting things in
order (while waiting out the storm).
     Commentary: This hexagram marks the birth of the phenomenal world
(as Fire is the first emanation of the four terrestrial or lower elements).
Growth through a time of danger. The theme of the lines is of a difficult
period of courtship and early wedded life.
     The Lines:

  1. * In chaos, better to stay still. Build up your Will. (the Yang at the
     bottom line subordinates himself to the three Yin that follow, to build
     up support).
  2. Difficult beginnings; moving back and forth, no progress is made. The
     damsel plays “hard to get” for ten years! (the “damsel” is the Yin line).
  3. Without a guide, the hunter loses his prey; if he persists, he will be
     disappointed. The Superior Individual knows to stay still.
  4. Moving back and forth, waiting for marriage. When it comes, it will be
     prosperous. Be wise, seek favour.
5. * Troubles in conceiving; pushing for small things is good, but for
   large things, woe.
6. He runs around, back and forth, crying until he bleeds. What a drama
   queen!
    

       Hexagram 4: Meng (pr. “mng”)Immaturity




   Earth and Moon are immature.

    Image: A pit (Moon) at the foot of a mountain (Earth).
    Ruling Lines: 2 & 5.
    Description: When the immature seek out the wise, it will at first be
helpful; but don’t ask twice! No more explanation will he provide. Do not
do more castings on this matter.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual must nourish his virtue, by
being determined to be of right conduct.
    Commentary: How one behaves at the start of things is very important.
Receiving this hexagram can imply that you are consulting the oracle too
frequently on this topic. The theme of the lines is of dealing with the folly
of youth.
    The Lines:

  1. Correct and bind the youth to discipline, but also set a good example.
     If youth rushes forth without education, woe!
  2. * Be gentle with the immature. Take a wife, have children. Good luck.
     Inheritance will come.
  3. Don’t choose a wife that lusts after rich or handsome men.
  4. Stubborn immature fantasies cause harm and regret. He has strayed too
     far from the truths of his teacher! (This is because this Yin line is far
     away from the strong Yang lines).
  5. * Pure youthful innocence will bring good luck, because he is
     receptive to his teacher’s truth. (This is because this Yin line is close to
  a strong Yang line and the reflection of the strong Yang in line 2).
6. To deal with the immature, he tries to beat the child! To do what is
   right, he must instead show him that they are on the same side. The
   true enemy is ignorance, and you cannot fix a wrong with another
   wrong.
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 5: Hsu (pr. “shu”)—Pause




   The Moon and Heaven unite to pause.

    Image: The Moon at its peak; clouds gather in the sky.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Pause, and others’ trust will bring shining success.
Pushing rightly will bring luck. Cross the great river.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual should spend their time as in
feasting and taking pleasure; waiting without concern for the appropriate
opportunity to act.
    Commentary: Do not be bewildered, do not rush forth. Do not be
worried or seem insecure as you wait. Be firm. Waiting is to your advantage
until the perfect moment arises.
    The Lines:

  1. Pause at the borderland. Be constant and you will be safe.
  2. Pause at the shoreline. It will be scandalous, but lucky in the end.
  3. Pause in the mud, and evil approaches. Don’t get stuck, or you’ll be
     hurt! Be discreet, and avoid brigands.
  4. Pausing in a pool of blood, calm even in danger. Things will pass and
     you will escape from the pit. (This is in reference to being the weak
     lower line of the Moon trigram)
  5. * Pause at the feast, entertain others with wine and food; but keep to
     the right path for gain.
  6. He falls into the pit, danger! Three unexpected visitors arrive; showing
     hospitality to them brings good luck. (The pit is a reference to this
being the weak top line of the Moon trigram).
    

       Hexagram 6: Sung (pr. “soong”)Struggling




   Heaven and Moon unite in struggling.

    Image: The Moon is low in the sky—an ill omen. Moon and Heaven
are in the opposite of their natural places, this symbolizes dark times and
conflicts.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: When one’s confidence and sincerity are doubted, a
struggle commences. Care for justness and perseverance makes things work
for a while, but the struggle pushed to its extreme would bring disaster. It is
good if a Great Man comes and judges the dispute; but do not cross the
river.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual does not engage in any
activity without careful planning right from the beginning.
    Commentary: The imagery of this hexagram is both of a needless or
unjust war, and of a legal dispute. It begins because wickedness was not met
by firmness right from the start. If the wicked think you lack conviction,
conflict is inevitable (because they will take liberties).
    The Lines:

  1. Don’t push the issue or speak too much; you will be slightly shamed,
     but will avoid starting a longer conflict. In the longer term, this is
     luckier. (This is in reference to the weak first line in the Moon
     trigram).
  2. Overwhelmed, retreat; quickly! Take refuge with 300 family members.
     (This is in reference to the solid second line being surrounded by
     broken Yin lines; the “300 family members” are presaged by the three
     solid lines of the Heaven trigram).
3. Rely on ancient virtues, guard against dangers. Trouble at first, better
   later. Support the King but do not seek public office.
4. Overwhelmed, retreat, realize the folly (i.e., the unnatural mentality) of
   what you were thinking. Return to reason. Push for the right way, but
   seek peace (not revenge).
5. * Conflict ends with a fair judge arbitrating the dispute. Great fortune!
6. The sash of honour, given today, is lost tomorrow. Gained in strife, it
   brings little respect (because it was not truly deserved, for what was a
   needless conflict to begin with).
                                   Notes
    

       Hexagram 7: Shih (pr. “shrr”)—The Army




   The World and the Moon are an army.

    Image: Water (in pits) deep beneath The World.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: You must persevere on the right path. There is good luck
and freedom from mistakes, if the chosen commander is wise.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual accepts and nourishes all
who come to his side, and thus assembles an army.
    Commentary: Persistence is needed to govern a large host. This is the
quality of a King. The strong (the solid second line of the hexagram) must
progress through difficult tasks and thus conquer, winning the people’s
allegiance.
    The Lines:

  1. Armies need discipline. If not, corruption and disaster follow! There
     must be discipline from the very start.
  2. The general commands justly and has good fortune. He is honoured
     three times by the King, and given important offices!
  3. An army of corpses: disaster on the battlefield, defeat!
  4. The army retreats, and regroups in an orderly fashion: no mistake.
  5. * Beasts in the field, but they are easy for the wise to spot. Choose the
     wise general and he leads the armies (to victory); choose an Inferior
     Person, and he will carry back corpses (in defeat).
  6. The Prince takes command, all is well. He gives titles to the victorious
     generals. But an Inferior Person must not be given offices or disaster
will follow.
    

       Hexagram 8: Pi (pr. “bee”)—Union




   The Moon and The World are in union.

    Image: The tides (from the Moon) naturally ebb and flow over The
World.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Union! Luck. Vassals follow their Superior’s Will. You
must have a clear vision of the real situation. Anxious rebel Princes come
back into union with the King. The lazy (those slow to answer the King’s
call) lag behind and face disaster. Do a second I Ching reading (on a related
question) for great value.
    The Great Work: The rulers of old did well by being on good terms
with their vassals.
    Commentary: Coordination works by bringing into the fold and
assuring the support and loyalty of one’s subordinates. The theme of this
hexagram is uniting for common causes, or failing to do so.
    The Lines:

  1. Be confident and sincere. Assist the King, faultlessly. He will give you
     a windfall. Good fortune.
  2. Unification of the inner circle (that is, of those in your close group).
     Right pushing is auspicious. (The “inner circle” refers to the united
     harmony of the weak second line with the strong fifth line)
  3. Union with evil-doers brings suffering.
  4. Union with the King is achieved even from those outside his inner
     circle (as the weak fourth line is in the outer edge of the Moon
     trigram); right pushing brings auspiciousness.
5. * The King loses his prey, but because he allows their escape. Thus he
   can see which traitors flee, and who remains loyal.
6. He hesitates too long to unite to the King’s cause; he is forsaken and
   stands alone. Disaster!
                                Notes
    

  Hexagram 9: Hsiao Chu (pr. “sheeau choo”)—
Small Nourisher




   Air and Heaven make small nourishment.

    Image: The wind (Air) blows softly across the sky (Heaven). Dense
clouds form but there is not yet rain (this is in reference to the broken line at
number 4, which is still in the process of rising).
    Ruling Line: 5.

    Governing Line: 4.
    Description: Small nourishment, promising. Success. Dense clouds
form in the western borderlands, but there is no rain yet.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual should engage in scholarly
matters (a reference to the Air element), and refine his virtue (a reference to
the Heaven element).
    Commentary: The “west” implies that problems could arise from
unstable territories, but these have not yet manifested. Our affairs can thus
continue (in the early lines of this hexagram, the implication is that one
should not stop what one is doing out of concern yet). The theme of this
hexagram’s lines simultaneously describe (in literal terms) the build-up of
bad weather in the distance, and (in allegorical terms) potential unrest in the
border territories of a Kingdom.
    The Lines:

  1. Come back to this path, there is no harm, and good luck (in
     continuing).
2. Bringing yourself back to the right way, returning to your duties and
   commitments, good luck!
3. The wheel of the carriage breaks; husband and wife quarrel and
   separate.
4. ^ Fear and struggle are avoided by confident support. (Implied by the
   strong fifth line protecting the weak fourth line)
5. * Confidence leads the strong to unite to you, and you can thus be
   benevolent to troubled neighbours.
6. The clouds build up too much, they cannot contain themselves. Rain
   pours down. The moon has become full and now there is danger
   (particularly for women). If the Superior Individual keeps trying to
   build himself up, there will be disaster.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 10: Lu—Stepping




   Heaven and Water unite in stepping.

     Image: Water flows openly downstream, accessible to all.
     Ruling Line: 5.
     Governing Line: 3.
     Description: He walks carefully, following the tiger, but is not bitten.
Success!
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual communicates with the high
and the low alike, steadying the people’s will, and directing them back to
the proper rites.
     Commentary: The tiger represents Heaven’s force. The strong
(Heaven) is above, and the joyful (Water) is below. The tiger walks and one
moves behind it, following its firm trail. The tiger follows its Will, and the
wise man does likewise. As a ruler governs with strength and virtue (and
people follow him joyously), so should you set foot blamelessly (that is,
with full consciousness) in the place of the Supreme Ruler, for glory. The
theme of the lines is of following the Tiger while trying not to step on its
tail.
     The Lines:

  1. Be simple and straightforward, perform the proper rites. Then you
     advance without blame.
  2. Hermits walk peacefully along the trail. Right pushing brings luck.
     Without hesitating, he knows the path, having performed ancient rites.
  3. ^ A blind man tries to see, a cripple tries to walk; step on a tiger’s tail
     and get bitten! Disaster! Subsume your will to the King’s will! (The
  blind try to see, without awareness; the crippled try to move, without
  ability.)
4. Stepping on a tiger’s tail, pause and don’t even breathe! Fear. Use
   caution, and the tiger will not bite; good luck follows.
5. * Step softly, but with determination. Trouble is nearby, but acting
   properly will avoid it.
6. Watching your steps, remembering, heeding the signs; note the
   difference between fortune and disaster. Know when to stop and when
   to turn back; you will thus receive a great blessing.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 11: Tai—Harmony/Intercourse




   The World and Heaven unite in harmony.

     Image: Male and Female (Heaven and The World) in intercourse with
each other. Note that the female is above the male (an allusion to a
technique present in Taoist Sexual Alchemy, Tantra, and other schools of
Sexual Magick). This hexagram is a symbol equivalent to the western
magical symbol of the Holy Hexagram.
     Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
     Description: Harmony. All is as it should be. The Base decline, and the
Great and Good enters. Good luck, and success.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual penetrates to the heart of all
things, for the sake of the Great Work.
     Commentary: The high and the low are of one Will. Strength (Heaven)
is inside, while softness (The World) is yielding and lustful. There may be a
historical significance to the line-descriptions of this hexagram; they appear
to tell the story of the period of harmony between the Shang and the Zhou,
when King Wen’s father maintained his loyalty to the Shang King in spite
of mounting unrest. The Shang King married one of his daughters to the
ruling family of Zhou, and thus maintained stability for one more
generation through their mutual good will. As presaged by the sixth line,
eventually decadence set in and inevitably the period of harmony came to
an end.
     The Lines:

  1. Pull up grass and you get its roots. It is good to go ahead with plans,
     progress will be swifter than expected.
2. * If your vision is vast, you can cross rivers even without boats. Do not
   forget your friends, even when far away. Avoid having your own
   agenda, and instead serve the King, staying centred (on the Great
   Work).
3. The steep follows the flat; don’t lose heart, persist! No error. Even if
   others doubt you at first, fulfil your public office.
4. Always ready to serve, he stays loyal in his modest place. His friends
   (thus) do likewise. (“Friends” refers to the fifth and sixth lines).
5. * The old King’s youngest daughter is given for marriage. Happiness
   and good luck; blessings come due to impartiality. (the King, referred
   to by name in this line, was the second-last King of the Shang
   Dynasty; according to historical legend he may have married his
   daughter to King Wen’s father as a show of impartiality, which
   maintained peace for one more generation between the Shang and the
   Zhou).
6. The city walls are crumbling; this is no time to go off to war! Keep
   order; cut through red tape and guard against chaos. Though this is
   right, you will likely face criticism. Harmony is decaying into
   decadence and stuckness.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 12: Pi (pr. “pee”)—Stuckness




   Heaven and The World unite in stuckness.

    Image: Male and Female do not meet in intercourse.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Line: 2.
    Description: Stuckness due to the wicked. Nothing is beneficial. A bad
omen, but the Superior Individual must keep pushing rightly. The Great and
Good decline, the Base rise up (filling and blocking all opportunities for
growth).
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual should withdraw and look
within, declining all temptations of superficial honours or riches. Be thrifty,
and avoid danger.
    Commentary: Everything is out of intercourse with everything else.
The Yin is within, and Yang is without. The King and his subjects do not
communicate. Weakness at the centre; mean men govern there, while the
strong and honourable are exiled to the fringes.
    The Lines:

  1. Pull up grass, and you get its roots. Right pushing brings good luck
     and success. Stay loyal, keep persevering for the sake of the King.
  2. ^ Criminals flatter great men, their crimes are pardoned and they rise
     up (to undeserved offices). The Superior Individual seeks no favours,
     flattery, or pardon for doing his Will. Nor does he deviate due to the
     decadence that surrounds him.
  3. The pardoned criminal continues his corruption. He hides his blame
     but causes great shame in the end.
4. He brings reforms in accordance with the law (Heaven), and cannot go
   wrong. His companions (his comrades in the cause) are likewise
   honoured and blessed.
5. * Even in stuckness the Superior Individual can find fortune. He must
   remind himself constantly to avoid corruption.
6. The time for reform has come; at first some stuckness persists, but the
   corrupt is gradually removed. Then great joy follows.
                                Notes
    

   Hexagram 13: Tong Ren (pr. “toong rn”)—
Fellowship




   Heaven and the Sun make lovers and friends.

    Image: Heaven and the Sun are natural brothers in their closeness.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: Finding fellowship, even in distant barbarian lands—
success! Establish fellowship. Cross great rivers. The Superior Individual
benefits if he keeps pushing rightly.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual treats others as he would
himself. He finds similarities and cause for brotherhood even among
foreigners.
    Commentary: Someone weak occupies the central position (broken
line 2) but responds well to the creative force (solid line 5). This is the
refining influence. It is the pure Virtue of the Superior Individual that lets
them find brotherhood in others. Eventually the strong (the five solid lines)
will integrate the weak (line 2). The theme of the lines involves reaching
out to a barbarian tribe, making peace with them, and integrating them into
the Kingdom.
    The Lines:

  1. Fellowship in your own neighbourhood, no harm in that.
  2. * Fellowship within one’s own tribe—trouble! Disappointing, no
     growth. (Having a sense of fellowship only among your own group is
     limiting).
  3. They planned an ambush, but then ran for the hills! They dare not
     attack for three years. (They fear the strength of the opposing force).
4. They besiege the city walls but then pull back (a ceasefire is declared)
   —good luck!
5. * Trying to establish fellowship with a foreigner (the weak second
   line). There is weeping and shouting at first, but laughter in the end.
   Joining forces, they win a great battle, and others come to their side.
6. He looks for fellowship in lonely frontier regions; no fellowship is
   found, but there is no blame (in trying).
                                 Notes
    

   Hexagram 14: Ta Yu (pr “da you”)—Great
Holdings




   The Sun and Heaven make great holdings.

   Image: The Sun is high in the Heavens, the Sun in splendour.
   Ruling Line: 5.
   Description: He who has much—great success! Riches and virtue.
   The Great Work: The Superior Individual suppresses the evil and
upholds the virtuous. He promotes charity, and obeys Heaven’s orders.
Most are on his side.
   Commentary: Because he has splendour (Sun) and vigour (Heaven), he
causes the strong to agree to his Will. Being responsive to Heaven, and
doing things at the right time, success is won.
   The Lines:

  1. Do not mingle with others, stay away from the wrong. If you are not
     involved, there is no blame, even in trouble. Consider potential pitfalls
     to avoid harm.
  2. The (merchant) wagons are full and ready to leave for their
     destination. If you have a goal, leaving now you cannot fail.
  3. A Duke can afford to pay the King’s price, but an Inferior Person
     would ruin himself if he tried.
  4. He is wealthy but modest, humble in success—no error.
  5. * In society he is sincere and confident, earning respect. Dignity is the
     greatest wealth. Good fortune! (He is poor, but rich in dignity, honest
     and bold in demeanour, and thus wins great regard).
6. Blessings. Protected by Heaven, good luck and success in all
   endeavours.
    

       Hexagram 15: Qian (pr. “chee-en”)—Humility




   The World and Earth are humble.

   Image: A mountain in the centre of a flat plain: too much of things in
one place, not enough in others.
   Ruling Line: 3.
   Description: Humility brings success. The Superior Individual acts
with humility and thus takes things from beginning to end.
   The Great Work: The Superior Individual weighs and balances things
equitably, apportioning from the large to the small.
   Commentary: Change tends to diminish the full and augment the
humble, or help to maintain it. Human nature loathes the high, but loves the
humble. No one can manage to up-end the humble.
   The Lines:

  1. The Superior Individual, with humility and discipline, will ford the
     great river—good luck.
  2. His humility is heard in others’ hearts. Right pushing brings good luck.
  3. * The Superior Individual is hardworking and humble, bears fruits in
     his efforts, and remains humble even at the end—good luck.
  4. Auspiciousness to those whose humility is nurtured and sincerely
     displayed.
  5. Be modest and charitable about your wealth. Thus looked upon
     favourably by neighbours, they unite to your cause attacking outlaws.
     Everything in the expedition goes in your favour.
6. Your fame of humility is known far and wide. The call comes to
   command the armies, marching now to pacify neighbouring countries
   for the King and the good. (Your humility works against you in that it
   makes you notable for obligatory duties)
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 16: Yu—Certainty




   Fire and The World unite in certainty.

    Image: Signal fires lit across the land.
    Ruling Line: 4.
    Description: Certainty benefits those who build empires, apportion
vassal states, and send out armies!
    The Great Work: Ancient rulers made solemn music to venerate the
Virtue of Heaven, and sacrificed to the Celestial Lord and to the honour of
ancestors.
    Commentary: Anything willed can be done. Action in accordance to
the Will brings certainty. Certainty moves in accord with Nature. Thus all
things move without error. This is a time of great significance, and timely
application (of the hexagram) is vital!
    The Lines:

  1. The men took pleasure in indulgence last night, and are too long
     getting ready at the sound of the alarm—(potential) disaster.
  2. Certain as a rock, appropriate (in moderation) with pleasures, right
     pushing will bring good luck before the day’s end.
  3. Flattering his superiors for his own gratification, this brings regret if
     not corrected quickly. More regrets (if correction is delayed).
  4. * Great results from certainty; have no doubt. He pleases others,
     befriending officials, and gains much. His friends stay close to his side.
  5. Illness foretold, but careful attention avoids danger. He will retain his
     health and not die.
6. Crazy indulgence! Confusion. Only timely change of ways can prevent
   harm.
    

       Hexagram 17: Sui (pr. “sway”)—Following




   Water and Fire unite in following.

    Image: Thunder rumbling in a lake.
    Ruling Lines: 1 and 5.
    Description: Following. Great success. Right pushing brings gain, and
no mistake or harm.
    The Great Work: Noting the times, seeing darkness fall, the Superior
Individual goes inside (his home) and rests, knowing there is no more to be
done.
    Commentary: The firm (Fire) below follows the soft (Water);
movement and joy conjoined. All the Universe is in accord with what Time
dictates for it. Move in accord with the pulse of Time! Acting at the
appropriate moment is vital.
    The Lines:

  1. * Ideas change over time. The powerful must also change. Rightly
     pushing your Will brings good luck. Leave home and mingle with
     outsiders. Results follow.
  2. Following the Inferior Person, he loses the Superior Individual.
     Following fashion, he loses what worked. You cannot follow two ways
     at once.
  3. Following the Superior Individual, he loses the Inferior Person.
     Following the old, he loses the fashionable, but gains what is sought.
     Make no move, be steadfast and determined in your Will.
  4. Following a deceiver brings disaster. But if you are true, no harm
     comes. Being open and honest, others will follow you and all benefit.
5. * Treating all good people with sincerity, certainty in following. Good
   luck!
6. Captured, he is forced to follow. He is put in irons! The King must go
   do penance and sacrifice on mountaintops.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 18: Ku (pr. “goo”)—Repair




   Earth and Air unite in repairing.

    Image: Wind blows down the foot of a mountain.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: What has decayed now begins to be repaired. Gentle
success. Cross the great river. What came before will come again; look
carefully at what took place three days before, you can then predict what
will have to be done for the next three days.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual stimulates hearts, and
nourishes the people’s Virtue.
    Commentary: When people are receptive, decay can be rectified. Only
hard work going forward can bring opportunities. Heaven’s activity is such
that all endings are followed by new beginnings.
    (The theme of this hexagram may refer to ritual exorcism to atone for
parental errors; it may also be in reference to King Wen’s son completing
his father’s wish in rebelling against the corrupt Shang monarchs)
    The Lines:

  1. Children fix the errors of their fathers. The dead are exorcised of
     blame, evil is repaired. Sons can complete their father’s work. Luck in
     spite of danger.
  2. Children fix the errors of their mother. Though difficult, push rightly
     and wait for the right opportunity.
  3. Taking responsibility for a father’s errors may bring regret, but no
     blame or harm.
4. Failing to resolve your father’s errors will eventually cause regret. (It
   will be harder to repair the longer you put it off)
5. * Taking responsibility for your father’s errors, by Virtue you will win
   honour and praise.
6. Serve your Will, more than any king or prince’s commands.
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 19: Lin—Convergence (of Will)




   The World and Water are converging.

    Image: An island on a lake.
    Ruling Lines: 1 and 2.
    Description: Convergence of Will (between superiors and their
subjects). Great success! Right pushing brings gain, but in the eighth
month, force declines and misfortune begins.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual’s teaching and affection for
his subordinates is inexhaustible. He gives his all to nurture and enlighten
his people.
    Commentary: Great success is won by individuals obeying their
superior’s Will, and directing their subordinates; thus are all things
rectified. But this will soon wane, as the initial Will has trouble being
maintained (this is due to the solid lines being used up too early in the
hexagram).
    The overall theme of the lines involves the convergence of the Will
throughout different levels; between ruler and minister, between minister
and subject.
    (There is a mystical symbolism in this, of connecting one’s
consciousness to the True Will, and in turn directing those lower forces;
invoking the Holy Guardian Angel, uniting that true Will to the Will of the
Universe, while in turn evoking lesser forces; Goetic spirits, for example).
    The Lines:

  1. * His Will converges with his superior (the True Will). Right pushing
     brings gain.
2. * All converges—he does the will of the King! Good luck; and all
   problems are thus far still only illusory.
3. He flatters his inferiors; no true benefit can be gained (from this
   attitude). He gets nowhere, talking much and doing little. But if he
   pays attention, and doesn’t settle for this, it is not too late to correct
   errors.
4. He closely supervises his inferiors, benevolent toward them but not
   flattering. Perfect convergence—no mistake.
5. Wise convergence, he invokes the nature of the King in his Virtue—
   good luck!
6. He is magnanimous, putting aside his own ambitions to serve the
   Kingdom. Honest and sincere, he supervises his inferiors with
   certainty. Good luck and no error.
                                 Notes
    

   Hexagram 20: Kwan (pr. “gwan”)—
Contemplating




   Air and The World unite in contemplating.

    Image: Wind blows over the land.
    Ruling Lines: 5 and 6.
    Description: Contemplating. The rite of communion being mastered,
you may bypass the technical details of the sacrifice, because you are filled
with the essence of Heaven’s Virtue.
    The Great Work: Rulers of old visited many regions, to observe and
learn rites, and in turn they instructed the people.
    Commentary: Contemplating means being able to observe the vast
picture from a high place. Because the Sage has become receptive to
Nature’s Virtue, he is respected by all. If one cannot embody Heaven yet, he
must follow the technical disciplines meticulously in his rites. He who
attains to the Heavenly essence may now give instructions in any land. (The
mystical symbolism of this hexagram relates to the type of awareness
gained through powerful shifts in perspective. In western terminology, this
would be the Knowledge & Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel; one
who gains this degree of Adept-hood is able to understand the essence and
not just the technique, only then does he have the freedom to modify the
rituals. In general it refers to the difference between investigation that is
mere curiosity, or technical trivia, and actual comprehension. Aleister
Crowley was on record saying that this hexagram related to the secrets of
sexual alchemy, the “rites of communion” being its technique.)
    The Lines:
1. Contemplating childishly (trivially, without deeper understanding) is to
   be expected and may even be a necessary step for the Inferior Person,
   but will be unsatisfying and disappointing to the Superior Individual.
2. Spying through keyholes is advantageous to women (though
   shameful!).
3. Contemplate Virtue, and judge yourself by that standard; then you will
   know whether to go forth, or retreat.
4. Contemplate the many different regions of the Kingdom (observing
   and learning); and then you will become the honoured guest of the
   King!
5. * He is viewed with great respect by the people, and yet he does not
   stop examining himself critically. (This is virtuous.)
6. * There is no wrong in being admired for your Virtue and conduct. Nor
   is it wrong to ceaselessly continue in your cultivation regardless.
                                  Notes
    

   Hexagram 21: Shih Ho (pr. “shrr heh”)—
Chewing




   Sun and Fire make chewing.

    Image: Sun and heat, thunder and lightning.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Chewing. Success! A good time for legal processes, and
bringing criminals to justice.
    The Great Work: Rulers made Law clear to all, and then enforced it
solemnly and vigorously.
    Commentary: Something is held between the jaws (an allusion to the
shape of the hexagram: line 4 is the “something”, held between the “jaws”
of lines 1 and 6). The weak (line 5) is contained by the strong (lines 4 and
6). Thus this is a good time for the application of Law (material, or
spiritual). The theme is of chewing (i.e., working through something, the
process of dissolving something difficult).
    (The mystical interpretation here is of using the Law of Heaven to
establish discipline and to “punish”, adjust or reform the “criminal”
elements of the Inferior Person.)
    The Lines:

  1. The criminal’s feet are shackled, he cannot walk. No error in this! The
     just application of discipline avoids recidivism.
  2. Chewing into the soft outer layer, things go smoothly without
     difficulty. The criminal’s nose is cut off—no error! (because he then
     submits to proper conduct).
3. Chewing dry meat, he is poisoned, failing (through this indigestion) to
   carry out his disciplines. Disappointment, but no long term harm. (He
   has used out-dated methods).
4. Chewing tough gristly meat, discipline is not carried out well. But he
   is firm and determined like a golden arrow (i.e., his inner Will is
   strong). There is much opposition, your discipline is not well-looked
   upon by others; but stay strong in difficulty—luck.
5. * Chewing dry meat, discipline is not carried out well; but he is steady
   in temperament, solid and golden (i.e., his inner Will is now firmly
   established). Be determined to guard against danger. There is trouble,
   but no error.
6. The stupid criminal is put in stocks, and his ears are cut off—woe! He
   is too stubborn to mend his ways. Distrust your predilections.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 22: Pi (pr. “bee”)—Adornment




   Earth and Sun unite in Adornment.

    Image: Sunlight bathes the foot of a mountain. That is, it is beautiful
but will not be seen for very long.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 6.
    Description: Adornment. Success. It is right for those in a position of
weakness (or smallness) to have goals.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual is open and elegant, but not
frivolous or too lenient in his judgements.
    Commentary: Reaching only a certain level of growth, and then
stopping, is the pattern of the common man. Refinement and ritual are the
great advancements of human civilization. By contemplating the nature of
Reality, studying human capacity, and seeing the pattern of Time unfolding,
we can change ourselves, our environment, and The World.
    The Lines:

  1. Having properly adorned his feet, he can leave his carriage and walk
     for himself on solid ground. He does not have to rely on others to
     move.
  2. * Adorn the beard (i.e., support the Will) of your Superior (as line 2
     supports line 3).
  3. His adornments shine—following the right Will to the very end brings
     luck, and mutual benefit for his supporters.
  4. Adorned in white, on a white horse; the suitor is looked upon with
     suspicion (some think him a bandit). But if he goes forward, in spite of
  the doubts of others and even of his own, he will be satisfied in the
  end.
5. He (the Master) humbly tends to and adorns his modest garden. All he
   can offer his virtuous subordinate is a poor and simple belt (i.e., a
   discipline) as a gift. Those below him may decide not to respond to his
   offer of work; disappointing! But if those above him take notice, there
   will be luck, and happiness in the end!
6. * In an exalted position, he can adorn himself plainly (with nothing to
   prove). No error.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 23: Po (pr. “poh”)—Shedding




   Earth and The World are shedding.

    Image: A landslide from a mountain-top, down to a valley.
    Ruling Line: 6.
    Description: Shedding. No goal or destination can be worthy now.
    The Great Work: The Great, in high positions, must reorganize their
lifestyles to avoid collapse. They can show generosity to those under them
who are virtuous (while shedding themselves of those who are not).
    Commentary: The Inferior Person becomes powerful and affects the
strong. Stay where you are and accept the situation (but seek reform). The
Superior Individual contemplates the ebb and flow of all things. The
shedding of hindrances is advised, progressively (through the lines), getting
rid of things and people we relied upon (because they cannot be trusted).
This will lead to growth in the long run, through the gradual shedding off of
obstacles.
    The Lines:

  1. The foot of the bed is damaged (corruption at the very bottom). He
     sheds subordinates finding no firm foundations (of trust). Only right
     determination avoids disaster.
  2. The head of the bed is also damaged. No loyalty is found (among
     friends or those intimate with you). Only right determination in
     shedding avoids disaster!
  3. Shed off all that is above and all below alike—error is thus avoided.
  4. The very mattress of his bed must be shed—disaster! (Everything must
     be thrown out.)
5. The palace maids are all in order and wait to be given favours from the
   King. No blame, in spite of troubles.
6. * Only the richest fruit remains available to be plucked. If the Superior
   Individual gains it, he can ride forth in his carriage, and give protection
   and happiness to the people. If the Inferior Person gets it first, his
   uselessness will ruin the households of thousands!
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 24: Fu (pr. “foo”)—Return




   The World and Fire unite in returning.

    Image: Fire, deep below The World.
    Ruling Line: 1.
    Description: Return! Success. When strength (the strong first line)
returns, whether from without or from within, there is no error. All things
follow their cycle in nature, and in seven days the strong will return. It will
(then) be safe to come or go, and good to have a goal. Adventurous friends
gather together!
    The Great Work: Wise Kings of old forbade activity or travel on Holy
Days. They regimented themselves likewise (by the same rule).
    Commentary: The strong (solid line at the bottom) has returned. The
strong (Yang) is only starting to return and grow in power, from the base of
the hexagram. Strength returns so only now can we come to understand
how things we thought bad or unlucky served their purpose (in ultimately
bringing about renewal). The theme is of returning to a strong and healthy
way, after reactions to chaos lead one astray.
    The Lines:

  1. * Returning from close-by, before having gone too far. Trouble is thus
     avoided. Some regret, but swift correction to the right ways brings
     good luck.
  2. Return blessed by heaven—good luck comes from treating others (who
     are below you) kindly.
  3. Reluctantly forced to return. There’s trouble, but if you return in the
     right way then harm is avoided.
4. Halfway along, he is forced to return alone (to avoid being led astray
   by others).
5. Returning for a good cause, honest and sincere, brings no regrets.
   Examine yourself.
6. Confused, lost, he doesn’t know how to return. Bad luck. Disaster and
   harm. In command of troops, his army is crushingly defeated. In public
   office, the minister misrules and brings on ten years of chaos!
                                Notes
    

    Hexagram 25: Wu Wang (pr. “woo wang”)—
Integrity and Fortune




   Heaven and Fire make integrity.

     Image: A chance firestorm rolls across The World. This gives energy
for new growth, to those who respect and stand in awe of creation.
     Ruling Lines: 1 and 5.
     Description: Integrity. Great success. Right pushing brings reward;
failing to follow the Will leads to disaster. Avoid having a firm goal or
destination.
     The Great Work: Rulers studied the course of changes in nature, and
used their Virtue to help things and people grow.
     Commentary: Fire is movement, Heaven is strength. A strong line (at
the bottom) enters from without, and becomes chief within. Firmness finds
resonance with the weak second line. Be mindful of the power of Heaven,
you cannot control it. If you try to force your own way (instead of following
the Will), then you will face disaster! There’s no going anywhere without
the invocation of the Will of Heaven above you. Do what is right (your true
Will) to gain success.
     One important element of the line readings of this hexagram is that
integrity is a value in and of itself, life does not inherently reward those
with integrity; disasters can still happen to those with integrity. However,
integrity rewards itself, and changes how we deal with disaster.
     The Lines:

  1. * He moves forward with integrity, advancing brings good luck!
2. He doesn’t plant or plow the fields, how can he expect a profitable
   harvest? It is good to have a goal.
3. Unexpected calamity! (it can befall even those with integrity) The
   wanderer finds an ox, the farmer lost an ox. Be careful about who you
   blame for problems.
4. Right pushing is essential now, to avoid harm in the long-term.
5. * Unexpected illness, it can strike those with integrity as well! But it is
   best not to panic (foolishly thinking that illness is somehow not part of
   nature too) and try to treat it carelessly with untested medicine. (Don’t
   look for “miracle cures”).
6. Even with integrity, if he acts at the wrong time he invites disaster. It is
   better not to go anywhere.
                                   Notes
    

   Hexagram 26: Ta Chu (pr. “dah choo”)—The
Great Nourisher




   Earth and Heaven unite in great nourishment.

    Image: A mountaintop rises above the clouds.
    Ruling lines: 5 and 6.
    Description: The Great Nourisher smiles on right pushing. Do not stay
home, go, gather with others and eat at the court of the King. Cross the
great river.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual studies the words and acts
of the ancient Sages to gain their power of Virtue.
    Commentary: Firmness, strength, and daily growth of Virtue is called
for. The firm (sixth line) ascends and pays respect to the worthy. Discipline
in the use of the Will is the excellent way! Follow the Will of Heaven.
    The Lines:

  1. Danger, threat! Cease all advance. Do not even try to oppose troubles
     at this time (or you’ll only invite more trouble).
  2. The cart’s axle breaks, and you must halt. No blame.
  3. A fast horse! Enduring through hardships, master your horse and
     defend yourself from opposition. But do not stop advancing!
  4. Yoke the young ox, teach it discipline. Happiness and luck follow.
  5. * Geld the boar and blunt its tusks. Preventing trouble is cause for
     celebration, and brings good luck.
  6. * Following Heaven’s ways, Virtue makes the road wide and smooth.
     (Discovering your Will creates a vast perspective that allows
unfettered movement.)
    

       Hexagram 27: Yee—Eating




   Earth and Fire unite in eating.

    Image: Fiery change at the foot of a mountain.
    Ruling Lines: 5 and 6.
    Description: Eating. Right pushing for good luck. Watch how people
(try to) feed themselves, and how they think to feed others. From this
understand how to best feed yourself.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual is thoughtful in speech, and
frugal in eating and drinking.
    Commentary: Nourish yourself on what is fitting. Heaven and The
World give nourishment to all. Find food for yourself by the right ways
(that is, find the right nourishment). The Sage nourishes both the virtuous
and the unworthy alike, even if they do not understand or appreciate him.
The theme of “eating” is about a disciple seeking Truth.
    The Lines:

  1. He wants to fancy himself like a magical being who can live without
     eating. He abandons his search (for food), but still drools when seeing
     others eating. Woe! (his notions are worthless).
  2. He leaves the fertile valley (line 1) and seeks to abandon society for
     the broken hilltops, looking to be fed by hermits. Persisting in this
     course is disaster.
  3. He tries to be fed by some outlandish method (that is, some odd
     teaching). Trying this for ten years, he proves to be useless the entire
     time. His methods are pointless and perverse.
4. Eating on the mountaintop; enlightened and sharing with others. Good
   luck. His glare is like a tiger’s! (Through Will he has found something
   of substance.)
5. * Normal ways have been abandoned. Right enduring will bring luck
   to those who stay still. Don’t cross the river.
6. * Eating brings trouble, many depend on him. Guard against dangers,
   good luck! Cross the Great River, and you will be blessed.
                                Notes
    

   Hexagram 28: Ta Kuo (pr. “da gwo”)—Excess
(weight)




   Water and Air unite in excess.

    Image: A forest (Air) has been drowned by a flood (Water).
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 4.
    Description: The beam sags, it cannot hold. It is good to have a goal or
path. Success!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual, although alone, is free from
fear. He has no trouble withdrawing from the world.
    Commentary: Too much weight (the solid Yang lines) in the middle,
while the outer (first and sixth lines) are weak. The second line is
unsuitably placed. Moving quickly (and thus avoiding the weak spot when
you are strong) can free you from trouble, but timely application is vital.
The theme is of a beam or tree trying to hold up great weight (the
environment is unable to handle the growth of strength).
    The Lines:

  1. With gentle care, he uses reeds to make humble mats to present to the
     elder. No error—do things as well as you can with what you have.
  2. * The old tree grows new branches. The old man can marry the young
     girl. All can be favourable.
  3. The beam sags, not being well supported. Disaster!
  4. * The beam gets propped up, blame is avoided. If it starts sagging
     (from having more weight put on it) there will be bad luck.
5. The old tree blossoms. The old woman marries a boy; not good, not
   bad, just embarrassing.
6. Crossing the river, he drowns in the deep water. His death came at the
   time appointed by nature, and led to greater good. Thus there is bad
   luck, but no blame.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 29: Kan (pr. “cun”)—The Pit/ Abyss




   Moon and Moon are a pit.

    Image: Abyss within Abyss! A deep pit filled with water.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: The pit—danger upon danger! Discipline your
consciousness; honesty and openness will allow one to be magnanimous (in
trouble). Struggling to endure unto the end will win respect.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual holds to unwavering Virtue,
and spends much time trying to teach others the same.
    Commentary: Great danger, but going with the flow he may traverse
the Abyss without loss of certainty. Holding firm in his Will (with the
strong lines in 2 and 5) lets him see it through. Nothing escapes dangers
from Heaven, but worldly dangers are no more than mountains, hills, and
great rivers. Princes set up border walls at dangerous places to defend the
nation; Kings engaged in dangerous intrigues to protect the realm. What
wonders can be done in times of danger! Timely application of the
hexagram is essential. (Being double Moon, this hexagram refers to the
profound unconscious; it can thus be related to the idea of the Abyss in
western magick, and the power of dispersion of the forces that rule the
Abyss. The theme of the lines involve awareness serving as a means to
avoid falling into a pit.)
    The Lines:

  1. Pit upon pit! He fails to be cautious, falls in, and is lost—disaster!
  2. * Danger in the pit. You can gain ground by solving smaller problems,
     but you are still trapped in a pit.
3. Grave danger near the pit of pits. Going forward is risky, but going
   back will leave you unable to live with yourself. If you fall into an
   Abyss, you will be completely unable to help your self.
4. A bucket of wine and rice is lowered through the cell window into the
   prison-pit. Staying true to the imprisoned elder, friendship brings no
   blame at the very end.
5. * The pit has not yet filled with water, and a rescue is planned. Danger
   still persists, but no harm done yet (and hope is not lost).
6. Bound with black rope and imprisoned in a pit surrounded by thorns.
   For three years you will fail to gain anything, making grandiose plans
   without first obtaining your freedom.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 30: Li (pr. “lee”)—Flaming Majesty




   Sun and Sun make flaming majesty.

    Image: The rising Sun emanates a double beam of burning light.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: Flaming majesty. Right pushing gains. Success! Caring
for gentle livestock—good luck!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual perpetuates the light of
Truth, to benefit and illuminate every quarter under Heaven.
    Commentary: The Sun and Moon depend upon the power of Heaven.
Plants depend upon The World. If we are clear on what is Natural, we can
transform the world. The weak (the broken lines at 2 and 5) are properly
cared for by the strong (the solid lines around them).
    (The theme of the lines is of manifesting the Solar force).
    The Lines:

  1. Approach things seriously, respectfully, pay reverence, and keep
     silence. No Error.
  2. * Golden sunlight—gentle good luck. Follow the middle way.
  3. Sunset. If the young man stays quiet now (and does not make joyous
     noise), then the old man will sigh later. Bad luck, majesty fades. (Bad
     luck if you fail to seize the moment).
  4. Sunrise brings beams of flaming light! Then it fades away fast. (It
     comes quickly and is lost quickly, a beautiful illusion).
  5. * Tears and heavy sighs, but his distress is noticed and the Ruler aids
     him—good luck! (He is noted in his distress because he is a central
  position, in line 5).
6. The King is blessed. He goes forth to war and crushes the rebel
   leaders, taking many prisoners with little bloodshed.
                             Notes
    

   Hexagram 31: Hsien (pr. “shee-en”)—Feelings
(Sensation)




   Water and Earth are feelings.

    Image: A mountain-top lake.
    Ruling Lines: 4 and 5.
    Description: Connection. Success! Right pushing rewards. It is good
luck to go courting, and take a wife.
    The Great Work: In dealing with others, the Superior Individual shows
themselves empty of self-referencing (i.e., dividing “self” from “other”).
    Commentary: The Union of Opposites governs this hexagram. When
the weak (broken lines) rises and the strong (solid lines) descends they
achieve communion (Knowledge and Conversation). First the ritual of
Courting must be properly performed. Men reveal their character by what
attracts or repels them. If we observe all manner of sensation, we can
commune with Heaven, The World, and all things of Creation (that is, all
the elements). The theme of the lines is of sensation in the different parts of
the body; although this can also be interpreted as the touches of lovemaking
between two partners; the mystical understanding is of gradually
approaching a state of divine Communion through meditative trance.
    The Lines:

  1. Feelings in the toes—worrying about peripheral matters.
  2. Feeling in the legs—resist the urge to move—bad luck! Stay still for
     good luck.
  3. Feeling in the loins. He follows the feeling to connect with others
     foolishly, being manipulated. Shame and regret.
4. * Right pushing brings good luck—but only close friends follow you,
   because you dither.
5. * Feeling in the spine—no chance to act yet (you lack the vision), but
   no blame.
6. Feeling in the jaws, don’t talk so much!
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 32: Heng (pr. “hng”)—Persistence




   Fire and Air make persistence.

    Image: Wind blows and thunder roars.
    Ruling line: 2.
    Description: Persistence, success, free from mistakes. Right pushing
brings rewards. Have a goal!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual stands so firmly that they
cannot be uprooted.
    Commentary: The balance (of three weak and three strong lines) in this
position indicates persistence. It is that which endures unto the end. Heaven
and The World move (change) constantly and do not stop; this (and not
staying still) is persistence. The inner nature of all under Heaven and The
World can be judged by what makes them continue. It is specifically good
to have a new goal.
    The Lines:

  1. Lust of result is bad luck. Seek to be persistent in going deeper (than
     mere desire) or you will get stuck!
  2. * Regret vanishes. You stay true, moving along the middle path.
  3. Failing to keep Virtue, disgrace! If you do not restore your persistence
     you will be rejected everywhere (as one who has broken a vow). No
     one could stand such inconsistency.
  4. No beasts are found in the fields, you are hunting in the wrong place
     (the strong line is in the wrong position; thus persistence is
     misdirected).
5. Making a great virtue of marital loyalty: good luck for women, bad
   luck for men.
6. He retires early, longing for a change in life, but then finds nothing to
   do. Disaster!
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 33: Tun (pr. “dun”)—Retreat




   Heaven and Earth unite in retreating.

    Image: A mountain hidden under the clouds.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 1 and 2.
    Description: Retreat. Success! Even being weak, you can persevere in
small things, for gain.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual withdraws to a solitary place
when things are unfavourable. By keeping distance from lesser people, thus
avoiding the need to express wrath, dignity is preserved.
    Commentary: Retreat at the right time can lead to success. The weak
(broken lines) is rising, but there is still enough strength to achieve
something. You can “gain” in the sense of plants growing well if they are
properly tended to. The theme of the lines is retreat from battle. Timely
action is essential in this hexagram, as the time of retreat is a critical
moment.
    The Lines:

  1. ^ He delays his retreat and is routed. Cornered—disaster! It is useless
     to seek any goal.
  2. ^ Bound in tough ox-hide straps, nothing can untie it! Powerful Will.
  3. He is reluctant to give up, for the sake of his subordinates; woe!
     Danger, exhaustion and illness (are the result). But there is luck for
     those who care for their servants and concubines.
  4. Even though he cares for his subordinates, he must retreat! Good luck
     for the Superior Individual, bad luck for the Inferior Person (as the
  Superior Individual was maintaining them).
5. * Orderly retreat. Right pushing, gently, brings good luck. Organize
   your aims.
6. He retreats with ample time, getting away completely and with ease.
   Excellent! (you chose the right time).
                               Notes
    

   Hexagram 34: Ta Kwang (pr. “dah jwung”)—
Great Power




   Fire and Heaven make great power.

    Image: Thunder roars over heaven.
    Ruling Line: 4.
    Description: Great power. Pushing the right brings gain, in spite of any
challenges.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual never fails in his rites, nor
takes even a single step away from duty.
    Commentary: The Superior Individual has great power because of his
active nature (the strong lines). Firmness and vigorous movement creates
Power. “Great” and “Right” are synonymous here, because only by
understanding Truth and being upright can one attain Power.
    The Lines:

  1. Power in the toes (that is, very peripheral and minor power). If he
     advances it will be disaster, in spite of all his confidence. It is better to
     stay calm, humble, and keep silent.
  2. Right pushing brings good luck! A strong position.
  3. Base men use their power (to abuse others), if Superior Individuals
     don’t use theirs (to protect). Be careful, danger! Use force now, and
     you may get tricked or stuck, like a ram charging a hedge and getting
     its horns entangled.
  4. * Right pushing rewards, regret vanishes. Entanglement (as in line 3)
     disappears, and the axle of the cart is firm for going great distances!
5. Making a blood sacrifice for petty reasons—no blame, but ill-advised.
6. Entangled in the hedge, he can go nowhere. But this will ultimately
   lead to good luck.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 35: Chin (pr. “jin”)—Advance




   The Sun and The World unite in advancing.

    Image: The Sun rises in the east.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Advance. The young Prince receives gifts of royal horses
and a carriage. He is also given three audiences with the King; well
deserved!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual reflects Heaven’s Virtue in
their very presence.
    Commentary: The World is radiant with the Sun’s splendour. People in
lower positions can advance by attaching themselves loyally to the great
and good in higher positions.
    The Lines:

  1. Advancement seems challenged, with setbacks and demotions. But
     right pushing brings luck. If you are mistrusted, be patient and
     generous.
  2. Nervous at the time of advancement, sad and worried. Right pushing
     brings luck. He is given a blessing by the Queen Mother.
  3. Trust is won. All in agreement—no regret!
  4. Advancing, climbing too fast and quick, he lacks the right skills. Ill-
     prepared, pushing would have serious risks!
  5. * Regret leaves. Be free of lust for gaining, or fear of losing. Seek a
     goal, all is well.
6. Advancing to the extreme, trying to dominate entire cities. Although
   there is danger, luck avoids harm. But such behaviour may bring
   shame, from infamy!
    

   Hexagram 36: Ming Yi (pr. “ming yee”)—Dark
Injury




   The World and Sun unite in dark injury.

    Image: The Sun sets in the west and goes under The World at midnight.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Governing Line: 6.
    Description: Darkening; right pushing in spite of hardship brings
reward.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual takes care to conceal his
light, trying to guide others in secret; yet he still shines!
    Commentary: The individual must clothe his inner being with
refinement and intellect, while externally appearing humble and obedient.
King Wen overcame many great dangers in this way. Win advantage in
difficulty by concealing brilliance of mind and character. Despite troubles
locked in the heart, unfaltering, fix your Will on righteousness!
    The Lines:

  1. Darkness while escaping. He panics and flees, going without food for
     three days. Wherever he goes, his superior hosts will comment,
     doubting and judging him (for his poor behaviour).
  2. * Darkness, an injury in the thigh; but he finds a strong horse and
     manages to move forward (an ease to troubles). Good luck!
  3. Fighting battles in the dark, hunting down the barbarian chief; he is
     injured but kills his enemy. Gain, but crazy risks should usually be
     avoided!
4. Doing his duty, he is injured on the left side (betrayed); only then does
   he see the other’s dark heart! He leaves the court and goes off to the
   wilds (having become disillusioned).
5. * The Prince was injured, but his perseverance led to reward.
6. ^ Endless dark! He turns from shining brilliance to causing darkness.
   From rising so high, he falls to the farthest depths.
                                 Notes
    

  Hexagram 37: Chia Ren (pr. “jee-ah rn”)—
Household




   Air and Sun make a household.

    Image: Air rises from the heat of the Sun.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: The family and home. For women, persistence brings
gain.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual speaks with sincere
substance, and behaves with constancy on a daily basis.
    Commentary: Woman’s place is within, man’s place is without.
Women and men in their proper places accords with Heaven and The
World. When parents and children act suitably to their positions, the way of
the household runs straight.
    (Superficially, this seems to refer to traditional family roles; but
mystically it should be understood as an alchemical commentary on the
nature of “masculine” and “feminine”, “developed” and “developing”
qualities in situations and people. Everyone’s nature contains both Yin and
Yang, the Yin is expressed within, the Yang on the exterior. The accord is
the balance of elements, with parallels found in western teachings of the
tetragrammaton. The condition of aspiration is masculine, of
surrender/attainment feminine.)
    The Lines:

  1. The household is well-defended against evil. No regrets. Unfailing
     determination. Take care no one in the family loses his Will.
2. * Nothing works on the outside, but in the home the woman provides
   for her family. Right pushing brings gain.
3. Family fights; complaints about discipline. Regret and danger, but this
   may lead to luck. However, women or youths chattering and fooling
   around (without working) would only bring shame and disappointment
   in the end.
4. Her industriousness makes the family rich—great luck!
5. * The King’s household is his nation. His Virtue is a good influence
   and ensures the royal family’s safety. No cause for worry—good luck!
6. He is sincere and certain, managing the household with discipline;
   others are inspired and this brings good luck in the end.
                                   Notes
    

       Hexagram 38: Kuei (pr. “kway”)—Separated




   The Sun and Water unite in separating.

    Image: The Sun rises and Water falls.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: The separated. You can handle small affairs attentively,
and win good luck in those things, at least.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual maintains their difference,
while seeking broader unity.
    Commentary: Sun moves up, Water moves down. Two women live in
the same house and squabble constantly; one is extroverted and pleasure-
seeking, the other responsible and introverted. But when they accord, what
radiance! The weak (broken line) advances ascending (to line 5); it
responds (to the solid lines), thus good luck in small affairs. Though
Heaven and The World are separated they are one in activity. Man and
Woman are opposites but desire union. Everything has its own separateness
(individuality) and has its own purpose to accomplish, but all share the
same overarching reality. Timing in applying this hexagram is essential!
    The Lines:

  1. Regret goes. The lost horse will return on its own, even in evil places.
     Don’t go looking for it. Receive your (evil) opponents, there is no
     harm.
  2. * In the narrow alley, he bumps into his Lord, no blame (for he was on
     his proper path; and the alley is not a proper place for superiors to find
     themselves).
3. They destroy his carriage, steal his ox, shave off his hair, and cut off
   his nose! A bad start; yet later they will become his allies! (Troubles
   will end, in time.)
4. Separated, he is alone, but then finds a firm friend. Lonely for a long
   time, she finds a fine caring husband. Trouble but no harm, nor error.
5. * Regret passes! The Barbarian chief eats well at the feast, and seeks
   peace. The plan is blessed—proceed!
6. On the path, in the rain, he thinks he sees ugly boars and frightening
   demons. But he should put aside his bow and not delay! If he goes
   forth he reunites with his wife and has good luck! (Do not waste time
   fighting illusions, these are the cause of your separation.)
                                    Notes
    

       Hexagram 39: Chien (pr. “jee-en”)—Trouble




   The Moon and the Earth are trouble.

    Image: The Moon rising over a mountain with treacherous terrain.
    Ruling Line: 5
    Description: Trouble! The South and West (the plains) are good
directions; East and North (the mountains) are bad. See the Great Man.
Right pushing brings good luck.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual relies on their own
cultivation of Virtue, by bringing about revolution within themselves.
    Commentary: Trouble, danger ahead. Movement is difficult. To see
danger ahead, and avert it, is the nature of wisdom. “South and West” lead
to a middle path. “East and North” end in stuckness. The strong (line 5)
signifies that persistence brings luck in overcoming troubles and setting the
Kingdom aright. There is great opportunity here but right timing is
essential!
    The Lines:

  1. Leaving brings trouble; returning earns praise. Wait.
  2. The Minister (King’s man) meets trouble after trouble in his service,
     no blame (because he is trying to serve the King).
  3. Going forward would bring trouble, turn back! It is good luck for
     women when he returns (appreciate inner happiness during troubled
     times).
  4. Going forward would bring trouble, turning back would also bring
     trouble. Seek to make connections. No blame.
5. * Severe trouble! But then, all his friends arrive to help.
6. Going forward brings trouble, but he overcomes this and returns to
   great honours (with help from his allies). Seek a great man.
    

       Hexagram 40: Hsieh (pr. “shee-ay”)—Shooting




   Fire and the Moon unite in shooting.

    Image: A dark thunderstorm; later the trees sprout in the aftermath.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: Shooting. Going South and West to relieve besieged
peoples is good. If there is no point in either staying put or charging forth,
then turn back! If there is a point, even if it is dangerous, go forth with the
utmost haste!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual forgives wrongs and
pardons criminals, once the shooting is over.
    Commentary: Forceful action in the face of danger. Going South and
West to relieve people in danger wins many hearts. Return brings luck, and
allows the middle path to flourish. Thunder and rain bring forth sprouting
plants, renewal. Timely application of this hexagram is essential!
    The Lines:

  1. The danger has already been relieved. No harm.
  2. * A golden arrow (of upright Virtue) kills three foxes with one shot.
     Right pushing brings gain.
  3. Driving a carriage filled with riches, robbers attack him! Pushing (in
     such an ostentatious way) would be bad luck, and shame! Blame.
  4. A bad shot. Dismiss Inferior Persons and trust in sincere friends who
     arrive.
  5. * The Superior Individual shoots true, defeating danger! He may
     inspire lesser men, though they may flee (in fear, awe or shame)
  instead.
6. The Prince’s shot from the city walls kills a hawk. All is well, you
   eliminate rebels and end the danger.
                               Notes
    

       Hexagram 41: Sun—Losing




   Earth and Water are losing.

    Image: A marshy lake (swamp) at the base of a mountain.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 3 and 6.
    Description: Loss, but certainty. Sincerity brings luck, no harm or error.
Have a goal. Two plain bowls of food will suffice for a sacrificial rite (i.e.,
use any small thing). Be moderate.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual keeps his anger in check,
and moderates his desires.
    Commentary: Loss below, gain above. The way leads upward. “Two
small bowls” means use anything that is on hand to start the process of
change. The timing matters more (than the technical preparations). There
are times when it is good to lose: sometimes the strong (solid lines) must
decrease to augment the weak (broken lines), sometimes the weak must
decrease to augment the strong. Loss, gain, filling, emptying—each happen
in their proper timing.
    The Lines:

  1. It is not wrong to rush away after work (to help a superior); no harm, if
     you do not ask too much of yourself.
  2. Pushing rightly brings gain, but charging forth rashly brings disaster.
     Do not give yourself needless losses.
  3. ^ Three women together, in search of a man! If one goes off on her
     own, she will have better luck. Lose bad company.
4. Losing ill-will, she quickly speeds luck along and obtains a fiancée.
   Happiness, and no error.
5. * A superior enriches you and insists upon it until you cannot refuse.
   Great luck!
6. ^ Gain, without making others lose. No error. Push rightly for good
   luck. Have a goal. Gain supporters and not only from one family.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 42: Yi—Gaining




   Air and Fire make gaining.

    Image: Wind and thunder!
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Governing Lines: 1 and 4.
    Description: Gain. Have a goal. Cross the Great River.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual emulates the good, and
corrects the bad.
    Commentary: Loss above, gain below. If those above are generous,
and not arrogant to those below them, their Virtue is illuminated. The route
is central and straight, and leads to blessings. When you find a wooden boat
(knowledge, the Air element) you may cross the river. Gain is active and
smooth, but each gainful activity must happen at its appointed time!
    The Lines:

  1. ^ Do great works now—gentle good luck, no mistake.
  2. * A foreigner enriches you, insisting upon it. Right pushing brings
     gain. Earlier good works continue and bring reward. The King should
     offer sacrifice to Heaven, for a blessing.
  3. Tragedy is an unfortunate reason for gain, but no blame. Be sincere.
     When visiting the Prince, bring your seal of office with you!
  4. ^ He swears loyalty to the Prince, prudently offering tribute. The
     Prince will heed his counsel and give him great tasks.
  5. * Sincere in his Will, he gives much benefit to all people, who express
     regard and gratitude for his generosity.
6. He didn’t help anyone, so they struck out at him for his hypocrisy and
   avariciousness. Seeking gain for its own sake—bad luck!
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 43: Kuai (pr. “gwy”)—Resolve




   Water and Heaven unite in resolve.

     Image: A lake evaporating into the sky.
     Ruling Line: 5.
     Governing Line: 6.
     Description: Resolve. A declaration at the King’s court; he is
determined to expose the crimes of the Inferior Person. Too much honesty
can be dangerous! He needs help against danger from other sincere people.
It is unseemly to make a declaration in one’s own city while bearing arms.
Have a goal.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual can condemn those below,
because he is Virtuous, and generous to people. If he does not do so, he
invokes condemnation himself.
     Commentary: The strong (solid lines) determine the affairs of the
weak. He wins admiration in his determination to punish wrongdoing. But it
is dangerous (the broken line is above the solid lines). However, the solid
lines are gaining in strength (if they join together in a common cause). If he
resorts to force (bearing arms) he will lose Virtue (becoming like those he
condemns). At the King’s court, speaking frankly is a glorious danger! (The
theme of this hexagram can be understood externally, or internally as a
struggle against one’s own Inferior Person).
     The Lines:

  1. Strong only in the outer. Going forward rashly now will fail and bring
     harm and shame (those in opposition have too much power and
     influence). Be sure (before acting)!
2. Being armed, and on alert with staunch allies, he will not have to fear a
   night attack. Prudent!
3. His face shows his anger—bad luck! The Superior Individual must be
   firm and go forward with resolve. Even caught in the midst of the
   storm, muddied and frustrated, in the end he can punish the Inferior
   Person; and avoid harm and blame to himself, if he’s prudent.
4. Being lashed until he limps! A superior offers help, but he feels
   humiliated and refuses, distrusting motives and ignoring wise advice.
   Stupid!
5. * Weak but determined, he defeats the Inferior Person; in spite of
   being doubted by all.
6. ^ Bad luck! In spite of his cries, he cannot escape disaster (because of
   his own inferior behaviour).
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 44: Kou (pr. “go”)—Encounters




   Heaven and Air make encounters.

    Image: Wind blows down from Heaven.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Governing Line: 1.
    Description: Encounters. Women hold power. Do not marry.
    The Great Work: The King issues orders that ministers should meet
with their subordinates.
    Commentary: The weak (broken line) embraces the strong (solid
lines). If the feminine (broken line) holds too much power, a marriage right
now would not last long. When strength is directed and used wisely (rather
than brutishly) all goes well. When a strong teacher meets a receptive
student, only then can Enlightenment and Virtue be transmitted. Thus, the
right timing in applying this hexagram is vital!
    (The symbolism of this hexagram can relate to the relationship between
men and women, but also between superiors and subordinates, or teachers
and students. The mystical symbolism relates to creating
connections/harmony between one’s own levels of consciousness.)
    The Lines:

  1. ^ The carriage has a strong brake. Pushing rightly brings luck, but
     driving recklessly (in a rush) brings disaster.
  2. * Stealing a fish from the kitchen; even to share it with guests, it is
     shameful. Failing in one’s duty.
  3. He’s been lashed, and limps. But he still walks proudly, avoiding being
     shamed by others. Trouble, but no great harm.
4. A fish stolen from the kitchen—bad luck! Accusations and conflict.
   The people are no help as they distrust you and won’t speak up on your
   behalf. Disaster!
5. * Beauty hidden away (within). Heaven blesses you, and an ideal
   encounter will take place unexpectedly.
6. Alone, butting his head against a wall. Regret, exhaustion.
   Disappointment at finding no one, but no mistake (there was no one
   worthy of encountering).
                               Notes
    

       Hexagram 45: Tsui (pr. “tsway”)—Gatherings




   Water and The World are gathering.

    Image: A lake is fed by rivers from different directions in The World.
    Ruling Lines: 4 and 5.
    Description: Gathering—success! The King is in the temple, using his
Virtue to summon the spirits for the ritual. See the great man. Right pushing
brings reward. Make great sacrifices. Have a goal.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual is armed, to prepare against
the unforeseen.
    Commentary: The solid (strong line) individual in a strong position
(line 5) can direct things properly, and guide subordinates. Thus, many will
flock to him. The King is in the temple for the good of all. Observe what
each thing in creation gathers to itself. The theme of the lines is of a
religious (festival) gathering. (The mystical interpretation of the hexagram
can be related to the performance of a ritual operation).
    The Lines:

  1. Sincerity falters: confusion, wrong gathering (with inappropriate
     people), and dispersion results. Crying, but a friendly hand brings
     laughter. Advance!
  2. Gathering brings luck, and no mistake. With certainty, you can gain by
     making a sacrifice, however humble.
  3. No one to gather with, sighs and despair! No good goal. Advancing
     would be no mistake, but would bring some regret and disappointment.
  4. * Great good luck, and no harm or mistake.
5. * He is respected at the gathering. No mistake (due to his exalted
   station); but he fails to win their trust. The King will have to work hard
   to show his Virtue.
6. Sighs and distress, weeping. No harm or mistake, but the gathering
   fails.
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 46: Sheng (pr “shng”)—Rising




   The World and Air unite in rising.

    Image: Trees growing from out of the dirt.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Line: 1.
    Description: Rising—great success! It is essential to see a great man,
removing all doubts and worry. Going South brings good luck.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual starts with the small, and
builds up much merit doing virtuous things; for the sake of the Great Work.
    Commentary: At the right time, the weak (broken line at the bottom)
ascends. Our position is far from ideal, but a keen sense of timing can raise
us up. Unexpected luck results from seeing the great man. “Going South”
implies ascending by fulfilment of what is natural. The theme of the lines is
of a step-by-step rise in rank (and spiritual duties).
    The Lines:

  1. ^ Sure to be promoted—great good luck!
  2. As long as you are sincere, it is right to offer even very poor and
     simple sacrifices at the ceremony of the Summer Solstice (in the
     South). No harm, happiness results.
  3. Promoted to a position in a large city, it is achieved effortlessly.
  4. The King sacrifices to the spirits on the holy mountain; you follow and
     serve his majesty. Good luck, no error. Perform your duty.
  5. * Rising up step by step, right pushing brings good luck.
6. Rising in the dark, self-indulgent, he spends great wealth (in bribery)
   to ascend. Rising by such false methods cannot prevail, he is sure to
   lose his undeserved power. Seek to discipline yourself with constancy.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 47: Kun (pr. “kwn”)Hardship




   Water and Moon are hardship.

    Image: A dried-up lake-bed.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: Hardship. If you try to push rightly to escape a trapped
situation, there will be success. Good luck (only) for the Superior
Individual, free from mistakes. Words can be spoken, but they generate no
truth.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual, even when trapped, risks
their very life to do their Will.
    Commentary: Hardship due to being trapped. The real cause may lie
hidden. There is no room to move freely. Be joyful even facing danger. The
solid line in the middle of both trigrams means that only the Superior
Individual can yet persevere (in this situation). As words generate no trust,
trying to rely on words to solve things now is useless.
    The Lines:

  1. Tangled in branches, wandering into a dark vale, lost for three years!
     Disaster.
  2. * Trapped without food or wine (imprisoned, due to prior
     drunkenness). It is time to make a great sacrifice! Advancing brings
     great dangers, but no harm. Power, riches and happiness will
     eventually result (if you atone).
  3. Trapped under a rock, stepping on sharp thorns, even when she gets
     home she finds her suitor is gone. Disaster.
4. Taking a golden carriage, but arriving late (due to hesitation). Shame,
   but not for long, as someone will soon stand with you.
5. * The harsh Minister abuses the people and is put under house arrest.
   He will be pardoned, but can only restore trust gradually (by applying
   moderation). Offer sacrifices!
6. Tangled up in vines and slipping, any action brings regret. But if you
   truly regret, you can advance, and gain good luck.
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 48: Ching (pr. “jing”)—The Well




   The Moon and Air unite in a well.

    Image: A well (Moon trigram) with a wooden bucket (Air trigram).
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: The well. You can move a city, but not a well. The well
stays steady and provides water; but if the rope is short or the bucket breaks
—bad luck.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual encourages people to work
and help each other, giving advice and aid.
    Commentary: The city (that which we construct) can be moved, but
the well (that which comes from nature) cannot. The Superior Individual’s
nature should be deep and steady like the well. The theme of the lines is of
the trouble when the well (that is, the inner depth) is neglected.
    The Lines:

  1. Muddy water at the bottom of the neglected well. No animals come to
     drink the tainted water. Give up.
  2. Infested water, and the bucket leaks, double bad luck!
  3. The well is cleaned, but no one comes to drink from it, sadly. The King
     is wise and shares his fortune.
  4. The well is being repaired—a delay (no one can drink from it yet), but
     hopeful progress!
  5. * The water is clean and icy cool, there is no need to hide it. Great
     luck. All is well.
6. The well-rope is found and can be used. A fine achievement. Great
   luck and great success!
    

       Hexagram 49: Ko (pr. “Ge”)—Revolution




   Water and The Sun unite in revolution.

    Image: The Sun rises over a marshy lake.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Revolution. Only when its time has come will it work.
Only when finished will the people trust in it. Gentle success. Right pushing
brings gain, regret vanishes.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual studies the calendar,
understanding change. He guides others through the times and the seasons.
    Commentary: Sun and Water are opposed to each other, like two
women in the same household, constantly squabbling. One must go.
Revolution must come first, then with successful change will public trust
gradually be established. When revolution is in accord with Heaven’s
decree, dynasties can fall and new ones rise. This is a time of epic
significance!
    (The theme of the lines is of revolution, be it outer or inner.)
    The Lines:

  1. It is not yet time for revolution. Acting rashly, he is bound in tight ox-
     hide ropes (arrested, prevented from causing change).
  2. The time to begin revolution has come. Advancing brings gain. Good
     luck, no harm or error.
  3. Advancing too quickly brings trouble—disaster! Guard against
     dangers. Do not go forth (with the revolution) without thinking of
     others. Be sincere and listen to people. When you hear talk of
     revolution three times, act!
4. Regret leaves, certainty is gained. He is sincere and thus the change of
   government succeeds. A new dynasty is established, good luck!
5. * A Great Individual makes change brilliantly! He is like a fierce tiger.
   He can reveal his Will with certainty, no divination is needed.
6. The Superior Individual helps to make change gracefully. Lesser
   people will gradually come to his side. If he pushes too radically at this
   time there are disasters. Being firm but advancing gently brings gain
   and good luck.
                                 Notes
    

  Hexagram 50: Ting (pr. “ding”)—Sacrificial
Bowls




   The Sun and Air make sacrificial bowls.

    Image: The Sun rises over the treetops. An offering bowl to help duty
be performed gently and gracefully.
    Ruling Lines: 5 and 6.
    Description: A sacrificial bowl—success. Great luck!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual takes the stance that Heaven
requires.
    Commentary: Wood (the Air Element) and holy fire (symbolic of the
Sun) combine to cook the sacrificial offering. Cook well for offerings to the
Lord of Heaven, but cook even better to provide for Sages (teachers) and
virtuous individuals in The World. The King provides for his Ministers so
they will advise him well and care for the Kingdom. (The theme of the lines
involves sacrificial/alchemical rites for the production of results, including
the creation of a magical child).
    The Lines:

  1. The bowl is overturned and rotted meat dumped out. If the concubine
     bears a son, there is no shame in making her a wife! (Get rid of the old
     and non-functional, use what is practical)
  2. The bowl is strong and full of offerings. The former wife is ill and
     does not object (to the new one). Good luck!
  3. The bowl-handles are broken; it is hard to move it! Good food is
     wasted (you used an unsuitable vessel). But then the rains come
  regardless (the goal of the ritual succeeds in spite of its failings),
  washing off regrets and bringing luck in the end.
4. The bowl’s legs snap. The Prince’s food spills and his robes are
   stained. A shameful mess—bad luck! (From trying too hard, indicated
   by the solid line in this position.)
5. * The bowl has golden handles—very suitable (for concrete worldly
   rituals). Right pushing brings substantial rewards.
6. * The bowl has jade handles—the most suitable (for Heavenly rituals).
   Great luck! Everything is going your way.
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 51: Chen (pr. “Jn”)—Thunder




   Fire and Fire make thunder.

    Image: Continuous roaring thunder!
    Ruling Line: 1.
    Description: Thunder—success. Great noise, awe and panic, but then
there may be laughter and joyful shouting. Some are afraid, but the holder
of the sacred cup does not spill the wine. Be prudent, but make a noise that
echoes forever!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual, in awe and trembling, seeks
to improve themselves.
    Commentary: Thunder is frightening but can lead to prosperity
(reshaping the world after a storm). It can frighten people for a hundred
miles around. That wine is not spilt means that one has been found qualified
to lead (the sacrifices). Make a noise (a shock to generate change),
considering how others after yourself may continue to use the current of
change you have initiated. The theme of the lines is of the state before,
during and after a storm (a great period of shock and change).
    The Lines:

  1. * Thunder, great noise! He is panicked at first, but later feasts. Good
     luck, happiness and laughter. (Taking advantage of a great shock).
  2. Thunderstorm fast approaching. Danger! He drops his goods and heads
     for the hills. Do not search for the lost riches, they will be regained in
     seven days.
  3. Sudden thunder—panic! Act with haste to avoid harm. Prudent.
4. During the thunderstorm he slips and falls. Muddy road; muddy
   thoughts.
5. Unpredictable thunder—trouble! He runs around in panic. Careful
   thought and attention is needed to avoid loss. Maintain discipline in
   your rites.
6. Thundering chaos! She is panicked, not knowing where to go.
   Advance brings bad luck. Her neighbour is struck down by the storm;
   she must be cautious to avoid harm as well. Seeking marriage at this
   time causes gossip and conflicts.
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 52: Ken (pr. “gn”)—Stopping




   Earth and Earth are stopping.

    Image: Two mountains conjoined.
    Ruling Line: 6.
    Description: Keep the back straight, free the body from its habits.
Walking in the courtyard, not seeing any false qualities in others, nor
showing any yourself. Meditation—no mistake!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual restrains their base impulses
and concentrates on maintaining their present posture.
    Commentary: Stop, when it is time to be still. Move, when it is time to
move. Remain aware in both movement and stillness. Thus your inner
brilliance will shine forth. The theme of the lines relates to the stages in the
practice of meditation.
    The Lines:

  1. Stop the toes—no mistake. Continue cultivating from this beginning.
  2. Stopping the legs, though you may feel unhappy at being unable to
     follow others.
  3. Stopping the sex will make your spine too stiff, and give you
     heartburn. Danger! (You are practising too much restraint.)
  4. Stopping the torso, success in avoiding any movement—no mistake!
     (You are approaching stillness with all of your being.)
  5. Stopping the jaw, you avoid speaking nonsense. Order your words
     carefully to avoid regret.
6. * The highest stillness—base impulses are sincerely redirected and
   transformed into Virtue. Good luck!
    

  Hexagram 53: Chien (pr. “jee-en”)—Gentle
Momentum




   Air and Earth unite in gentle momentum.

     Image: A tree (air trigram) on a mountaintop (earth trigram).
     Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
     Description: Gentle momentum. A girl marries following all the proper
rites. Good luck. Right pushing brings gain.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual cultivates Virtue and thus
learns how to improve the practice of rituals.
     Commentary: Gradual advance and fortune to those who follow the
proper rites, like a virtuous maiden. Going forward this way, success is
assured; and even a whole Kingdom can be put in order. The strong solid
fifth line indicates that progress has been made and the momentum should
continue at this pace.
     (The mystical theme of the lines involves the challenges of the aspirant,
in pursuit of the True Will; the aspirant here is the maiden, and the True
Will her suitor/husband)
     The Lines:

  1. The maiden moves slowly toward the river. The young son is in
     trouble (due to inexperience). There is much gossip, but no blame (if
     one continues forward without rushing).
  2. * The maiden moves slowly toward solid ground. There is good food
     (nourishment), and good luck (material prosperity). Happiness.
  3. The maiden moves slowly up the hill. The husband leaves, and does
     not return. She is pregnant (through adultery)! Shameful. Disaster!
  Take precautions against intruders (who lead you away from the path
  of cultivating genuine Virtue).
4. The maiden moves slowly toward the tree, and rests there a while; (its
   shade is) nurturing and gentle. No harm (in pausing).
5. * The maiden reaches the hilltop, looking (toward the horizon) for her
   husband. He does not return for three years, but in the end there is
   good luck and fulfilment. (Pregnancy results, at the proper time).
6. The maiden moves slowly to the city: she is dressed for a great
   ceremony. Her Will is flawless and chaos cannot prevail.
                                Notes
    

   Hexagram 54: Kwei Mei (pr. “gway may”)—
The Eligible Maiden




   Fire and Water unite in an eligible maiden.

    Image: Lightning striking a lake.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 3 and 6.
    Description: The maiden eligible for marrying, fire and water clash. If
she advances with inappropriate ways, there is bad luck. No goal is
favourable now.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual knows that to achieve an
enduring end, they must be aware of their mistakes from the beginning, and
stay true to their Love.
    Commentary: The eligible maiden: man’s end and man’s beginning. If
there is Love, then the maiden may wed; but if there is no Union (of
Heaven and The World), then there will be no prosperity. (As in the case of
the previous hexagram, the line meanings here can be understood
mystically to reflect challenges on the spiritual path.)
    The Lines:

  1. The girl is only given as a concubine. The man is lame and cannot
     walk firmly. But if she aids him, he will aid her—good luck!
  2. She is married, but to an evil husband. The blind man tries to see
     (attempting the impossible). If she meditates, and maintains her duty,
     she may persevere. (A very difficult situation, but this in no way
     changes the need to do your duty.)
3. ^ A servant girl is impatient for marriage, but she would do better to
   accept being taken as a concubine. (Some improvement is better than
   nothing.)
4. The young maiden grows old waiting for a husband. Her expectations
   were too high and her actions too few.
5. * The King marries off his youngest daughter. She dresses more
   humbly than the concubines—Noble! The moon is nearly full (she has
   great maturity). Good luck!
6. ^ The girl’s basket is empty, the man’s sacrifice fails. They have no
   offerings to present for the rites. No goal is favourable, nothing of
   value. (The prerequisites for proper Union are missing.)
                                  Notes
    

  Hexagram 55: Feng (pr. “fng”)—Richness
Waning




   Fire and the Sun make waning richness.

     Image: The Sun at its peak; thunder and lightning striking at once.
     Ruling Line: 5.
     Description: Richness—success! The Sun-King inspires, but the Sun is
at its peak; do not be sad that it (naturally) begins to wane.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual makes judgements and
applies strict discipline to himself and others. (He has high expectations of
himself and his environment.)
     Commentary: First obtaining Virtue, one may then manifest it with
rich results. This is the time to let the light of your Virtue shine in The
World. The King inspires his people through his respect for them. At its
peak, the Sun begins to set. All things follow the same course (in Nature).
Humans at their peak being in the process of dying.
     The Lines:

  1. Meeting a fellow Prince, he stays for ten days, but no more. This earns
     respect. Proper.
  2. Stuck. The Sun has darkened even in mid-day (there is an eclipse).
     Going now would bring ills and doubts. But with sincerity, trust begins
     to rise—good luck!
  3. He hides in a tent at mid-day, blocking out the Sun, hiding in the dark.
     He acts as if he broke his right arm (pretending to be useless)—no
     error. (Hide your abilities at this time.)
  4. Stuck. Hiding in a tent at mid-day, blocking out the sun. Meeting an
     ally of equal Virtue—luck! That will be the time to move.
  5. * He shines forth to all, drawing talented allies to himself! He will
     receive unexpected honours and gifts. Fame won, it is time to celebrate
     —luck!
  6. He builds a great wall around his treasure-house. No one can see him
     now. He remains reclusive for three years. If he does not show himself
     soon—disaster! (He has hidden his brilliance for too long.)
    (There is a significant similarity in these lines to the description of a
“black brother” in the tenth aethyr of Crowley’s “The Vision and the
Voice”.)
                                    Notes
    

       Hexagram 56: Lu—The Traveller




   Sun and Earth unite in the traveller.

    Image: Sunlight warms a tall peak.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: The Traveller—gain in small things. Success, if one is
modest and cautious. Pushing in travelling brings good luck!
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual takes careful attention to
administer situations, and prudence in doling out punishment; but he also
does not stand for cases to be delayed.
    Commentary: The broken line at the fifth place is bordered on both
sides by firm solid lines; hence “gain in small things” is possible. Timely
application of this hexagram is essential! The theme of the lines is of a
traveller on a journey, literal or allegorical.
    The Lines:

  1. At the start of the journey, he worries about supplies and money, and is
     miserly. He invites troubles on himself (by expecting the worst and
     over-reacting).
  2. The traveller gets to the inn with his pockets full. He gains a loyal
     young servant. He should continue to push rightly.
  3. The inn burns down, he suffers burns and the servant’s loyalty is lost.
     The traveller was reckless and continuing this way brings trouble.
     Guard against danger!
  4. The traveller stays in one place for a time. He gets new supplies and
     yet he is still joyless. (Unsatisfied with the current place and situation.)
5. * Hunting, he loses an arrow, but then hits a pheasant (on the second
   try). He gains praise and titles from superiors. Small loss, great gain.
6. The bird’s nest is burnt, the cow is lost in the wild. The traveller laughs
   at first but later cries. Carelessness leads to loss and there is no one to
   help or care for you. Woe!
                                  Notes
    

       Hexagram 57: Sun—Surrender




   Air and Air make surrender.

    Image: A favourable wind!
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 1 and 4.
    Description: Willing surrender. Success in small things. Have a goal,
visit the Great Man.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual shows leadership and
administrates the situation.
    Commentary: When people surrender willingly, the King can establish
law, and implement his Will. Utmost surrender is required to carry out the
Will of Heaven (to take advantage of the natural momentum of the divine
wind). The theme is of giving up of efforts (attempts at spiritual surrender).
    The Lines:

  1. ^ Hesitating in battle, going back and forth, too apprehensive to act
     decisively. The right pushing of warriors brings advantage. (The Will
     must be cultivated further, it is not yet time to surrender.)
  2. Surrendering excessively (afraid). Consulting with crazy wizards and
     learning how to work with spirits, he can gain great fortune. No error
     —despite chaos. (Overcome fear and learn how to boldly deal with
     inner demons.)
  3. Aggravated, he surrenders many times but not with a true Will.
     Shameful, frustrating, and disappointing. (You cannot fake surrender.)
  4. ^ Regret leaves! Hunting, he catches three beasts: one for sacrificial
     rites, one for tribute to the King, and one for celebration. Great deeds
  done, solid results by surrendering to the King’s Will.
5. * Right pushing, gain. Regret leaves, all is well. A bad start in
   discipline, but in the end it is implemented well. Acting three days
   early, good luck for three days after the event.
6. Surrendering excessively, cowering under his bed (afraid). His axe has
   lost its edge; he loses his travelling money (mental and material
   conditions for gain are in chaos). Pushing now would bring disaster.
   Focus on realigning yourself. Guard against trouble.
                                 Notes
    

       Hexagram 58: Tui (pr. “dway”)Bliss




   Water and Water are bliss.

    Image: Two bodies of water connect and flow one into the other.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Governing Lines: 3 and 6.
    Description: Bliss. Success. Right pushing brings gain.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual joyfully makes friendships,
joining in discussion and practice of Art and Virtue.
    Commentary: Joyous rapture. When joyously led, people forget their
woes. The Superior Individual feels joy at guiding others. Wrestling
blissfully with difficulties, one can even forget the woe of death. Bliss’
greatest quality is the encouragement it affords (to keep going).
    (Mystically, this hexagram relates to the state of Bliss, the “hyperactive”
parallel trance state to that of the “hyper-passive” trance state of Surrender.)
    The Lines:

  1. Untroubled bliss and harmony. He treats others joyously and none
     doubt him. Good luck and no regrets!
  2. * Certainty, bliss. Good luck; he treats others sincerely and regret
     vanishes!
  3. ^ He starts to expect bliss (always). Disaster! (Becoming addicted to
     bliss and demanding it; getting lost seeking constant “highs” of Bliss
     instead of seeing it as a vehicle to the Great Work.)
  4. Foolishly trying to force future bliss, anxious and troubled. If he can
     stop pretending to himself and others (trying to convince himself that
  he can achieve bliss by force), then happiness will come from
  unexpected blessings! (Celebrate and appreciate things as they are.)
5. * Trusting in an Inferior Person, and in crumbling situations. He will
   have problems and danger. (Don’t trust promises of easy bliss, don’t
   hold onto situations that no longer work.)
6. ^ Bliss turns into decadence—he seduces others to these false ways,
   and is ultimately rejected. (When you use bliss to avoid growth rather
   than encourage it, you settle for cheap glitter without substance.)
                                Notes
    

       Hexagram 59: Huan (pr.”hwn”)—Banishing




   Air and the Moon unite in banishing.

    Image: Wind blowing over the waves of the sea.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 2 and 4.
    Description: Banishing—success. The King goes to the temple for
sacrifice and uses his Virtue to banish interfering spirits. Cross the great
river. Right pushing brings gain.
    The Great Work: Ancient Kings built temples to unite the disparate
people, offering sacrifices to the Lord of Heaven in places of safety.
    Commentary: The strong solid second line has freedom of action
(because it is surrounded by broken lines). All is not yet exhausted, but
dispersion must first be banished. The King and his Temple are found in the
centre. The Air trigram is like a (wooden) boat that allows you to cross
dangerous rivers (through mental discipline).
    The Lines:

  1. With a strong horse one can ride through difficult terrain and help
     others. Good luck, agreement, cooperation.
  2. ^ In chaos, go to the safety of the temple, for firm grounding. Regret
     will be banished.
  3. Banish self-referencing (self-obsessed) thought, unite your Will to the
     respected King’s—no regret.
  4. ^ Banishing poor companions, great luck. Calm the mob, unite
     quarrelling groups into common causes. An Inferior Person cannot
     achieve this (he cannot even conceive of it!).
5. * Apply discipline so that worry and illness is banished! The King’s
   treasures can thus be shared with the people. No error.
6. In extreme chaos, people gather together, united to banish evil and
   injury, worry and fear. No error. Banishing is achieved.
                               Notes
    

       Hexagram 60: Chieh (pr. “jee-eh”)—Restraint




   The Moon and Water are restrained.

    Image: Water restrained by a dam.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Description: Restraint—success. But do not restrain too harshly for too
long. Right pushing gains.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual makes and uses rites and
regulations to maintain Virtue, and encourages those of good report to
likewise ascend.
    Commentary: Equal number of solid and broken lines create balance.
The firm solid lines in the second and fifth places create regulation. If
restraint is too extreme, then all restraint will soon be lost (in a dangerous
deluge). Take joy in undertaking what is difficult and dangerous. When
restraint is properly applied, people and property are protected, and not
harmed. The theme is of holding back cautiously in danger.
    The Lines:

  1. Restrained, he doesn’t leave his outer wall; no mistake. When the way
     is blocked you should remain within.
  2. Restrained. He doesn’t even leave the inner walls, missing
     opportunities. Woe! (excessive inward restraint.)
  3. He fails to restrain himself! Later, he regrets this, showing good
     judgement. The harm ceases—no mistake.
  4. Restraint and peace—success! Prudent.
5. * Voluntary restraint at first—good luck. Then (later) it is time to move
   and win respect and praise.
6. Harsh restraint! Pushing in this brings disaster. End the way of
   excessive restraint, and regret will leave.
                                 Notes
    

   Hexagram 61: Gong Fa (pr. “Joong Fuh”)—
Divine Law




   Air and Water unite in divine law.

    Image: Wind blowing over a lake.
    Ruling Line: 5.
    Governing Lines: 3 and 4.
    Description: Sincerity, certainty. Even piglets and river fish (lucky
symbols; in some versions the latter are translated as “dolphins”) will be
moved by it. Cross the great river effortlessly. Right pushing brings gain.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual puts careful attention into
judgement, and holds back from issuing death sentences (i.e., judging too
harshly).
    Commentary: The broken lines are in the safe middle of the hexagram.
The strong solid lines are at the visible exterior, and also in the central
positions (lines 2 and 5). With Divine Law you can win the confidence of
all creatures (hence even piglets and river fish will be moved by it).
Crossing the great river is effortless because you have mastered the wooden
boat (the Air trigram, the mind).
    The Lines:

  1. Maintain your heavenly nobility—good luck. To seek out anything else
     will only bring worry. Stand alone.
  2. Birds sing to each other; soon the sound of chicks will follow.
     Someone will wish to share good wine with you. Follow Nature’s Law,
     with Will situated in your heart. Share sincerity.
3. ^ Insecure, he faces a strong enemy! He dithers about what to do,
   making much noise, attacking, fleeing, crying, or singing. (Dispersion,
   being disconnected from Divine Law.)
4. ^ Horses stray, just before the full moon, going free their own way
   (apart from their mates). No harm or error in this (it is their natural
   Will).
5. * Certainty generates momentum. Sincerity            generates   good
   communication with others. No mistake.
6. The bird calls too loud and flies too high. Bragging to the Heavens—
   hubris! Continuing brings bad luck. Guard against trouble.
                                 Notes
    

  Hexagram 62: Hsiao Kuo (pr. “shee-au gwo”)—
Small Gains




   Fire and Earth unite in small gains.

    Image: Thunder rumbles on a mountaintop.
    Ruling Lines: 2 and 5.
    Description: Small gains—success. Right pushing brings gain. Small
goals are possible to achieve now, large goals are not. High-flying birds
sing out of tune, they should find somewhere to land. The humble, and not
the strong, have good luck now.
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual makes a point to be more
reverent, feel more sorrow and grief, and be more thrifty in his expenses
(that is, he imitates the ways of the Inferior Person).
    Commentary: There are times when it is appropriate to behave in a
small manner. The broken lines in the second and fifth places signify that it
is possible to achieve small goals. The strong solid lines at the third and
fourth places would overstretch themselves in this situation and fail. A
high-flying bird can’t sing harmoniously. Those trying to ascend at this time
will meet with hardship; those descending find their way smooth.
    The Lines:

  1. The high-flying bird augurs bad luck. Disaster, nothing can be done to
     avoid it.
  2. * In the cemetery, to honour ancient ancestors, he sees his mother’s
     ghost! Trying to reach the King, he is instead only met with the
     Minister (he is not ready to progress further until first dealing with
     intermediate issues).
3. Unless he takes care, one of his subordinates will kill him—disaster!
   Do not avoid simple attention and precautions. (Some small care will
   avoid very big problems.)
4. Harassing her, being too forward, there will be trouble. Do not show
   off. Hide your talents but hold on to your determination.
5. * High dark clouds from the west, too high, no rain. The Prince shoots
   the vicious beast in the cave! (In spite of appearances, this is the right
   time to act.)
6. Smugly, he gets too far ahead and fails to meet his ally. A bird who
   flies apart from the flock is sure to be shot. Disaster, injury!
                                   Notes
    

   Hexagram 63: Chi Chi (pr. “jee jee”)—After
Ending




   The Moon and the Sun unite after ending.

     Image: The Moon rises as the Sun sets. The evening at dinner time, the
end of the day.
     Ruling Line: 2.
     Description: After ending. Success even in the smallest details. Right
pushing brings gain. If one is not prudent, the good luck at first will turn to
chaos at the end.
     The Great Work: The Superior Individual considers future troubles
with careful thought, and takes advance precautions.
     Commentary: Things are as good as they can be: there is an equal
balance of strong and weak lines, and they are all in their proper position
(all solid lines in odd places, all broken lines at even places). Good luck at
this time, but if we do not determine to seek out and embrace new change,
entropy will overtake us. Whenever something reaches its peak, it must
inevitably decline. Momentum will wane, and things will collapse into
disorder. Thus, do not cling too long to the present situation. Take prudent
care against collapse, and seek out change (in spite of your present
comfort).
     The Lines:

  1. He applies the brakes to the chariot’s wheels to slow down its descent.
     Prudent.
  2. * The Lady loses her chariot-drapes, and cannot go out. She shouldn’t
     seek them out; they will be restored to her in seven days (be proper,
  don’t draw attention to yourself, let things fix themselves).
3. The Great King invaded barbarian lands and conquered them in three
   years of heavy battle. Tiring, but Inferior People would have failed at
   such a task. Do important things yourself. Persevere to the very end, in
   spite of exhaustion.
4. Rags hidden under fine silk (a trick to mask worthless goods). Be
   cautious, and suspicious of appearances. Guard against trouble.
5. The Eastern nation sacrifices a bull, but gains less than the more
   sincere Western nation, even though the latter’s sacrifice was less
   ostentatious. (This line is clearly a reference to the decadent and
   hypocritical Shang Dynasty, which was in the East; as opposed to the
   poor and modest but sincere and virtuous Zhou, who eventually
   overthrew them. Note that in his lifetime, King Wen (who is said to
   have written these lines) was chief of the Zhou, and a prisoner of the
   Shang King).
6. He crosses the river and the water reaches his head. Danger! Being
   unprepared, chaos rises.
                                Notes
    

   Hexagram 64: Wei Chi (pr. “way jee”)—Before
Ending




   The Sun and the Moon unite before ending.

    Image: The Sun rises as the Moon declines; it is not yet noon.
    Ruling Lines: 5.
    Description: Before ending—success, if you work hard for it. The little
fox tries to cross the frozen river, but gets its tail wet before it can finish
crossing the ice. No goal is favourable now (if you seek only the easy way).
    The Great Work: The Superior Individual takes care to distinguish
between things, before ordering them each into their proper place.
    Commentary: The fox crossing the frozen river must be cautious (this
is an old Chinese proverb). If he tries to rush to the end he will fall into the
water. The image suggests we are not yet at the middle of the situation. Our
affairs cannot be rushed to completion. The lines are all in the wrong
position (the solid lines are all in even places, the broken lines are all in odd
positions); but (because there are an equal number of solid and broken
lines) they can complement each other in order to succeed (with hard work).
The theme of the line descriptions is one of trying to cross a frozen river.
    The Lines:

  1. The fox gets its tail wet, embarrassing! Failing to be prudent and
     wisely judge chances, distance, or timing.
  2. Putting the brakes on the chariot to slow it down (on icy terrain).
  3. The ford is not yet finished. If he rushes ahead—danger! Crossing the
     river (at the proper pace) brings gain, in spite of risks.
4. Right pushing brings gain, regret vanishes. He leads his army like a
   thunderbolt to attack barbarian lands! It takes great work, but three
   years later he conquers, and is rewarded with titles and vast lands.
5. * Right pushing brings luck, and regret vanishes. The Superior
   Individual shines bright and true, winning people’s hearts. Good luck!
6. Trusting others, and having their trust, you can feast—no harm. But if
   you indulge until your head is wet (with drunkenness) you will lose
   that trust, and gain shame. (Refine your rapture, exceed by delicacy, be
   subtle in your joy.)
                                  Notes
                           Chapter Four
                  Advanced I Ching Studies
     Permutations of the Hexagrams
    At this point, we have already explored the basics of the I Ching: the
text itself, and the fundamentals of how to cast and interpret a standard I
Ching reading. For someone using the I Ching casually as a tool for
divination, this is essentially all that is needed. However, this is only the
tiny tip of a very large iceberg of the incredible wealth of knowledge,
contemplation, and imagery found in the mysteries of I Ching. These
mysteries can be studied carefully to obtain a much more profound
knowledge of the way the I Ching hexagrams relate to each other; and as
the hexagrams represent different situations in Time/Space, this type of
study allows us to understand the particular ways phenomena in existence
are interconnected.
    The first, oldest, and most important set of advanced studies in the I
Ching is found in what are called the “permutations”. These are the ways
that a hexagram can be transformed into another hexagram. One of these
permutations has already been explained: the “resulting hexagrams” that are
formed when changing lines in a casting are shifted into their opposite.
Every changing line becomes its opposite, and in this way a new hexagram
(generally understood to be the “future” hexagram of that particular casting)
is created. This permutation is of obvious significance in divination,
because it represents the way a particular hexagram casting is in the process
of transforming in that specific instant into another kind of hexagram.
    The other hexagram permutations are not specific to an individual
casting, but rather are static permutations: the way a specific hexagram will
always be connected to certain other hexagrams through specific
transformations. Studying these will not always be of direct use to a specific
divination, but will provide powerful insights for contemplation which
reveal certain details about a given hexagram and its qualities; by virtue of
comprehending what hexagram it emerges from, which is its
complementary pair, which represents the same forces in opposite positions,
and which in reversed positions.
   Overturned Hexagrams and Opposite
Hexagrams
    The first sets of permutations that should be observed in advanced I
Ching studies are what are called the “overturned” hexagrams and the
“opposite” hexagrams. These are particularly important because they
directly relate to the way the I Ching is ordered in its standard text. This
ordering or “sequence” is called the “King Wen Sequence”, because
allegedly King Wen was the one who arranged them in this way.
Historically, we know this is almost certainly not true, and that in fact this
sequence predates the time of King Wen. It is the oldest and most common
sequence of the I Ching.
    It should be noted that there are other sequences: some ancient versions
of the I Ching do not appear to have the hexagrams in any special
mathematical or symbolic order, but possibly in an order that made the
hexagrams easy to memorize based on their names. Later on, the great I
Ching master Shao Yung ordered the hexagrams according to binary code.
However, the King Wen sequence is the most important, and has become
the established canonical sequence of ordering the hexagrams.
    Ironically, many inexperienced students of I Ching can use the I Ching
for years without realizing the significance of this particular arrangement of
the Hexagrams. The King Wen sequence is not as obvious as the binary
sequence, and thus it leads the I Ching student to think it may just be
random. In fact, the King Wen sequence contains within it a series of
profound symbolic interconnections.
    The first and most apparent rationale for the King Wen sequence
becomes immediately apparent when you start to observe the ordering as a
set of thirty-two pairs. Look at hexagrams #1 and #2, #3 and #4, #5 and #6,
etc., all the way to #63 and #64. Compare each hexagram in a pair to the
other. What you will find is that every single pair is either an “overturned”
hexagram pair or an “opposite” hexagram pair.
    An opposite hexagram is generated when you take all the lines in a
hexagram and change them into their opposite. So for example, if you look
at hexagram #27, “Eating” (Fire below, Earth above):
    and change it into its opposite, you get hexagram #28 “Excess (weight)”
(Air below and Water above):




    This tells you that there is a connection between these two hexagrams,
that they are oppositional to each other; and there is much that you can
contemplate in these paired symbols. To begin with, even the very titles are
significant: Eating implies hunger, lack. Excess (weight) implies obesity,
saturation. The imagery of the two hexagrams are very telling: “Eating”
shows solid lines on the outer edges with a wide gap of broken lines in
between them. The imagery evoked is literally that of an open mouth,
waiting to receive food. “Excess (weight)” shows weak broken lines on the
outer extremes while the middle is over-full of solid lines. The traditional
imagery of this hexagram is of a beam that is under a weight that is just too
heavy to hold it; but you can also almost visualize in the hexagram imagery
a portly man, his stubby legs at the bottom just too weak to handle his
bumbling bulk. The opposition of the trigrams are also notable: in #27 you
have potent Fire below and solid Earth above. In western elemental
symbolism these are the higher masculine (the Y of YHVH) below, and the
lower feminine (the final H of YHVH) above; in the traditional Chinese
“family” of the trigrams, Fire is known as the “eldest son” while Earth is
known as the “youngest son”. In #28 the Fire is burned up into Air (the Y
becoming a V; or the “eldest son” becoming the “eldest daughter”), while
Earth is washed away into Water (the lesser feminine H-final becoming the
greater feminine first-H of YHVH; or the “youngest son” becoming the
“youngest daughter”).
    On the other hand, an overturned hexagram is generated when you take
a hexagram and put it upside down; so that line 6 of the first hexagram
becomes line 1 of the new hexagram, line 5 becomes line 2, line 4 becomes
line 3, etc. For example, if you look at hexagram #23 “Shedding” (The
World below, Earth above):
    and overturn the hexagram, you generate hexagram #24 “Return” (Fire
below, The World Above):




    The overturned hexagram pairs are not directly oppositional, but
represent instead the inverse forces of one another. Once again, here we can
contemplate significance in the names, the trigrams, and the lines. The core
concept of hexagram #23 is of “Shedding”, of a situation of corruption
where things must be shed off in order to initiate reform. Hexagram #24
marks “Return”, where we can understand that the period of crisis has
ended and now strength is just starting to return. In the constitution of the
trigrams we see that both trigrams have The World; but in “Shedding”, The
World is below and Earth is above. Both of these are passive forces, and the
greater of the two is at the base of the situation. In “Return”, the weight of
Earth is gone, and now The World and its passivity is no longer the
foundation; it has the appearance (in comparison) of moving away from the
base of things. The situation is still not ideal, but now a Fire has been lit
under the hexagram and energy and motion is starting to build up!
    In the line imagery, you can see that both hexagrams have only a single
solid Yang line, but in Shedding that line is at the very top, at the “end” of
the hexagram; you almost get the sensation that it risks slipping away. The
sixth position is at the very end, at the periphery of the line structure. So in
this hexagram, force is being lost in a time of great weakness. In Return,
you find the single solid line at the very bottom, at the base. The first line in
a hexagram represents a force that is also outside; it is only at the very
beginning, it has not yet achieved a central part of the process. But the
sensation evoked by the solid line in this position is that the strong line is on
the way up; it is going to start moving into a more central position, possibly
bringing more strong lines behind it. Thus in hexagram #23, the weak has
almost completely overwhelmed the strong; while in #24, the strong has
returned and will now begin to restore strength to a weakened environment.
    To understand the King Wen sequence, you must consider opposite and
overturned hexagram pairs. Every single pair in the King Wen sequence is
either an overturned pair or an opposite pair; the overturned pairs are the
majority, while the opposite pairs are formed by those hexagrams which
would otherwise be identical to each other if overturned. In this way, all
phenomena in time and space are understood as either a two-part process of
coming and going (or going and coming); or as two directly oppositional
forces in interaction with one another. By studying the King Wen sequence
in its constituent pairs, you can greatly deepen your understanding of the
hexagrams involved and the processes they represent.
    Of course, it can also be worthwhile to observe the opposite hexagram
pair of each hexagram that isn’t already paired to its opposite in the King
Wen sequence.

     Nuclear Hexagrams
    The next most significant set of permutations are the so-called “nuclear
hexagrams”. They are called this because they are the hexagrams within
other hexagrams (found in the “nucleus” of a hexagram). The way to create
a nuclear hexagram from another hexagram is as follows: take the second,
third and fourth line of a hexagram, and make this the lower trigram of your
new hexagram. Then take the third, fourth and fifth line of the hexagram,
and make this the upper trigram of your new hexagram.
    So a standard hexagram will have six lines; from the bottom counting
up, we’ll call them lines 1-6:
    6
    5
    4
    3
    2
    1
    We now generate the lower trigram of the nuclear hexagram by copying
lines 2, 3, and 4 of the regular hexagram; then we generate the upper
trigram by copying lines 4, 5, and 6 of the regular hexagram. So the nuclear
will look like this:
    5
    4
   3
   4
   3
   2
   For example, if we were to look at the hexagram #30, “Flaming
Majesty”:




    This hexagram is Sun below and Sun above. If we first look at lines 2,
3, and 4, we get the Air trigram. Lines 3, 4, and 5 make the Water trigram.
Thus we discover that the nuclear hexagram of #30 is #28 “Excess”
(weight):




    These are “nuclear” hexagrams because they consist of a folded-up or
interlaced (a mathematician might call it a “hyper-dimensional”) hexagram
that is contained entirely within the first hexagram; it does not use lines 1 or
6, so it does not exist in the outer fringes of the hexagram, only within the
core of the hexagram.
    There is a great deal of misunderstanding regarding the nuclear
hexagrams: often, many I Ching students I’ve encountered (of the minority
who know about nuclear hexagrams) seem to think that any hexagram
might be a nuclear hexagram, when in fact this is not the case. This
misconception is largely due to the fact that even many of those books or
translations of the I Ching that mention nuclear hexagrams do not really
seem to understand the concept or the underlying mathematics.
Consequently, some students treat a nuclear hexagram as an extra part of a
casting, using it the way one might draw another Tarot card in a Tarot
reading, to describe “hidden influences”. While this is not altogether wrong,
the nuclear hexagrams do not describe some kind of hidden influences
particular to the situation of a casting (much less of the person getting the
casting), but rather they represent a fundamental root of the hexagram itself.
    The key to understanding nuclear hexagrams is this idea of hyper-
dimensionality: imagine that the sixty four hexagrams do not all exist at the
same level of space-time; if you projected the sixty four hexagrams as a
multidimensional object, you would end up with an image that looks similar
to a lattice with several levels, or a sphere that folds in on itself in more
than three dimensions. The patterns of the nuclear hexagrams are key to
comprehending this, and the King Wen sequence (the regular ordering of
the hexagrams in the canonical I Ching) takes this into account.
    To understand this, let’s look at the pattern of nuclear hexagrams in
reverse. There are only four hexagrams from which ultimately all other
hexagrams derive (that is, all other hexagrams have one of these four as
their nuclear hexagram, or as their nuclear hexagram’s nuclear hexagram).
These are Hexagrams #1, #2, #63 and #64. You’ll note that #1 is all solid
lines, #2 is all broken lines, and #63 and #64 are alternating solid and
broken lines. You’ll also note that these are hexagram pairs, and that the
King Wen sequence thus begins and ends with the two pairs.
    It is also worthwhile to note that of these four fundamental nuclear
hexagrams, #1 and #2 are opposite to each other and #63 and #64 are
opposite to each other. Yet at the same time, #1 and #2 are self-contained
qualities. They represent a basic force that remains fundamentally itself;
thus the nuclear of #1 is #1, and the nuclear of #2 is #2. It is not that they do
not change, because everything is change; but that unless modified by
change (as can happen in reality, and can be measured in an I Ching
divination casting) to mutate into a different hexagram, in an idealized state
free of any other influence they would constantly change into themselves:
#1 is the fundamental point, #2 the fundamental space. On the other hand,
#63 and #64 represent a cycle of eternal recurrence; the nuclear of #63 is
#64, and the nuclear of #64 is #63. Free of any outside influences, they
would constantly change into each other. Sun and Moon, Moon and Sun;
Yin without turning into Yang without, Yang within turning into Yang
without. They represent the flow of time at its essence: the old and the new,
ending and beginning. Thus in these four hexagrams (the first and last two
pairs of the King Wen sequence), you have the fundamental “nuclear
forces” that define all of space and time.
    Above: the pattern of the nuclear hexagrams, projected as a circle. To
visualize this in a more authentic fashion, the circle would actually need to
be a multidimensional sphere.
    The following reference chart allows you to quickly look up the nuclear
hexagram of any hexagram:

Hexagram #                            Is a Nuclear Hexagram of:
1                                     28, 43, 44
2                                    23, 24 27
63                                   38, 40, 54
64                                   37, 39, 53

   The following hexagrams are all nuclear hexagrams of #1, 2, 63 or 64,
and are in turn nuclear hexagrams of:

Hexagram # (nuclear)             Is a Nuclear Hexagram of:
23       (2)                          3, 8, 20, 42
24       (2)                          4, 7, 19, 41
27       (2)                          29, 59, 60, 61
28       (1)                          30, 55, 56, 62
37       (64)                         6, 10, 47, 58
38       (63)                         5, 9, 48, 57
39       (64)                         16, 21, 35, 51
40       (63)                         15, 22, 36, 52
43       (1)                          14, 32, 34, 50
44       (1)                          13, 31, 33, 49
53       (64)                         12, 17, 25, 45
54       (63)                         11, 18, 26, 46


      Reversed Hexagrams
    There is one other form of permutation that can be worthwhile to
examine, and this is what is called a “reversed hexagram”. Not to be
confused with overturned or opposite hexagrams, a reversed hexagram
works by taking the constituent trigrams of a hexagram and reversing their
positions. For example, starting from hexagram #62, “Small Gains”, which
is Earth below and Fire above:
    Its reversal would be formed by putting Fire below and Earth above;
thus the reverse is #27, Eating:




    As with the oppositional or overturned hexagrams, the reversed
hexagram permutation can reveal certain mysteries about both hexagrams
involved. The elements of both hexagram will be the same ones, but the
change in their position affects their relationship and the structural
appearance of the lines. “Small Gains” feels a bit claustrophobic; the strong
lines are right in the middle of the hexagrams, the central (second and fifth)
lines and the outer (first and sixth) lines are all broken lines. The hexagram
feels like it is introverted, looking in, and this matches its advice about the
need of the Superior Individual to hide one’s greatness.
    On the other hand “Eating” is wide open in the middle, its “mouth”
formed by the two strong lines at either outer edge; it implies something
very extroverted, an open mouth seeking to be fed. Here Fire is below,
engaged in intercourse with Earth, warming it and making it more volatile
than usual; while in “Small Gains” the trigrams seem to be back-to-back to
each other, facing in opposite directions, Fire does not intermingle with
Earth enough to create any great explosions (so only small gains are
possible).

     Directional Theories of the I Ching
    In the course of its history, the I Ching has been used quite heavily for
predictive fortune telling of different varieties. As this was underway,
various models were gradually developed for understanding the relationship
between trigrams and hexagrams, and specific details that could be used to
aid in prediction. Different systems tried to map specific trigrams or
hexagrams to seasons, dates and times, to parts of the body, or to compass
directions.
     The latter is particularly significant because it overlaps with another
Chinese art that has recently become popularized (in certain forms) in the
West: Feng Shui. Originally intended as a system for the auspicious
construction of buildings or other structures (a kind of fortune-telling for
architecture), in the West the specific brand of Feng Shui that has become
popular is largely concerned with interior designing (possibly because it is
easier to rearrange your furniture in order to avoid bad luck, than to
remodel your entire house).
     The development of Feng Shui played a significant role in codifying the
importance of directions for assessing the eight trigrams; and this has led to
two very different arrangements of the trigrams along compass points. The
first of these is the “Earlier Heaven” arrangement, which was attributed to
Fu Xi but in fact (ironically) is almost certainly the later invention of the
two; possibly created by Shao Yung or one of his pupils (as with most of
Shao Yung’s theories on the I Ching, it is notable for trying to follow a
logical mathematical sequence):




    In this image, as is standard in ancient China, the upper compass point
is actually south, and thus the Heaven trigram is pointing south and The
World trigram points north. These also correspond in seasons to Summer
and Winter, respectively. The Sun trigram thus points east, and the Moon
west; and both represent Spring and Autumn respectively.
   There is a mathematical code inherent in the choice of trigrams: if you
count every solid line in a trigram as “1” and every broken line as “2”, then
adding the total number values of any two trigrams at opposite compass-
points will give you a total of 9. This is thus an equivalent talisman to the
“magical number squares” which were popular in the East and West alike.
   The other arrangement is called “later heaven” and is attributed to King
Wen:




     As before, south is at the top of this arrangement. Here it is the Sun
trigram that faces south, while Moon is north; Fire is east while Water is
west. The seasons correspond to the same directions as before: south is
Summer, north is Winter, east is Spring, and west is Autumn. This
attribution has none of the mathematical elegance of the former; the
explanation given is that the “earlier heaven” arrangement expresses the
“ideal universe” of perfect order, while the “later heaven” arrangement
expresses the world as it actually is. Thus, in Feng Shui the “earlier heaven”
arrangement is usually only used for burial grounds, tombs and religious
monuments; while the “later heaven” arrangement is used for the building
of houses (and, in a more simplistic way, for modern “interior designer”-
style Feng Shui).
     These correspondences to directions and seasons are included here
mainly because they may be of some use for predictive divination; if a
question asked requires an answer in the form of a direction or even a
particular time period, examining the direction or season to which the
trigram corresponds (particularly to the trigram that is most central in the
divination, for example the one with the most significant changing line)
could provide a predictive answer (ostensibly using “earlier heaven” for
esoteric matters, and “later heaven” for more practical matters). When one
considers that if the trigrams of either arrangement are spread out over the
course of the year each line would then correspond roughly to a fifteen-day
period, one could also use this to make very specific predictions. For
example, if the bottom line of the Heaven trigram in the “earlier heaven”
arrangement is taken to mean the first fifteen days following the Summer
solstice, this would mean that a key changing second line of the Air trigram
in a divination casting would correspond to the first-half of the third month
of Summer.

     Correspondences
    From at least the time of Aleister Crowley, there has been a concerted
effort among western practitioners of occultism to try to map the I Ching
system to western symbolic languages; to find what are called
“correspondences”, understanding which symbol in the I Ching system
corresponds to equivalent symbols in the western occult system. In fact, it
could be argued that there were some minor attempts to do this even earlier,
as early as when the first Jesuits discovered the existence of the I Ching; at
that time, they were seeking evidence of the Christian God’s inspiration in
foreign (non-Christian) culture, and Jesuits in China felt that the
mathematical and symbolic genius of the I Ching might have been one such
piece of evidence. They attempted to find connections between the
symbolism and philosophy of the I Ching and the metaphysical system of
Catholic dogma.
    For practitioners of western magick, correspondences are an essential
concept, as they allow the western magician to tie-together all phenomena
into a single common language; however, the question persists of how
much of what we consider “correspondences” are absolute truths and how
much are relative cultural values. Is the Qabalistic system of the Tree of
Life a “real” concept outside of human conception, or even outside of
western cultural paradigms? And if it is not, then can there be some kind of
value in even attempting to use correspondences at all, much less to try to
incorporate correspondences from other cultural backgrounds that are not
western?
     It is fairly clear to anyone capable of understanding the concept of
symbol that there is no great invisible tree out in space any more than there
is a giant Yin-and-Yang “Taiji” symbol out rotating somewhere in space.
Just as the periodic table is not something that literally exists somewhere,
but rather is a way of organizing the elements of chemistry; just like the
letters d-o-g do not make up a literal dog, but a way of symbolically
representing the concept of “dog”; likewise metaphysical systems (be they
the Qabalistic Tree of Life, the trigrams and hexagrams of the I Ching, the
Norse Tree of Yggdrasil, or the six-worlds model of Tantric Buddhism, etc.)
are not literal representations of reality but systems by which we can
organize concepts in the universe. To conceive of these as literal is to
mistake a filing system for the things it is organizing.
     If this is the case, it means that neither western nor eastern systems of
metaphysics are inherently “right” or “wrong”, they can only be judged by
their utility. Certainly, the complex metaphysical system of the I Ching has
utility, as does the system found in the hermetic/qabalistic Tree of Life. If
all things were equal, it would be difficult to reach any conclusion about
whether one system has more “utility” than another; fortunately no such
objective conclusion is necessary. What is important instead is the fact that
if one is a westerner, there is an added value to the western system, in that
the western occult tradition is something westerners are immersed in.
Obviously, if one is already a practising occultist, one will have a first-hand
experience with this symbolic language; and thus there will be value in
trying to understand correspondences between the I Ching and the Western
Occult Tradition, rather than having to “reinvent the wheel” by undertaking
a full immersion into the Taoist/Confucian cosmology. Even if one is not an
experienced western magician, however, there is a value in trying to put the
I Ching into a context of western symbolism. This is because even someone
who has never studied any kind of western esoteric teachings whatsoever
will still have a natural familiarity with its symbols. Those symbols are all
around us in the West: they’re found in the major western religions, in our
mythology, legends, literature, and art. Much like someone could use
common phrases in English culture like “I haven’t slept a wink” or “give
the devil his due” without realizing it comes from Shakespeare, and “you’re
the apple of my eye” or “he’s the salt of the earth” without realizing that
these come from the King James Bible, one will likewise have
subconscious cues when it comes to western symbolism. Westerners will
have an inherent and unconscious connection through immersion to the
ideas of what western symbols of the Elements, planets, mythological
deities, even magical words or images represent, without having a full and
informed intellectual knowledge of western occultism. It is one of the
reasons why the Tarot cards (a treasure-house of western esoteric imagery,
which might not even have originally been intended as such!) make such an
impact and evoke sensations even in people who have had no formal
training in Tarot study.
     There is no essential requirement that we map correspondences between
the I Ching system and western occultism; the I Ching stands perfectly fine
in its own right and can be used by westerners without ever bothering with
such mapping. However, the exercise of trying to make these links can
certainly help to deepen our contemplations on the I Ching from a
westerner’s perspective.
     I will also note that none of these correspondences should be understood
as definitive; that is not to say that there cannot be definitive
correspondences, but that at this point these are only the working models
and theories that I have found some value in exploring over the last two
decades. There is still a great deal of work that can be done before any
conclusions can be reached on most of these subjects.

     I Ching Trigrams and Magical Elements
     The first, simplest, and most direct level of correspondence between the
I Ching and western symbolism is found in the trigrams. In fact, in this
book I have already been making use of “correspondence” in the way I have
titled the trigrams. The standard translation of the eight trigrams found in
most versions of the I Ching are Heaven, Earth, Fire, Water, Thunder, Lake,
Wind, and Mountain. In this edition, I have titled each of these as follows:
Heaven, The World, Sun, Moon, Fire, Water, Air and Earth. It is important
to note that this is not a foreign mislabelling of the original trigrams,
because each trigram has its own set of various symbols associated with it,
and each of the titles I have used are in fact traditional Chinese attributions
for those trigrams; it happens that they also function very effectively to
explain how each trigram relates to the western elemental system.
    At first glance, it would seem tricky to incorporate a system of eight
elements into the western system of four classical elements. However, this
becomes simpler if you comprehend that there are two groups of trigrams:
there are the “terrestrial trigrams” which are the four classical elements
(Fire, Water, Air, and Earth), and then there are the “celestial trigrams”
which are the four elements reflected in the higher sphere (Heaven, The
World, Sun, and Moon).
    It should be noted that the nature of this division is not purely arbitrary
or even aesthetic. It is also directly in the geometry of the trigrams
themselves. Look at the celestial trigrams: Heaven and The World are both
perfectly harmonious systems within themselves, pure Yang or pure Yin.
The Sun and the Moon are one stage lower, they have a single line that is
different in them, but this line is in the middle, balanced there between the
two outer lines. On the other hand, if you examine the terrestrial trigrams,
you will observe that they are all inherently unbalanced by themselves; they
too have one line that is not like the others, but now that line is always at an
extreme, either on top or at the bottom. The King Wen sequence itself
makes note of this, as the first two and last two hexagrams of the sequence
consist of only celestial trigrams; these four hexagrams are also the four
“core” nuclear hexagrams, the ones from which all other hexagrams are
derived.
    One way to understand the western correspondences of these two
groups of trigrams is through the model of the pentagram, the five-pointed
star which in western occultism is connected to the elements. The four
lower points of the pentagram are tied to the four classical elements; the top
point of the pentagram is “Spirit”, the “quintessence” (literally “fifth
element”), which is consciousness beyond matter (and yet, through the
pentagram, tied to matter).
    With the eight trigrams of the I Ching, we can think of the four
“terrestrial” trigrams as representing the four basic elements, and the four
“celestial” trigrams are likewise the four elements but seen through the
perspective of spirit; they are the four basic elements infused with the
“quintessence”.
    Thus we can think of the Moon as Earth elevated by spirit; the Sun as
Air sparked by the energy of spirit; The World as Water in the full depth of
spirit, and Heaven as Fire refined into the creative power of spirit. One
cannot just think of the “celestial trigrams” as a merely “stronger” version
of a terrestrial element, however. The difference is that the terrestrial
elements are self-contained; each is only their own element, albeit with
reflections in material nature.
    The Earth trigram is only earth, not fire, water, or air. But it manifests in
matter in a number of ways: mountains, hills, rocks, solidity in all its forms;
as well as stillness and stubbornness in human beings.
    The Air trigram is only air, it is not fire, water or earth; though its
manifestation in matter is found in various things that operate under the
aegis of air (traditionally, this includes the wind, plants/trees, and human
intellect).
    The Water trigram is only water, and not fire or earth or air; but it can be
understood also as containing concepts like rivers, seas, lakes, marshes,
swamps, as well as human joy/bliss and ecstatic emotion.
    The Fire trigram is only fire, not water, air, or earth; but it also includes
thunder, heat, movement, the fire under the earth, anything moving,
consuming, arousing or exciting in humanity or in nature.
    On the other hand, the celestial trigrams represent the full manifestation
of each element in its dominant aspect over all other elements; in that way,
we can envision each of the four celestial elements not only as a “bigger” or
“stronger” version of their corresponding terrestrial element, but as
encompassing all the terrestrial elements with one particular force ruling
over them. Using the analogy of the western elemental pentagram, the
celestial trigrams would each be the Invoking Pentagram of a particular
element. When you draw an invoking pentagram of Water, you do not only
draw water, you draw all the points of the pentagram from the perspective
of Water; and likewise with each of the “Invoking Pentagrams”.
    Thus the Moon trigram contains within it aspects of Earth, Air, Water,
and Fire, infused by spirit, and from the perspective of “invoking” Earth. In
this way the Moon trigram represents the Moon; but also the idea of an
abyss, a pit in the earth, the “great water” (in the sense of how the water is
affected by the Moon in things like the tides or even the menstrual cycles of
women), clouds, darkness, the night, the cold, danger, anything deep, and
profound animal instinct in that sense of how animals (including human
beings) are unconsciously affected by the patterns of the Moon.
    The Sun trigram contains within it aspects of all four terrestrial
elements, infused by spirit, and from the perspective of “invoking” the Air.
The Sun is gas ignited by nuclear forces to create fire and heat and light.
The Sun trigram also governs lightning and energy that is transmitted in
non-material form. The Sun is brightness, elegance, brilliance as light
shines down from the air. It is beauty; and illumination in the sense of that
peak of what human intellect can achieve.
    The World trigram contains within it all terrestrial elements (found in
the world, obviously), infused by spirit, and from the perspective of
“invoking” Water. Most of the world is covered by water, surrounded by
water in the atmosphere, and full of water beneath its surface (as well as
liquid fire). Thus The World trigram corresponds to heat, to darkness, to
receptive forces; it is femininity, the Mother, the Yoni of the Tantrists, and it
could in fact be called “the Universe” as it really encompasses the fullness
of creation looking within itself; the downward-pointing triangle of the six-
pointed star. It represents all that is open, receptive, devoted, and
surrendering about human consciousness.
    The Heaven Trigram has within it these same terrestrial elements,
infused by spirit, and from the perspective of “invoking” Fire. It is the
highest point to which the elements can aspire; the four elements and spirit
united, the fullness of creation looking beyond itself. It is thus the upward-
pointing triangle of the six-pointed star. Heaven is thus space infused with
creative power. It is the sky (but also outer space), it is cold, but has
energetic power. It is strength, the masculine, the Lingam of the Tantrists,
the Father. In human consciousness it represents everything that aspires,
that seeks to create, the Will seeking to act to overcome itself.
    This understanding has enormous consequences in terms of
“correspondences” with western esoteric symbolism and how the I Ching
trigrams can be useful to the western practitioner. Just to begin with, it
provides a whole new set of symbols that can be utilized to represent
something not easily represented in symbolic form until now (the idea of an
actively invoking elemental pentagram with a single pictogram). Beyond
which, this has very big implications in terms of how a western practitioner
can understand and contemplate both the western elemental system and the
I Ching, enriching the understanding of both. It has further implications
when you consider the relationship of the I Ching to the foremost divination
system of the western tradition: the Tarot.
     The Trigrams and Court Cards of the Tarot
     Those of you who have even a basic level of study in western esoteric
symbolism will likely have experience with the Tarot. And if you have
studied the Tarot in the hermetic context, you may have already noted with
some excitement how the elemental structure of the Trigrams has
significant implications for creating direct correspondences between I
Ching and the Tarot, in at least one area: the Court Cards of the Tarot’s
minor arcana.
     The sixteen court cards each consist of a combination of two of the
classical elements (or a single element doubled). There is thus a direct
correspondence with the sixty four hexagrams of the I Ching, wherein each
Court Card corresponds to four of the I Ching’s hexagrams.
     To give an example, the card known as the Knight of Disks in the Thoth
tarot (known in other decks as the King of Coins or King of Pentacles) is
understood as the Fiery part of Earth. This would directly relate to the
hexagram #62, “Small Gains” (Fire over Earth). Like the Knight of Disks,
this hexagram advocates staying low, focusing on the necessities at hand
and having small goals. You could also relate this card to the hexagram #33
“Retreat” (Heaven over Earth), which advocates withdrawal from large
ambitions and again suggests that “you can persevere in small things, for
gain”. Likewise, you can relate the Knight of Disks to Hexagram #40,
“Shooting” (Fire over Moon), which suggests “if there’s no point in either
staying put or charging forth, go back!” but that if you do have an actual
point in taking action, you should do so with the utmost haste. Finally, it
can relate to Hexagram #6 “Struggle” (Heaven over Moon), which suggests
a time of difficulty and that taking things to extremes now foreshadows
disaster.
     You can similarly connect the various hexagrams to all of the court
cards. The following lists the Court Card correspondences by number (with
hexagrams listed for the upper and lower trigrams, respectively):
     King/Knight of Wands: #51 (fire/fire), #25 (heaven/fire), #34
(fire/heaven), #1 (heaven/heaven);
     Queen of Wands: #17 (water/fire), #24 (world/fire), #43
(water/heaven), #11 (world/heaven);
     Prince of Wands: #42 (air/fire), #21 (sun/fire), #9 (air/heaven), #14
(sun/heaven);
     Princess/page of Wands: #27 (earth/fire), #3 (moon/fire), #26
(earth/heaven), #5 (moon/heaven);
     King/Knight of Cups: #54 (fire/water), #10 (heaven/water), #16
(fire/world), #12 (heaven/world);
     Queen of Cups: #58 (water/water), #45 (world/water), #19
(water/world), #2 (world/world);
     Prince of Cups: #61 (air/water), #38 (sun/water), #20 (air/world), #35
(sun/world);
     Princess/Page of Cups: #41 (earth/water), #60 (moon/water), #23
(earth/world), #8 (moon/world);
     King/Knight of Swords: #32 (fire/air), #44 (heaven/air), #55 (fire/sun),
#13 (heaven/sun);
     Queen of Swords: #28 (water/air), #46 (world/air), #49 (water/sun),
#36 (world/sun);
     Prince of Swords: #57 (air/air), #50 (sun/air), #37 (air/sun), #30
(sun/sun);
     Princess/Page of swords: #18 (earth/air), #48 (moon/air), #22
(earth/sun), #63 (moon/sun);
     Knight/King of Disks/coins: #62 (fire/earth), #33 (heaven/earth), #40
(fire/moon), #6 (heaven/moon);
     Queen of Disks: #31 (water/earth), #15 (world/earth), #47
(water/moon), #7 (world/moon);
     Prince of Disks: #53 (air/earth), #56 (sun/earth), #59 (air/moon), #64
(sun/moon);
     Princess/Page of disks: #52 (earth/earth), #39 (moon/earth), #4
(earth/moon), #29 (moon/moon).
     Thus we have the entirety of the I Ching reflected in the court cards of
the tarot, in this particular group of correspondences. I have to note that in
this particular model, on a personal level, I feel it reveals and instructs
much more about the mysteries of the court cards than it illuminates new
information about the I Ching.

   The “Double Element” and “Big Element”
Hexagrams
    In the process of considering the elemental correspondences of the
Trigrams there are two more details worthy of particular attention. These
are the “double element” and “big element” hexagrams.
    A “double-element” hexagram is simply any hexagram that consists of
two of the same element. Thus #1 is the double-element hexagram of
Heaven, #2 of The World, #30 of the Sun, #29 of the Moon, #51 of Fire,
#58 of Water, #57 of Air, and #52 of Earth. These are significant because
they are considered the most intense expression of one particular element;
much in the same way that in the Tarot the Queen of Cups (water of water)
is considered the most intense expression of the water element. By studying
the double hexagram one can gain more insight into the trigram itself in its
intensity. It is notable that these come in pairs: 1 and 2 (Heaven and World),
29 and 30 (Moon and Sun), 51 and 52 (Fire and Earth), 57 and 58 (Air and
Water).
    A “big element” hexagram is somewhat more unusual. In short, the “big
element” hexagrams have to be imagined as a trigram of doubled lines. This
means that each line in the trigrams is actually two in the hexagram. For
example, let’s say one wishes to find the “big element” trigram for the Air
trigram:


    As the Air trigram has one broken line followed by two solid lines, its
“big element” hexagram would consist of two broken lines followed by four
solid lines. Thus the “big element” hexagram would be #33 “Retreat”:




    Thus, Hexagram 33 looks like a “big” version of the Air Trigram.
    It is important to note that in this case the hexagram’s component
trigrams do not in fact include air at all. Rather, they are Earth below and
Heaven above. This is not always the case; “big Heaven” and “big World”
are the same as “double Heaven” and “double World”, in both cases
hexagrams #1 and #2 respectively (but this is a feature of the special
qualities of those two hexagrams). On the other hand, “big Sun” is
Hexagram #61 (water below, air above), “big Moon” is Hexagram #62
(Earth below, Fire above), “big Fire” is Hexagram #19 (Water below, World
above), “big Water” is Hexagam #34 (World below, Fire above), “big
Earth” is Hexagram #20 (World below, Air above), and as described above
“big Air” is Hexagram #33 (Earth below, Heaven above).
    It is immediately notable that the “big hexagrams” (like the “double
hexagrams”) come in pairs: 1 and 2 (Heaven and World), 19 and 20 (Fire
and Earth), 33 and 34 (Air and Water), and 61 and 62 (Sun and Moon).
    While the “double hexagrams” unquestionably represent the direct
elemental forces (at their fullest extension), the “big element hexagrams”
are more speculative; they usually represent a more subtle manifestation of
the elemental concept, since most of the hexagrams are not composed of the
element in question at all. Heaven and The World, being the purest
trigrams, are the exception to this; but in all other cases the hexagrams
express the elemental energy at its most dispersed. For example, hexagram
#19 as “big Fire”, representing “Convergence (of Will)”, relates to the
quality of the Fire element as relating to Will, as the aspiration of terrestrial
will to ascend and connect to the superior Will. “Big Earth”, hexagram #20
(“Contemplating”), relates to Earth in the form of the Earth element’s
contemplative quality, of studying and understanding the mysteries of
nature in order to ascend to Heaven’s Virtue.
    For this reason, contemplation of both the “double” and “big”
hexagrams can lead the practitioner to new realizations as to the mysteries
of the elements; in both the I Ching’s internal context, and in the larger
sense of how they relate to the esoteric tradition in East and West alike.

     Planetary Correspondences
    The elements are the most obvious correspondences for the (obviously
elemental) trigrams of the I Ching. However, they are not the only
correspondences that have been established. The correspondence between
the trigrams and the planets of astrology is obviously of great interest to a
western practitioner.
    In western occultism, the planets correspond to the Tree of Life of the
Qabalah; thus in establishing the correspondences between the trigrams and
the planets we also take a significant step to mapping the I Ching system to
the western esoteric tradition in general. The qualities of these
correspondences are quite convincing. The placement of the trigrams on the
Qabalistic Tree of Life will be explained in the following section, but even
without having clear explanations of methodology, even a cursory glance of
the correspondences as they relate to western imagery will make immediate
sense to any individuals with some basic knowledge of astrological
symbolism (whether or not they are familiar with the hermetic Qabalah).
The correspondences are as follows:

Trigram                  Planet
Heaven                   Saturn
Water                    Jupiter
Fire                     Mars
Sun                      Sun
Earth (element)          Venus
Air                      Mercury
Moon                     Moon
World                    Earth

    At first glance, some of these attributions might be confusing to those
not familiar with either the Qabalah or the western astrological attributions.
Saturn, the planet equivalent to Heaven, was the original lord of the
heavens; and in the Qabalah it is the planet that represents the highest state,
the level of reality beyond which creation itself ends. Jupiter is exalted in
Cancer, the cardinal sign of Water; and the Water trigram in the I Ching
represents the pleasant and complementary quality, reminiscent of Lao
Tzu’s Taoist teaching that “water is the supreme good”, just as Jupiter was
known as a great benevolent planet in western astrology. Mars is a fiery
planet, and represents the exciting power of the Fire trigram. The
correspondences for both the Sun and Moon trigrams are self-evident. The
Earth Element trigram connects to Venus, a very physical planet, which
includes the themes of sensuality in not only the romantic sense but also all
forms of emotional engagement in the world; Venus rules Taurus, the most
solid of the Earthly signs of the zodiac, and the Earth trigram has a strong
correlation to the Taurus qualities of stubbornness, prudence, and
simultaneously pleasurable engagement in the most basic of sensuality. The
Air trigram is tied to Mercury, and that is not surprising at all, as Mercury
symbolizes swift movement, intellect, the mind, and thought, all of which
are deeply connected to the Air trigram concept. Finally, The World is
clearly the Earth, the final receptive force of all other planetary influences.

     The I Ching and the Qabalistic Tree of Life
    Like the I Ching, the Qabalah is a system of cosmology; it tries to
organize the nature of reality by ordering it according to stages, and through
visual symbolism. The Qabalah originated as a Jewish mystical practice in
the middle ages (evolving from earlier mystical practices in the Hebrew
tradition), but the Qabalah as practised by most western magicians is not the
same as the Hebrew Qabalah taught in orthodox Judaism or in trendy
Hollywood “Qabalah Centres”. It is instead termed the “Hermetic Qabalah”
and dates to the fifteenth century when non-Jewish scholars, taking an
interest in the study of Hebrew to better comprehend the Old Testament in
its original language, came across the Qabalistic writings and were
immediately entranced by their mysteries. These “Hermetic Qabalists”
originally sought to use the Qabalah to find parallels or proofs of Christian
doctrine in Hebrew mysticism, but from there the study evolved to a
magical tool of extreme utility. The Qabalah, as they understood it, sought
out the hidden connections between all things, and could thus be used in
magick to understand the correspondences of all symbols. The Hermetic
Qabalah evolved in its own direction on parallel lines with the Hebrew
Qabalah so that while they began from the same sources, they became
increasingly different from one another over the centuries.
    The Hermetic Qabalah understands the system not as something
contained within or limited to Hebrew scripture and dogma, but as a
universal system, capable of expressing the nature of reality in a form
separate from any particular religious expression of that reality. The Tree of
Life, a fundamental symbol of the Qabalah, allows one to place any thing at
all (any name, image, object, deity, number, sign, planet, spirit, scent,
animal, plant, mineral, part of the body, or any other thing material or
immaterial, or any idea or concept) on one of its ten spheres or twenty-two
paths. This is very much the same idea as that expressed in the I Ching
system, where Confucians confidently state that somewhere within the
sixty-four hexagrams, eight trigrams, and the yin and yang or the Tai-ji
(Tao), you can categorize any phenomenon in time or space.
    It would take an entire book of its own to explain the full details of the
Hermetic Qabalah (to those interested I would recommend the writings of
Israel Regardie, Aleister Crowley, Dion Fortune, or Lon Milo Duquette);
but for the purposes of the relationship between the Hermetic Qabalah and
the I Ching, the main symbol that needs to be explained is the Qabalistic
Tree of Life.




     Above is an image of the Tree of life with its ten spheres and twenty-
two paths. In this particular image of the Tree, the 22 paths are labelled
according to the card of the Major Arcana of the Tarot that corresponds to
each path; but each path similarly corresponds to one of the twenty-two
letters of the Hebrew alphabet (as well as many other things).
     The ten spheres (“sephira”) represent ten different levels of reality; they
also correspond to different planets, deities, and forces. The paths represent
connections between one sphere and another, and thus concepts that unite
one force to the other.
    The expression of reality actually begins above the Tree of Life, with
nothingness. This nothingness is called Ain (nothing), then Ain Soph
(limitless), and finally Ain Soph Aur (the limitless light). All three of these
are emptiness, but of different kinds; the latter is what in Buddhism is called
“luminous emptiness”, a nothingness pregnant with potential. In the
symbolism of the I Ching, this is equivalent to the “primordial Tao”, Tao as
Emptiness.
    From this emptiness manifests absolute Oneness, a oneness so
completely singular that it has no definition, there is no way to adequately
define it. This is the sphere of Kether (“the crown”), the beginning of the
Tree of Life. This is the Tao as Oneness, the Tao Tai Ji.
    This Oneness, Kether, inherently contains within it the potential for
duality. This duality manifests as the second and third spheres: Chokmah
(“Wisdom”) and Binah (“Understanding”), which are opposites to one
another, masculine and feminine. At this level of reality, the singular point
can now be definable by opposites, there is a theoretical form. Chokmah
and Binah represent pure Yang and pure Yin.
    Together, the first three spheres form a “Supernal Triad”; they are
theoretical form, beyond all actual form. They are symbolically separated
from the lower spheres by an Abyss, which is described as Daath,
“Knowledge”. It marks the furthest boundary of structural creation; and it is
correspondent to Saturn. It is thus also correspondent to the Heaven trigram.
    On the other side of the Abyss you find Chesed (“mercy”) which adds
structure; a triangle can now become a pyramid, you achieve solid form.
Chesed corresponds to Jupiter and thus to the Water trigram. A fifth sphere,
Geburah (“strength”) adds the concept of movement, a sphere which can
now operate in different co-ordinates over Time. This motion is represented
by Mars, and the Fire trigram in the I Ching.
    The sixth sphere, Tiphareth (“beauty”) represents the return to the
middle pillar, and the development of pure form into Consciousness. The
matter that now has depth and motion (and thus exists in time) can now also
be aware of itself. It corresponds to the Sun and thus to the Sun trigram.
    Once Consciousness is manifest, it develops emotion and intellect; these
are symbolized by the seventh and eighth spheres, Netzach (“victory”) and
Hod (“splendour”). They correspond to Venus and Mercury, and thus to the
Earth and Air trigrams respectively.
    These unite and emanate the ninth sphere, Yesod (“Foundation”). This
is conception, creativity, the imagination, the archetypal world. It
corresponds to the Moon, and thus to the Moon trigram.
    Finally, the emanations of all the other levels descend into pure solid
matter, our actual material world. This is Malkuth (“the kingdom”), it
corresponds to the planet Earth and to The World trigram.
    One important teaching found at the very core of the Qabalah is that
“Kether is in Malkuth and Malkuth is in Kether”. This means that, like the I
Ching cosmology, the Tree of Life is cyclical. Although its image appears
perhaps a bit more static than the changes obvious in the I Ching system,
the Tree of Life is meant to represent a process of cycling; and indeed the
system of divination most associated with it, the Tarot, is often referred to
as a Wheel (the terms TARO and ROTA (wheel) being anagrams).
    There is another important aspect to this teaching: it reveals that within
each sphere, each concept contains within it the nature of all the other parts
of the Tree. In the same way, we can understand that every trigram contains
within it the essence of all the other trigrams in potentiality (as well as the
Yin, the Yang, and the Tao itself). Similarly, every hexagram has the
potentiality of every other hexagram within it, as is evident from the system
for generating new hexagrams through changing lines. While some
hexagrams are more likely to emerge from any given hexagram, in theory
under the right conditions any hexagram may transform into any other
hexagram in the future.
    ***
    The correspondences of the hexagrams themselves to the I Ching are
somewhat more in doubt. Much less work has been done to form a truly
credible model. A number of approaches have been attempted, but each
should be taken only as theoretical.
    One clue that is immediately notable is the fact that the ten sephira plus
the twenty-two paths make for thirty-two keyed “points” in the Tree of Life;
one could thus assume that for each of these points you could fit two of the
sixty-four hexagrams of the I Ching! Thus one postulated model for
correspondences suggests simply putting the sixty four hexagrams, in order
of the standard King Wen sequence, attributed two per point on the tree:

Hexagram Pair                          Sphere/Path
1&2                                    Kether
3&4       Chokmah
5&6       Binah
7&8       Chesed
9 & 10    Geburah
11 & 12   Tiphareth
13 & 14   Netzach
15 & 16   Hod
17 & 18   Yesod
19 & 20   Malkuth
21 & 22   Aleph/Fool/Air
23 & 24   Beth/Magus/Mercury
25 & 26   Gimel/Moon/High Priestess
27 & 28   Daleth/Venus/Empress
29 & 30   Heh/Aquarius/Star
31 & 32   Vau/Taurus/Hierophant
33 & 34   Zain/Gemini/Lovers
35 & 36   Cheth/Cancer/Chariot
37 & 38   Teth/Leo/Lust
39 & 40   Yod/Virgo/Hermit
41 & 42   Kaph/Jupiter/Fortune
43 & 44   Lamed/Libra/Adjustment
45 & 46   Mem/Water/Hanged Man
47 & 48   Nun/Scorpio/Death
49 & 50   Samekh/Sagittarius/Art
51 & 52   Ayin/Capricorn/Devil
53 & 54   Peh/Mars/Tower
55 & 56                                 Tzaddi/Aries/Emperor
57 & 58                                 Qoph/Pisces/Moon
58 & 60                                 Resh/Sun/Sun
61 & 62                                 Shin/Fire/Aeon
63 & 64                                 Tau/Saturn/Universe

    It seems that the only particular advantage of this approach to
correspondence is its simplicity. Examined honestly, it appears to be an
arbitrary superimposition of the King Wen sequence on a completely
different way of ordering symbols, the Tree of Life. There is no particular
reason why the process of organization of the Tree should be identical to
those of the Hexagrams, as they begin with different underlying processes.
Both seek to symbolically organize reality, but that does not mean they’re
going to do the organizing in the same way. If one were planning to take
two library systems, where one was ordered alphabetically by title, and the
other ordered according to year of publication, it would not work to just
overlap them straight; there would be a need to adapt one to fit the other.
    The logical course would seem to be to try to map the hexagrams to
their corresponding places on the Tree of Life based on the planetary
correspondences of the Trigrams. With all of these present on the Tree, this
would be the most sensible course; but it immediately encounters a
complication. While the I Ching allows for any combination of two forces,
the Tree of Life does not allow for that in its image; there is no way to
connect Water and Air directly, for example. Thus, through this method we
face the possibility that while the entire Tree could be mapped to the I
Ching system, the I Ching system is too detailed to be mapped in its entirety
on the Tree of Life. Those areas that do have direct correspondences are as
follows:

Sphere/Path                    I Ching Hexagram
Kether                         (Tao)
Chokmah                        (Yang)
Binah                          (Yin)
Chesed                         58
Geburah                    51
Tiphareth                  30
Netzach                    52
Hod                        57
Yesod                      29
Malkuth                    2
Aleph/Fool/Air             (none) (possibly 9 and 44)
Beth/Magus/Mercury         (none) (possibly 9 and 44)
Gimel/Moon/High Priestess 1 (found in Daath)
                           (none)   (possibly     lesser
Daleth/Venus/Empress
                           Yin/Yang*)
Heh/Aquarius/Star          13
Vau/Taurus/Hierophant      10 and 43
Zain/Gemini/Lovers         14
Cheth/Cancer/Chariot       25 and 34
Teth/Leo/Lust              17 and 54
Yod/Virgo/Hermit           38 and 49
Kaph/Jupiter/Fortune       31 and 41
Lamed/Libra/Adjustment     21 and 55
Mem/Water/Hanged Man       32 and 42
Nun/Scorpio/Death          22 and 56
Samekh/Sagittarius/Art     63 and 64
Ayin/Capricorn/Devil       37 and 50
Peh/Mars/Tower             18 and 53
Tzaddi/Aries/Emperor       4 and 39
Qoph/Pisces/Moon           15 and 23
Resh/Sun/Sun                 48 and 59
Shin/Fire/Aeon               20 and 46
Tau/Saturn/Universe          7 and 8

    *: These are the two-line combinations of one Yin and one Yang line.
Likewise, the paths of Aleph and Beth may represent greater Yang and
greater Yin respectively; these are two lines of both-solid or both-broken
lines.
    This system for correspondences leaves twenty hexagrams absent. Thus
it is in no way fully satisfactory, and much speculation would need to
follow in order to “fill in” where those remaining hexagrams would be
assigned. We would have to presume, under this system, that in some way
the hexagrams that are not directly expressible on the Tree of Life would
have the following attributions:

Hexagram                               Attribution
3                                      From Yesod to Geburah
5                                      From Yesod to Daath/Supernal Triad
6                                      From Daath/Supernal Triad to Yesod
9                                      From Hod to Daath/Supernal Triad
16                                     From Geburah to Malkuth
19                                     From Malkuth to Chesed
24                                     From Malkuth to Geburah
                                       From Netzach to Daath/Supernal
26
                                       Triad
27                                     From Netzach to Geburah
28                                     From Chesed to Hod
                                       From Daath/Supernal       Triad    to
33
                                       Netzach
35                                     From Tiphareth to Malkuth
36                                     From Malkuth to Tiphareth
40                                     From Geburah to Yesod
44                                     From Daath/Supernal Triad to Hod
45                                     From Chesed to Malkuth
47                                     From Chesed to Yesod
60                                     From Yesod to Chesed
61                                     From Hod to Chesed
62                                     From Geburah to Netzach

    Finally, there are other possibilities to consider in mapping the I Ching
to the western esoteric system. From the very origins of the Qabalah
onward, there have been alternate models or depictions of the Tree of Life.
For example, the Sefer Yetzirah (one of the oldest qabalistic texts) presents
a circular Tree of Life; this is repeated in the writings of the profoundly
influential Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (a group that was deeply
formative to Aleister Crowley at the beginning of his magical career),
where the Golden Dawn material speculated on a model for the Tree of Life
presented as a three-dimensional sphere (the model was used primarily to
map the tree of life against the Zodiac, but there’s no reason a similar model
could not be attempted to map the Tree of Life to the cosmology of the I
Ching).
    Another possible model is the Cube of Space. This is a model mapping
the Hebrew Alphabet (and mysteries of the Qabalah) to a cubic form. It too
has its origins in the Sefer Yetzirah, and in the twentieth century was greatly
developed for the Hermetic Qabalah by Paul Foster Case (among others).
    On a final note, it cannot be discounted that there may be ways to obtain
correspondences between the Tarot (which is thoroughly correspondent to
the Tree of Life) and the Tree itself. The groundwork is already in the tables
above. Mapping seventy eight cards to sixty four hexagrams may seem a
challenge, but a possible key could be in the adding together of the
hexagrams, the eight trigrams, the four two-line forms (the “greater and
lesser Yin and Yang”), and the two single-line Yin and Yang forms. You
thus end up with seventy eight entries, which could theoretically be mapped
to the seventy eight cards of the Tarot.
     Yi-Fa as a Magical Word and Current
    Chapter One of this book explained the context of the term “Yi-Fa”, the
“manifested state”, as “the Law of Change”. It is my position that this
concept should be seen as a keystone to understanding the relationship
between the I Ching and esoteric practice, as well as the way to
comprehend the I Ching’s function in measuring space and time. It is an
important concept because it creates context for how the I Ching should be
approached as a divination practice; but more importantly, how the I Ching
can be used as a sophisticated guidebook for magical philosophy. It relates
the I Ching in a fundamental fashion to western occultism and particularly
to the philosophical implications of Thelema.
    While in the first chapter I approached this word in its original context
of Confucian history, here I would like to examine it as a magical word and
current, to describe in archetypal terms its “force” as a governing principle
of the I Ching. And its magical levels and implications are profound.
    If we were to examine the “Hermetic Qabalah” of “Yi-Fa” we could
explore the word as “II VH”, which by gematria (qabalistic numerology)
corresponds to the number thirty-one, a key number in Thelemic practice.
This ties it to the Thelemic current, and to the Book of the Law. The
number thirty-one corresponds to “AL” (“god”, “everything”) as well as
“LA” (“emptiness”, “not”). It also corresponds to “HVK” (the verb “to
go”), which implies the moveable quality of the I Ching and the entire
philosophy of the “Law of Change”.
    “Yi-Fa” can be understood as the “Way of Change”; “way” in the sense
of both a path, and also as a method. It is where you are going and what you
are doing, all at once. It is both what you must embody, and where you
must approach.
    Visually, “II” implies an empty space between boundaries. It can be
thought of as the twin pillars that frame the Qabalistic Tree of Life; or
likewise the black and white columns found on either side of several cards
of the Tarot, particularly the High Priestess, guardian of the mysteries.
These evolve into the two towers that mark the borders in the Moon card.
    VH, on the other hand, can be seen as the path between these
pillars/towers; for as “II”/Yi is the polarity of “change”, “VH”/Fa is the
constancy of “the way”. In the Moon trump, this path is the path toward the
Sun (the subsequent card), and stylistically the “V” implies this deep valley,
the cliff one falls from the Tower of false stability, into the deep waters of
the unconscious (seen at the very bottom of the Moon card). The path
emerges from this, it creates a bridge between the dark of the deep
subconsciousness and the light of the higher self or “True Will”. The letter
“H” stylistically resembles a bridge between the two towers of “II”; the
visible path that brings one into the garden of the Sun.
    In all this mystical symbolism, it is important to remember that the key
of any path, of the verb “to go”, is to actually move, and take action in the
world. Fundamentally, the Yi-Fa is not something to merely speculate upon,
but to live through regular and steady practice and progress.
    I should note that none of this is conventional to I Ching academia,
much less to typical fortune-tellers. This is my own manifesto. No attempt
is being made to bow here to either academic or Confucian orthodoxy; I
present this as something inspired by the works of Zhu Xi, but this is my
own declaration. It is the product of my attainment.
                           Chapter Five
    The Shao Yung “Plum Blossom Method” of I
               Ching Numerology
     As explained in the first chapter, Shao Yung was one of the great
innovators in the practice of the I Ching; he could almost certainly be
considered the most significant figure in I Ching studies outside of those
nearly legendary figures that are credited with forming the very canon of
the I Ching (Fu Xi, King Wen, and Confucius). He was notable as an
outsider from the institutional mainstream (as indeed Confucius himself
was in his own times), and for being a great defender of the necessity of
actual use of the I Ching as a divination system and system of practice,
rather than just a document for intellectual study (once again, a view that
was largely in opposition to the conventional wisdom of the intelligentsia of
his own age; and likewise paralleled Confucius’ own views and situation in
his own life).
     Shao Yung was responsible for many innovations or discoveries in I
Ching studies. He was almost certainly the one truly responsible for
conceiving of the “early heaven” directional model for the trigrams, even
though it was attributed to Fu Xi; he was likewise the most instrumental in
elucidating the nature of the I Ching as a system of binary code. But most
importantly, he designed (or, if the legend is to be believed, received from a
mysterious “old sage” which may in fact have been an allegory for his own
higher self) an entirely novel system of I Ching divination. Because the key
of how to apply this method was discovered while observing a plum tree, it
is called the “Plum Blossom” (or sometimes “plum flower”) method.
     There are several unique and interesting features to this system: in the
first place, it is not a standard “divination” method because it does not rely
on a (seemingly) random generation of a hexagram (in the way that casting
staves, yarrow stalks, or coins do). Instead, it is based on a series of
mathematical calculations, or alternately on the intuitive observation of
nature. In this sense, it is in some ways more similar to Astrology than to
generating systems like the Tarot, Runes, or the standard methods of I
Ching castings. It is most accurately described as a system of temporal
numerology, because in its most fundamental form it derives a hexagram
through the analysis of dates and times. This also means that the Plum
Blossom system is ideal for careful predictive forecasts based on
determining dates and times. It can thus be used to examine the process of
events starting from specific moments, to obtain a “natal hexagram” of the
date and time of your birth, or for judging the “auspiciousness” of particular
dates with relation to particular activities.
    While there have been a handful of books published that detail the Plum
Blossom method (or at least make reference to it), on the whole this is one
area of I Ching studies that has been underdeveloped in the west. In part
because it has only been in the last couple of decades that western students
of the I Ching have really moved beyond the most fundamental core part of
the I Ching canon in terms of studies; and the Plum Blossom method is
certainly not a part of the traditional Canon of the I Ching. There is also a
further problem involved with the Plum Blossom method: it depends largely
on the use of the Chinese calendar. This means that to be used properly, a
western date needs to be converted into its correct numerical equivalents in
the Chinese (lunar) calendar, a calendar which changes in relative position
to the western calendar every year.
    For some writers, the “solution” to this problem was simply to ignore
the situation, and present the method using western dates and times. But
this ignores the significance of the system as relating to geomantic and
astrological concepts. As a mere fortune-telling oracle, it would likely still
have value (in the same sense that you could tell someone that a tarot card
can “just mean whatever you feel like it means”); but then why bother with
the rest of the method at all? One might as well take this approach to its
logical conclusion and simply tell practitioners to pick any two trigrams
their intuition leads them to pick (and once again, there can be a certain
value to that). Fortunately, the advent of the internet has continued to
simplify matters for practitioners of all kinds of magical practices in terms
of obtaining information, and Chinese Calendar conversions are no
exception. It is now easier than it ever was before in the west to quickly
convert the dates correctly, as the material below will explain, and thus the
one real barrier to using the Plum Blossom method in its full context has
now been overcome.
    Before proceeding, it should be noted that there are many different
presentations of “Plum Blossom method” I Ching that vary considerably in
their methodology. What will be presented here is not exclusive or
definitive, but it is what I believe to be both the core of the system as well
as the most useful part. Because the Plum Blossom method was less
supported by Confucian orthodoxy, and was conversely widely embraced
by professional fortune tellers (part of its appeal was that it laid less reliance
on the I Ching as a book; some go so far as to create variant methods that
don’t use the actual text of the I Ching at all!), there is far more diversity of
methods.
     The first step to generating a Plum Blossom method hexagram is to
figure out a way to relate a value to the theme of the reading: the ideal is to
be able to tie the reading to a particular date. This could be, for example,
the birth date of the person in question, if what you are aiming for is an
“astrology chart”-style overall analysis of the person and the course of his
life. Other possibilities would include significant dates and times related to
the issue. It is not enough to simply use the present date and time, unless the
issue in question is one that requires immediate resolution (at this date, and
at this very time). Questions that are most suited for a Plum Blossom
method reading (as opposed to a standard I Ching casting) are enquiries
such as: “would x time be the right moment to start this new project?”;
“should I quit x on such-and-such date?”; “what will be the broad issues
related to the lifespan of a person born on x date?”; “what are the broad and
general events and issues related to a period of time beginning on date x?”,
etc.
     As the information below will explain, it is also possible to engage in
comparative readings, where one might look at the “compatibility” between
two dates. For example, to compare the birth date of a person to the current
date in order to see if the overall situation is favourable or inauspicious for
them, or to compare the birth dates of two people to judge if one person will
be “compatible” with the other. Finally, if the issue cannot reasonably be
connected to a particular date at all, the mechanics of the Plum Blossom
method could still be explored through the combination of an exploration of
the present time to generate one trigram and an intuitive “augury” of some
significant characteristic of the issue to generate the other component
trigram.
     To generate a hexagram through the standard Plum Blossom method,
you must calculate the number values of the hour, day, month, and year
based on the Chinese calendar.
   Number values for the hour are determined by the following
method:


Western Hour                   Hour Value
11pm-1am                       1
1am-3am                        2
3am-5am                        3
5am-7am                        4
7am-9am                        5
9am-11am                       6
11am-1pm                       7
1pm-3pm                        8
3pm-5pm                        9
5pm-7pm                        10
7pm-9pm                        11
9pm-11pm                       12

    Note that for a “birth chart” it is necessary to know the subject’s hour of
birth within a two-hour range; without it, one cannot use the standard
method to generate a hexagram. This is unfortunate for those who do not
have this information, but it is too crucial a part of the generation method to
be avoidable. Aside from replacing the numerical method of generation
with the more “intuitive” method (which I feel is particularly unsuitable for
a “natal chart” type of reading), the only other advice which could really be
offered to someone in this situation is to try to generate a hexagram based
on some other date (where the time is also known) relevant to the subject
the individual is most interested in learning about.
    The day, month, and year are all based on the Chinese Lunar Calendar.
The year’s number value is easy enough to generate, as it is keyed to the
Chinese Zodiac (which has by now become a common cultural detail in the
West):
Chinese Zodiac Year:          Number Value:
Rat                           1
Ox                            2
Tiger                         3
Rabbit/Hare                   4
Dragon                        5
Snake                         6
Horse                         7
Goat/Sheep                    8
Monkey                        9
Rooster                       10
Dog                           11
Boar/Pig                      12

    Western years correspond to the Chinese Zodiac Year around the first
two months of the year; the precise date of the Chinese New Year varies
from year to year (due to the use of the Lunar calendar with occasional
“leap months”); so the Chinese New Year can happen any time between
early January and late February. Most of 2014 (from 31 January)
corresponds to the year of the Horse; 2015 (from 19 February) to the year
of the Goat, 2016 (from 8 February) to the year of the Monkey, etc.
Similarly, 2013 was the year of the Snake, 2012 the year of the Dragon,
2011 the year of the Rabbit, and so on.
    The “Month” number values are thus the lunar months starting from the
Chinese new year, and do not precisely correspond to western months,
although very rough approximations can be attempted based on the
information above. The date is based on the twenty-nine or thirty daylong
months of the lunar calendar. For example, as the year of the Horse began
on 31 January 2014, the western date of 26 February 2014 would be the
twenty-seventh day of the first month of the seventh (horse) year.
    Clearly, it would be very complicated if one had to resort to trying to
calculate the Chinese calendar date from scratch. Similarly, if having to
learn Chinese in order to read a Chinese calendar were necessary, the Plum
Blossom method would be inaccessible to most westerners. Fortunately,
neither of these are required in this day and age; the internet has several
sources for conversions that make the whole process relatively painless.
One of the best of these as of the time of this writing is the website of the
Hong Kong observatory, which lists conversion charts from 1901-2100:
    http://www.hko.gov.hk/gts/time/conversion1_text.htm

    Once you have acquired the relevant number values you can generate
the component trigrams. To generate the lower trigram you would need to
add the number values of the hour, day, month and year, then divide this
total by eight. The resulting remainder (note: the remainder, not a decimal
value) will produce a trigram:

Remainder              Trigram
1                      Heaven
2                      Water
3                      Sun
4                      Fire
5                      Air
6                      Moon
7                      Earth
8 (0)                  World

    For example, if we were to use the date above of 26 February, 2014,
with the time of 10:30am, we would end up adding the following number
values:
    1(month) + 27 (day) + 7 (year) + 6 (hour) = 41
    Divided by eight we generate 41/8 = 5, with a remainder of 1 (as 8 x 5 =
40, and 41 – 40 = 1). Observing the list of Trigrams we see that 1 equals the
Heaven trigram.
    To generate the upper trigram, we would add the day, month, and year
values (without the hour), then likewise divide by eight and use the
remainder to obtain the trigram. In the above example we would thus have:
   1(month) + 27 (day) + 7 (year) = 35
   35 / 8 = 4, with a remainder of 3
   From the list of Trigrams we see that 3 equals the Sun trigram. Thus our
complete hexagram is #14, Great Holdings, Sun over Heaven:




    In most cases of operating with the Plum Blossom method we will also
want to generate a changing line (in this method, only a single changing
line is ever used). To generate the changing line, we would use the same
number values as for the lower trigram (time, month, day, and year), but in
this case divide by six rather than eight; the resulting remainder (with
remainder 0 counting as “6”) would indicate the changing line. Note that, as
before, you could generate the changing line by some intuitive or
alternative method instead (for example, dividing the hour of the subject, or
even of the actual reading, into six ten-minute parcels and using that
number of the time as the changing line number, or looking for a number
value in your surroundings, between one and six, to designate for the
changing line). Some mathematicians have pointed out that by using the
same value for the lower trigram as for the changing line (as Shao Yung’s
method does), this will end up excluding the possibilities of certain
changing lines ever being selected for certain hexagrams; and have then
suggested various alternate methods for correcting this “anomaly”.
However, given Shao Yung’s obvious mathematical knowledge, it seems
unlikely he wouldn’t have been well aware of this situation himself and
must have considered it a feature, rather than a “bug” of his methods.
Although this method’s anomaly seems problematic, I think it would be
naive to simply jump to find some other simplified solution. While it is
something that I have been considering for some time now, even in the
many years I have studied, I do not yet feel qualified to claim that any other
method would actually be more accurate. Thus I present to you the system
as Shao Yung did it.
    In this case, the month, day, year and hour values adding to 41, we
have:
    41 / 6 = 6, with a remainder of 5. Thus the fifth line is the changing line
of this particular reading. This generates our future hexagram, which in this
case happens to be #1, Creation:




    In the Plum Blossom method it is also considered of great importance to
observe the nuclear hexagram, as it reflects the inner or hidden qualities of
the situation (not of the individual in question, note, but the situation itself).
The nuclear hexagram is generated by the usual fashion. In our example,
combining the second, third, and fourth lines of Hexagram #14 we get the
Heaven trigram; and combining the third, fourth, and fifth lines of the
hexagram we get the Water trigram. Thus the Nuclear Hexagram is #43,
“Resolve”:




     These are the three hexagrams used in a Plum Blossom method reading.
     After generating the hexagrams, the next step is to determine the
“subject” trigram. The “subject” trigram (called “Ti” in Chinese) is the
source of the reading; in the case of the reading being about a person, it
represents the core of that person (likewise if the reading is about an object
it represents that object, or situation, etc.). The “subject” trigram is always
the trigram of the original hexagram that does NOT contain the moving
line. In our example, with Hexagram #14, as the changing line is line 5
(thus, in the upper trigram), the “subject” trigram is the lower trigram,
Heaven. All of the other trigrams of the reading are viewed relative to this
one, and are called “fate” trigrams. The fate trigrams (originally called
“Yong”) are the representation of the different environments or forces
acting upon the subject. These are going to be of paramount importance,
and are the great innovation of the Plum Blossom method; where the
trigrams are compared to one another according to their compatibility to
determine the details of auspiciousness or in-auspiciousness in the situation.
It is by examining how the elemental trigrams interact with one another that
detailed interpretations are laid out.
     First, however, one should review the images of each hexagram,
considering carefully what those images elicit in one’s mind. Just as Shao
Yung developed the real practical key of this method while observing a
plum blossom tree, this method is one that demands a certain kind of
contemplative trance-state. More so than the regular I Ching method, the
Plum Blossom method requires that the users turn off their minds just a
little, and allow the image and lines of the hexagrams, of the elemental
trigrams, of the scenes they create, to evoke concepts and insights in the
readers’ consciousness. In some cases, as with the story of Shao Yung and
his son trying to determine what their neighbour’s visit was about, just
consideration and contemplation on the component trigrams may reveal an
answer (and just like in that story, whether you can accurately guess that
answer will depend on a combination of your experience in divination
practice, and your consideration and awareness of the nature of things at
this very moment). Shao Yung made it very plain that if you do not pause,
contemplate, observe nature at the moment, and tie all this into your
operation, you are bound to make mistakes.
     Beyond this contemplation, one should also review the main text and
especially the changing line oracle of the hexagram; as well as the image
and main texts of the nuclear and resulting “future” hexagram. In some
schools of Plum Blossom I Ching, this is almost entirely skipped; a few
schools teach only to look at the one changing line, a few ignore even that
and focus only on image and the interaction of elements, without referring
to the actual text of the I Ching at all! This, however, seems to be a step too
far born out of the less rigorous “fortune telling” practices of the Chinese
equivalent of street-psychics, wary of Confucian intellectualism, and
wishing only to rely on their own “psychic insights” without any
inconvenient framework to oblige any kind of rigour or discipline. In my
own experience, at least, the study of the main text and line oracle remain
absolutely central to the practice of the Plum Blossom method.
     This achieved, we now additionally obtain information based on the
comparison of the elemental qualities (information that, in my experience,
must be interpreted within this context of the hexagram meanings and
changing lines). The elements are compared to each other, and follow set
rules by which certain elements generate others, certain elements strengthen
others, some clash with others, some drain or reduce others, and some
eliminate others. These relationships are based on the relation of the
elemental trigrams to the “Wu Xing”, the Five Phases.
    In some books the Wu Xing is translated as the “five elements”, as they
appear to also be an elemental system, with the names of wood, fire, earth,
metal, and water. However, these are neither terrestrial nor celestial
elements in the sense of the I Ching trigrams. They most closely correspond
to states of growth and decline similar to the three Gunas of Indian
occultism or the three Alchemical Elements (salt, sulphur, mercury) of
western occultism. They describe phases of transition.
    The five phases have been popularized and bastardized to the point that,
in modern uses in both East and West (in things like mundane Feng Shui)
there is very little understanding of their ancient meaning. In the oldest
surviving texts where they are discussed it is very clear that these Phases do
not describe states of matter, but of “Virtues”, powers, they are ways of
tracking states of change. In these oldest texts, they were most often
compared to the course of the seasons in nature; they mainly deal with
cycles and processes.
    It is (fortunately) not essential to really understand the mysteries of the
Five Phases in order to use the Plum Blossom method, but for those who
want to understand the underlying principles of the method, it should be
noted that the rules for how trigrams interact with one another are based
upon the relationship these trigrams have with the Five Phases.
    The Phases are:

   1. “Wood”/Spring/Generation: the start of growth
   2. “Fire”/Summer/Flowering: the peak of growth, the solstice.
   3. “Earth”/Late Summer/Plateau: the period of prolonged stability
   4. “Metal”/Fall/Decline: the period where process is deteriorating.
   5. “Water”/Winter/Barrenness: the absolute bottom of the process,
winter solstice, movement has stopped (until, naturally, spring begins the
phases anew).
   The Eight Trigrams are connected to these Phases as follows:

   1. Generation: Fire and Air.
   2. Flowering: Sun
   3. Plateau: Earth and The World
   4. Decline: Heaven and Water
    5. Barrenness: Moon
    There is great elegance in these correspondences. It is interesting to note
that two solstices have only one trigram associated with them, expressing
their relatively fleeting nature (the absolute peak or the absolute nadir are
both states that are inherently temporary). It is also interesting to note that
(contrary to the traditional Confucian relationships) in this Shao Yung set of
correspondences, the trigrams corresponding to “generation” are those
elements traditionally considered “masculine” in the West, while those
connected to “decline” are the western “feminine” elements. The
positioning of Heaven as “decline” might seem somewhat odd, but when
you have a force of such strength it can only possibly decline from there.
The Heaven trigram in this model could only be thought of as an “Indian
summer”, a last hurrah of force that is in fact predictive of things beginning
to fall apart (it conjures images of some late attempt at reform or return to
glory after a long period of stagnation).

     Fate Trigram
   To determine how any elemental trigram interacts with any other,
consult the table above.

     Explanation of Codes
   S: These fate trigrams strengthen the subject. The situation is positive
and easy at this stage; the subject and the situation are in mutual accord.
   R: These fate trigrams reduce the subject. The situation is inauspicious,
and only considerable effort, discipline, and hard work can prevail here.
The subject has the potential to be in command over the situation.
     C: These fate trigrams clash with the subject. The situation is
tumultuous, but this too can be auspicious. It is important to be very careful,
because it is easy for fortune to be disrupted. It is necessary to move
carefully, and take advantage of change without bringing on unnecessary
conflict or opposition. The subject must take command of the situation.
     E: These fate trigrams eliminate the subject. The situation is highly
inauspicious at this stage. It is only mitigated by judicious application of
virtue, and careful conservative choices. The situation overwhelms the
subject; it is beyond the subject’s control.
     G: These fate trigrams generate the subject. The situation has the
potential to be very auspicious, if the subject is willing to move along with
it. The situation is beyond the subject’s control; but if the subject accords to
the reality of the situation, the result is positive.
     To continue to apply our example of determining an augury for some
process related to the date 26 February, 2014 (at 10:30am): we had, at this
point, generated Hexagram #14 as our base hexagram, with #43 as its
nuclear hexagram and (with changing line 5) leading to hexagram #1 as the
future hexagram. The imagery of hexagram #14 (Great Holdings) is of the
Sun in splendour, the core message is of “riches and virtue”, and line 5
says: “In society he is sincere and confident, earning respect. Dignity is the
greatest wealth. Good fortune! (He is poor, but rich in dignity, honest and
bold in demeanour, and thus wins great regard)”. This forms the central
oracle, indicating that in spite of material difficulty, other qualities can
allow us to succeed.
     The Nuclear hexagram, “Resolve”, portrays the imagery of a lake
evaporating into the sky. The main text warns about the risk of being too
honest, and the importance of getting help from other sincere people; these
messages should be seen as underlying the message of the main hexagram.
     The future hexagram, “Creation”, contains the image of the four
Confucian virtues: “Sublime celestial forces in motion” (Love, Right
Conduct, Justice, and Wisdom). This is in continuity with the message of
the main hexagram (of demonstrating virtues to win regard). The promise
of the future hexagram text is that if one maintains a right course, reward
will be the result. It is already evident that the general reading is very
positive as to the events related to this date.
     The subject trigram of this reading is the Heaven trigram, the lower of
the two trigrams in hexagram #14, because it is the trigram that does not
have a changing line. To look at the interactions of the trigrams, we would
begin by comparing Heaven to the upper trigram, the Sun. Referring to the
table above, we see that the Sun trigram “eliminates” the Heaven trigram,
implying a very problematic situation where little can be done and that is
outside the Subject’s control to avoid. This may be the cause for the initial
consultation, and may relate to line 5 of the hexagram; if the reader was not
told the motive for the reading, he might surmise that the subject finds
himself in a situation where for reasons not of his own doing he is in serious
material difficulty and trying to find out how to change his situation for the
better.
     The lower trigram of the nuclear hexagram is Heaven, and this matches
and thus “strengthens” the subject. Furthermore, the upper Water trigram,
being representative of the same “phase”, likewise strengthens the subject.
Heaven and Water are both of the phase of decline; an analysis of the
trigrams from the perspectives of the five phases would thus suggest that
the present situation is one where the problem is at its peak (symbolized by
the Sun hexagram, which belongs to the “flowering” phase), and now the
crisis that has brought about the current problem is in a state of decline. The
initial period will be very difficult, as all the subject has to rely upon are his
personal virtues, but this will be enough. The problem will begin to
evaporate under the power of Heaven’s virtue (much like the imagery of a
lake evaporating into the sky in the nuclear hexagram); and assistance from
others that admire the subject’s virtue will lead into a prolonged period of
strengthening. This is confirmed by the two “strengthening” Heaven
trigrams in the future hexagram, where keeping the right course results in
reward.

   Summary of the Plum Blossom Method Standard
Procedure
  1. Calculate number values for date, time, month, and year, converted
     from the Chinese Lunar Calendar.
  2. Calculate lower trigram of main hexagram by adding values for:

                           Hour + Day + Month + Year

         then divide by 8 and use the remainder to determine the trigram.
  3. Calculate upper trigram of main hexagram by adding values for:

                               Day + Month + Year

         then divide by 8 and use the remainder to determine the trigram.
  4. Calculate the changing line of the hexagram by adding the values for:

                           Hour + Day + Month + Year

         then divide by 6, and the remainder is the line that is changing (a
     result with no remainder means line 6 is the changing line).
  5. Generate the Future hexagram in the standard fashion.
  6. Generate the Nuclear hexagram in the standard fashion.
  7. Study the image of the hexagram, as well as the main text description,
     and the changing line oracle.
  8. Study the images and main texts of the Nuclear hexagram and the
     Future hexagram. Contemplate all of the above carefully.
   9. In the main hexagram, the “Subject” trigram is the trigram that does
      not contain a changing line. Compare this trigram to each other trigram
      in turn on the list of elemental compatibilities; beginning with the
      other main hexagram trigram to determine the overall current situation,
      then with the lower and upper nuclear trigrams to determine the other
      influences upon the situation, and finally the two trigrams of the future
      hexagram to determine future developments of the situation.
    There are a few other details and tricks to consider in the “Plum
Blossom” method of I Ching numerology:
    Other ways of generating trigrams: If we cannot use time values,
several schools of Shao Yung’s method also make use of certain alternative
methods. Probably the most common (and one that records show Shao
Yung himself used) is to calmly observe one’s surroundings at the time of
preparing the hexagram. The idea is to look for hints in these surroundings
as to imagery that will relate to one of the Trigrams. Some of these will be
very literal: if one’s attention is drawn to a lit candle in front of one’s eyes,
for example, that would indicate the Fire trigram. Feeling a soft breeze or
draft might indicate the Air trigram. On the other hand, this observation
practice might also be less literal and instead form from a process of
intuitive connections; for example, one might hear music playing and
associate that with the Air element. Seeing something bright blue might
bring the Water element to mind. Some empty curved object (a bowl, for
example) might conjure up the image of the Moon trigram.
    This method can potentially be very fruitful; however it relies on having
a very trustworthy sense of intuition. The “changing line” in this case can
be derived from some numerical cue in the environment (noticing four
pieces of cutlery on the table in front of you, for example, may lead you to
conclude that the changing line is line 4). A very useful alternate method
would be to consider some symbol related to the subject of the reading; for
example, if someone had been worried about possibly losing his cellphone,
the quality of the cellphone itself might suggest the Heaven trigram to you
(although its nature as a communication device could just as easily suggest
the Air trigram; this is the difficulty of this method).
    Another very common method used by many Chinese Plum Blossom
readers is to generate a numerical value based on a word or name. This is
done by counting the number of brush-strokes required to draw the
ideogram of the word; dividing this by eight, and obtaining a remainder (as
with the date-focused method above) in order to find the hexagram. For
example, if a word required five brushstrokes, it would correspond to the
Air trigram; if a name required thirteen brushstrokes in total, it would also
correspond to the Air trigram (because 13/8 = 1, with 5 remainder). This
method does not automatically translate to the West, since western words
use letters rather than ideograms. It would be theoretically possible instead
to assign number values based on the number of pen-strokes required to
write a word, but clearly this is not quite the same. A few writers have
suggested instead that one could use a numerological value where one
would add the simple number-order value of a letter (ie. A=1, B=2, C=3,
etc). This last idea opens up an interesting possibility for the Qabalist; if
one used qabalistic gematria (the art of calculating a number value of a
word by using the numerical values of the Hebrew alphabet), this method
could suggest that any gematric number would have a trigram associated
with it. For example, the number 93 would correspond to the Air trigram (as
93/8 = 11, with 5 remainder). The Hebrew word Achad (“unity”) numerates
to 13, thus it too would have the Air trigram as its element.
    Calculating time scales using the Plum Blossom method: One of the
aspects of the Plum Blossom method, perhaps due to its popularity among
the more pragmatic fortune-tellers of Chinese culture, is the focus on trying
to make precise measurements of time scales. In China, fortune tellers are
expected to give very precise and accurate measurements, not vague
predictions; they are also usually consulted for very concrete questions
regarding practical and material concerns; being far less concerned with
“psychological” matters, and much more concerned with questions about
issues like specific work goals, marriage, children, investments,
construction, and so on. All of these demand some kind of relatively precise
temporal prediction.
    As before, there are a variety of schools of thought about how to judge
time-scales according to the Plum Blossom method; in fact, there may be
dozens of different ideas. And of course, the nature of the time-span of the
question affects how one might scale the answer: a question regarding
events that could take years to unfold will require a different time-scale than
those that require months, or weeks, or days.
    In terms of what are perhaps the most significant keys to the
relationship between time-measurement and the Plum Blossom system,
there are two specific attributions that are the most useful. The first relates
to the six lines of the hexagram. As with the standard I Ching system, it is
understood that from bottom to top, these lines represent progressive
developments; so clearly time flows from the lower line up to the top line,
with the lowest line representing the oldest force (that which is starting to
pass away into history) and the highest sixth line representing the newest
influence. Thus, in the Plum Blossom numerological system, these six lines
are also taken to represent six divisions in the flow of time. In some
interpretations, they can represent a six-month period, for example, with
one line per month. In this way, the main hexagram and future hexagram’s
component lines can be thought of as covering a full year period. It should
be noted that the line interpretations in the core text are not usually referred
to in this context; instead, the trigrams are considered (and the elemental
compatibility that is being experienced at that time), as well as whether the
line is Yin or Yang, and whether it is in a good position for its line (for
example, a solid line is well-dignified if it is in the first, third, or fifth place;
while it would be ill-dignified in the second, fourth or sixth place; and the
inverse applies to the broken lines). Likewise, the overall situation of the
lines are considered (for example, a broken line even in the third or fifth
place can be considered positive, or at least less negative, if it is surrounded
by strong solid lines supporting it both above and below).
    The other significant standard for the measurement of time in Plum
Blossom numerology is in the value of the lines. Yin lines (broken lines) are
valued at 6, while yang lines (solid lines) are valued at 9. These two
numbers can be used to represent any number of time measurements: hours,
days, weeks, months, years or more. In “natal chart” styles of Plum
Blossom readings, the age or duration of long term periods can be predicted
by calculating the lines, from the bottom up, as values of 6 or 9. This is
used especially in determining the “key period” of the changing line.
    In the “natal chart”, the changing line is considered to be the absolute
most significant or crucial period of the subject’s life, the part that will be
most defining. The date and age-range of this period can be determined by
this counting method. For example, in our sample reading above
(Hexagram #14), if we were to assume it was a “natal chart” for a person
born on 26 February, 2014 (10:30 am), the changing fifth line would
indicate that the most crucial period of a person’s life would begin at age
thirty seven and last until age forty two. This is because you have four Yang
lines below it (so 9 x 4 = 36) and the changing line itself is a Yin line (and
thus lasts six years).
    Clearly, a tremendous amount of intuition has to be applied in the use of
these types of calculations, as there is no hard and fast rule as to when or
how to apply them. The context of the reading, and the intuition of the
reader, must be used to determine just what kind of time scales these
numbers refer to.
    It is also worth repeating that these are not the only methods used. The
relative lack of “authoritative” rules in Plum Blossom practice is due to the
fact that while the I Ching’s canon has been studied, governed and regulated
to a certain extent by the Chinese Confucian “Academia” of the last two
thousand years, establishing concepts of what is orthodox and what is not,
Shao Yung’s system was decidedly unorthodox. While greatly respected in
Chinese society, Shao Yung was always a rebel and an outsider; he never
held significant offices, and his focus was on the use of the I Ching for
divination, something that the Confucian mainstream denigrated (except
those who were the most wise and learned of the Confucians, all of whom
ironically advocated the practice of divination). Thus, the Plum Blossom
system became a method largely given over to the diviners and the fortune-
tellers; the intellectual underclass who were not under any central authority.
Only time, tradition, and personal experiences of what actually works
allowed for certain methods to win out over certain others.
     To give just two other examples when it comes to time scales, that are
somewhat less reliable but may be of use: first, one can use the main
hexagram to predict a time scale within a 24 hour period. To do this, look
up the number associated with the two hexagrams (for example, Heaven is
1, Fire is 4, The World is 8, etc.) Add these together, and add them to the
number of the changing line. This gives you a period in hours. In our
example with Hexagram 14, we have Heaven (1) + Sun (3) + line (5),
meaning that the total period covered is nine hours long.
     Second, another way to predict a longer time scale would be to take the
number of the lower trigram, multiply it by ten, and then add it to the
number of the higher trigram and the changing line. So if we used this
method to predict a span of time with Hexagram #14, we have (1 x 10) + 3
+ 5 = 18. Hopefully this would not be used to predict a life expectancy!
     In my own opinion, these two methods seem more arbitrary and
generate less reliable results than the former two time scale methods
described above. But I include them as an example that the Plum Blossom
Method is a source of constant experimentation; while it follows certain
hard rules, it has constantly been modified and innovated in ways that the
more orthodox I Ching canonical material no longer experiences. This
continues to this day, where new writers have presented novel ideas for
Plum Blossom numerology, including attempts to convert the system so that
it is simplified for modern Chinese practitioners as well as westerners. No
doubt many of these experimental innovations will ultimately prove to be
unsuccessful, but the fact that such experimentation is still ongoing is (to
me, at least) a part of what makes the Plum Blossom system so fascinating.
                             Appendix I
             Setting up a Daily I Ching Practice
     All of the greatest Chinese thinkers whose writings on the I Ching have
stood the test of time have agreed on one fundamental point, often in spite
of other significant differences in their perspectives: all were in accord (and
usually contrary to the majority view in their intellectual culture) that the I
Ching could not be understood merely by reading it alone. So naturally, the
basic meaning of this is that one should actually use the I Ching for
divination. But if the point is also to use the I Ching as a guide to a deeper
spiritual practice (as part of one’s philosophy or as part of one’s “Great
Work” of transformation) it is also not enough to only read the I Ching, nor
even to read it and only occasionally use it in divination. The best way to
incorporate the I Ching into a serious spiritual practice is to actually make a
regular spiritual practice of it!
     So let us first assume that you have done the basics: read the I Ching
text, read as much of this book as you want to for your current level, and
begun to use the I Ching for divination. Inevitably, you will want to re-
examine the book at regular intervals (perhaps every six months or so),
since as a “living book” the I Ching will reveal new things to you to the
degree that you have been actively working with it. Likewise as your
studies and understanding grows, some of the additional material in this
book may become more comprehensible than it would have been at the very
first reading. Studying in this way is an ongoing process.
     Outside of these basics, it is also essential to have a schedule of daily
practice with the I Ching (if your goal is to reach the most profound levels
of understanding with it). For this, there are two steps that I think are vital.
But before elaborating on these, it is necessary to point out (a little
controversially) something that is not always realized: it is not vital to do an
I Ching casting every day.
     This is a position contrary to what many might think of as accepted
wisdom or common sense; many I Ching teachers would suggest that the
best way to work with the I Ching would be to cast a hexagram every single
day. However, doing so can become a problematic practice. One risk with I
Ching practice is that one might end up diluting it: if you are casting
hexagrams constantly, this can become a source of confusion or distraction
rather than a practice that creates clarity. You might “cheapen” the I Ching
into something too ordinary, that ends up preventing you from making an I
Ching casting into a spiritually significant event, into something that moves
you out of “normal space” and into a heightened space or state of
consciousness. The I Ching itself contains warning in its text about over-
consultation (witness hexagram #4 for the most obvious example of this
sort of warning). Doing a vague general casting each day will lead to the
attitude of trying to look for things to fit that casting in the course of your
day; it also creates a perspective of muddling the vastness of the I Ching.
Experiencing this, some people will react to this muddle by disconnecting
from the I Ching altogether, and being unable to find the insight of the
castings. Others might end up becoming over-dependent on the I Ching,
clinging to the notion of finding significance in the castings for every little
act that takes place (note that on some level this may be viable, but on a
practical level, it is usually counter-productive; unless one is a “Buddha” or
a “Master of the Temple” it is impossible to actually process this degree of
significance in all phenomena; and if one is at those levels, the I Ching will
not be necessary to find such significance in everyday events and
decisions). The over-use of castings can also lead to a situation where it is
the “persona” (the Inferior Person) that dominates interpretation; where you
will end up using the I Ching to tell you what your “ego” wants to hear.
Ultimately, the sense of uselessness this finally creates may lead a
practitioner to dismiss the utility of the I Ching altogether, blaming the tools
for the failure to use them properly and “throwing out the baby with the
bathwater”.
     But this is in no way to say that one should not be regularly engaging in
castings (on an as-needed basis); nor does it mean that the I Ching is limited
in the sense of only being meant for some pat definition of “exalted” or
“spiritual” questions. There’s no “taboo” subject in the I Ching, as long as it
is a subject that is actually of significance to you.
     In other words, you probably shouldn’t be asking the I Ching “Should I
go to the movies tonight”, unless that is a question of real significance and
importance to you. But if a subject does matter to you, then ask about it!
The I Ching is not something that should “only” be used for abstract
metaphysical ruminations, nor is it limited to only strictly material or
worldly concerns. It includes “everything under heaven”; so you can ask it
about your spiritual progress and the nature of reality, or you can ask it
about your investments, work, romance, vacations, family, or any other
mundane or personal questions. The real key is that one should cast the I
Ching when there is any situation actually worthy of casting about,
regardless what the subject of that question may be. This may mean that at
certain times, one might in fact be casting the I Ching on a daily basis
(whether to address an ongoing and developing matter, or a variety of
unconnected subjects that have all come up at the same time); while at other
times, one might only cast the I Ching for divination once every few weeks.
    So if the actual “practice” of the I Ching does not oblige one to actually
cast it for divination every day, what should constitute a daily practice?
    The first and foremost answer is the contemplation of the Hexagrams
themselves. There are several ways to handle this, and the goal is to
familiarize one’s self as much as possible with the hexagrams, and to do
this in such a way that one not only studies the text but also seeks to
understand the concepts and underlying significance. And it is here, and not
in casting itself, where one can select a hexagram per day and allow it to
permeate one’s thoughts, and to look for it (and for its component trigrams)
in the nature of our daily surroundings.
    The secondary answer is in keeping a record. Those readers who are
involved in the practice of magick will already be familiar with the
“magical diary”, where a practitioner keeps a daily record of his activities,
practices, rituals, any insights, results, mitigating circumstances (eg.,
physical health, emotional state, amount of sleep, etc.) and general
developments. The importance of keeping a diary is paramount: it is often
the most significant determining factor between success or failure in one’s
progress. If you can keep a record of your I Ching studies, and of I Ching
castings (how they turned out in terms of your forecasts, and what you have
learned from this), and then have the ability to review all of these records
months down the road, then you will grow and gain immensely in your
practice. It will allow you to be reminded of what you had forgotten, and
notice how your processes have changed and evolved.
    It cannot be emphasized strongly enough: among those who try to
engage in daily practice, the most important difference between success or
failure is whether or not you KEEP A DIARY.
    The diary could be a notebook, or an electronic record (but take care not
to lose it, make a backup); and you should record in it every day. This
creates a positive feedback-loop: writing in the diary will encourage you to
actually do the practice. Make a point of opening your diary every day even
if only to write “nothing to report today”; but usually, if you bother to open
it at all, you’ll decide to have something to report after all. It also
strengthens the hexagram study itself: it makes a huge difference to actually
have to copy information down, to draw the hexagram in a notebook, to
write down your thoughts and discoveries about it, than to just think about
these things in your head. Writing it down makes it more your own thing, it
internalizes and crystallizes the experience.
    The following provides a guideline for a set of daily I Ching exercises:
           0. Keep a diary, record in it daily. It is better to write your insights
      as quickly as possible; since insights, much like dreams, tend to slip
      away from your memory very quickly after they occur.
           1. Select a single hexagram to act as your subject for study for that
      day; it is probably best to go through the hexagrams in the order of
      the textual (King Wen) sequence, but one could theoretically choose a
      hexagram at random or by some other method.
           2. Begin your study by reading the whole section for that
      hexagram, and contemplate the significance of the image, governing
      lines, main text, commentary, advice for the Superior Individual, and
      line meanings.
           3. Once you have studied the text, pay attention to the hexagram
      itself. Look at the pairing of lines: the first and fourth, the second and
      fifth, the third and sixth. Do these complement each other (a broken
      line matching with a solid line)? Are the solid lines in their ideal
      positions (in lines 1, 3, or 5) and the broken lines in theirs (in lines 2,
      4, and 6)?
           4. The King Wen sequence, the order in which the hexagrams are
      arranged in the I Ching text, is based on sets of pairs; so look at each
      hexagram with its pair (1 with 2, 3 with 4, 5 with 6, etc., all the way
      to 61 with 62, and 63 with 64). Consider your hexagram of the day
      with relation to its paired hexagram: what is the message of these two
      in combination?
           5. Examine the changes of each line; see which hexagram results
      when you change line 1 of the hexagram, then if you change line 2,
      then line 3, and so on. This process of changing one line and seeing
      what results is a key way of understanding hidden mysteries in each
       line; and it creates a “tree” of hexagrams related to the one you are
       studying. Ask yourself what the relationship is between the way that
       one line is described in the text, and the way the new hexagram it
       would form is described in the text?
           6. Examine the nuclear hexagram; consider the ways in which the
       present hexagram is an unfolding of that nuclear hexagram. Consider
       the various other permutations as well: the reversed, opposite and
       overturned hexagrams.
    Depending on the amount of time you have at your disposal, you may
wish to cover all of these points each day; or you may wish to do only one
point at a time each day, or do a single point for sixty-four days, then
proceed to the next point in succession until you have eventually done each
of the different points of I Ching study in a gradual and progressive fashion.
    It is strongly recommended that you take notes of all your studies in
your diary; in fact, the first time you go through the core material (point 2
above) you should copy out the hexagram image, and the core text and lines
at least in point form, if not in full. This might seem like pointless busy-
work at first glance; after all, you own this book, so why would you need to
copy the material into a notebook?! However, there is a powerful effect on
the brain in copying out information with your own hand; it goes beyond
just reading, it rewires neural pathways at a level that does not happen by
merely glancing at the text. As you draw the hexagram, as you write out its
meanings, those images and meanings become your own within your
consciousness.
    This course of study is in addition to any castings you may perform,
which should also be meticulously recorded.
    All of this work is not easy; but the rewards are great. If you engage
with the I Ching on a daily basis, you will soon discover levels of
understanding that were not previously apparent. This will result in shifts of
consciousness in your everyday life: you will begin to look at your
surroundings differently, at your relationships differently, and at the nature
of time and change in different ways. You will find that through such study,
the ease and depth of your divination castings will increase remarkably. The
key is not in studying intensely, but in studying consistently. If you go
through working with the I Ching in fits and starts (going long periods
without referencing the work) then the opportunity for progress is more
limited, even if when you do study it you are doing a great amount of work.
In my own experience, it is much better to spend even ten or fifteen minutes
on the I Ching every day than to study the I Ching for five hours one day,
and then not at all for the next three. The practice progresses through
consistency and regular discipline (as the I Ching itself so often advocates);
so if there are days when you find yourself so harried that you cannot do the
whole of the study you had set out to do, it is still better at the very least to
give the I Ching some very minor, very short consideration, than to do
nothing at all. And as with any discipline, you will find that the more
regularly you practice it, the easier it will become to practice regularly.
                           Appendix II
               Aleister Crowley and the I Ching
     It would not be exaggeration to state that Aleister Crowley (1875-1947)
was the most influential figure in western occultism of the twentieth
century. He revolutionized ideas in ceremonial magick, incorporated raja-
yoga and other Indian teachings into western occultism in new and exciting
ways (that were more authentic to the spirit of the original sources than
previous attempts), founded the religion of Thelema, was directly
influential on the founder of Wicca (to the point that much of Crowley’s
ritual writing was cut-and-pasted into the original Gardnerian “Book of
Shadows”), and became a counterculture icon of the 1960s that significantly
influenced art, music, and film (and continues to do so).
     This appendix will not attempt to present his biography (there are many
other sources which can be found with a cursory search that do this job
admirably). Instead, it is meant to focus on one specific aspect of Crowley’s
life and work that was likewise tremendously revolutionary in the West:
Crowley’s relationship to the I Ching.
     Aleister Crowley was not the first westerner to have an encounter with
the I Ching; it had, after all, been known to westerners since the seventeenth
century at least, and Jesuit missionary priests had translated the text. What
makes Crowley remarkable was his approach to the I Ching (which was
novel), and the way he related the I Ching to his magical and Thelemic
system.
     It isn’t absolutely certain when Crowley first became aware of the I
Ching; there’s some possibility that his very first exposure to the I Ching
may have taken place in 1900, when Crowley was visiting San Francisco.
He may have seen the I Ching in practice in that city’s sizable Chinatown
(which would have contained various sensual delights of interest to him).
However, this is unverified. What is certain is that Crowley had definitely
experienced the I Ching by 1905, when he engaged in a lengthy trip across
parts of China. His diary records that by the time he had reached Shanghai,
his curiosity regarding the I Ching led him to commence what would
become a growing focus of his study for the remaining four decades of his
life.
    It is equally evident that while Crowley might have seen the I Ching in
use (be it in San Francisco or in China itself), he did not manage to find
anyone capable of instructing him personally in the traditional methods of
its use. We know this because Crowley never, in all his voluminous public
and private writings, gave any evidence of being familiar with any of the
traditional methods of I Ching casting (be it with coins, yarrow stalks, or
methods like the Plum Blossom system). Nor could Crowley have learned
this method by his own untutored research; he could not read Chinese, and
the only source of the I Ching text available to him was James Legge’s
1882 translation (published as part of the “Sacred Books of the East”
series). Legge’s work was academic, very imperfect by modern standards,
and significantly Victorian in its outlook. Crowley himself was aware of the
limitations of this edition (and in his typical fashion criticized the quality of
Legge’s often-ponderous writing by giving him the nickname of “Wooden
Legge”), but no alternative was available to him. Crucially, in this original
edition of Legge’s work, no instructions were provided as to how to actually
perform an I Ching casting (note that later printings of Legge’s translation
do often have such instructions added in). As a Victorian academic and a
devout Christian, Legge no doubt felt that such information was not
actually significant to the value of the I Ching as an historical text. In the
English-speaking world, accurate instructions on the I Ching’s use in
divination would not become readily available until the Wilhelm edition
was translated into English, several years after Crowley’s death.
    Thus, without any clear guide as to how to actually perform I Ching
divination in any traditional fashion, Crowley was obliged to develop his
own method. Possibly inspired by the witnessing of Chinese divination
sticks, Crowley’s way of consulting the I Ching involved the use of six
sticks, with a Yang (solid) line on one side and a Yin (broken) line on the
other, laid out in order, to create a randomly generated hexagram. While
there’s some indication that Crowley was familiar with the use of changing
lines, his diaries indicate that he did not generally make use of these;
instead, in his castings he would read the main text and then read all six
lines, in order. He would then try to use all six lines of his single hexagram
to generate some kind of narrative about the situation at hand.
    In spite of these limitations, the more remarkable detail in this story is
that Crowley was the first westerner we know of to regularly rely on the I
Ching for divination purposes. And the evidence of Crowley’s diaries
reveals that, despite having been forced to rely on a method of his own
devising, a method that certainly failed in many respects to take full
advantage of the advantages of the I Ching in terms of its full potential to
measure time and space, his system was still sound enough to work
sufficiently well for Crowley to rely on it in his daily life for both spiritual
and practical purposes. In general, his use of the I Ching for divination
increased over the course of his life. While Crowley was familiar with a
variety of systems of western divination, including the Tarot, Geomancy,
and Astrology, there is no doubt from the evidence that the I Ching was by
far his favourite for regular and practical use. At several points in his life,
his diaries note the details of several I Ching divinations per day.
    Crowley wrote his own (very abbreviated and largely unorthodox)
poetic re-interpretation of the I Ching; and while he never published a book
on the I Ching in his lifetime, in the final decade of his life Crowley was
engaged in collecting his notes on the I Ching, possibly in preparation for a
writing project that would have followed the ambitious “Book of Thoth”
and “Thoth Tarot” project he’d undertaken with Lady Frieda Harris.
    While the limitations of Crowley’s education on the I Ching was often
quite evident (and has been a regular source of criticism against him by
academics), considering the poor sources of information available to him in
his lifetime, this is perhaps less astounding than the quality of some of his
insights into the I Ching which could only have been the product of his own
insight.
    For example, there are notable similarities in Crowley’s approach to the
I Ching in his writings to the teachings of the ancient “Image and Number”
school of I Ching thought, in spite of the fact that Crowley had almost
certainly never heard of this school. On a similar note, Crowley’s choice of
description for the trigrams (one part of Crowley’s system that has
influenced the trigram descriptions used in this book) were selected as part
of his attempt to synthesize the concepts he found in the I Ching to his
western symbolic language; and yet at the same time (again, potentially
unbeknownst to Crowley) these attributions were not “foreign” or
“mislabelled” as some critics claim, but rather all fit into attributions that
Chinese scholars themselves have given to the trigrams over the centuries.
    In general, it is evident that awareness and states of enhanced
consciousness brought about by Crowley’s highly disciplined spiritual
practices (in western magick and Indian yoga/meditation), as well as
consistent and serious practice in the I Ching itself, proved their worth in
granting Crowley particular insights into aspects of the I Ching he could not
have merely studied through intellectual research. It is equally evident, and
equally fascinating, that this “enlightened perspective” did not allow him to
have uniformly “authentic” understandings. Rather, Crowley was at his best
with regard to the I Ching in his observations of the deepest or most
sublime aspects of the I Ching cosmology: the Tao, Yin and Yang, and the
Trigrams. That is, those parts of the I Ching that emerge most directly from
the study of the nature of reality itself. He was far less remarkable in his
insights on the hexagrams, the text of the I Ching and theories about
interpretation of meanings, and divination methods. That is, with those parts
that did not emerge purely from the study of reality but were partly the
“work of man”.
    Of equal interest was Crowley’s effort to correlate the I Ching to the
system of western magick. It was his life-long goal to create a grand unified
structure of occult symbolism, to fulfil the promise of the Qabalah in
uncovering the underlying language, the “perennial philosophy” spoken of
since at least the time of Pythagoras that explained the threads and
connections between all symbolic systems in esoteric teaching. Many of the
correspondences detailed within this book are based on the insights
Crowley developed over time in connecting the I Ching symbols to the
western esoteric road-map. Having chosen to identify the trigram by titles
and concepts that best fit the western framework, he proceeded to map the I
Ching hexagrams onto the Tree of Life of the Qabalah. It is noteworthy here
that over time Crowley’s understanding of these correspondences evolved;
his attributions early on in his I Ching studies (when he published “777”, an
encyclopedia of the Qabalah) were different than his final attributions
published almost four decades later (in “the Book of Thoth”, his
masterpiece on the Tarot). Sadly, his work on this important task was never
completed, but he presented enough to provide important groundwork on
the understanding of the I Ching’s correspondences to western thought.
    The fact that Crowley’s views on these subjects evolved over time
demonstrates that like any serious student of the I Ching, he did not rest on
his first assumptions about the system, but rather continued to refine his
studies as his practical experience with divination and the text of the I
Ching advanced. This is important because we can speculate that had
Crowley been presented with the opportunity to revise his understandings
with more efficient translations, more complete texts, or access to some of
the writings of the various historical I Ching scholars, he would not likely
have stood pat on his theories, or his divination methods as he practised
them. Thelemites and other admirers of Crowley would thus be doing him a
disservice by simply slavishly imitating Crowley’s divination technique, or
resting their understanding of the I Ching solely on Crowley’s operating
ideas. The only viable conclusion with regards to approaching Crowley’s
contribution to the western I Ching today is to carefully examine what he
wrote and practised, retain from these things that which proves useful in the
larger context of I Ching studies, and modify or leave behind those parts
that ought to be adjusted in the light of greater access to information about
the rich three-thousand year history of I Ching teachings now accessible.
            Appendix III
            Reference Tables
A: Hexagram Table
B: The Trigrams
    “Chien”: Heaven
     Chien is the trigram traditionally translated as “Heaven”. It is pure
Yang, solid and unbroken. It is the celestial power, all the energy of
creating, strong, the cold force, the masculine, the phallus, light, the father.
It is the quality of forcefulness. Its key spiritual concept is “Creative”.

            “Kun”: The World
    Kun is the trigram traditionally translated as “earth”, but its meaning is
“The World” (the opposite of Chien, which is “Heaven”). Kun is pure Yin,
broken lines. It is the worldly power, all the content of creation, weak, the
hot force, the feminine, the yoni, darkness, the mother. It is the quality of
spaciousness; as Heaven is the “force”, so is World the “field”. Its key
spiritual concept is “Receptive”.

            “Li”: The Sun
    Li has traditionally been translated as “fire”, but this is the concept of
pure primordial fire, not the lesser elemental fire. Thus, the best translation
for this trigram is another historical attribution, which would put it in line
with what “Li” is meant to represent in western esotericism: “The Sun”. It
is sometimes also referred to as “lightning”. It is the trigram associated with
summer (when the sun is at its strongest), beauty, the power of clinging.
Because it is a single weak line between two strong ones, it is referred to as
the “middle daughter”. Its quality is radiance. Its key spiritual concept is
“Elegance”.

            “Kan”: The Moon
     Kan has been traditionally translated as “water”, but in the same way
that Li represents primordial fire, Kan represents primordial water, thus
another traditional attribution is a more appropriate one for western
correspondence: “The Moon”. It is also referred to sometimes as the cloud,
or the pit. It can represent “danger”, because of its hidden power (a strong
line surrounded by weak lines). It is associated with winter (when the sun is
at its weakest), the characteristic of enveloping; and because of the strong
line in the middle it is called the “middle son”. Its quality is depth. Its key
spiritual concept is “Abysmal” (i.e., “Deep”).
            “Chen”: The Fire Element
    The trigram “Chen” is traditionally translated as “thunder”, but its
quality is that of the hermetic element of Fire. It is the active and moving
force, the force of dynamic power, the arousing or energetic force. It is
correspondent to springtime, the time of rising force. Because of its single
strong line at the bottom (the first line of the trigram, because in the I Ching
the lines are always read from the bottom to the top), it is called the “eldest
son”. Its quality is vibration. Its key spiritual concept is “Arousing” (i.e.,
“Exciting”).

            “Tui”: The Water Element
    The trigram “Tui” is traditionally translated as “lake”, but its quality is
that of the hermetic element of Water. It is the deep and still force. It
corresponds to autumn, when nature is slowing down. It is also sometimes
translated as “a marsh”, or even a “swamp” (but this is somewhat
inaccurate, as it is not meant to have any of the negative connotations
westerners associate with swamps). It has the quality of the rain, of joy and
relaxed pleasure. Because of its broken line at the top, it is called the
“youngest daughter”. Its quality is openness. Its key spiritual concept is
“Pleasant” (or “Complacent”).

            “Sun”: The Air Element
     The trigram “Sun” is traditionally translated as “wind”, but its quality is
that of the hermetic element of Air, which is also part of its traditional
attributions. It is sometimes also translated as “wood”, which is
correspondent in Taoist alchemy to some of the concepts of the Air element,
and like the hermetic air element corresponds to the intellect. It has a gentle
quality, but insistent. Because of its weak line at the bottom, it is called the
“eldest daughter”. Its quality is consideration. Its key spiritual concept is
“Flexible”.

            “Ken”: The Earth Element
    The trigram “Ken” is traditionally translated as “mountain”, but its
quality is that of the hermetic element of Earth, which attribution is clearly
included in its traditional symbolism. It is the immovable solid power, and
has the quality of stubbornness and stuckness. Because of its strong line at
the top, it is called the “youngest son”. Its quality is attachment. Its key
spiritual concept is “Solid”.

      C: A Quick Look-up of Nuclear Hexagrams
Hexagram #:                            Is a Nuclear Hexagram of:
1                                      28, 43, 44
2                                      23, 24 27
63                                     38, 40, 54
64                                     37, 39, 53

   The following hexagrams are all nuclear hexagrams of #1, 2, 63 or 64,
and are in turn nuclear hexagrams of:

Hexagram # (nuclear):                  Is a Nuclear Hexagram of:
23       (2)                           3, 8, 20, 42
24       (2)                           4, 7, 19, 41
27       (2)                           29, 59, 60, 61
28       (1)                           30, 55, 56, 62
37       (64)                          6, 10, 47, 58
38       (63)                          5, 9, 48, 57
39       (64)                          16, 21, 35, 51
40       (63)                          15, 22, 36, 52
43       (1)                           14, 32, 34, 50
44       (1)                           13, 31, 33, 49
53       (64)                          12, 17, 25, 45
54       (63)                          11, 18, 26, 46


     D: Plum Blossom Method:
   Summary of Plum Blossom Method Standard
Procedure
  1. Calculate number values for date, time, month, and year, converted
     from the Chinese Lunar Calendar.
  2. Calculate lower trigram of main hexagram by adding values for:

                          Hour + Day + Month + Year

         then divide by eight and use the remainder to determine the
     trigram.
  3. Calculate upper trigram of main hexagram by adding values for:

                              Day + Month + Year

         then divide by eight and use the remainder to determine the
     trigram.
  4. Calculate the changing line of the hexagram by adding the values for:

                          Hour + Day + Month + Year

         then divide by six, and the remainder is the line that is changing (a
     result with no remainder means line 6 is the changing line).
  5. Generate the Future hexagram in the standard fashion.
  6. Generate the Nuclear hexagram in the standard fashion.
  7. Study the image of the hexagram, as well as the main text description,
     and the changing line oracle.
  8. Study the images and main texts of the Nuclear Hexagram and the
     Future Hexagram. Contemplate all of the above carefully.
 9. In the main hexagram, the “Subject” trigram is the trigram that does
    not contain a changing line. Compare this trigram to each other trigram
    in turn on the list of elemental compatibilities; beginning with the
    other main hexagram trigram to determine the overall current situation,
    then with the lower and upper nuclear trigrams to determine the other
    influences upon the situation, and finally the two trigrams of the future
    hexagram to determine future developments of the situation.

      Number Value for Hours of the Day

Western Hour:                 Hour Value:
11pm–1am                            1
1am–3am                             2
3am–5am                             3
5am–7am                             4
7am–9am                             5
9am–11am                            6
11am–1pm                            7
1pm–3pm                             8
3pm–5pm                             9
5pm–7pm                             10
7pm–9pm                             11
9pm–11pm                            12


      Number Value for Year

Chinese Zodiac Year:          Number Value:
Rat                                 1
Ox                                  2
Tiger                               3
Rabbit/Hare                         4
Dragon                              5
Snake                               6
Horse                               7
Goat/Sheep                          8
Monkey                              9
Rooster                             10
Dog                                 11
Boar/Pig                            12


      Lunar Calendar Conversions found:
     http://www.hko.gov.hk/gts/time/conversion1_text.htm
      

      Hexagram Remainder Numbers

Remainder              Trigram
1                      Heaven
2                      Water
3                      Sun
4                      Fire
5                      Air
6                      Moon
7                      Earth
8 (0)   World
   

    Plum Blossom Trigram Comparison Table: Fate
Trigram
    

       Explanation of Codes
     S: These fate trigrams strengthen the subject. The situation is positive
and easy at this stage; the subject and the situation are in mutual accord.
     R: These fate trigrams reduce the subject. The situation is inauspicious,
and only considerable effort, discipline, and hard work can prevail here.
The subject has the potential to be in command over the situation.
     C: These fate trigrams clash with the subject. The situation is
tumultuous, but this too can be auspicious. It is important to be very careful,
because it is easy for fortune to be disrupted. It is necessary to move
carefully, and take advantage of change without bringing on unnecessary
conflict or opposition. The subject must take command of the situation.
     E: These fate trigrams eliminate the subject. The situation is highly
inauspicious at this stage. It is only mitigated by judicious application of
virtue, and careful conservative choices. The situation overwhelms the
subject; it is beyond the subject’s control.
     G: These fate trigrams generate the subject. The situation has the
potential to be very auspicious, if the subject is willing to move along with
it. The situation is beyond the subject’s control; but if the subject accords to
the reality of the situation, the result is positive.
                                    References
    Balkin, J. (2002). The Laws of Change: I Ching and the Philosophy of Life. New York:
Schocken.
    Blofeld, J. (1965). I Ching, The Book of Change. New York: Dutton.
    Ching, J. (2000). The Religious Thought of Chu Hsi. New York: Oxford.
    Crowley, A. (1986). 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings of Aleister Crowley. New York:
Weiser.
    Ibid. (1972). The Book of Changes. San Francisco, CA: Level.
    Ibid. (1974). The Book of Thoth. York Beach, ME: Weiser.
    Ibid. (2004). Liber AL vel Legis: The Book of the Law (centennial edition). New York: Weiser.
    Ibid., & Skinner, S. (Ed). (1996). The Magical Diaries of Aleister Crowley: Tunisia 1923
(subsequent edition). New York: Weiser.
    Fancourt, W. & Moore, S. (Ed.). (1995-2000). The Oracle: The Journal of Yijing Studies (11
vol.).
    Huang, A. (2000). The Numerology of the I Ching: A Sourcebook of Symbols, Structures, and
Traditional Wisdom. Rochester, NY: Inner Traditions.
    Hulse, D. (1993). The Key of It All. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn.
    Kaczynski, R. (2010). Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley (revised and expanded
edition). Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic.
    Legge, J. (1963). The I Ching. New York: Dover.
    Liu, D. (1975). I Ching Numerology. San Francisco, CA: Harper.
    Lynn, R. (1994). The Classic of Changes. New York: Columbia.
    McKenna, D. & McKenna, T. (1994). The Invisible Landscape: Mind, Hallucinogens, and
the I Ching (Reprint Edition). San Francisco, CA: Harper.
    Schoter, A. (2005). The Yijing as a Symbolic Language for Abstraction. Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on I-Ching (Yijing) Studies and Contemporary Civilization: 291-
305. International Association of I Ching Studies: Yongkang City, Taiwan.
    Shaughnessy, E. (1996). I Ching: The Classic of Changes. New York: Ballantine.
    Sherrill, W. & Chu, W. (1989). An Anthology of I Ching. London: Arkana.
    Smith, K., Bol, P., Adler, J., & Wyatt, D. (1990). Sung Dynasty Uses of the I Ching.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
    Wilhelm, R. & Baynes, C., (Trans). (1967). The I Ching or Book of Changes. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


    Websites
    Lunar Calendar Conversion Charts. Hong Kong Observatory.

http://www.hko.gov.hk/gts/time/conversion1_text.htm
    Yijing Dao.

http://www.biroco.com/yijing/index.htm
    Yijing.

http://www.yijing.co.uk/index.html
    
    
   To continue your I Ching studies, please join us at “The Magician’s I
Ching” facebook group:
   https://www.facebook.com/groups/346543022152305/

    For more instruction on universal mysticism in general, please visit the
author’s YouTube channel and website:
    https://www.youtube.com/user/SwamijiNisarg/videos

   http://www.mystery-school.net/
