     
0
The variables of Human Design 

The variables are an additional layer of Human Design that discuss your 
relationship with taking in information. Understanding these four arrows 
helps you to create an environment that supports your energetic needs on an 
even deeper level. The variables are a system that goes very deep and relies 
on a lot of different factors including the base, color, and tone. To get your 
base, color, and tone, or the information associated with your variables and 
primary health system you need to have an advanced Human Design chart 
that is generated with a paid version of software. Lucky for you, I have this 
software and upon request I will provide you with your advanced Human 
Design chart so that you can utilize this information. 
 
The variables provide you with insight to what things you need from your 
environment to function optimally. Because we want to be manifesting 
abundance, we want to be functioning optimally!! 
 
This information will help you understand a few things about what you need 
in your abundance practice to best support your energy. 
 
 
An important note to make is that to align with the variables you must be 
aligned with your strategy and authority to truly see the benefits of this 
information. You can learn all of the information about Human Design but if 
you are not practicing and embodying the foundational work the knowledge 
is not useful.  
 
 
Let’s get started! 
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 1 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                     
 
Digestion  
 
The two arrows on the left side of the bodygraph are associated with 
digestion. This side of the bodygraph is associated with the subconscious 
mind and the body. These are things that you are not always as aware of but 
that others probably see as being true for you. These have a lot do with how 
you take in not just food, but information and energy. This shows you how 
structured you need to be, if you like routine, if you need to focus, or if 
repetition works better for you. This side talks about what changes you can 
make to your environment to support you being able to connect with your 
desires, take in ideas, and learn new concepts. Having this information can 
also help you when it comes to setting up the perfect environment for you 
manifestation practice and connecting with the divine. 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  2 
The variables of Human Design 

 
 
Awareness 
While the subconscious side shows how you take in information, the right 
side shows your ability to access this information and bring your awareness to 
all that is unseen. When you understand this you are able to practice 
manifestation with certain actions and intentions that will feel aligned to your 
soul. You can also set up systems that support you being able to utilize your 
specific type of awareness. These arrows show your conscious perspective of 
the world and teach you how to embrace your outer authority, which is the 
way in which you pull information out of your deep well of intelligence and 
information. These arrows deal much more with the conscious mind than the 
unconscious programming in your system. This is how you think, process 
information, and recall answers. 
 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                               3 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                  
Independent variables 
 
The arrows on the bottom are foundational. They work independently. These 
are the foundations that the top arrows sit on. To align with all of them the 
foundation needs to be stable so that the dependent variables have 
something to stand on. 
 
Dependant variables 
 
The function of the top arrows is dependent on the bottom arrows. To 
actually see the benefits of using these arrows it is important to be in 
alignment with the bottom arrows. For example, the way you take 
information will work best when you are in the right environment. If you are 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                               4 
The variables of Human Design 

in the wrong environment, even the correct methods for taking in 
information won’t be as effective.  
 




                                                                                     
Part of understanding how to interpret the variables is going to be in 
interpreting the difference between Left facing arrows and Right facing 
arrows. Now, when I first got into Human Design I learned about the variables 
in a training series done by Ra Ura Hu himself. I shared an interpretation of 
the information and got a lot of back-lash from the Human Design 
community for associating Left facing arrows with masculine energy and 
Right facing arrows with feminine energy. This is information I learned from 
the creator of Human Design and therefore I choose to stand by this 
interpretation! 
 
If you think back on the last hundred years or so, we as a collective have built 
an extremely mascule structured system. If you think about the messaging 
that we all learned growing up you will see what I am talking about. Raise 
your heard things like: “you need to work hard to get good grades”, “You need 
good grades to get into a good college”, “You have to go to college to get a 
good job”, and “you have to work hard, pay your dues to be successful”.  
The world we live in is built around masculine principles. Taking action. Being 
disciplined. Being structured. Having a set routine. However, as we make a 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                5 
The variables of Human Design 

shift and transition in the present and in the near future, we are realizing that 
we no longer need to all abide by the structures that were previously praised.  
 
Left 
Left facing arrows represent structure, consistency, and a more masculine 
energy. This is associated with taking action, creating routines, being 
disciplined and actively participating in whatever that arrow is associated 
with.  
 
Right  
Right facing arrows are a more passive, feminine, and flowy energy. These will 
be the variables that naturally occur without too much effort. These will be 
areas of your variables that you enjoy freedom and flexibility over consistency 
and taking action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  6 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                    
 
The top arrow on the LEFT SIDE is where we get the information about your 
digestion and consistency. While we will briefly go into the information about 
digestion we are first going to start with looking at what the direction means. 
 
Consistency  
 
If this arrow points to the LEFT you enjoy consistency. 
 
You take in information in a sequential and repetitive manner. This probably 
means you like flash cards, you need to re-watch information and be an 
active learner in order to take in information.  
 
For a manifestation practice this means that you do well with a set routine 
 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                              7 
The variables of Human Design 

Things to try  
Affirmations  
Mantras  
A set practice with a sequence of events 
 
 
If this arrow points to the RIGHT you are a passive learner. If you pay attention 
while learning something one time, you can remember it from that point on. 
You absorb much more information than you think through association. This 
might show up as a lot of unconscious beliefs that you don’t remember how 
you “learned them”. 
 
You enjoy your freedom and a set routine might feel a little frustrating and 
restrictive to you. 
 
You take in information like a sponge, passively absorbing all of what you 
focus on and letting it become imprinted into your knowledge space. 
 
For a manifestation practice this means trying out different things and not 
thinking you NEED a specific routine. 
 
Things to try 
What ever feels good to you 
Give yourself the freedom to skip certain elements 
Don’t be too strict - this doesn’t need to be an every day event for you  
 
                                                                                    
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 8 
The variables of Human Design 


Digestion, Color, and Determination 
 
To know your digestion type you will need to know more than just the 
direction that this arrow faces. This dives into a deeper layer of the variables. 
You can get this information for free if you go to Geneticmatrix.com and 
enter your information. In the dropdown box that will currently say 
“quantum” choose “body” and the information will show up on the side. If you 
choose “mind” you will get the information about the right two arrows. 
 
For this information you are looking for the DETERMINATION in your 
human design chart. 
 
Color  
When you learn about your profile in human design you learn that it is a 
combination of two numbers. For this arrow the number we are looking at is 
the second number in your profile. For example, I am a 6/2 profile. The 6 
comes from the right side of my chart. The 2 cones from the left side of my 
chart. If you look at the top two planets you will see these two numbers as the 
line for those gates.  
As a 6/2 the two gates on the LEFT side of my chart are 40.2 and 37.2. This is 
where I get the 2 from. This also means that I am a COLOR 2. 
 
Tone 
Tone is determined by the arrow facing either left or right. This is what is 
responsible for your cognition which is your innate sense of intelligence. The 
food and information you take in feeds your intelligence in a specific way. 
When you digest life correctly you are feeding the core of your being. 
 
Left Brain System 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   9 
The variables of Human Design 

If this arrow points to the left you don’t like being hungry. It is important for 
you to take in food in a consistent manner. This means do your best to avoid 
fasting and restrictions around food or water throughout the day. You do well 
taking in the same foods over and over and probably like the routine of 
eating similar things each day. Fluids should also be ingested in a consistent 
manner with a similar amount each day. The same thing goes for 
information. You might need to go over something a few times to really 
digest it. Like re-reading something, re-watching a call and things like that. 
You are also likely to always be taking in something. You’re always learning! 
You don’t typically do deep dives and then go for long periods of time 
without learning something new. You like a constant steady stream of 
information.  
 
Right Brain System 
If this arrow points to the right you are much more fluid in your methods of 
taking in food. You don’t need to always be digesting and too much food can 
be detrimental to your ability to focus, think, or function. Fasting is good for 
you in the right circumstances - when it is intuitive and feels right for your 
body and ​not ​for the sake of dieting. Fluids should also not be limited but 
your system also doesn’t do well with taking in too much water.  
 

Determination 
 
First color  
The first color is associated with a very primitive digestion system. This color is 
also associated with a caves environment and the hunter. The line one is 
about the foundation and this carries over into food as well. These individuals 
do well when they are eating foundational and basic foods so you don’t 
overwhelm your digestive system. You digest single ingredients at a time. If 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    10 
The variables of Human Design 

you think about the role of a hunter it is to bring in a single source of food and 
this will be consumed on it’s own. 
 
Consecutive appetite (arrow will point left) 
A very primitive and foundational digestion type. You do best taking in only 
one thing at a time. When it comes to food this means taking in one 
ingredient at a time. Complex dishes with lots of spices and foods combined 
together don’t sit well with you. Simplify things to one thing at a time. Don’t 
feel afraid to eat entire meals of just one food. Your body will thank you. 
 
When it comes to taking in information, focus on one task at a time. Don’t 
jump all over the place. If you are focusing on studying, choose a single topic 
at a time. For a manifesting practice use one manifesting modality at a time. 
Whether this is working solely with affirmations of focusing on meditation for 
a month before trying something else. I also suggest working on a single 
manifestation at a time. Focus your energy.  
 
Alternating appetite (arrow will point right) 
This is still a very foundational digestive type. You still enjoy simple foods and 
simple ingredients but probably find you enjoy alternating your foods. Having 
a bite of this then a bite of that. Your system genuinely likes to have a single 
thing at a time, this includes oils, seasonings and more. While you might 
initially say that sounds so boring, it means that you can fully enjoy the 
complexity of a single item in depth.  
 
When it comes to taking in information, focus on one thing at a time but 
allow yourself to switch between single things. If you are manifesting, focus 
on one money goal and one health goal or something along those lines. 
Alternate your affirmations and allow for some variation in your experience. 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  11 
The variables of Human Design 

Focus your energy on a single thing at a time but allow what you focus on to 
shift between a few things. Maybe focus on meditation and affirmations. 
Meditation in the morning and affirmations throughout the day. But don’t try 
to use affirmations IN your meditation. 
 
 
Second color  
The second color is associated with being taste, and being a gatherer. These 
individuals go out and gather seasonal ingredients. These individuals have a 
high demand for nourishment and still have a very primitive or foundational 
digestive system. They do well with a rigid diet that incorporates similar 
things each day. These are seasonal individuals and do very well when eating 
seasonal and local foods to be extremely healthy. They are very sensitive to 
imported or highly processed foods.  
 
 
 
Open taste (arrow will point left) 
Having an open taste will impact your decision making in what you like and 
what you don’t like. You have to try new things to know what you like and 
what you don’t like. Your relationship with food is very experimental and can 
take some practice to zone in on what works best for you.  
 
When it comes to a manifestation process try out different things. Have a 
system for how you do this and then play around with different modalities to 
really identify what it is that you like and don’t like. Try new things with the 
seasons. You will go through phases with what works and what doesn’t. Try 
not to force things if they no longer serve you. 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  12 
The variables of Human Design 

Closed taste (arrow will point right) 
Having a closed taste means that without needing to taste or try something 
you know if you will like it or not. This is a more passive form of figuring out 
what you want without needing to be actively involved in the process of 
trying out the different foods. 
 
When it comes to a manifestation process you know what you will and won’t 
like. Intuitively pick what works for you and stick with it. If a new idea or 
modality comes up use your intuition to sense if it will benefit you to 
incorporate this. You are seasonal, so allow the things that you do to change 
with the seasons. Maybe yoga works well for you in the summer months but 
as soon as it gets cold you need to meditate more. 
 
Third color  
The third color is associated with the sense of thirst and the role of the 
transformer. With thirst you are either dealing with a hot or cold individual. 
When we bring in the concept of temperature we can see dysfunction in the 
digestive system when eating according to your dietary needs. 
 
Hot thirst (arrow points left) 
Having a hot digestive system means that your body doesn’t do well when it 
needs to digest whole foods with complex fibrous systems. When you cook 
your food you add heat which helps your body break down the foods in your 
cold system. You cannot burn off what you need to burn off and need heat to 
add to your digestive process.  
 
Temperature is very important to your manifesting process. Keep your 
environment warm. Try hot yoga, or wear layers if you need. Try incorporating 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    13 
The variables of Human Design 

walking meditation or kundalini yoga or other activities that keep you 
moving. 
 
Cold thirst (arrow points right) 
Having cold thirst means your body runs hot and you need to use food and 
drink to cool down your system. If what you consume is lower than your body 
temperature you will not overheat your system. These people often struggle 
with heartburn if they are consuming high temperature foods. Putting hot 
food in your already hod system will overheat and burn unnecessary amounts 
of energy.  
 
For a manifesting process allow yourself to not be to active. Allow yourself to 
be passive. Think about incorporating stillness or practices like cold plunges 
to cool and invigorate your body. 
 
Fourth color  
This color is associated with the sensation of touch and the role of the 
determiner. You are dealing with forces that are energetic with this color. This 
is about taking the right environment with you when you eat. It is not about 
being nervous or calm when you eat but about having a calm or nervous 
environment when you eat.  
 
Calm touch (arrow points left) 
You need a calm environment to best take in food. This means few people, or 
maybe being alone. Busy restaurants probably feel difficult to consume food 
in. You yourself don’t need to be calm when eating, but your environment 
does so that you can focus on connecting with your food. 
 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                14 
The variables of Human Design 

For a manifestation process bring the same principles. Create a calm space 
for you to learn, research, connect with your desires, or journal. 
 
Nervous touch (arrow points right) 
You yourself don’t need to be nervous when you consume food. You need to 
be in an upbeat environment when you are consuming nurishment. Try not 
sitting through a meal. You need to move energy while you eat. You can talk 
on the phone or work through meals to create a busy environment.  
 
Create a busy environment for you manifesting practice. Try walking 
meditations, meditating with upbeat lyrical music like EDM. Allow yourself to 
do other things at the same time. Fro you it doesn’t need to be extremely 
focused.  
 
Fifth color  
The fifth color is associated with the sensation of sound and the role of the 
listener. When we get to the higher number colors like 5 and 6 we get more 
and more sensitive. While the first line needed simple foods and a very 
foundational diet the fifth color gets more complex. Once again, this is not 
about exactly how you eat and this is not about internal chatter. Your mind 
can be as loud or as quite as is comfortable for you. This color is associated 
with creating the right external environments acoustically so that you can 
digest food and information properly.  
 
High sound (arrow points left) 
For high sound individuals turn on music while you enjoy your meals. You are 
really designed to have lots of sound around you while you take in 
nurishment. Restaurants feel good to you because they are full of noise 
everywhere. When you are designing your manifestation practice go to a 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 15 
The variables of Human Design 

busy place to journal like a coffee shop. Put on some loud music while you 
meditate or visualize. Make the environment you are in support you sound 
wise. You also do well with listening to subliminal messages when you sleep 
or having an audiobook or podcast on all the time. Try playing with frequency 
music, binaural beats, and sound bowls.  
 
Low sound (arrow points right)  
If you are a low sound individual you need it to be quiet to take in any 
information or food. Sitting alone, with no music, or even noise canceling 
headphones are great for you during meal time. You need silence. The ability 
to eliminate sound is amazing and you should invest in anything that helps 
you tune out the sound of the world around you. Sound is disruptive to your 
digestive process. 
 
When it comes to your manifestation practice create a low sound 
environment. Try silent meditation, silent journaling, and silent yoga. When 
you tune out sound you are able to connect with your intuition and desires at 
a deeper level.  
 
Sixth color  
The sixth color is associated with light and is highly sensitive. When it comes 
to light we start dealing with the edges of the physical world and a new 
dimension. These individuals are at the end of our human evolution and have 
the most sophisticated and sensitive systems. When we talk about this color 
liquid is not included in the conversation. Again this is less about the light 
inside of your being or how you ingest life and more about creating the 
perfect environment. When we talk about light we talk about natural light. 
While we can artificially create this environment we are tapping into the 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 16 
The variables of Human Design 

circadian rhythms of hormones that are secreted at different points in the 
day.  
 
Direct light (arrow points left) 
You need to be in a brightly lit and naturally bright area. It is highly suggested 
to only eat when the sun is up. So while your arrow points to the left and you 
don’t do well with fasting you don’t digest properly in dark areas or late at 
night. You do best when you eat when the sun is up, and even better if you 
can eat while in direct sunlight. Now of course this is ideal and with changes 
in weather and schedules this is not always possible. But whenever possible 
try to eat in direct sunlight.  
 
For a manifestation practice give yourself a set routine that allows you to be 
in the sunshine whenever possible. Try beach yoga, sunrise meditations, or 
journaling while sitting outside. If weather is not permitting make sure that 
your environment when you connect with your desires is brightly lit and your 
manifestation practice occurs during hours that the sun is up. 
 
Indirect light (arrow points right) 
Being an indirect light individual you are essentially a nocturnal individual. 
You do best when you only eat when the sun is down. It is suggested that you 
sleep in during the day and eat later in the day. Working a night shift of some 
kind also allows you to function on this opposite schedule. You may also want 
to try using blackout curtains or other methods of keeping your environment 
dark while you eat your food when it is not possible to wait till evening. Try 
lighter and more liquid filled foods like smoothies or juices during the day 
and then having a nutrition filled meal after the sun is down. Midnight snacks 
are your friend! 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 17 
The variables of Human Design 

For your manifestation practice or learning of any kind try to do any rituals 
during night time. Utilize candle light instead of traditional light when 
possible. You might also do well with meditation modalities that incorporate 
darkness or things like float tanks that help to reduce external senses to aid in 
deeper meditations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                    




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                18 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                      
 
Environment Overview 
 
This arrow shows you what you need from your environment and how 
discipline shows up in your life. In order for you to be healthy your 
environment has to support you.  
 
Left 
If this arrow points to the left you are more active in your environment. You 
are known as the “observed”. This means you are here to be an active part of 
the environment and enjoy being watched by those close to you. When 
relating this to children, if a child has this arrow pointing to the left chances 
are they will be the type of child to call their parents to come watch them. 
When they are learning or working and they have someone looking over their 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  19 
The variables of Human Design 

shoulder they thrive. They are here to be seen and observed by others in all 
that they do. 
 
You are strategic. You are healthiest when you are busy inside of your 
environment, when you are focused on things to do, and you are active 
within your life. Your environment needs to bring out this active side of your 
nature and support you in the movement you crave. When you are not busy 
and you are forced to sit, or do nothing it is unhealthy for your system. You 
become vulnerable and experience negative conditioning when you are in 
the wrong environment and you are forced to be still. You have a high activity 
level, and a place where you need to be still is not supportive to your 
energetic needs. 
 
Right 
If this arrow points to the right you are here to be less active in your 
environment. You are know as the “observer”. This means that you are here to 
be a passive part of the environment and you enjoy watching the ecosystem 
work while being a separate entity. To relate this to children, these are the 
children who desire to be alone when learning new things and don’t do well 
when they have someone looking over their shoulder. As someone with this 
arrow pointing right I remember being a competitive gymnast when I was 
younger. I remember thinking “If I could just be alone in the gym and have 
nobody around me I could play around with this skill and I would master it in 
no time”. These individuals don’t feel comfortable when there are people 
always around and always watching them.  
 
These individuals are not here to be active in this life, but are here to take it all 
in. These are the individuals who look at the environment or current situation 
as a phase of life and evolution instead of as a permanent state of existence. 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    20 
The variables of Human Design 

To be in the right environment you are actually not very active at all but much 
more relaxed. You are here to be much more laid back about in your 
experience of life. 
 

Environment 
 
The environments are based on your north and south node in your Human 
Design chart. These gates are based on what energy you have mastered and 
what energy you are here to master in this lifetime.  
 
Before your Saturn return you are primarily working on the functioning of 
your subconscious mind and the generational patterns that you are inherited. 
This means that your environment is not that important. After your Saturn 
return your energy begins to shift dramatically. This means that your 
environment becomes much more important to you.  
 
Your life unfolds in a linear pattern. You begin with heavy conditioned 
influences from your family and inherited traits that show up in your 
unconscious or left side of your chart. As you grow you begin to experience 
more and more of your own self shine through and you evolve. You evolve 
from who you were in relation to your family and you become a unique 
individual. By the time you experience your saturn return, around the age of 
29-30, you are designed to have established your own unique place in this 
world. In this phase of life you set into motion a new and unique story. This is 
the story of your incarnation cross, the story of who you are, and the story of 
how you started from where your family lines left off and created a new 
direction. Your environment is the phase that supports you in this evolution 
and growth. The environment also has a little something to say about who 
you are as an individual. 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                21 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Your energy is looking for the correct environment to exist in. When you 
nourish your outside body with your environment the inside world you exist 
in can also thrive.  
 
 
First color  
This first line is associated with hardscapes. You need to feel safe and 
protected by the environment you exist in. A cave feels dark and warm and 
safe to you. The first line in environments is very similar to the first line in any 
color. It is foundational and feels safe to be in. You need to have your 
environment feel like it is protecting you. You like to have control over the 
entrance and the exit.  
  
Selective caves (this arrow points left) 
People who have selective caves as their environment enjoy cool, dim, 
calming environments that only have one entrance. PEople with this 
environment do best when they feel safe and in control of what comes in and 
out of their environment. They also tend to thrive when alone or when only 
sharing their space with one other person. 
 
Blending caves (this arrow points right) 
The blending cave environment feels enclosed and safe. These individuals are 
more open and flexible when it comes to the entering and exiting of their 
sacred safe space. These individuals enjoy having a common place or 
community environment that has many entrances and lots of space for 
movement in many directions.  
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    22 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Second color  
The second line in this variable relates to the marketplace. The marketplace is 
all about business, money making, and exchanging of energy. This tends to 
be a system that allows for energy to exchange between individuals in many 
different ways. These people thrive when they are in the heart of the action, 
or are in an urban setting. 
 
Internal markets (this arrow points left) 
Internal markets like to have their own business at home or some sort of 
vocation that allows them to invite others into their home so they can 
conduct business. These individuals are about exchanging space, goods, 
energy, and information, The internal parket is an enclosed space that has 
been created by the person who has this environment. This allows them to 
invite other people in and share their sacred space with others. However, in a 
masculine energetic form, these individuals like to be in charge of and in 
control of their environment. They will share their space with others if there is 
a common goal or interest.  
 
External Markets (this arrow points right) 
Those with an external environment are in the middle of the hustle and 
bustle of a community where there is exchange of goods, money, services, 
communication and information. Remember, because this arrow points to 
the right this is an individual who is not an active participant in their 
environment but someone who is here to observe their environment. When 
these individuals are able to be in a marketplace with a specific goal in mind 
they can accomplish it. They observe the rules of the environment and are 
able to effortlessly master this process. These are people who will engage in 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 23 
The variables of Human Design 

an energetic exchange only when it truly benefits them. When these 
individuals live behind, above, or close to a store environment they thrive. 
 
Third color  
The kitchen environment is associated with humidity or a lack of humidity. 
These are people who react strongly to the wrong type of humidity and this 
can be seen in adverse reactions to dry environments or allergies to molds 
that grow in wet environments. The kitchen is an environment of 
transformation. Single ingredients enter this space and are transformed into 
beautiful and complex dishes. This does not mean you are a cook at heart or 
are designed to actually live in a kitchen (we do not conform to outdated 
gender roles here!). This simply means that you are someone who thrives in a 
space where something is transformed. This can be a hair salon, a hospital, a 
car wash…. Any environment where a transformation occurs. The kitchen can 
also be seen as the laboratory. Experiments occur, things come together and 
this is a space for creativity to occur.  
 
Wet kitchens (this arrow points left) 
People who thrive in a wet kitchen environment live in a humid environment. 
Your skin will feel better. Your hair will feel better. Your breathing will feel 
easier with a certain level of humidity. If the natural environment of the 
geographical location you live in does not provide this level of humidity you 
are likely someone who takes lots of hot showers just to hang out in a humid 
room, or you run a humidifier, or you enjoy diffusing essential oils so that you 
can moisten the air of your environment.  
 
Dry kitchens (this arrow points right) 
People who thrive in a dry kitchen environment live in geographical locations 
with very low humidity. They love being in a desert like area. The tryer the 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                       24 
The variables of Human Design 

environment the better you feel physically. Humidity probably feels heavy, 
dense, and gross to you. You thrive in spaces with a desert like feel. With a dry 
heat that allows things to feel crisp and clear. Moisture probably leads to a 
sense of fogginess to you instead of a sense of comfort. When things are dry 
you feel at home. 
 
Fourth color  
When we reach the second half of this particular color the evolution 
continues. Individuals who have a mountain environment physically need 
less oxygen than others. The high altitude that your body craves comes with a 
lower oxygen percentage than others, These are people who love being 
physically high up. The clear sky around you feels like it is easier to breathe in. 
The ability to be above and looking down at the people below you gives you a 
physical sense of perspective.  
 
Active mountains (this arrow points left) 
Active mountains are individuals who thrive when they physically can get up 
high within their environment. This feels physically and energetically 
engaging. Someone with an active mountain environment would thrive 
when learning or studying on a top floor of a library. The climb to get to this 
level feels like a physical challenge and then being in this space makes it so 
you feel like you can see, think, breath, and learn better than when you are 
low to the ground. You enjoy a high level of activity and a sense of joy comes 
when you are physically high in the air. 
 
Passive mountains (this arrow points right) 
Passive mountains have a lower level of activity but enjoy being on the high 
grounds. There is a certain joy that comes with being up high, however, these 
individuals are much more likely to enjoy an elevator to climb the 20 floors 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  25 
The variables of Human Design 

than the stairs. These individuals thrive when in a physical environment that 
has mountains. The place is up high and they can get away from other 
people. This allows you to spend quality time in your own aura with a clear 
mind. 
 
Fifth color  
Valleys are all about hearing the sounds that occur and being in a protected 
space. This is where everything keeps moving along. In a valley there is 
usually a river. These are people who usually are very interested in being a 
part of the world they live in. They enjoy travel and exploration. For these 
people it is all about themes. These are the individuals who tend to fall in love 
with a partner from another world. These are not the people who stay in a 
small town their entire life but people who love to travel.  
 
Creating a safe space in your home environment is important. Being low to 
the ground, having a single story home, or having tall buildings surrounding 
you feels good. In the opposite fashion of the mountain individuals these 
people need a high oxygen environment and tend to bring home lots of 
plants to meet their oxygen demands. True isolation is toxic for these 
individuals. These individuals need to move and flow of air, people, and 
energy going by their space at all times to feel good. 
 
 
Narrow valleys (this arrow points left) 
Narrow valleys are more likely found in city environments with tall buildings 
close by and all around. They enjoy engaging in private conversations with 
others and like being around people in their community. Hearing the lives, 
fights, and conversation between neighbors is also supportive to the health of 
these individuals. They thrive when the sound is close to them. This can be 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   26 
The variables of Human Design 

recreated if they wear headphones, constantly listen to podcasts, or keep the 
TV on in their home to create the constant chatter that they crave from their 
environment.  
 
Wide valleys (this arrow points right) 
If you are a wide valley individual you thrive in spaces that are much larger, 
more open and have at least two walls. The acoustics of a wide valley space 
allows you to absorb the sounds in a unique way. You are more likely to 
choose a literal valley with some sort of moving body close by. The sounds of 
highway traffic or a running river is peaceful to you. You don’t want to be 
right on top of the action but you want to be able to overhear it from far 
away. You want to take in the movement of life and to be in a space that life 
goes by but you still have some sort of isolation. 
 
Sixth color  
The sixth color is associated with shored. Shores are a place where you can 
see the horizon and allow you to look far out. It is also important to connect 
with water in some way. Having a pond, an ocean, a pool, or a lake nearby 
helps to put you in that environment that is open and on the edge of what 
feels like the world.  
 
Natural shores (this arrow points left) 
Natural shores are spaces where you are on the edge of something and can 
look out. Seeing the horizon is important for you and being near a physical 
body of water is also important. The natural shore is a space that is created in 
nature, a natural edge of land. You like to be on a true shore where the water 
meets the land. This point where two distinct environments come together is 
where you feel the most peaceful.  
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  27 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Artificial shores (this arrow points right) 
Artificial shores is about being on the edge of something, but non-natural 
environments. This can be living on the street where the city becomes a 
suburb. Or the edge of a forest. A space that borders two cities, countries, or 
neighborhoods. A way to cultivate this for yourself within your home can be 
creating an edge where part of the home is considered a work space and part 
of the home is considered living space. Being in the middle of the division is 
where you feel peaceful. Water is also very important for you, but being near 
the ocean is not necessary.  
 
 
                                                                                     
 

Cognition 
 
Smell (this arrow will point left) 
Your most heightened sense is your sense of smell. In a physical sense, when 
you are nourishing your body, let yourself feel into and truly experience the 
scents of your meal before you start eating. This gives you the ability to 
prepare your cells for what you are about to eat. This sense for you is how you 
trigger your body to secrete the correct enzymes to properly digest what you 
are consuming. This also goes for learning and manifesting. Let yourself 
connect to the scent of your goal. Get some cash and smell it, get an 
abundance candle, get some abundance essential oils. Another way to really 
nail this in is when you manifest let yourself connect to exactly how it smells. 
Purchasing your dream car? What does the dealership smell like? What does 
the interior smell like? Just hit a $100k month? What does it smell like? 
 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 28 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Taste (this arrow will point left) 
If your sense acuity is taste it is not about going out and licking your 
environment or food before consuming it. This goes into discernment. This is 
actually primarily about boundaries and barriers. You do better having small 
windows all over your house than large ones. With large windows there is too 
much information coming in, too much to take in that you can’t get a taste 
for what each element means. You are here to block most stuff out. Taste is 
about taking in only what you choose. There is a huge violation in boundaries 
to be force fed, for you this goes into everything. When you say no to all that 
is wrong, you can open yourself up to what is truly magical. If you are at a 
buffet you don’t want to try everything out, you want to be able to take in 
what you truly enjoy. You are designed to say yes to things that align with 
your sense of taste. What color palettes, textures, and flavors do you enjoy in 
your life? 
 
Outer vision (this arrow will point left) 
You are someone who very literally needs your environment and your food to 
be very visually stimulating. Your home is likely very stimulating and visually 
appealing in a way that you don't really need to go outside. Or it can be the 
opposite. You need things to look good. Take the time to plate your food so 
that it looks good to you. Take the time to arrange your home so that it looks 
good. Make sure that you are surrounded by things that you like looking at. 
When it comes to manifestation investing in physical items that remind you 
of wealth and success are very helpful. Having a vision board is also extremely 
helpful for you to visually see and connect with what you are calling into your 
experience.  
 
Inner vision (this arrow will point right) 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   29 
The variables of Human Design 

Inner vision is about what is coming. This is a different type of sensory 
sensitivity. Inner vision is using your imagination, your inner ability to see, 
your third eye. For the environment, inner vision individuals need to have 
visually interesting surroundings. These individuals have an inner world and 
need to connect to it often. These are the people who can turn off the lights 
but still have a full sensory experience in their minds This can sometimes 
cause difficulty falling asleep if they are too active in their inner world. These 
are people who deeply dislike interruptions and distractions from their inner 
processing. It is almost like if they are pulled out of their inner world they are 
pulled out of themselves. This can be a huge trigger for a non-self theme! 
Imagine trying to meditate or visualize and someone coming into the room 
to ask you a question. These people are not meditating all day, but are 
visualizing their current reality, to-do lists, tasks, day, goals, and thoughts. 
They don’t need music or distractions to keep themselves busy. They can 
stare outside the window and get lost in their inner world. 
 
Feeling (this arrow will point right) 
Feelings are the inner vision of senses. Having a feeling cognition means that 
your sense of feeling is your most heightened sense. Because this is related to 
the 5th tone, which is a higher level of evolution, it means that you are much 
more sensitive. It is important that you understand the effects of technology 
on your mechanics. Do your best to spend time away from technology to 
allow your nervous system to communicate with you. You have a strong 
sense of feeling, but you cannot connect with this if you are distracted. If you 
are a specific or a passive manifestor that will show up in this area of your life. 
You are sensitive to feelings. Technology can block the way you deal with 
other people and can ultimately negatively impact your wellbeing. Print 
things out so you can absorb information away from a computer. This is not 
about being against modern advancements, this is about connecting to your 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                       30 
The variables of Human Design 

inner sense of truth and protecting your ability to connect with your sense of 
feeling. 
 
Touch (this arrow will point right) 
This is a tactile sensation. You are likely someone who fills their home with 
textures through plants, furniture, throw pillows and leaves very little open 
space. You like to touch something unique everywhere you go. Everything is 
touchable for you. You like to touch everything you possibly can. When 
grocery shopping you touch all the produce to find the right one. Your hands 
are your eyes and you like to keep your hands busy. Physical touch is also 
likely your love language! You are here to physically touch your environment 
and be physical with others. You do well with work that is in person and 
allows you to touch, create with your hands, or make something. When 
learning or manifesting write out your goals and desires and notes. Use 
colors, textured paper, anything to add depth and dimension. The physical 
feeling of writing out your desires can be extremely therapeutic and magical 
for you. It is like you are making it. Go to a high end store and touch all the 
fabrics, find what makes you feel luxurious.  
                                                                                      




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  31 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                      
 
 
Left Mind: Focused 
This information has to do with your conscious mind, and the top arrow on 
the right side of your chart. You have a focused mind. This means you recall 
things exactly as they are. You recall exact facts, and this probably shows up 
as having a little bit of a photographic memory! When coaching and teaching 
you are able to talk about exact things, exact experiences, and you can easily 
access the depths of your memory. This also means you can access future 
memories as part of your manifestation process. A type of visualization is 
looking at situations you desire to be in as if it is a memory. Look at your goal 
as if you are remembering it. What emotions does it bring up? How did it feel 
to walk into that dream home for the first time? Did you know immediately 
that it was right? How did it feel when the 50th member enrolled in your 
program? What was going through your mind? Were you surprised or did 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 32 
The variables of Human Design 

you already know it was going to happen? Get familiar with the details of 
what it looks like. 
 
 
Right: Receptive 
Having a receptive mind means that you take in absolutely everything. Every 
gesture, movement, word, tone, and frequency. You absorb all of it. Because 
you are wired to absorb you are not personally designed to retrieve. This 
means that you often need the assistance of others to reach in and retrieve 
your experiences through questions. Because of this, it is important for you to 
be around the correct people in your life. You are able to answer the 
questions of others much more easily than you are able to answer your own 
questions. This means you can be asked a question and explain the answer in 
a way that you have never thought about before, but you know is true. You 
piece it together and learn as you answer the question for others. The people 
around you pull out the information inside of you. You are a great “outer 
authority”. You have access to a deep inner well of wisdom and passively 
allow the information to be pulled out of you. You likely did better on oral 
exams, essays, debates, or conversations than fill in the blank recall exams. If 
you are trying to create something, have someone ask you questions. If you 
are trying to show up as an expert, have others interview you or do Q&A 
sessions to better highlight the true depths of your wisdom. 
 

Motivation 
Motivation is what pushes you and drives the way you choose your 
perspectives. This is a binary structure which essentially has both an 
authentic and aligned motivation and a shadow motivation. The shadow will 
show up in your chart as a “Transference”. These are the negative sides of 
your motivations that are often a distraction, and most of the time quite 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   33 
The variables of Human Design 

painful. You will notice that each motivation is also a transference for some 
people. What motivates some people hurts other people. When coaching or 
working with other people on their motivation this is an important piece of 
information to know. This motivation is also known as your outer authority. 
This is the thing outside of you that is driving you. Itis through your authentic 
motivation that the power of what you are here to reveal is truly understood. 
 
Color One: ​ Fear 
If your motivation is fear you are driven by the unknown. We fear what we 
cannot see and within the mystery is what calls you forward. The process of 
overcoming the unknown and reaching for a deeper understanding keeps 
you going. What are you afraid of not knowing? When you teach from within 
the boundaries of what you know you keep yourself in integrity. You are 
interested in gaining new information and the deepest fear that keeps 
driving you is the fear of not knowing enough, getting caught out of your 
depth, or not understanding something. Use this to drive you. Identify what 
you are afraid of and then ask yourself what you need to do in order to make 
sure it doesn’t happen.  
 
Transference: need 
The energy of need gets really specific and detailed. When you let yourself 
feel like you NEED to think about something you are out of alignment with 
your motivation. When you start tying yourself down to what you think you 
need it stops being cognitive. You fall away from your truth. You are 
motivated by the unknown, to know what you need is not a part of the 
unknown. It’s not adventurous, cautious, and moving forward for you. It is 
putting steps between you and where you are designed to go. 
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 34 
The variables of Human Design 

Color Two: ​ Hope 
Hope is a way that you can deal with the surprise of change. Hope holds the 
energy of transmutation. You are capable of blocking so much out. Set your 
eyes on the prize and hold onto it. You are able to filter away the frequencies 
of what you don’t want. This is a powerful motivation when it comes to 
manifestation because you are able to connect so deeply with the feeling of 
your desire. You understand when it is time to wait instead of take action. 
You know when to take responsibility and when to step back. Hope holds the 
frequency of faith in a better outcome and ultimately also recognizes that 
you are worthy of a better outcome. Hope is light and releases any 
resentment or guilt of what happened in the past.  
 
Transference: guilt 
When in the transference or the shadow, you feel like you don’t know how to 
fix it. You start to look backwards instead or forwards. You hold onto the past, 
over-analyze it. You want to fix the past, you hope that you ca. But you don’t 
always need to. You are not supposed to worry about fixing things. You’re 
supposed to think about how you can let life unfold and simply surrender to 
the flow of this beautiful life.  
 
Color Three: ​ Desire 
The motivating factor in your energy is desire. You desire to change the 
world, to lead people in a new direction. You want their life, their views, and 
their reality to be filled with all the best things that life has to offer. You want 
it all for not just you, but for the people around you as well. Whenever you get 
caught up in your head, or your fears, ask yourself what you want. You want it 
all and you want it delivered. So, go for it. Because why not? There are no 
limits. The better it gets the better it gets! Your mind is powerless because 
your body is overcome entirely with the fire of your desires. This is the energy 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    35 
The variables of Human Design 

of leadership, trying to get things to work out. This is a very powerful 
motivation. When you want something you have the desire in your heart that 
fuels not only you but the entire universe to make it happen. 
 
Transference: innocence 
Innocence is when you lose yourself and your connection to your desires. You 
don’t let it be about you. You avoid getting involved, you’re disconnected with 
your heart. There is a difference between holding space for others and pulling 
back because you’re afraid you are too much. The energy of innocence is 
rolled up in the expression “It’s not about me”. For you, it is about you. You are 
designed to let yourself be selfish with your desires. Because when you go 
after what you want it is powerful. It is about you. 
 
Color Four: ​ Need 
This is a similar energy to specific manifesting. Getting clear on exactly what 
you need. How much money. What type of home. Very detailed, but in a light 
hearted way. When you do without doing, everything gets done. Speak your 
manifestations from the “I need” perspective. When you understand where 
you want to go and you get clear on the necessary support that you need to 
get there, you accomplish things without needing to do much. You get to be 
supported, you get to be in flow. 
 
Transference: fear 
If you find yourself in fear, in a perpetual state of worry about the unknown 
you are in your transference. When you are trying to take the extra steps to 
be cautious, to avoid your fears you are doing more than necessary and 
wasting energy. You are not designed to be afraid of what you don’t know. 
You are not designed to constantly be searching for more information. You 
don’t need a safety net in terms of cognitive understanding.  



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 36 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Color Five: G
            ​ uilt 
You’re motivated by fixing things. You are here to see what is wrong with the 
world around you, the relationships, and the systems. Especially if you see 
that how things are currently working is harmful to someone else. This is a 
form of outer authority that is about the others. You see the large framework 
because this is based off of your perspective. You are here to think about how 
things can be better, how you can fix what is right in front of you.  
 
Transference: hope 
You’re a factual person who sees what is wrong. When you ignore what you 
see and rely on false hope you are out of alignment. This is hope that is not 
backed up by anything. This is nothing but a distraction or an escape, or a 
defense mechanism that you fall into when you don’t want to take 
responsibility for the role that you play as a leader and as a fixer.  
 
Color Six: I​ nnocence 
Innocence is not actually considered a motivation. This is the 6th color and 
holds a similar frequency to the 6 line profile. The be a role model is to be 
someone trustworthy. This means having no hidden motives or agendas. You 
are innocent in your process, uncorrupted by personal desires. You 
understand it is not about you. You are in your own element. You appear to 
not be connected with the forces that want you to move towards something 
or away from something. You exist with a sense of purity. You just are. And 
when you show up in this surrendering space of innocence you allow yourself 
to be of service to those who need your wisdom and guidance. You are 
magnetic. 
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    37 
The variables of Human Design 

Transference: desire 
You change the way the bridge works between motivation and individuality. 
When you are in transference you are trying to conceptualize and understand 
your desires. This is the last thing you are designed to do. The way you think, 
the way you exist is a part of your basic power. When you start 
conceptualizing your desires and figuring out what you want you start 
making it about yourself. It’s not about what you want, it is about the 
collective. You are here to be of service, and part of how you do this is by 
surrendering your personal desires so that you can show up in innocence. 
 
 
                                                                                       
 

Sense 
Behind your motivation is your Tone, a deeper layer of what motivates you. 
This is known as your sense. This goes deeper into something known as outer 
authority. Outer authority is the ability to provide your unique perspective to 
others. Outer authority deals with cognition and how you think since this is 
associated with your mind. This is another layer of what makes you unique. 
When you liberate yourself from the need to make decidiosn (following your 
inner authority) you become a deep source of knowledge to other people. 
This is an area where you become of high service to others. This is where you 
start to become a resource of wisdom. Apply your sense underneath your 
motivation. You are motivated by one thing with a deep sense of something 
else.  
 
For example, ​if you are motivated by fear and your sense is meditation you 
are someone who wants all the facts. You are motivated by the unknown and 
other people can take advantage of your mediitative frame. When you show 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   38 
The variables of Human Design 

up in a passive minded and meditative energy you allow yourself to channel 
information from the unknown to the other person.  
 
Tone one:​ ​ Security (arrow pointing left) 
    The intelligence of this individual is deeply rooted in an issue of security. This 
is the first line of the senses and therefore is that foundation. A foundational 
need is security. This can be about safety in your home, body, relationship to 
money, or just about anything. You desire to protect yourself. Your outer 
authority is rooted in your sense of security and safety. Your ability to create 
the foundation of information is what other people pull out of you. Your sense 
of security within the information. Your boldness with the information. 
 
Tone two: ​ Uncertainty (arrow pointing left) 
    If your sense is uncertaintyyou truely see the uncertainty of any idea or 
principle. You are aware of just how much something could not be true. You 
see around what is being presented to you. You filter the deeper truth out of 
the presented facts. You can get to a place where you understand what other 
people cannot. You have the ability to access the information you need 
because you are almost waiting to be called forward. So you are ready.  
 
Tone three:​ ​ Action (arrow pointing left) 
    The third line here starts to create a shift. Your mind is active and this can 
sometimes be a bit challenging. You have a strategic mind and your intellect 
is rooted in the activity of your brain. Your way of understanding and 
conceptualizing is an active process. You map out the steps of how to study, 
understand, and learn. This is how you guide others to their sense of wisdom. 
You give them the action steps to learn and understand. You can guide them 
through this process. “Learn this piece of information. Then take this action. 
Then do this.” It is natural for you to be a good teacher but it is not necessarily 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                      39 
The variables of Human Design 

the only way that this sense can be utilized. You can guide people through 
the right action steps in any way. 
 
Tone four: ​ Meditation (arrow pointing right) 
    This is where we make the switch from left to right. You are receptive and 
you take it all in. You are focused on the future and not the past. This is a new 
evolutionary sensory awareness that collectively is being developed within us. 
This is the opposite of action, this is surrender and flow within the cognition. 
This is observing the world and information unfold in front of you while you 
process. You are designed to see your mind, meditation is not about working 
on something it is about allowing the movie that is your thoughts and 
attention flow. The information is brought to you. It is braught to you by 
others and by their questions. You then get to relax and watch your mind 
flow to the answers they need. You are hardly concerned with the outside 
world, everything is an internal process. It is important for you to tune into 
your mental monolog and just listen. 
 
Tone five:​ ​ Judgement (arrow pointing right) 
    The intelligence of of judgement is very powerful, as all line five energy has 
shown. This brings in the heretic energy of the five line and goes deeper tos 
aying that it will have a universal impact. This is deep power. You have the 
ability to think practically and you can easily create suspicions. Your mind is 
the definition of intelligent and will always create an edge. You create 
judgements, you compare, and contrasts, and analyze. Sometimes when yous 
hare these judgements you can feel lke you are being a bit harsh. When you 
are respected these judgemental qualities act as guidance. You are designed 
to share your judgements, from a loving space. If you hold yourself back it will 
start to affect your health. Your outer authority is rooted in your power and 
judgements.  



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    40 
The variables of Human Design 

 
Tone six: ​ Acceptance (arrow pointing right) 
    The theme of acceptance is associated with the line six. This is the role model 
energy that is looking outside of what is complete, what is done, and looking 
forward, onto to next thing. You get outsode of all the problems, msitakes, 
and games that are being played in the current world around you. Your 
wisdom comes from your foresight into what is next. People come to you for 
your wisdom and your ability to pull them out of the games that are being 
played, the rules they think they need to follow, and all the details that don’t 
actually matter in the bigger picture. Give yourself permission to look forward, 
to see the big picture and to guide other people to seeing things the way you 
do. 
 
 
 
 




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  41 
The variables of Human Design 




                                                                                       
 
Tone 
The tone correlates to if the arrow points to the left or right. This particular 
arrow is associated with the north and south node on the design side, or the 
right side of the bodygraph. This helps to create your perspective, how you 
see things, and where you live at a cognitive level. 
 
Left Perspective: Focused 
Your perspective is how you view the world. This is the lens that you look 
through, your default setting for how you see things. You are a detailed 
person. You see things in detail, you see things as they are, you see the small 
moments and not the entire big picture energy. This arrow is the key to 
quantum leaps. Some people need to connect to big picture themes to fast 
forward and jump in time. You need to zone in on a specific, fully detailed, 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   42 
The variables of Human Design 

extremely vivid picture. This is how we manifest. You need to choose a 
specific goal, a specific reality, and paint the picture as much as possible. 
Don’t worry too much about the emotional experience (the whole “hold the 
vibration of your desire” doesn’t work for you). See the details. You want a new 
car? Make a list. What color? What brand? What model? The more detailed 
the better. For business don’t just choose an ideal client avatar, choose exact 
people in your audience and say “I’d have fun working with her” very 
detached. The whole energy of your manifesting is detached and playful. “If I 
got this exact thing, that would be pretty fun”. 
 
Initially this can take some faith. There can be some fear around getting 
specific and really detailed because “what if I can’t call it in exactly how I want 
it?”. This is where you shift into alignment. You get to have it because if you 
can imagine it, it exists and it can happen for you. Spend more time playing 
with the details of what you are calling in than worrying about how you’re 
going to make it happen. You’re supported in your desires. 
 
Right  
This is where we get the idea that you are a passive manifestor. A theme of 
the arrows pointing to the right is that the right is looking forward. The right 
is a new energy that embodies a new way of manifestation. We are all 
capable of manifesting in both ways however this will be the most aligned 
and effortless for you. You don’t need to get caught up in the details of what 
you want, you get to connect with what you want to feel. In the highest 
frequency of this energy you get to feel good all the time and the perfect 
opportunities, items, and things that you are calling in will appear. This is a 
very feminine energy. You get to feel good and allow the perfect things that 
you want to show up, better than you could have imagined. In this energy, 
you get to be the feminine and you allow the universe to be the masculine. 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                    43 
The variables of Human Design 

Challenge the universe, flirt, make it playful. “I want a beautiful relaxing 
evening” then you allow all the perfect components to come together for you. 
“I love feeling abundant and supported by money” then you allow the money 
to show up for you.  
 
Initially this can take some faith, how can the universe support me if it doesn’t 
know what I want?! It knows what you want because you are an extension of 
the universe. Have faith that you get to be supported and that the universe 
will catch you. 
 

View 
The colors on the personality side are known as binary. This means that it has 
two sides, an authentic side and a shadow side. The shadow is known as the 
transference and is essentially the “non-self” of the color in this area. In each 
color you will see the actual view and then the transference. View is about 
your unique perspective, it is how you see the world.  
 
Color One: ​ S
             ​ urvival 
You have the ability to see what will survive and what is necessary for 
something to survive. This can be the survival of a culture, a business idea, a 
relationship… anything. You see things at a very primal level and in certain 
reas of this world, this can be a huge advantage! This also goes deeper. You 
have the ability to see what people are afraid of. Fear is a part of the 
foundation (think about fear being the first motivation as well). You see the 
mundane, the details, and the foundation of what this world is built on. Your 
ability to see these fears and help guide people through dealing with these 
fears is part of your outer authority. 
 
 


Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                   44 
The variables of Human Design 

Color Two: ​Possibility 
You see potential, what is possible. This can be a wonderful spirit to tie into 
your outer authority because you can look out and see what is possible. This 
means that others can come to you and leave seeing the potential in their 
own ideas and future. This is a beautiful source of empowerment. You can see 
the amazement, the theoretical possibilities, and anything in-between. 
Sometimes this can feel a little frustrating. When you truly see that anything 
is possible it can be difficult to narrow it down or choose just one possibility to 
move towards. This can give you a sense of insecurity and inconsistency. 
However, because anything is possible you can choose to see that it is 
possible for you to choose a single direction to go towards. Let yourself stay 
open, and remember that you are a great person to brainstorm with! 
 
 
Color Three: P
             ​ ower 
You view things in a competitive nature, you see heirarchically. In the context 
of power. In terns of who is winning and who is losing. You see who is up and 
who is down. The three line here is very grounded in the material plane. You 
see the competition but also the personal competition. Who is winning in 
their own way, who is doing their best, and who is overcoming personal 
battles. You are a measurer, the prize, the race, the classifications… You help 
to judge and catagorize all parts of the moving world. You make a great critic, 
but do what you can to not be too critical of yourself. If you start seeing that 
the you are behind, not doing enough, or you find yourself comparing 
yourself to others see if you can change this. How can you see yourself as 
powerful, in your power, and winning in your personal life? 
 
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                  45 
The variables of Human Design 

Color Four: W
            ​ anting 
You see what is missing! You see between the lines of what is. This allows you 
to pick up on what is necessary in your life to create the one you want. You 
see the space between where you are and where you desire to go. The four is 
about networking and community. This view is easily applicable to seeing 
what is needed in a community, what is necessary for improvement, and 
what the missing pieces are. You see yourself as deeply social, and you can 
easily find yourself filling in the missing pieces, because you’re the only one 
who can even tell that they are missing. This is a line of friendship because 
you have the capability and capacity to fill the space.  
 
 
Color Five: P
            ​ robability 
You see not only what is possible, but also that it is possible that it might not 
be probable. You are a “most linkely” thinker and tend to base things on your 
personal experiences. You like to be sure, you base your advice and decisions 
on calculations. This can sometimes lead to an almost gambling like 
tendency because you have the ability to bet on your predictions and you will 
probably be right. This is going to bring you back to your strategy and 
authority. This is your guidance system. While you may know what is 
probable, open your mind to being guded to also see what is possible.  
 
 
Color Six: P
           ​ ersonal 
You see things in a personal context. This can come across as narcissistic 
sometimes, but it is the way that you are designed. You see things in your 
own process, this is how you are designed. You are an individual at a deep 
level and seeing things on a personal level. You see from your own dimension. 
This can sometimes show up as seeing through rose-colored glasses, and can 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 46 
The variables of Human Design 

make you feel a little isolated at times. Ground yourself. Sometimes it can be 
a little naive to stay blind to what is going on. Yu can help others see things in 
their own way, be careful not to try and convince them to see things your 
way.  




                                   Thank you! 
                                        
                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                                 47 
The variables of Human Design 

 
 
                            Acknowledgements 
 
All information is interpreted from “Variables That Which Binds Us” Created 
by Ra Ura Hu, the founder and creator of the Human Design System.  




Created by Eden Carpenter All Rights Reserved                            48 
