                         The Creation of Consciousness (E. Edinger)




                                  Where there is no vision the people perish – Proverbs 29:18



1. The New Myth


The myth of the necessary incarnation of God…can be understood as man’s creative
confrontation with the opposites and their synthesis in the self, the wholeness of his
personality… That is the goal…which fits man meaningfully into the scheme of creation and at
the same time confers meaning upon it.

                                                       (Jung/Memories, Dreams, Reflections)



       History and anthropology teach us that a human society cannot long survive
unless its members are psychologically contained within a central living myth. Such a
myth provides the individual with a reason for being. To the ultimate questions of
human existence it provides answers which satisfy the most developed and
discriminating members of the society. And if the creative, intellectual minority is in
harmony with the prevailing myth, the other layers of society will follow its lead and
may even be spared a direct encounter with the fateful question of the meaning of life.
       It is evident to thoughtful people that Western society no longer has a viable,
functioning myth. Indeed, all the major world cultures are approaching, to a greater or
lesser extent, the state of mythlessness. The breakdown of a central myth is like the
shattering of a vessel containing a precious essence: the fluid is spilled and drains
away, soaked up by the surrounding undifferentiated matter. Meaning is lost. In its
place, primitive and atavistic contents are reactivated. Differentiated values disappear
and are replaced by the elemental motivations of power and pleasure, or else the
individual is exposed to emptiness and despair. With the loss of awareness of a
transpersonal reality (God), the inner and outer anarchies of competing personal
desires take over. [p. 9]
       It is the loss of our containing myth that is the root cause of our current individual
and social distress, and nothing less than the discovery of a new central myth will solve
the problem for the individual and for society. Indeed, a new myth is in the making and
Jung was keenly aware of that fact. [p. 11]
        Jung later found his myth, and it is the thesis of this book that just as Jung’s
discovery of his own mythlessness paralleled the mythlessness condition of modern
society, so Jung’s discovery of his own individual myth will prove to be the first
emergence of our new collective myth. In fact, it is my conviction that as we gain
historical perspective it will become evident that Jung is an epochal man. I mean by
this a man whose life inaugurates a new age in cultural history. [p. 12]

                                                                                           1
      In his autobiography, Jung writes:
“Man’s task is…to become conscious of the contents that press upward from the
unconscious. Neither should he persist in his unconsciousness not remain identical
with the unconscious elements of his being, thus evading his destiny, which is to create
more and more consciousness. As far as we can discern, the sole purpose of human
existence is to kindle a light in the darkness of mere being. It may even be assumed
that just as the unconscious affects us, so the increase in our consciousness affects
the unconscious.”
      And finally:
“Once [the union of opposites] has been experienced, the ambivalence in the image of
a nature-god or Creator-god ceases to present difficulties. On the contrary, the myth
of the necessary incarnation of God – the essence of the Christian message – can
then be understood as man’s creative confrontation with the opposites and their
synthesis in the self, the wholeness of his personality. The unavoidable internal
contradictions in the image of a Creator-god can be reconciled in the unity and
wholeness of the self as the coniunctio oppositorum of the alchemists or as a unio
mystica. In the experience of the self it is no longer the opposites “God” and “man” that
are reconciled, as it was before, but rather the opposites within the God-image itself.
That is the meaning of divine service, of the service which man can render to God, that
light may emerge from the darkness, that the Creator may become conscious of His
creation, and man conscious of himself.
       That is the goal, or one goal, which fits man meaningfully into the scheme of
creation, and at the same time confers meaning upon it. It is an explanatory myth which
has slowly taken shape within me in the course of the decades. It is a goal I can
acknowledge and esteem, and which therefore satisfies me.”
      These are the chief statements Jung has made concerning the emerging new
myth. To many, especially those without personal experience of the unconscious,
these statements may be hard to comprehend… The essential new idea is that the
purpose of human life is the creation of consciousness. Unfortunately, the experiential
meaning of this term is almost impossible to convey abstractly. As with all fundamental
aspects of the psyche it transcends the grasp of the intellect. An oblique, symbolic
approach is therefore required.
       I understand consciousness to be a substance, a psychic material usually but
now always invisible and intangible to the senses. The problem in understanding
concerns the words psyche and psychic. Until one has experienced the reality of the
psyche, he can follow the discussion no further. Given the experience of psychic reality
one can grasp the idea of a psychic substance. All psychic contents have substance,
so to speak, if they are experienced as objectively real. What then distinguishes the
psychic substance of consciousness? Consciousness is psychic substance connected
to an ego. Or more precisely, psychic contents which are potential entities become
actualized and substantial when they make connection with an ego, i.e., when they
enter an individual’s conscious awareness and become an accepted item of that
individual’s personal responsibility.
                                                                                       2
       The process whereby a series of psychic contents – complexes and archetypal
images – make connection with an ego and thereby generate the psychic substance
of consciousness is called the process of individuation. This process has as its most
characteristic feature the encounter of opposites, first experienced as the ego and the
unconscious, the I and the not-I, subject and object, myself and the “other”. Thus we
can say that whenever one is experiencing the conflict between contrary attitudes or
when a personal desire or idea is being contested by an “other”, either form inside or
outside, the possibility of creating a new increment of consciousness exists.
       Experiences of inner or outer conflict which are resolved creatively and are
accompanied by a sense of satisfaction and life enhancement are examples of the
creation of consciousness. Such encounters, sought deliberately and reflected upon
systematically, are an essential feature of the individuation process which is a continual
coming to terms with contents that are “other” than or opposite to the ego. In alchemy,
the Philosophers’ Stone is described as the mediator between opposites. In one text,
where the Stone has a feminine quality, it says:
I am the mediatrix of the elements, making one to agree with another; that which is warm I make cold,
and the reverse; that which is dry I make moist, and the reverse; that which is hard I soften, and the
reverse. I am the end and my beloved is the beginning. I am the whole work and all science is hidden
in me.

       Understood psychologically, this text tells us that in the process of creating
consciousness we shall at first be thrown back and forth between opposing moods and
attitudes. Each time the ego identifies with one side of a pair of opposites the
unconscious will confront one with its contrary. Gradually, the individual becomes able
to experience opposite viewpoints simultaneously. With this capacity, alchemically
speaking, the Philosophers’’ Stone is born, i.e., consciousness is created. The
Philosophers’ Stone is often described as the product of the coniunctio of sun and
moon. For a man’s psychology, the sun corresponds to the conscious psyche and the
moon to the unconscious. Thus Jung says, “Becoming conscious of an unconscious
content amounts to its integration in the conscious psyche and is therefore a coniunctio
Solis et Lunae.” [p. 15]
       The most outstanding symbolism pertaining to the creation of consciousness is
found in alchemy. Although the texts are confused and obscure the basic idea of
alchemy is quite simple. The alchemist must find the right material to start with, the
prima materia. He must then subject it to the proper series of transformative operations
in the alchemical vessel and the result will be the production of the mysterious and
powerful entity called the Philosophers’ Stone. We now know through Jung’s profound
researches that the alchemical procedure symbolizes the individuation process and
that the Philosophers’ Stone represents the realization of the Self, i.e., consciousness
of wholeness. A crucial feature of the Philosophers’ Stone is that it is a union of
opposites. It is the product of a coniunctio often symbolized by the union of the red king
and the white queen, the king and queen standing for any or all of the pairs of
opposites.
      The alchemical myth tells us that consciousness is created by the union of
opposites and we learn the same lesson from the dreams of individuals. [p. 19]

                                                                                                    3
       Contrary to the implications of the erotic imagery, the coniunctio of opposites is
not generally a pleasant process. More often it is felt as a crucifixion. The cross
represents the union of horizontal and vertical, two contrary directional movements. To
be nailed to such a conflict can be a scarcely endurable agony. [p. 20]
       The union of opposites in the vessel of the ego is the essential feature of the
creation of consciousness. Consciousness is the third thing that emerges out of the
conflict of twoness…out of such paralyzing conflicts can emerge the third,
transcendent condition which is a new quantum of consciousness. [p. 21]
       The image of the ego as a vessel leads to the important idea of being a carrier
of consciousness, i.e., an incarnation of transpersonal meaning. Two main archetypal
figures have represented this idea in world culture, namely Buddha and Christ…What
they have in common is the idea of being a carrier of consciousness. Characteristically,
the imagery emerging in the West represents the standpoint of the ego and that
deriving from the East speaks from the standpoint of the Self. Together, they reveal a
pair of opposites. The crucified Christ and the meditating Buddha represent
consciousness as agony and consciousness as tranquil bliss – total acceptance of the
bondage to matter on the one hand and total transcendence of the world on the other.
United they picture the two sides of the carrier of consciousness. [p. 22]
      The opposites are initially experienced as painful and paralyzing conflicts, but
enduring and working on such conflicts promote the creation of consciousness and
may lead to a glimpse of the Self as coniunctio. As Jung says, “All opposites are of
God, therefore man must bend to this burden; and in so doing he finds that God in his
“oppositeness” has taken possession of him, incarnated himself in him. He becomes a
vessel filled with divine conflict.” This is precisely the “divine service…which man can
render to God”... [p. 31]


2. The Meaning of Consciousness
       The goal of psychotherapy, indeed of all modes of psychological development,
is the maximum degree of consciousness. Consciousness and all it signifies is the
ultimate value. But what does it signify? Do we really know what we mean when we
use the word? [p. 35]
       In Psychological Types, Jung says:
“By conscious I understand the relation of psychic contents to the ego, in so far as this
relation is perceived as such by the ego. Relations to the ego that are not perceived
as such are unconscious. Consciousness is the function or activity which maintains the
relation of psychic contents to the ego. Consciousness is not identical with the psyche
because the psyche represents the totality of all psychic contents, and these are not
necessarily all directly connected with the ego, i.e., related to it in such a way that they
take on the quality of consciousness.”




                                                                                          4
This statement offers at least a beginning for a phenomenological description of the
experience of consciousness; it also states explicitly the important fact that the ego is
the carrier of consciousness.
       We can proceed further by examining the unconscious side of the term
consciousness, namely its etymology. Conscious derives from con or cum, meaning
“with” or “together”, and scire, “to know” or “to see”. It has the same derivation as
conscience. Thus the root meaning of both consciousness and conscience is “knowing
with” or “seeing with” an “other”. In constrast, the word science, which also derives
from scire, means simple knowing, i.e., knowing without “withness.” So etymology
indicates that the phenomena of consciousness and conscience are somehow related
and that the experience of consciousness is made up of the factors – “knowing” and
“withness.” In other words, consciousness is the experience of knowing together with
an other, that is, in a setting of twoness. I shall now examine the implications of this
statement. [p. 36]
Knowing
       The psychological function of knowing or seeing requires first of all that
undifferentiated, diffuse experience be split into a subject and an object, the knower
and the known. This primordial division of original oneness corresponds to Erich
Neumann’s description of the separation of the world parents. The separation of Father
Sky from Mother Earth, or light from darkness, is the original cosmogonic event
marking the birth of consciousness as the ability to know. As Neumann says, “This act
of cognition, of conscious discrimination, sunders the world into opposites, for
experience of the world is only possible through opposites.” The ego separates from
the pleroma, the subject of knowledge is separated from the object of knowledge and
the act of knowing thus becomes possible. [p. 37]
       The classical mythical example of the value of separating subject from object by
the power of reflection is found in the myth of Perseus and Medusa: to look upon
Medusa directly is to be turned into stone, i.e., she represents a psychic content that
destroys the ego; she can be overcome only by viewing her through reflection in the
mirror-shield which Athena provides for Perseus.
       I consider Athena’s mirror-shield ultimately to symbolize the process of human
culture itself, which redeems man from the destructive Medusan horror of raw being.
Language, art, drama and learning provide the Athena mirror for humanity, allowing
the psyche to emerge and develop. [p. 39]
        Dreams and fantasy can serve the same mirror function. For example, a man in
the early stages of analysis dreamed that he looked into a mirror and was amazed to
see that his face was his father’s face. This man was identified with his father and was
living out his father’s unhappy fate. The dream was a mirror enabling to see that fact –
to make his identification with his father an object of knowledge. Thus the subject of
knowledge (the ego) became separated from the object of knowledge (identification
with the father), and the dreamer took his first step out of that identification and into
greater consciousness. [p. 40]


                                                                                        5
Being Known
       …unconscious contents, as a rule, cannot stand to be observed. They react
violently to being known because this destroys or relativizes the autonomy
(omnipotence) they enjoy while operating unconsciously. These unconscious contents
or complexes are various aspects of ego-Self identity, which is profoundly threatened
by being subordinated to the status of an object known to a transcendental subject. [p.
44]
Knowing With
        We have now explored the two sides of the “knowing” factor of consciousness:
1) the experience of being the knowing subject, and 2) the experience of being the
known object. One could say that we begin our psychic existence in the unconscious
state of known object and only laboriously, with the growth of the ego, achieve the
relatively tranquil status of knowing subject. Then, if development is to proceed, the
relative freedom we have won must be relinquished as the ego becomes aware that it
is the object of a transpersonal subject, namely the Self. After both these experiences
the way is open for the reconciling third, which I take to be the full meaning of “knowing
with.”
       The process of knowing is a power process. To be a knower means to dominate
the known object by the power of Logos. To be the known one means to be the victim
of the knower. To participate in the process of knowing means to play one of these two
roles or both alternately. However, the definition of consciousness as “knowing with”
has a second factor: it involves not only knowing but also “withness.” Withness is the
dynamism of connectedness, the relationship principle. If knowing is a function of
Logos, withness is as function of Eros. We thus reach the unexpected discovery that
the word we use for the highest value, consciousness, is in its root meaning a
coniunctio, a union of Logos and Eros. [p. 52]
       Since the unconscious provides the material of our dream-life, the Self becomes
visible to the ego by being seen in dreams. Presumably the reverse is also true.
Perhaps the life dramas of the ego are the dreams of the Self. Shakespeare says, “We
are such stuff as dreams are made on” (The Tempest, act 4, scene 1, line 156). [p. 56]
      Near the end of his life, Jung made the statement that expresses explicitly his
conclusion regarding the general purpose and meaning of human life:
“Man’s task is…to become conscious of the contents that press upward from the unconscious. Neither
should he persist in his unconsciousness, nor remain identical with the unconscious elements in his
being, thus evading his destiny, which is to create more and more consciousness. As far as we can
discern, the sole purpose of human existence is to kindle a light in the darkness of mere being. It may
even be assumed that just as the unconscious affects us, so the increase in our consciousness affects
the unconscious.” (Memories, Dreams, Reflections, p. 326)

This passage distills the work of a lifetime, a life which in my opinion is the most
conscious life ever lived. If we condense the statement to its essence, we arrive at this:
The purpose of human life is the creation of consciousness.



                                                                                                     6
       …If religion is Self-oriented, science is ego-oriented. Religion is based on Eros,
science on Logos. The age now dawning will provide a synthesis for this thesis and
antithesis. Religion sought linkage, science sought knowledge. The new world-view
will seek linked knowledge. [p. 57]


3. Depth Psychology as the New Dispensation: Reflection on Jung’s “Answer to Job”

       …The unconscious is a piece of Nature our mind cannot comprehend. It can
only sketch models of a possible and partial understanding.
          In “Answer to Job” Jung writes:
        “It is only through the psyche that we can establish that God acts upon us, but we are unable to
distinguish whether these actions emanate from God or from the unconscious. We cannot tell whether
God and the unconscious are two different entities. Both are border-line concepts for transcendental
contents. But empirically it can be established, with a sufficient degree of probability, that there is in the
unconscious an archetype of wholeness…Strictly speaking, the God-image does not coincide with the
unconscious as such, but with…[this] special content of it, namely the archetype of the self” (par. 757).
[p. 67]
      …Yahweh as a psychic reality is a personification of the collective unconscious
especially in the aspect of center and totality, the Self. [p. 68]
       In psychological terms, the incarnation of God means individuation. To the
extent that one becomes aware of the transpersonal center of the psyche, the Self,
and lives out of that awareness, one can be said to be incarnating the God-image. This
experience involves encounter with the opposites. The Self is a union of opposites.
When it first emerges into consciousness, the opposites split apart and the ego is faced
with the conflict of their opposition. Jung says:
“All opposites are of God, therefore man must bend to this burden, and in so doing he finds that God in
his ‘oppositeness’ has taken possession of him, incarnated himself in him. He becomes a vessel filled
with divine conflict. God acts out of the unconscious of man and forces him to harmonize and unite the
opposing influences to which his mind is exposed from the unconscious.” (Mysterium Coniunctionis, CW
14, par.740)

       The hallmark of individuation is the differentiation of the individual psyche from
its containment in the collective psyche. [p. 84]
       …And like Job, we can expect to find within our antagonist, the unconscious,
also our redeemer. When the unconscious buffets us most severely with storms of
affect or depression, we can also expect to find in dreams and fantasy the healing
meaning that rescues.
          …Jund writes:
“The unconscious wants to flow into consciousness in order to reach the light, but at the same time it
continually thwarts itself, because it would rather remain unconscious. That is to say, God wants to
become man, but not quite.” (Answer to Job, par. 740). [p. 86]

       …The latin word dispensation was used to render the Greek oikonomia, which means literally
administration of a household…The significant phrase [in “Éphesians” by Paul] is “dispensation of the
mystery,” oikonomia tou mysterious. It is as though man’s relation to the hidden mystery of God must

                                                                                                            7
be dispensed or administered much as the economy of a household is administered. In psychological
terms it means, I think, the provision of a world-view that relates man (ego) to God (archetypal psyche)
and promotes the smooth transfer of energy from one realm to the other. [p. 88]

         The Christian dispensation brought about a new oikonomia to administer man’s relation to the
divine. That mode of administration is now largely exhausted, and, if my perception is accurate, a new
mode is on the horizon, namely depth psychology. The new psychological dispensation finds man”s
relation to God in the individual’s relation to the unconscious. This is the new context, the new vessel
with which humanity can be the carrier of divine meaning.



4. The Transformation of God
        The objective psyche [“the collective unconscious”] was first experienced and
described in a religious, metaphysical context; hence traditional religious images are
our richest source of data concerning the objective psyche…According to the
psychological standpoint man cannot get outside his own psyche. All experience is
therefore psychic experience. This means that it is impossible, experientially, to
distinguish between God and the God-image in the psyche. My use of the term “God”
in this chapter, therefore, always refers to the God-image in the psyche, i.e., the Self.
[p. 91]
      Another example is Sisyphus, whose name means “the very wise one” or
perhaps “divinely wise”. His story is as follows:
One day Zeus abducted Aegina, daughter of the river god Asopus. He took her to the isle of Oenone
where he raped her. Sisyphus happened to witness this event and he gave the information to Asopus
in return for a spring of fresh water, the Peirene spring. For revealing divine secrets, “Sisyphus was
given an exemplary punishment. The judges of the Dead showed him a huge block of stone – identical
in size with that into which Zeus had turned himself when fleeing from Asopus – and ordered him to roll
it up the brow of a hill and topple it down the farther slope. He has never yet succeeded in doing so. As
soon as he has almost reached the summit, he is forced back by the weight of the shameless stone,
which bounces to the very bottom once more, where he wearily retrieves it and must begin all over
again, though sweat bathes his limbs, and a cloud of dust rises above his head.” (Graves – Greek Myths,
vol. 1, p. 218) [p. 102]

      The transformation of God is also the secret and essential meaning of alchemy.
The prima materia which was to be transformed into the Philosophers’ Stone by the
alchemical process was sometimes identified explicitly with God. [p. 103]




EDINGER, Edward F.: The creation of consciousness: Jung’s myth for modern man.
Toronto: Inner City Books, 1984.



                                                                                                       8
