Alfred North Whitehead




Modes
of
Thought
The Free Press, New York
         Six Lectures Delivered in Wellesley College, Massa·
         chusetts, and Two Lectures in the University of Chicago
              COPYRIGHT,   1958,   BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
            COPYRIGHT RENEWED      1966 BY T.   NORTH WHITEHEAD

                 Printed in the United States of America

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or• trans·
mitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
         system, without permission in writing from the Publisher.

           Collier-Macmillan Canada, Ltd., Toronto, Ontario
          Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-55184


                 FIRST FREE PRESS PAPERBACK EDITION    1968


                                                              prir&Ung number
                                                2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
               TO
      MY CHILDREN
AND GRANDCHILDREN
                                         Preface


 he doctrine dominating these lectures is that factors in
our experience are "clear and distinct" in proportion to
their variability, provided that they sustain themselves for
that moderate period required for importance. The neces-
sities are invariable, and for that reason remain in the
background of thought, dimly and vaguely. Thus philo-
sophic truth is to be sought in the presuppositions of lan-
guage rather than in its express statements. For this reason
philosophy is akin to poetry, and both of them seek to ex-
press that ultimate good sense which we term civilization.
    The first six chapters, namely Parts I and II, were de-
livered as lectures at Wellesley College, Masssachusetts,
during the session 1937-38, succeeding my retirement from
Harvard. This fortunate opportunity has helped me to con-
dense for publication those features of my Harvard lectures
which are incompletely presented in my published works.
The two lectures of Part III, entitled "Nature and Life,"
were delivered four years          at the University of Chi-
cago, and have been published by the University of Chicago
Press, and in England by the Cambridge Press. They were
meant to form part of a book such as the present one, but
                                                          vii
                                                    Preface

various circumstances have delayed the completion of the
plan.
    The Epilogue, "The Aim of Philosophy," is adapted
from a short address at an annual reception, 1935, for
graduate students of the Harvard and Radcliffe Philosophi-
cal Departments. It was reported in the Harvard Alumni
Bulletin.
                          ALFRED NoRTH WHITEHEAD
April 25, 1938




                                                        viii
                        Contents


       PREFACE,   vii


I.
CREATIVE IMPULSE

LECTURE
   I   IMPORTANCE, 1
  II   EXPRESSION, 20
 III   UNDERSTANDING,   42




II.
ACTIVITY

  IV PERSPECTIVE, 65
   V FORMS OF PROCESS, 86
  VI CIVILIZED UNIVERSE, 105
                               ix
                                    Contents


Ill.
NATURE AND LIFE

 VII   NATURE LIFELESS, 127
VIII   NATURE ALIVE, 148



IV.
EPILOGUE

 IX    THE AIM OF PHILOSOPHY, 171
       INDEX, 175




                                           X
I.
CREATIVE IMPULSE




                                              LECTURE ONE



                                 Importance


 he first chapter in philosophic approach should consist
in a free examination of some ultimate notions, as they
occur naturally in daily life. I am referring to the generali-
ties which are inherent in literature, in social organization,
in the effort towards understanding physical occurrences.
    There are no definitions of such notions. They are
incapable of analysis in terms of factors more far-reaching
than themselves. Each must be displayed as necessary to the
various meanings of groups of notions, of equal depth
with itself. In discussion of such a group any one of its
members might, with slight adjustment of language, have
been chosen as the central figure. In this lecture the notion
of "Importance" has been taken as central, so that the
discussion of a variety of topics comes back, time and again,
to this idea.
    In this whole set of lectures my aim is to examine some
of those general characterizations of our experience which
are presupposed in the directed activities of mankind.
There will be no attempt to frame a systematic philosophy.
Such a goal is too ambitious for a short course. All syste-
matic thought must start from presuppositions. Also, as
                                               Creative Impulse
mentioned above-the discussion will incidentally employ
more basic notions than are expressed in its explicit aim.
The verbal expositions of such data must be trimmed, and
dressed, and put in order, during any process of systemati-
zation.
    In all systematic thought, there is a tinge of pedantry.
There is a putting aside of notions, of experiences, and of
suggestions, with the prim excuse that of course we are not
thinking of such things. System is important. It is necessary
for the handling, for the utilization, and for the criticism of
the thoughts which throng into our experience.
    But before the work of systematization commences,
there is a previous task-a very necessary task if we are to
avoid the narrownesses inherent in all finite systems.
Today, even Logic itself is struggling with the discovery
embodied in a formal proof, that every finite set of prem-
ises must indicate notions which are excluded from its
direct purview. Philosophy can exclude nothing. Thus it
should never start from systematization. Its primary stage
can be termed assemblage.
    Such a process is, of course, unending. All that can be
achieved is the emphasis on a few large-scale notions, to-
gether with attention to the variety of other ideas which
arise in the display of those chosen for primary emphasis.
Systematic philosophy is a subject of study for specialists.
On the other hand, the philosophic process of assemblage
should have received some attention from every educated
mind, in its escape from its own specialism.
    In Western literature there are four great thinkers,
whose services to civilized thought rest largely upon their
achievements in philosophical assemblage; though each of
them made important contributions to the structure of
philosophic system. These men are Plato, Aristotle, Leib-
niz, and William James.
    Plato grasped the importance of mathematical system;
                                                              2
                                                  Importance

but his chief fame rests upon the wealth of profound sug-
gestions scattered throughout his dialogues, suggestions
half smothered by the archaic misconceptions of the age in
which he lived. Aristotle systematized as he assembled. He
inherited from Plato, imposing his own systematic struc-
tures.
    Leibniz inherited two thousand years of thought. He
really did inherit more of the varied thoughts of his pred-
ecessors than any man before or since. His interests ranged
from mathematics to divinity, and from divinity to politi-
cal philosophy, and from political philosophy to physical
science. These interests were backed by profound learning.
There is a book to be written, and its title should be, The
Mind of Leibniz.
    Finally, there is William James, essentially a modem
man. His mind was adequately based upon the learning of
the past. But the essence of his greatness was his marvellous
sensitivity to the ideas of the present. He knew the world
in which he lived, by travel, by personal relations with its
leading men, by the variety of his own studies. He syste-
matized; but above all he assembled. His intellectual life
was one protest against the dismissal of experience in the
interest of system. He had discovered intuitively the great
truth with which modem logic is now wrestling.
    This prefatory discussion has been concerned with the
two aspects of philosophy. Systematization is the criticism
of generality by methods derived from the specialism of
science. It presupposes a closed group of primary ideas. In
another aspect ph1losopliy is the entertainment of notions
of large, adequate generality. Such a habit of mind is the
very essence of civilization. It is civilization. The hermit
thrush and the nightingale can produce sound of the ut-
most beauty. But they are not civilized beings. They lack
ideas of adequate generality respecting their own actions
and the world around them. Without doubt the higher
                                                           3
                                              Creative Impulse
animals entertain notions, hopes, and fears. And yet they
lack civilization by reason of the deficient generality of
their mental functionings. Their love, their devotion,
their beauty of performance, rightly claim our love and
our tenderness in return. Civilization is more than all
these; and in moral worth it can be less than all these.
Civilized beings are those who survey the world with some
large generality of understanding.
    2. There are two contrasted ideas which seem inevi-
tably to underlie all width of experience, one of them is the
notion of importance, the sense of importance, the presup-
position of importance. The other is the notion of matter-
of-fact. There is no escape from sheer matter-of-fact. It is
the basis of importance; and importance is important be-
cause of the inescapable character of matter-of-fact. We
concentrate by reason of a sense of importance. And when
we concentrate, we attend to matter-of-fact. Those people
who in a hard-headed way confine their attention to
matter-of-fact do so by reason of their sense of the impor-
tance of such an attitude. The two notions are antithetical,
and require each other.
    One characteristic of the primary mode of conscious
experience is its fusion of a large generality with an insist-
ent particularity. There is a lack of precise analysis in the
characterization of the particularities of experience. It is
not true that the characterization of individual experience
by qualitative notions commences with any detailed analy-
sis of such quality. The basis of our primary consciousness
of quality is a large generality. For example, characteristic
modes of thought, as we first recall ourselves to civilized
experience, are-"This is important," "That is difficult,"
"This is lovely."
    In such ways of thinking there is an insistent particu-
larity, symbolized above by the words this and that; and
there is a large, vague characterization indicative of some
                                                             4
                                                   Importance

form of excitement arising from the particular fact in the
world without. This vagueness is the despair of cultivated
people. For the generality, when stated, is too obvious to
be worth mentioning. And yet it is always there, just on
the edge of consciousness. But good literature avoids
the large philosophic generality which the quality exhibits.
It fastens upon the accidental precision which inevitably
clothes the qualitative generality. Literature is a curious
mixture of tacitly presupposing analysis, and conversely of
returning to emphasize explicitly the fundamental emo-
tional importance of our naive general intuitions.
    Language is always relapsing into the generality of
this intermediate stage            animal habit and learned
precision. It is always degenerating into philosophic
generality, under the guise of words capable of more pre-
cise use. Such a lapse is uneducated, because it expresses the
obvious. And yet, it is philosophic; because the obvious
embodies the permanent importance of variable detail.
Literary people object to the vague use of words which are
capable of precision.
    For example, Coleridge, in his Biographia Literaria,
objects to a party of tourists who gazed at a torrent and
ejaculated "How pretty!" as a vague characterization of an
awe-inspiring spectacle. Undoubtedly, in this instance, the
degenerate phrase "How pretty!" lets down the whole
vividness of the scene. And yet there is a real difficulty in
the way of verbal expression. Words, in general, indicate
useful particularities. How can they be employed to evoke
a sense of that general character on which all importance
depends? It is one function of great literature to evok'e a
vivid feeling of what lies beyond words.
    3. Unfortunately for philosophy, learning tends to
detail. Although in attempting to grasp our fundamental
presuppositions, such as the contrast between "Importance"
and "Matter-of-fact," we must undoubtedly have recourse
                                                            5
                                              Creative Impulse
to the learning which we inherit; yet in the development
of intelligence there is a great principle which is often for-
gotten. In order to acquire learning, we must first shake
ourselves free of it. We must grasp the topic in the rough,
before we smooth it out and shape it. For example, the
mentality of John Stuart Mill was limited by his peculiar
education which gave him system before any enjoyment
of the relevant experience. Thus his systems were closed.
We must be systematic; but we should keep our systems
open. In other words, we should be sensitive to their limi-
tations. There is always a vague beyond, waiting for pene-
tration in respect to its detail.
    The general notions which underlie the detailed
thoughts of the modem Western civilizations of Europe
and America are largely derived from the expressions of
fundamental ideas bequeathed to us by the ancient world
of Greeks, Semites, and Egyptians. All three sources empha-
size the matter-of-fact world around us. But their emphasis
of importance, as we have inherited from them, differs.
From the Greeks our inheritance has been primarily
aesthetic and logical; from the Semites it has been moral
and religious; from the Egyptians it has been practical.
The Greeks bequeathed enjoyment, the Semites worship,
the Egyptians practical observation.
    But this inheritance from the civilizations of the eastern
Mediterranean has its special forms. Our notion of impor-
tance as a general factor in the universe has been restricted
to these forms. It is the first task of modem philosophy to
conceive of importance and matter-of-fact in some disen-
gagement from the mentalities of the ancient world.
    Matter-of-fact is the notion of mere existence. But
when we seek to grasp this notion, it distinguishes itself
into the subordinate notions of various types of existence-
for example, fanciful or actual existences, and many other
types. Thus the notion of existence involves the notion of
                                                             6
                                                   Importance

an environment of existences and of types of existences.
Any one instance of existence involves the notion of other
existences, connected with it and yet beyond it. This
notion of the environment introduces the notion of "more
and less," and of multiplicity.
    The notion of importance also refers to grades of im-
portance and types of importance. Here again we reach the
notion of more and less. Also something has to be impor-
tant. There is no importance in a vacuum. Thus impor-
tance leads us back' to matter-of-fact. But the multiplicity
of matter-of-fact requires for a finite intellect selection in
dealing with it. Now "selection" requires the notion of
"this rather than that." Thus intellectual freedom issues
from selection, and 'election requires the notion of rela-
tive importance in order to give it meaning. Thus impor-
tance, selection, and intellectual freedom are bound up
together, and they all involve some reference to matter-of-
fact.
    We have now been brought back to matter-of-fact. Let
us again consider it for a while. The environment sur-
passes us in every physical dimension. Thus matter-of-fact
is tinged with the notion of a compulsive determinism.
The earth rotates; and we move with it, experiencing the
routine of day and night as a prime necessity in our lives.
The first Roman to mention the report of the midnight
sun disbelieved it. He was an educated man well aware of
the necessities of nature. In this way, the necessities of
nature can be exaggerated. But all the same, in some sense
or other they are there. In the same way, the freedom pre-
supposed in the notion of selection is there, in some sense
or other. Here we find an example of the value of a syste-
matic philosophy. For we have either to explain the diverse
senses in which freedom and necessity can coexist, or we
have to explain away one or other of the most obvious
presuppositions of our daily thoughts.
                                                            7
                                                  Creative Impulse
    4. Let us set these two topics of matter-of-fact and of
importance in another light.
    The notion of mere matter-of-fact is the emergence
into thought of the habit of mere existence to coordinate
itself with the necessities of external activity. It is the recog-
nition of the goings-on of nature in which we, and all things
of all types, are immersed. It has it§ origin in the thought
of ourselves as process immersed in process beyond our-
selves. This grasp of factuality is one extreme of thought.
Namely, it is the concept of mere agitation of things agi-
tated.
   This is the ideal of physical science, and it is the hidden
ideal of those who insist upon the exclusive importance of
objectivity.
   The notion of importance is equally dominant in civi-
lized thought. It can be inadequately defined as "Interest.
involving that intensity of individual feeling which leads
to publicity of expression." We are here trenching upon
the topic of the next lecture. The definition is inadequate
because there are two aspects to importance; one based on
the unity of the Universe, the other on the individuality of
the details. The word interest suggests the latter aspect; the
word importance leans towards the former. In some sense
or other interest always modifies expression. Thus, for the
sake of reminding ourselves of this aspect of importance,
the word interest will occasionally be used as a synonym.
But importance is a fundamental notion not to be fully
explained by any                 to a finite number of other
factors.
    As an explicit thought it is somewhat at odds with the
concept of "Fact." A sound technological procedure is to
analyse the facts in disregard of any subjective judgment
as to their relative interest. And yet the notion of impor-
tance is like nature itself: Expel it with a pitchfork, and it
ever returns. The most ardent upholders of objectivity in
                                                                8
                                                   Importance

scientific thought insist upon its importance. In truth, "to
uphold a doctrine" is itself such an insistence. Apart from
a feeling of interest, you would merely notice the doctrine
and not uphold it. The zeal for truth presupposes interest.
Also sustained observation presupposes the notion. For
concentrated attention means disregard of irrelevancies;
and such disregard can only be sustained by some sense of
importance.
    Thus the sense of importance (or interest) is embedded
in the very being of animal experience. As it sinks in domi-
nance, experience trivializes and verges towards nothing-
ness.
    5. The notion of a mere fact is the triumph of the
abstractive intellect. It has entered into the explicit
thought of no baby and of no animal. Babies and animals
are concerned with their wants as projected against the
general environment. That is to say, they are immersed in
their interest respecting details embedded in externality.
There is the merest trace of the abstraction of the detaiL
A single fact in isolation is the primary myth required for
finite thought, that is to say, for thought unable to embrace
totality.
    This mythological character arises because there is no
such fact. Connectedness is of the essence of all things of
all types. It is of the essence of types, that they be con-
nected. Abstraction from connectedness involves the omis-
sion of an essential factor in the fact considered. No fact
is merely itself. The penetration of literature and art at
their height arises from our dumb sense that we have passed
beyond mythology; namely, beyond the myth of isolation.
    It follows that in every consideration of a single fact
there is the suppressed presupposition of the environ-
mental coordination requisite for its existence. This en-
vironment, thus coordinated, is the whole universe in its
perspective to the fact. But perspective is gradation of rele-
                                                            9
                                              Creative Impulse
vance; that is to say, it is gradation of importance. Feeling
is the agent which reduces the universe to its perspective
for fact. Apart from gradations of feeling, the infinitude of
detail produces an infinitude of effect in the constitution
of each fact. And that is all that is to be said, when we omit
feeling. But we feel differently about these effects and thus
reduce them to a perspective. "To be negligible" means
"to be negligible for some coordination of feeling." Thus
perspective is the outcome of feeling; and feeling is graded
by the sense of interest as to the variety of its differentia-
tions.
    In this way the finite intellect deals with the myth of
finite faqs. There can be no objection to this procedure,
provided that we remember what we are doing. We are
presupposing an environment which, in its totality, we are
unable to define. For example, science is always wrong,
so far as it neglects this limitation. The conjunction of
premises, from which logic proceeds, presupposes that no
difficulty will arise from the conjunction of the various
unexpressed presuppositions involved in these premises.
Both in science and in logic you have only to develop
your argument sufficiently, and sooner or later you are
bound to arrive at a contradiction, either internally within
the argument, or externally in its reference to fact.
    Judging from the history of European science, about
three or four thousand years of continuous thought by a
sufficient number of able people suffice to uncover some
contradiction latent in any logical train of thought. As to
physical science, the unguarded Newtonian doctrines sur-
vived for three hundred years. The span of life for modem
scientific schemes is about thirty years. The father of Euro-
pean philosophy, in one of his many moods of thought, laid
down the axiom that the deeper truths must be adum-
brated by myths. Surely, the subsequent history of Western
thought has amply justified his fleeting intuition.
                                                            10
                                                     Importance

    It is to be noticed that none of these logical or scientific
myths is wrong, in an unqualified sense of that term. It is
unguarded. Its truth is limited by unexpressed presupposi-
tions; and as time goes on we discover some of these limi-
tations. The simpleminded use of the notions "right" or
"wrong" is one of the chief obstacles to the progress of
understanding.
    6. Thus one characterization of importance is that it
is that aspect of feeling whereby a perspective is imposed
upon the universe of things felt. In our more self-conscious
entertainment of the notion, we are aware of grading the
effectiveness of things about us in proportion to their in-
terest. In this way, we put aside, and we direct attention,
and we perform necessary functions without bestowing the
emphasis of conscious attention. The two notions of
importance and of perspective are closely intertwined.
    We may well ask whether the doctrine of perspective is
not an endeavour to reduce the concept of importance to
mere matter-of-fact devoid of intrinsic interest. Of course
such reduction is impossible. But it is true to say that per-
spective is the dead abstraction of mere fact from the
living importance of things felt. The concrete truth is the
variation of interest; the abstraction is the universe in per-
spective; the consequent science is the scheme of physical
laws which, with unexpressed presuppositions, expresses
the patterns of perspective as observed by average human
beings.
    Importance is a generic notion which has been obscured
by the overwhelming prominence of a few of its innumer-
able species. The terms morality, logic, religion, art, have
each of them been claimed as exhausting the whole mean-
ing of importance. Each of them denotes a subordinate
species. But the genus stretches beyond any finite group of
species. There are perspectives of the universe to which
morality is irrelevant, to which logic is irrelevant, to which
                                                             1J
                                               Creative Impulse
religion is irrelevant, to which art is irrelevant. By this
false limitation the activity expressing the ultimate aim
infused into the process of nature has been trivialized into
the guardianship of mores, or of rules of thought, or of
mystic sentiment, or of aesthetic enjoyment. No one of
these specializations exhausts the final unity of purpose in
the world. The generic aim of process is the attainment of
importance, in that species and to that extent which in that
instance is possible.
     Of course the word importance, as in common use, has
been reduced to suggest a silly little pomposity which is the
extreme of trivialization of its meaning here. This is a
permanent difficulty of philosophic discussion; namely,
that words must be stretched beyond their common mean-
ings in the marketplace. But notwithstanding this diffi-
culty, philosophy must found itself upon the presupposi-
tions and the interpretations of ordinary life. In our first
approach to philosophy, learning should be banished. We
should appeal to the simple-minded notions issuing from
ordinary civilized social relations.
     I will illustrate this doctrine by an anecdote of an inci-
dent which illustrated to me the possible irrelevance of
moral considerations. About eleven years ago, a young
friend of mine reached her tenth birthday. I will not
guarantee the precise accuracy of these figures. Anyhow
the young woman is now twenty-one and our friendship is
still flourishing. The child's great-aunt celebrated the day
by taking her to an afternoon performance of the opera
Carmen, rendered in English. Also, she was allowed to
select two companions for the treat. She chose another
little girl and-I am proud to say-myself. As we came out
of the opera house after the performance, she looked up at
her aunt and said-"Auntie, do you think that those were
really good people?" Both the aunt and I sidestepped the
question by looking for the car which was to take us home.
                                                             12
                                                    Importance

    The point that I now wish to make is that our enjoy-
ment in the theatre was irrelevant to moral considerations
applied to the performance. Of course smugglers are
naughty people, and Carmen is carefree as to niceties of
behaviour. But while they are singing their parts and
dancing on the stage, morals vanish and beauty remains.
    I am not saying that moral considerations are always
irrelevant to the stage. In fact, sometimes they are the very
topic of the play, especially of modern plays. But the
retreat of morals in the presence of music, and of dancing,
and the general gaiety of the theatre, is a fact very interest-
ing to philosophers and very puzzling to the official censors.
    7. The point is that moral codes are relevant to presu p-
positions respecting the systematic character of the relevant
universe. When the presuppositions do not apply, that
special code is a vacuous statement of abstract irrelevancies.
We evade this difficulty as to codes by retaining their
language with alterations of meaning introduced by the
social changes within centuries and millennia. Also the
inevitable imperfections of translation help in effecting the
evasion. The translation has always to make sense in the
epoch of the translators. The notion of the unqualified
stability of particular laws of nature and of particular
moral codes is a primary illusion which has vitiated much
philosophy.
    For example, consider the application of our moral
notions concerning family relations to beings such as fish,
who produce hundreds, nay thousands, of eggs in one year.
    This conclusion as to moral codes must not be extended
to involve the negation of any meaning to the term moral-
ity. In the same way, the notion of legality of behaviour
within a state evades the possibility of complete codifica-
tion. The legal profession can never be superseded by
automata.
     Morality consists in the control of process so as to
                                                             13
                                              Creative Impulse
maximize importance. It is the aim at greatness of experi-
ence in the various dimensions belonging to it. This
notion of the dimensions of experience, and of its impor-
tance in each dimension and of its final unity of impor-
tance, is difficult and hard to understand.
    But only so far as we can adumbrate it, do we grasp the
notion of morality. Morality is always the aim at that union
of harmony, intensity, and vividness which involves the
perfection of importance for that occasion. The codifica-
tions carry us beyond our own direct immediate insights.
They involve the usual judgments valid for the usual occa-
sions in that epoch. They are useful, and indeed essential,
for civilization. But we only weaken their influence by
exaggerating their status.
    For example, consider the Ten Commandments. Can
we really hold that a rest day once in seven days, as distinct
from once in six or eight days, is an ultimate moral law of
the universe? Can we really think that no work whatever
can be done on Sundays? Can we really think that the divi-
sion of time into days is an absolute factor in the nature of
all existence? Evidently, the commandments are to be con-
strued with common sense. In other words, they are formu-
lations of behaviours which in ordinary circumstances,
apart from very special reasons, it. is better to adopt.
    There is no one behaviour system belonging to the
essential character of the universe, as the universal moral
ideal. What is universal is the spirit which should permeate
any behaviour system in the circumstances of its adoption.
Thus morality does not indicate what you are to do in
mythological abstractions. It does concern the general
ideal which should be the justification for any particular
objective. The destruction of a man, or of an insect, or of
a tree, or of the Parthenon, may be moral or immoral. The
Ten Commandments tell us that in the vast majority of
cases such slaughter is better avoided. In these exceptional
                                                            14
                                                    Importance

instances we avoid the term murder. Whether we destroy,
or whether we preserve, our action is moral if we have
thereby safeguarded the importance of experience so far
as it depends on that concrete instance in the world's
history.
    8. Great advances in thought are often the result of
fortunate errors. These errors are the result of oversimpli-
fication. The advance is due to the fact that, for the
moment, the excess is not relevant to the use of the simpli-
fied notions. One of the chief examples of this truth is
Aristotle's analysis into genus, and species, and sub-species.
It was one of the happiest ideas possible, and it has clarified
thinking ever since. Plato's doctrine of "division" was an
anticipation, vague and hazy. He felt its value. It did not
do much good, by reason of its lack of decisive clarity.
Among sensible people, Aristotle's [\lode of analysis has
been an essential feature in intellectual progress for two
thousand years.
    Of course, Plato was right and Aristotle was wrong.
There is no clear division among genera; there is no clear
division among species; there are no clear divisions any-
where. That is to say, there are no clear divisions when you
push your observations beyond the presuppositions on
which they rest. It so happens, however, that we always
think within limitations.
    As a practical question, Aristotle was right and Plato
was muddled, But, what neither Aristotle nor Plato ade-
quately conceived was the necessity for investigation of the
peculiar characterization of that sense of importance which
is current in the thought of each age. All classifi01tion
depends on the current character of importance.
    We have now behind us some detailed history of three
or four thousand years of civilization. The Greeks (as
Thucydides discloses) were ignorant of history, except for
that of two or three almost contemporaneous generations.
                                                            15
                                              Creative Impulse
The Egyptians and the Jews worshipped a long history,
uncritically. The Greeks would have criticized history, if
they had known anything about it; the Jews would have
criticized history, if they had not worshipped its records;
the Egyptians would have criticized history, if they had not
been sensible men who confined themselves to "pure his-
tory." By the same exercise of good sense, the Egyptians
failed to generalize their geometrical knowledge, and thus
lost their chance to become the founders of modem civili-
zation. An excess of common sense has its disadvantages.
The Greeks, with their airy generalizations, were always
children-very fortunately for the modem world. Panic of
error is the death of progress; and love of truth is its safe-
guard.
    9. For these reasons, the criticism of history has been
left for development by the modern world of the last four
centuries. Of course there is no sudden beginning. Antici-
pations of such criticism can always be found in the older
literature. Yet it remains true that modern thought is
remarkable for its concentration of attention upon history.
This criticism has itself passed through phases.
     The first emphasis was upon the authenticity of the
record. Such questions as, Did Plato write this dialogue?,
Did the Emperor Constantine make this donation?, were
the primary topics. This phase of correction passed to de-
tails. It was then called "emendation." Is this manuscript
of the Aeneid a correct version of what Virgil wrote? This
is a fairly definite question. But the relation of Homer to
the Iliad is vaguer. Perhaps Homer and his comrades could
not write. Even if they could write, they were very unlikely
to have written down the Iliad. Papyrus was scarce, and it
was easier to remember it. Thus the poem was handed
down through generations of groups of bards with a sub-
lime indifference to minor variations. Later we have rec-
                                                            16
                                                   Importance

ords of formal revisions of the text. Analogous vagueness
applies to the concepts of all social transactions. Thus the
notion of accurate record has its limitations.
    History has now passed into another phase. It is dis-
playing transitions of behaviour. The Western historian is
depicting types of activity, types of mood, and types of
formulated belief, exhibited in the adventures of the
European races as they overran first Europe, then America,
and the fringes of other continents and islands. This
change in emphasis showed itself decidedly in the eight-
eenth century.
    For example, Bentley, the typical scholarly critic, died
in 1742; and Gibbon, who traced the decline and fall of a
political system, and the variations of motive animating its
activity, was born in 1737. Gibbon corrected no editions
of authors, and Bentley depicted no transitions of be-
haviour. In Europe, the change may be symbolized by
Mabillon, who died in 1707, and Voltaire, who was born
in 1694. Of course historical phases overlap each other. I
am speaking of predominant interest. In the earlier period,
even the discursive humanist, Erasmus, issued accurate
editions; in the nineteenth century historical narrative was
more prominent than devotion to editorial accuracy. Of
course there were reasons for the change, and all the types
of historic scholarship co-exist.
    Under the influence of physical science, the task of his-
tory has more recently been limited to the narration of
mere sequences. This ideal of knowledge is the triumph of
matter-of-fact. Such suggestion of causation, as is admitted,
is confined to the statements of physical materialities, such
as the economic motive.
    Such history confines itself to abstract mythology. The
variety of motives is excluded. You cannot write the history
of religious development without estimate of the motive-
                                                           17
                                              Creative Impulse
power of religious belief. The history of the Papacy is not
a mere sequence of behaviours. It illustrates a mode of
causation, which is derived from a mode of thought.
    Thus the study of history as mere sequence wears itself
out. It is a make-belief. There are oceans of facts. We seek
that thread of coordination derived from the special forms
of importance prevalent in the respective epochs. Apart
from such interests, intrinsic within each period, there
would be no language, no art, no heroism, no devotion.
Ideals lie beyond matter-of-fact, and yet provide the colour
of its development.
    10. Matter-of-fact is an abstraction, arrived at by con-
fining thought to purely formal relations which then mas-
querade as the final reality. This is why science, in its
perfection, relapses into the study of differential equations.
The concrete world has slipped through the meshes of the
scientific net.
    Consider, for example, the scientific notion of measure-
ment. Can we elucidate the turmoil of Europe by weighing
its dictators, its prime ministers, and its editors of news-
papers? The idea is absurd, although some relevant infor-
mation might be obtained. I am not upholding the irrele-
vance of science. Such a doctrine would be foolish. For
example, a daily record of the bodily temperatures of the
men, above mentioned, might be useful. My point is the
incompleteness of the information.
    Each social system is realizing a variety of modes of
interest, some of them dominant, and some in the back-
ground. The eighteenth century was not merely the age
of reason, nor was the sixteenth century merely the age of
religious excitement. For example, to study the Reforma-
tion turmoil without reference to America, and to India,
and to the Turks, and to the rise of nationalism, and to
the recent diffusion of printing, is ridiculous. The rele-
vance of these factors consists in their modifications of
                                                            18
                                                   Importance

prevalent modes of importance, which interfused with the
religious interest.
    The chequered history of religion and morality is the
main reason for the widespread desire to put them aside
in favour of the more stable generalities of science. Unfor-
tunately for this smug endeavour to view the universe as
the incarnation of the commonplace, the impact of aes-
thetic, religious and moral notions inescapable. They are
the disrupting and the energizing forces of civilization.
They force mankind upwards and downwards. When their
vigour abates, a slow mild decay ensues. Then new ideals
arise, bringing in their train a rise in the energy of social
behaviour.
    The concentration of attention upon matter-of-fact is
the supremacy of the desert. Any approach to such triumph
bestows on learning a fugitive, and a cloistered virtue,
which shuns emphasis on essential connections such as
disclose the universe in its impact upon individual experi-
ence.




                                                           19
                                             LECTURE TWO



                                 Expression


This lecture is concerned with various ideas involved in
the notion of "Expression." The more general notion of
importance is presupposed by expression. Something is to
be diffused throughout the environment which will make
a difference. But there is a distinction between the two
notions. Importance is primarily monistic in its reference
to the universe. Importance, limited to a finite individual
occasion, ceases to be important. In some sense or other,
importance is derived from the. immanence of infinitude
in the finite.
    But expression is founded on the finite occasion. It is
the activity of finitude impressing itself on its environ-
ment. Thus it has its origin in the finite; and it represents
the immanence of the finite in the multitude of its fellows
beyond itself. The two together, namely importance and
expression, are witnesses both to the monistic aspect of the
universe and to its pluralistic character. Importance passes
from the world as one to the world as many; whereas, ex-
pression is the gift from the world as many to the world as
one.
                                                          20
                                                    Expression
    Selection belongs to expression. A mood of the finite
thing conditions the environment. There is an active entity
which fashions its own perspective, implanted on the world
around. The laws of nature are large average effects which
reign impersonally. Whereas, there is nothing average
about expression. It is essentially individual. In so far as
an average dominates, expression fades.
    Expression is the diffusion, in the environment, of
something initially entertained in the experience of the
expressor. No conscious determination is necessarily in-
volved; only the impulse to diffuse. This urge is one of the
simplest characteristics of animal nature. It is the most
fundamental evidence of our presupposition of the world
without.
    In fact, the world beyond is so intimately entwined in
our own natures that unconsciously we identify our more
vivid perspectives of it with ourselves. For example, our
bodies lie beyond our own individual existence. And yet
they are part of it. We think of ourselves as so intimately
entwined in bodily life that a man is a complex unity-
body and mind. But the body is part of the external world,
continuous with it. In fact, it is just as much part of nature
as anything else there-a river, or a mountain, or a cloud.
Also, if we are fussily exact, we cannot define where a body
begins and where external nature ends.
    Consider one definite molecule. It is part of nature. It
has moved about for millions of years. Perhaps it started
from a distant nebula. It enters the body; it may be as a
factor in some edible vegetable; or it passes into the lungs
as part of the air. At what exact point as it enters the
mouth, or as it is absorbed through the skin, is it part of
the body? At what exact moment, later on, does it cease to
be part of the body? Exactness is out of the question. It
can only be obtained by some trivial convention.
                                                           21
                                               Creative Impulse
    Thus we arrive at this definition of our bodies: The
human body is that region of the world which is the pri-
mary field of human expression.
    For example, anger issues into bodily excitements,
which are then publicized in the form of appropriate lan-
guage, or in other modes of violent action. We can leave it
to the physiologists, in the various departments of that
science, to analyse the special sorts of bodily functioning
thus elicited. Philosophy should refrain from trespassing
upon specialist investigations. Its business is to point out
fields for research. Some fields remain untilled for cen-
turies. The fruitful initiation is absent, or perhaps interest
has never concentrated upon them.
    In the present instance, we have defined an animal
body-for the higher grade of animals-and have indicated
the sort of researches required. Of course, mankind has
been engaged on this job for some thousands of years, with
some lack of comprehension of its full import. It is the
business of philosophy to elicit this consciousness; and
then, to coordinate the results of all such specialist en-
quiries.
    So far, we have been considering the bodies of animals
with dominant centres of feeling and of expression. We
can now enlarge the definition so as to include all living
bodies, animal and vegetable:-
     Wherever there is a region of nature which is itself the
primary field of the expressions issuing from each of its
parts, that region is alive.
     In this second definition, the phrase "expressions issuing
from each of its parts" has been substituted for the phrase
"human expression," as used previously. The new defini-
tion is wider than the former by extending beyond human
beings, and beyond the higher animals. Also it will be
noticed that these definitions involve the direct negation
                                                             22
                                                   Expression
of any extreme form of Behaviourism. In such behaviour-
istic doctrines, importance and expression must be ban-
ished and can never be intelligently employed. A consistent
behaviourist cannot feel it important to refute my state-
ments. He can only behave.
     There are two sides to an animal body of the higher
type, and so far we have only developed one of them. The
second, and wider, definition enables us to find the distinc-
tion between vegetation and animal life. This distinction,
like others, refuses to be pushed to meticulous exactness.
In the animal, there is the one experience expressing itself
throughout the animal body. But this is only half the
tale.
    The other half of the tale is that the body is composed
of various centres of experience imposing the expression
of themselves on each other. Feeling (in the sense here
used), or prehension, is the reception of expressions. Thus
the animal body is composed of entities, which are mutu-
ally expressing and feeling. Expressions are the data for
feeling diffused in the environment; and a living body is a
peculiarly close adjustment of these two sides of experi-
ence, namely, expression and feeling. By reason of this
organization, an adjusted variety of feelings is produced
in that supreme entity which is the one animal considered
as one experiencing subject.
    Thus the one animal, and the various parts of its body
considered as themselves centres of experience, are in one
sense on a level. Namely, they are centres of experience ex-
pressing themselves vividly to each other, and obtaining
their own feelings mainly by reason of such mutual ex-
pressions.
    In another sense, the animal as one centre of experience
is on a higher level than its other bodily centres. For these
subordinate centres are specialists. They only receive re-
                                                          23
                                              Creative Impulse
stricted types of emotional feeling, and are impervious be-
yond such types. Throughout the body there is a complex
coordination of a vast variety of emotional types. The
bodily organization is such that the unity of feeling, which
is the one animal as a sentient being, receives its complex
variety of experience from these bodily activities. Thus the
combined data for feeling in the animal centre are on a
higher level than are the corresponding data for its other
bodily centres.
    In the case of vegetables, we find bodily organizations
which decisively lack any one centre of experience with a
higher complexity either of expressions received or of in-
born data. A vegetable is a democracy; an animal is domi-
nated by one, or more centres of experience. But such
domination is limited, very strictly limited. The expres-
sions of the central leader are relevant to that leader's
reception of data from the body.
    Thus an animal body exhibits the limited domination
of at least one of its component activities of expression. If
the dominant activity be severed from the rest of the body,
the whole coordination collapses, and the animal dies.
Whereas in the case of the vegetable, the democracy can be
subdivided into minor democracies which easily survive
without much apparent loss of. functional expression.
    It is evident that our statement is oversimplified. In
the first place, the distinction between animals and vege-
tables is not sharp cut. Some traces of dominance can be
observed in vegetables, and some traces of democratic inde-
pendence can be found in animals. For example, portions
of an animal body preserve their living activities when
severed from the main body. But there is failure in variety
of energy and in survival power. Yet allowing for such
failure, the vegetable characteristics of equality and inde-
pendence do manifest themselves. Thus ordinary vegeta-
                                                           24
                                                   Expression
tion and the higher animals represent extremes in the
bewildering variety of bodily formations which we term
living things.
    Then we have neglected the differentiation of functions
which are to be found alike in vegetables and animals. In
the case of the flora, there are the roots, and the branches,
and the leaves, and the flowers, and the seeds-all obvious
to common inspection. And the detailed observations of
botanists supplement these blatant examples of differen-
tiation by a hundred other functional activities which con-
stitute the physiology of plant life.
    When we turn to the animal body, the notion of the
sole domination of the directing experience requires limi-
tation. There are subordinate agencies which have essential
control of the bodily functioning. The heart is one example
among many others. The activities of the heart are neces-
sary to the bodily survival, in a way that contrasts with the
feet. A foot can be severed with slight damage to the inter-
nal functioning; the heart is essential. Thus an animal
body in its highest examples is more analogous to a feudal
society, with its one overlord.
    This final unity of animal intelligence is also the organ
of reaction to novel situations, and is the organ introducing
the requisite novelty of reaction. Finally, the overlord
tends to relapse into the conventionality of routine imposed
upon the subordinate governors, such as the heart. Animal
life can face conventional novelties with conventional de-
vices. But the governing principle lacks large power for the
sudden introduction of any major novelty.
    The bodies of the higher animals have some resem-
blance to a complex society of insects, such as ants. But the
individual insects seem to have more power of adaptation
to their problems than does the community as a whole.
The opposite holds in the case of animals. For example,
                                                          25
                                               Creative Impulse
an intelligent dog has more power of adaptation to new
modes of life than has its heart, as it functions in the animal
body. The dog can be trained, but its heart must go its own
way within very close limits.
    When we come to mankind, nature seems to have burst
through another of its boundaries. The central activity
of enjoyment and expression has assumed a reversal in
the importance of its diverse functionings. The concep-
tual entertainment of unrealized possibility becomes a
major factor in human mentality. In this way outrageous
novelty is introduced, sometimes beatified, sometimes
damned, and sometimes literally patented or protected by
copyright. The definition of mankind is that in this genus
of animals the central activity has been developed on the
side of its relationship to novelty. This relationship is two-
fold. There is the novelty received from the aggregate
diversities of bodily expressions. Such novelty requires de-
cision as to its reduction to coherence of expression.
    Again there is the introduction of novelty of feeling
by the entertainment of unexpressed possibilities. This
second side is the enlargement of the conceptual experience
of mankind. The characterization of this conceptual feel-
ing is the sense of what might be and of what might have
been. It is the entertainment ·of the alternative. In its
highest development, this becomes the entertainment of
the ideal. It emphasizes the sense of importance, discussed
in the previous lecture. And this sense exhibits itself in
various species, such as, the sense of morality, the mystic
sense of religion, the sense of that delicacy of adjustment
which is beauty, the sense of necessity for mutual connec-
tion which is understanding, and the sense of discrimina-
tion of each factor which is consciousness.
    Also it is the nature of feeling to pass into expression.
Thus the expression of these various feelings produces the
                                                            26
                                                    Expression
history of mankind as distinct from the narrative of animal
behaviours. History is the record of the expressions of feel-
ings peculiar to humanity.
    There is, however, every gradation of transition be-
tween animals and men. In animals we can see emotional
feeling, dominantly derived from bodily functions, and yet
tinged with purposes, hopes, and expression derived from
conceptual functioning. In mankind, the dominant de-
pendence on bodily functioning seems still there. And yet
the life of a human being receives its worth, its importance,
from the way in which unrealized ideals shape its purposes
and tinge its actions. The distinction between men and
animals is in one sense only a difference in degree. But the
extent of the degree makes all the difference. The Rubicon
has been crossed.
    Thus in nature we find four types of aggregations of
actualities: the lowest is the nonliving aggregation, in
which mutual influence is predominantly of a formal char-
acter expressible in formal sciences, such as mathematics.
The inorganic is dominated by the average. It lacks indi-
vidual expression in its parts. Their flashes of selection (if
any) are sporadic and ineffective. Its parts merely transmit
average expressions; and thus the structure survives. For
the average is always there, stifling individuality.
    The vegetable grade exhibits a democracy of purpose-
ful influences issuing from its parts. The predominant aim
within the organism is survival for its own coordinated in-
dividual expressiveness. This expressiveness has a large
average character. But the nature of this average is domi-
nated by the intricacies of its own bodily formation. It has
added coordinated, organic individuality to the impersonal
average formality of inorganic nature. What is merely
latent potentiality in lifeless matter, has awakened into
some realization in the vegetable. But in each instance of
                                                           27
                                               Creative Impulse
vegetation, the total bodily organism strictly limits the
individuality of expression in the parts.
    The animal grade includes at least one central actuality,
supported by the intricacy of bodily functioning. Purposes
transcending (however faintly} the mere aim at survival are
exhibited. For animal life the concept of importance, in
some of its many differentiations, has a real relevance. The
human grade of animal life immensely extends this con-
cept, and thereby introduces novelty of functioning as
essential for varieties of importance. Thus morals and reli-
gion arise as aspects of this human impetus towards the
best in each occasion. Morals can be discerned in the higher
animals; but not religion. Morality emphasizes the detailed
occasion; while religion emphasizes the unity of ideal in-
herent in the universe.
    In every grade of social aggregation, from a nonliving
material society up to a human body, there is the necessity
for expression. It is by reason of average expression, and of
average reception, that the average activities of merely
material bodies are restrained into conformity with the
reigning laws of nature. It is by reason of individual ex-
pression and reception that the human body exhibits activ-
ities expressive of the intimate feelings, emotional and
purposeful, of the one human person.
    3. These bodily activities are very various and intensely
selective. An angry man, except when emotion has
swamped other feelings, does not usually shake his fist at
the universe in general. He makes a selection and knocks
his neighbour down. Whereas a piece of rock impartially
attracts the universe according to the law of gravitation.
    The impartiality of physical science is the reason for its
failure as the sole interpreter of animal behaviour. It is
true that the rock falls on one special patch of earth. This
happens, because the universe in that neighbourhood is
                                                            28
                                                    Expression
exemplifying one particular solution of a differential equa-
tion. The fist of the man is directed by emotion seeking
a novel feature in the universe, namely, the collapse of his
opponent. In the case of the rock, the formalities predomi-
nate. In the case of the man, explanation must seek the
individual satisfactions. These enjoyments are constrained
by formalities, but in proportion to their intensities they
pass beyond them, and introduce individual expression.
    Consciousness is the first example of the selectiveness of
enjoyment in the higher animals. It arises from expression
coordinating the activities of physiological functionings.
There is a baseless notion that we consciously observe those
activities of nature which are dominant in our neighbour-
hood. The exact opposite is the case. The animal conscious-
ness does not easily discriminate its dependence on detailed
bodily functioning. Such discrimination is usually a sign
of illness. When we observe the functionings of our viscera,
something has gone wrong. We take the infinite complexity
of our bodies for granted.
    The first principle of epistemology should be that the
changeable, shifting aspects of our relations to nature are
the primary topics for conscious observation. This is only
common sense; for something can be done about them.
The organic permanences survive by their own momen-
tum: our hearts beat, our lungs absorb air, our blood
circulates, our stomachs digest. It requires advanced
thought to fix attention on such fundamental operations.
    The higher animals have developed superficial relation-
ships to nature, such as eyesight, hearing, smell, and taste.
Also such connections are alterable in proportion to their
high-grade character. For example, we have only got to
shut our eyes, and visual experience has vanished. We can
block our ears, and there is no hearing.
     The experiences on which accurate science bases itself
                                                           29
                                               Creative Impulse
are completely superficial. The blind and the deaf are
capable of the ultimate greatness of human life. They are
deprived of its walking sticks. The traffic lights on the high-
ways are useful for the accomplishment of modem pur-
poses. And yet there have been great civilizations without
motor cars, and without traffic lights.
    But though any one of these sense experiences is non-
essential to the existence of the organism, the whole group
is quite essential for the development of the higher forms
of animal life. Mankind and the animals with analogous
abilities are distinguished by their capacity for the intro-
duction of novelty. This requires a conceptual power which
can imagine, and a practical power which can effect. The
role of sense experiences consists in the fact that they are
manageable.
    The animals evolved and emphasized the superficial
aspects of their connexity with nature, and thus obtained
a manageable grip upon the world. The central organism
which is the soul of a man is mainly concerned with the
trivialities of human existence. It does not easily meditate
upon the activities of fundamental bodily functions. In-
stead of fixing attention on the bodily digestion of vege-
table food, it catches the gleam of the sunlight as it falls
on the foliage. It nurtures poetry. Men are the children of
the Universe, with foolish enterprises and irrational hopes.
A tree sticks to its business of mere survival; and so does an
oyster with some minor divergencies. In this way, the life
aim at survival is modified into the human aim at survival
for diversified worthwhile experience.
    The pitfall of philosophy is exclusive concentration on
these manageable relationships, to the neglect of the under-
lying necessities of nature. Thus thinkers repudiate our
intimate vague experiences in favour of a mere play of
distinct sensations, coupled with a fable about underlying
                                                            30
                                                    Expression
reality. I am now pleading that our whole experience is
composed out of our relationships to the rest of things,
and of the formation of new relationships constitutive of
things to come. The present receives the past and builds
the future. But there are grades of permanence and of com-
pulsive stability.
    During many generations there has been an attempt to
explain our ultimate insights as merely interpretive of
sense impressions. Indeed this school of thought can trace
itself back to Epicurus. It can appeal to some phrases of
Plato. I suggest to you that this basis for philosophic under-
standing is analogous to an endeavour to elucidate the
sociology of modem civilization as wholly derivative from
the traffic signals on the main roads. The motions of the
cars are conditioned by these signals. But the signals are
not the reasons for the traffic. Common sense supplies
this conclusion, so overwhelmingly that illustration is un-
necessary.
    It is this direct insight, vague as to detail and yet the
basis of all rationality, that has been denied by the preva-
lent epistemology of the preceding century. Interest and
importance are the primary reasons for the effort after
exact discrimination of sense data. The traffic signals are
the outcome of the traffic.
    Importance generates interest. Interest leads to dis-
crimination. In this way, interest is increased; and the two
factors, interest and discrimination, stimulate each other.
Finally consciousness develops, gradually and fitfully; and
it becomes another agent of stimulation.
    4. In this lecture, the dominant topic is expression. Ac-
cordingly, we now pass to the outstanding example of the
way in which mankind has fabricated its manageable con-
nections with the world into a means of expression. Lan-
guage is the triumph of human ingenuity, surpassing even
                                                           31
                                              Creative Impulse
the intricacies of modern technology. It tells of widespread
intelligence, sustained throughout scores of thousands of
years. It is interesting that from the alternatives, sight and
sound, sound was the medium first developed. There might
have been a language of gesticulation. Indeed, there is a
trace of it. But the weak point of gesticulation is that one
cannot do much else while indulging in it. The advan-
tage of sound is that the limbs are left free while we
produce it.
    But there is a deeper reason for the unconscious re-
course to sound production. Hands and arms constitute the
more unnecessary parts of the body. We can do without
them. They do not excite the intimacies of bodily exist-
ence. Whereas in the production of sound, the lungs and
throat are brought into play. So that in speech, while a
superficial, manageable expression is diffused, yet the sense
of the vague intimacies of organic existence is also excited.
Thus voice-produced sound is a natural symbol for the
deep experiences of organic existence.
    This sense of reality is of great importance for the
effectiveness of symbolism. Personal interviews carry more
weight than gramophone records. What an economy could
be achieved if the faculties of colleges could be replaced
by fifty gramophones and a few               records! Indeed,
we might have expected that in the sixteenth century
printed books would have replaced universities. On the
contrary, the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were an
active period in the development of educational founda-
tions. The sense of reality can never be adequately sus-
tained amidst mere sensa, either of sound or sight. The
connexity of existence is of the essence of understand-
ing.
    Language has two functions. It is converse with an-
other, and it is converse with oneself. The latter function
                                                            32
is too often overlooked, so we will consider it first. Lan-
guage is expression from one's past into one's present. It is
the reproduction in the present of sensa which have inti-
mate association with the realities of the past. Thus the
experience of the past is rendered distinct in the present,
with a distinctness borrowed from the well-defined sensa. In
this way, an articulated memory is the gift of language,
considered as an expression from oneself in the past to
oneself in the present.
    Again by the aid of a common language, the fragmen-
tary past experiences of the auditor, as enshrined in words,
can be recombined into a novel imaginative experience by
the reception of the           sentences of the speaker. Thus
in both functions of language the immediate imaginative
experience is enormously increased, and is stamped with
a sense of realization, or of possible realization.
    When we examine the content of language, that is to
say, the experiences which it symbolizes, it is remarkable
how largely it points away from the abstractions of high-
grade sensa. Its meaning presupposes the concrete relations
of real events happening and issuing from each other. What
Descartes, in his Meditations, terms a "Realitas Objectiva"
clings to most sentences, especially to those recording the
simpler experiences.
    Consider, for example, the homely illustration, used
earlier in this lecture, of the angry man who knocks his
neighbour down. We each of us frame a pictorial imagina-
tion of such a scene. But the flux of imagined sensa is not
of the essence of our thought. The event may have gener-
ated sensory schemes in a thousand ways. It may have hap-
pened by day, or by night. It may have happened in the
street, or in a room. Every variety of attitudes for victor
and for vanquished is indifferent. Yet amid all this am-
biguity of sensa, the stubborn flux of events is asserted, that
                                                            33
                                               Creative Impulse
the fist of the angry man completely upset the stable func-
tioning of his victim's body. It is not a flux of sensa which
is asserted, but a bodily collapse as the result of the expres-
siveness of the angry man.
    Also the anger of the man undoubtedly affected the
functioning of his own body. A careful physiological ex-
amination with a microscope could have yielded many
visual sensa to an observer! Again, consider the variety of
sensory pictures which are aroused by the notion of one
man knocking another down. What is it that binds them
together? In themselves, they are merely different composi-
tions of visual sensa. Their unity consists in the type of
connected process in the world that they suggest.
    Deserting this special example, different sensory experi-
ences derived from the same action have a unity, namely,
in the identity of the action. The accounts may be in dif-
ferent languages and may fasten upon different transitions
of visual or auditory sensa; and yet they refer to the same
action. Also the action may not be purely physical. Hero-
ism, and courage, and love, and hatred are possible char-
acteristics of things that happen.
    The essence of language is that it utilizes those elements
in experience most easily abstracted for conscious enter-
tainment, and most easily reproduced in experience. By
the long usage of humanity, these elements are associated
with their meanings which embrace a large variety of hu-
man experiences. Each language embalms an historic tradi-
tion. Each language is the civilization of expression in the
social systems which use it. Language is the systematization
of expression.
    Of all the ways of expressing thought, beyond question
language is the most important. It has been held even that
language is thought, and that thought is language. Thus a
sentence is the thought. There are many learned works in
                                                            34
                                                   Expression

which this doctrine is tacitly presupposed; and in not a few
it is explicitly stated.
     If this extreme doctrine of language be adopted, it is
difficult to understand how translation from language to
language, or within the same language between alternative
sentences, is possible. If the sentence is the thought, then
another sentence is another thought. It is true that no
translation is perfect. But how can the success of imper-
fection be achieved when not a word, or a syllable, or an
order of succession is the same? If you appeal to grammar,
you are appealing to a meaning which lies behind words,
syllables, and orders of succession. Some of us struggle to
find words to express our. ideas. If the words and their
order together constitute the ideas, how does the strug-
gle arise? We should then be struggling to obtain
ideas; whereas we are conscious of ideas verbally unex-
pressed.
     Let it be admitted then that language is not the essence
of thought. But this conclusion must be carefully limited.
Apart from language, the retention of thought, the easy
recall of thought, the interweaving of thought into higher
complexity, the communication of thought, are all gravely
limited. Human civilization is an outgrowth of language,
and language is the product of advancing civilization. Free-
dom of thought is made possible by language: we are
thereby released from complete bondage to the immedi-
acies of mood and circumstance. It is no accident that the
Athenians from whom we derive our Western notions of
freedom enjoyed the use of a language supreme for its deli-
cate variety.
     The denial that language is of the essence of thought,
is not the assertion that thought is possible apart from the
other activities coordinated with it. Such activities may be
termed the expression of thought. When these activities
                                                          35
                                              Creative Impulse
satisfy certain conditions, they are termed a language.
The whole topic of these lectures is the discussion of the
interdependence of thought and its expressive activi-
ties.
    Such activities, emotional and physical, are older than
thought. They existed in our ancestors when thought slum-
bered in embryo. Thought is the outcome of its own con-
current activities; and having thus arrived upon the scene,
it modifies and adapts them. The notion of pure thought
in abstraction from all expression is a figment of the
learned world. A thought is a tremendous mode of excite-
ment. Like a stone thrown into a pond it disturbs the whole
surface of our being. But this image is inadequate. For we
should conceive the ripples as effective in the creation of
the plunge of the stone into the water. The ripples release
the thought, and the thought augments and distorts the
ripples. In order to understand the essence of thought
we must study its relation to the ripples amid which it
emerges.
    5. Nevertheless, putting aside these refinements as to
the origins and effects of thought, language, as commonly
understood in the most simple-minded way, stands out as
the habitual effect of thought, and the habitual revelation
of thought. In order to                the modes of thought
we must endeavour to recall the psychology which has pro-
duced the civilization of language-or, if you prefer to
invert the expressiop, the language of civilization.
    The first point to notice is that we now employ two dis-
tinct types of language, namely, the language of sound and
the language of sight. There is speech, and there is writing.
The language of writing is very modern. Its history extends
for less than ten thousand years, even if we allow for the
faint anticipations of writing in the primitive pictures. But
writing as an effective instrument of thought, with wide-
                                                           36
                                                   Expression
spread influence, may be given about five or six thousand
years at the most.
    Writing as a factor in human experience is comparable
to the steam engine. It is important, modern, and artificial.
Speech is as old as human nature itself. It is one of the
primary factors constituting human nature. We must not
exaggerate. It is now possible to elicit the full stretch of
human experience by other devices when speech in excep-
tional instances is denied. But speech, developing as a gen-
eral social acquirement, was one leading creative factor in
the uprise of humanity. Speech is human nature itself, with
none of the artificiality of written language.
    Finally, we now so habitually intermingle writing and
speech in our daily experience that, when we discuss lan-
guage, we hardly know whether we refer to speech, or to
writing, or to the mixture of both. But this final mixture is
very modern. About five hundred years ago, only a small
minority could read-at least among the European races.
That is one great reason for the symbolism of religion, and
for the pictorial signs of inns and of shops. The armorial
bearings of great nobles were a substitute for writing. The
effect of writing on the psychology of language is a neg-
lected chapter in the history of civilization.
    Speech, in its embryonic stage as exemplified in animal
and human behaviour, varies between emotional expres-
sion and signalling. In the course of such variation it
rapidly becomes a mixture of both. Throughout its most
elaborate developments, speech retains these three char-
acterizations, namely, emotional expression, signalling, and
interfusion of the two. And yet somehow in the intellec-
tualized language of advanced civilizations, these charac-
teristics seem to fade into the background. They suggest
something which has lost its dominating position. We can-
not understand modes of thought in the recent civilizations
                                                          37
                                               Creative Impulse
of the last thirty centuries unless we attend to this subtle
change in the function of language. The presuppositions
of language are various.
    Language arose with a dominating reference to an im-
mediate situation. Whether it was signal or expression,
above all things it was this reaction to that situation in this
environment. In the origin of language the particularity of
the immediate present was an outstanding element in the
meaning conveyed. The genus bird remained in the back-
ground of undiscemed meaning; even these particular
birds on some other occasion were but dimly sensed. What
language primarily conveyed was the direction of attention
to these b_irds, here, now, amid these surroundings.
    Language has gradually achieved the abstraction of its
meanings from the presupposition of any particular en-
vironment. The fact that the French dictionary is pub-
lished in Paris, at a definite date, is irrelevant to the mean-
ings of the words as explained in the dictionary. The
French equivalent to the English word green, means just
green, whatever be the state of Europe, or of the planetary
system. Green is green, and there is the end of it. There is
nothing more to be said, when you once understand the
word in reference to its meaning.
    Of course, we are much more civilized than our an-
cestors who could merely think ·of green in reference to
some particular spring morning. There can be no doubt
about our increased powers of thought, of analysis, of recol-
lection, and of conjecture. We cannot congratulate our-
selves too warmly on the fact that we are born among
people who can talk about green in abstraction from
springtime. But at this point we must remember the warn-
ing-Nothing too much.
    So long as language is predominantly speech, the refer-
ence to some particularity of environment is overwhelm-
                                                            38
                                                    Expression

ing. Consider the simple phrase "a warm day." In a book,
as interpreted by a standard dictionary, the words have a
generalised meaning which refers to the rotation of the
earth, the existence of the sun, and the scientific doctrine
of temperature. Now put aside the dictionary, and forget
all scraps of science. Then, with this abstraction from learn-
ing, the experience indicated by the ejaculation "a warm
day" is very different for speakers in Texas, or on the coast
of England bordering the North Sea. And yet there is an
identity of meaning. Nothing too much.
     We have to understand language as conveying the iden-
tities on which knowledge is based, and as presupposing the
particularity of reference to the environment which is the
essence of existence. Spoken language is immersed in the
immediacy of social intercourse. Written language lies hid-
den in a volume, to be opened and read at diverse times
and in diverse places, in abstraction from insistent sur-
roundings. But a book can be read aloud. Here we find an
instance of the fusion of writing and speech. Reading aloud
is an art, and the reader makes a great difference. The im-
mediacy of the environment then enters into the abstrac-
tion of writing.
     The abstraction, inherent in the development of lan-
guage, has its dangers. It leads away from the realities of
the immediate world. Apart from a balanced emphasis, it
ends in the triviality of quick-witted people. And yet, for
all its dangers, this abstraction is responsible for the final
uprise of civilization. It gives expression to the concep-
tual experiences, latent throughout nature, although kept
under by vast conformity to average matter-of-fact. In man-
kind, these conceptual experiences are coordinated, and
express themselves throughout their environment. This
coordination has two aspects, aesthetic and logical. These
aspects will form the topic of my next lecture.
                                                           39
                                               Creative Impulse
      In conclusion, it is time to sum up what I have been
saying this afternoon. This lecture is nothing else than a
modem rendering of the oldest of civilized reflections on
the development of the universe as seen from the perspec-
tive of life on this earth. In comparing modem thought
with ancient records, we must remember the difficulties of
translation, and the difficulties of any thinker battling with
the verbal expression of thought which penetrates below
the ordinary usages of the market place. For instance, how
differently would Aristotle's metaphysical reflections read
if we persisted in translating one of his metaphysical key
words by the English term wood, and also insisted on
giving the most literal meaning to that word. There is evi-
dence that three thousand years ago there were deep
thinkers, enmeshed as to their imaginations in the trivial
modes of presentation belonging to their own days.
      But we can discern in the records, which have been
edited and re-edited by unimaginative scribes, the notion
of the evolution of the universe as viewed from the per-
spective of life on this earth. We can discern the classi-
fication, involving the large physical grades, the grades
of vegetation and of animal life, the final rise to human
life.
     We can also discern the notion of the interweaving of
language with the rise of human experience, in the naive,
childish account of the naming of things. In fact, the whole
ancient account is simple-minded in the extreme. And yet
the pretentious generalities of the modem rendering do
not attain much more than an endeavour to avoid the over-
sharp divisions between the various stages, and the exces-
sive simplification of.the agencies involved.
     This lecture has been written in terms of immanence,
and in terms of action and reaction. Its final conclusion
respecting human nature, is that the mentality of mankind
                                                            40
                                                    Expression

and the language of mankind created each other. I£ we like
to assume the rise of language as a given fact, then it is not
going too far to say that the souls of men are the gift from
language to mankind.
    The account of the sixth day should be written, He
gave them speech, and they became souls.




                                                            41
                                            LECTURE THREE



                        Understanding


/n the two foregoing lectures, importance and expression
have been discussed. The notion of "Understanding" is the
third of the trilogy, upon which we base our endeavour to
analyze the intelligence of mankind. Our quest is to under-
stand understanding.
    I submit to you that in its full extent this is a hopeless
task. We can enlighten fragmentary aspects of intelligence.
But there is always an understanding beyond our area of
comprehension. The reason is that the notion of intelli-
gence in pure abstraction from· things understood is a
myth. Thus a complete understanding is a perfect grasp of
the universe in its totality. We are finite beings; and such
a grasp is denied to us.
    This is not to say that there are finite aspects of things
which are intrinsically incapable of entering into human
knowledge. Whatever exists, is capable of knowledge in
respect to the finitude of its connections with the rest of
things. In other words, we can know anything in some of
its perspectives. But the totality of perspectives involves an
infinitude beyond finite knowledge. For example, we know
about the colour green in some of its perspectives. But
                                                           42
                                                Understanding
what green is capable of in other epochs of the universe,
when other laws of nature are reigning, is beyond our
present imaginations. And yet there is nothing intrinsically
impossible in the notion that, as years pass, mankind may
gain an imaginative insight into some alternative possi-
bility of nature, and may therefore gain understanding of
the possibilities of green in other imagined epochs.
    There is a rhyme which fits onto the tradition respect-
ing Dr. Whewell, who was Master of Trinity College, Cam-
bridge, about eighty years ago. The rhyme is well-known,
and runs thus:

                 I am Master of this College;
                 And what I know not,
                 Is not knowledge.

This attitude is always prevalent in the learned world. It
sterilizes imaginative thought, and thereby blocks progress.
    In our discussion of understanding, this is the first
heresy that I wish to combat. I am not attributing this
heresy to Dr. Whewell, although he is said to have ex-
hibited an arrogance, perhaps justified by his very exten-
sive learning. My point is that understanding is never a
completed static state of mind. It always bears the character
of a process of penetration, incomplete and partial. I fully
admit that both aspects of understanding enter into our
modes of thought. My thesis is that when we realize our-
selves as engaged in a process of penetration, we have a
fuller self-knowledge than when we feel a completion of
the job of intelligence.
    Of course in a sense, there is a completion. But it is a
completion presupposing relation to some given undefined
environment, imposing a perspective and awaiting explora-
tion. Thus we have a large knowledge of the colour green.
But this knowledge is limited by the perspective of the
present epoch of the universe. It is relevant to a definite
                                                           43
                                                Creative Impulse
unexplored immensity; and this immensity is only itself to
be understood by its relevance to alternative immensities.
   Shelley, in a chorus of his dramatic poem "Hellas,"
writes

               Worlds on worlds are rolling ever
               From creation to decay,
               Like the bubbles on a river,
               Sparkling, bursting, borne away.

Amidst this passage of creation, understanding is limited
by its finitude. Yet amidst the infinity of things finite, there
is nothing finite which is intrinsically denied to it. Such
ignorance is accidental; and such possibility of knowledge
discloses its relevance to unexplored aspects of things
known. Any knowledge of the finite always involves a
reference to infinitude.
    The specialization which is necessary for the develop-
ment of civilized thought had in the last century a most
unfortunate effect on the philosophic outlook of learned
people, and thence on the development of institutions for
the promotion of learning. The various departments of
universities emphasized their independence of each other.
Also a university gained reputation in proportion to its
expansion in terms of such
    As science grew, minds shrank in width of comprehen-
sion. The nineteenth century was a period of great achieve-
ment, suggestive of an anthill. It failed to produce men of
learning with a sensitive appreciation of varieties of interest,
of varieties of potentiality. It criticized and exploded,
where it should have striven to understand. The detailed
setting of its interest is, in every age, a crude mixture of
depth of understanding and of triviality of setting, when
looked at from beyond that age. And yet to understand the
nature of existence, we must grasp the essential character
of that depth which, beyond all mistaken details, is the
                                                              44
                                                   Understanding
mainspring of the ascent of life discernible in its own age.
And here another qualification must be added, namely-If
ascent there be.
    The very Renaissance itself, of which the last century
was the final phase in the agonies of begetting its successor,
carried in itself limitations which obstructed the proper
expansion of intellectual interest. It was rooted in Greek
learning, conceived as the only begetter of civilization. Un·
doubtedly, the debt of Europe to Greece is beyond words
to express. But, after all, Grecian thought, even when
expanded into Greek-Hebrew-Egyptian thought, only pre-
sents one finite aspect of the many-sided modes of im-
portance which are pressing upon the outskirts of human
consciousness.
    We must enlarge our effort at understanding. In the
nineteenth century, the Greek scholars were somewhat nar-
rower than the best of the Greeks, the Christian scholars
were somewhat narrower than the best of the early Popes,
and the men of science were somewhat narrower than the
founders of the study of mathematics and of physical
science. The nineteenth century in the aggregate knew im-
measurably more than the Greeks, and the Popes, and the
founders of science, all put together. But the moderns had
lost the sense of vast alternatives, magnificent or hateful,
lurking in the background, and awaiting to overwhelm our
safe little traditions. If civilization is to survive, the expan-
sion of understanding is a prime necessity.
    2. What is understanding? How can we characterize it?
In the first place, understanding always involves the notion
of composition. This notion can enter in one of two ways.
If the thing understood be composite, the understanding
of it can be in reference to its factors, and to their ways of
interweaving so as to form that total thing. This mode of
comprehension makes evident why the thing is what it is.
    The second mode of understanding is to treat the thing
                                                              45
                                               Creative Impulse
as a unity, whether or not it is capable of analysis, and
to obtain evidence as to its capacity for affecting its en-
vironment. The first mode may be called the internal
understanding, and the second mode is the external under-
standing.
     But this phraseology tells only part of the tale. The two
modes are reciprocal: either presupposes the other. The
first mode conceives the thing as an outcome, the second
mode conceives it as a causal factor. In this latter way of
stating our meaning, we have drifted into the notion of
understanding the process of the universe. Indeed the pre-
supposition of process seems even to enter into our pre-
vious analysis. We can take these ways of explanation of
meaning as applying to the understanding of the passage
of nature.
     It is true that nothing is finally understood until its
reference to process has been made evident. And yet, there
is the understanding of ideal relationships in abstraction
from reference to the passage of brute fact. In the notion
of such relationships there is no transition.
     For example, throughout mathematics, in one sense,
transition does not enter. The interconnections are dis-
played in their timeless eternity. It is true that the notions
of time, and of approach, and of approximation, occur in
mathematical discourse. But as used in the science, the
timefulness of time and the motion of approach are ab-
stracted from. In mathematics, as understood, the ideal fact
stands out self-evident.
     There is very little large-scale understanding, even
among mathematicians. There are snippets of understand-
ing, and there are snippets of connections between these
snippets. These details of connection are also understood.
But these fragments of intelligence succeed each other.
They do not stand together as one large self-evident
                                                            46
                                                Understanding
coordination. At the best, there is a vague memory of
details which have recently been attended to.
    This succession of details -of self-evidence is termed
proof. But the large self-evidence of mathematical science
is denied to humans.
    To give an example, the snippet of knowedge that the
addition of 1 and 4 produces the same multiplicity as the
addition of 2 and 3, seems to me self-evident. It is a humble
bit of knowledge; but, unless I deceive myself, it stands
before me with a clarity of insight. I hesitate to claim any
such self-evidence when larger numbers are involved. I
have recourse to the indignity of proof. Other people have
wider powers.
    For example, consider Ramanujan, the great Indian
mathematician, whose early death was a loss to science
analogous to that of Galois. It was said of him that each
of the first hundred integers was his personal friend. In
other words, his insights of self-evidence, and his delight in
such insights, were of the same character as most of us feel
for the integers up to the number 5. Personally, I cannot
claim intimate friendship beyond that group. Also the re-
striction of the group somewhat, in my own case, hinders
the growth of that feeling of delight which Ramanujan
enjoyed.
    I confess to a larger pleasure in patterns of relationship
in which numerical and quantitative relationships are
wholly subordinate. I mention these personal details in
order to emphasize the great variety of characters that self-
evidence can assume, both as to extent and as to the charac-
ter of the compositions which are self-evident. The sense
of completion, which has already been mentioned, arises
from the self-evidence in our understanding. In fact, self-
evidence is understanding.
    The sense of penetration, which also clings to our ex-
                                                           47
                                             Creative Impulse
perience of intelligibility, has to do with the growth of
understanding. To feel the completion apart from any
sense of growth, is in fact to fail in understanding. For it
is a failure to sense dimly the unexplored relationships
with things beyond. To feel the penetration without any
sense of completion, is also to fail in understanding. The
penetration itself is then deficient in meaning. It lacks
achievement.
    3. We now come to the notion of "Proof." The thesis
that I am developing conceives proof, in the strict sense of
that term, as a feeble second-rate procedure. When the
word proof has been uttered, the next notion to enter the
mind is halfheartedness. Unless proof has produced self-evi-
dence and thereby rendered itself unnecessary, it has issued
in a second-rate state of mind, producing action devoid of
understanding. Self-evidence is the basic fact on which all
greatness supports itself. But proof is one of the routes by
which self-evidence is often obtained.
    As an example of this doctrine, in philosophical
writings proof should be at a minimum. The whole effort
should be to display the self-evidence of basic truths, con-
cerning the nature of things and their connection. It should
be noticed that logical proof starts from premises, and
that premises are based upon ev.idence. Thus evidence is
presupposed by logic; at least, it is presupposed by the
assumption that logic has any importance.
    Philosophy is the attempt to make manifest the funda-
mental evidence as to the nature of things. Upon the pre-
supposition of this evidence, all understanding rests. A
correctly verbalized philosophy mobilizes this basic ex-
perience which all premises presuppose. It makes the
content of the human mind manageable; it adds meaning
to fragmentary details; it discloses disjunctions and con-
junctions, consistencies and inconsistencies. Philosophy is
                                                           48
                                                Understanding
the criticism of abstractions which govern special modes of
thought.
    It follows that philosophy, in any proper sense of the
term, cannot be proved. For proof is based upon abstrac-
tion. Philosophy is either self-evident, or it is not philoso-
phy. The attempt of any philosophic discourse should be to
produce self-evidence. Of course it is impossible to achieve
any such aim. But, nonetheless, all inference in philoso-
phy is a sign of that imperfection which clings to all human
endeavour. The aim of philosophy is sheer disclosure.
    The great difficulty of philosophy is the failure of lan-
guage. The ordinary intercourse of mankind is concerned
with shifting circumstance, It is unnecessary to mention
self-evident facts. Thus hunting scenes had been depicted
on the walls of caves for thousands of years before the more
permanent spatial relations had become a topic for con-
scious analysis. When the Greeks required terms for the
ultimate characters of the actualities of nature, they had
to use terms such as water, air, fire, wood.
    When the religious thought of the ancient world from
Mesopotamia to Palestine, and from Palestine to Egypt,
required terms to express that ultimate unity of direction
in the universe, upon which all order depends, and which
gives its meaning to importance, they could find no way
better to express themselves than by borrowing the charac-
teristics of the touchy, vain, imperious tyrants who ruled
the empires of the world. In the origin of civilized religion,
gods are like dictators. Our modern rituals still retain this
taint. The most emphatic repudiations of this archaic no-
tion are to be found scattered in the doctrines of Buddhism
and in the Christian Gospels.
    Language halts behind intuition. The difficulty of
philosophy is the expression of what is self-evident. Our
understanding outruns the ordinary usages of words. Phi-
                                                           49
                                               Creative Impulse
losophy is akin to poetry. Philosophy is the endeavour to
find a conventional phraseology for the vivid suggestiveness
of the poet. It is the endeavour to reduce Milton's "Lyci-
das" to prose; and thereby to produce a verbal symbolism
manageable for use in other connections of thought.
    This reference to philosophy illustrates the fact that
understanding is not primarily based on inference. Under-
standing is self-evidence. But our clarity of intuition is
limited, and it flickers. Thus inference enters as means for
the attainment of such understanding as we can achieve.
Proofs are the tools for the extension of our imperfect self-
evidence. They presuppose some clarity; and they also pre-
suppose that this clarity represents an imperfect penetra-
tion into our dim recognition of the world around-the
world of fact, the world of possibility, the world as valued,
the world as purposed.
    4. At this point of our discussion another aspect of
things claims explicit recognition. It is a general character,
whose special forms are termed variously disorder, evil,
error. In some sense or other, things go wrong; and the
notion of correction from worse to better, or the notion of
decay from better to worse, enters into our understanding
of the nature of things.
    It is a temptation for philosophers that they should
weave a fairy tale of the adjustment of factors; and then as
an appendix introduce the notion of frustration, as a sec-
ondary aspect. I suggest to you that this is the criticism to
be made on the monistic idealisms of the nineteenth cen-
tury, and even of the great Spinoza. It is quite incredible
that the absolute, as conceived in monistic philosophy,
should evolve confusion about its own details.
    There is no reason to hold that confusion is less
fundamental than is order. Our task is to evolve a general
concept which allows room for both; and which also sug-
gests the path for the enlargement of our penetration. My
                                                            50
                                                Understanding
suggestion is that we start from the notion of two aspects
of the universe. It includes a factor of unity, involving in
its essence the connexity of things, unity of purpose, and
unity of enjoyment. The whole notion of importance is
referent to this ultimate unity. There is also equally fun-
damental in the universe, a factor of multiplicity. There
are many actualities, each with its own experience, en-
joying individually, and yet requiring each other.
    Any description of the unity will require the many
actualities; and any description of the many will require
the notion of the unity from which importance and pur-
pose is derived. By reason of the essential individuality of
the many things, there are conflicts of finite realizations.
Thus the summation of the many into the one, and the
derivation of importance from the one into the many, in-
volves the notion of disorder, of conflict, of frustration.
    These are the primary aspects of the universe which
common sense brooding over the aspects of existence
hands over to philosophy for eluCidation into some co-
herence of understanding. Philosophy shirks its task when
it summarily dismisses one side of the dilemma. We can
never fully understand. But we can increase our penetra-
tion.
    When there is a full understanding, any particular
item belongs to what is already clear. Thus it is merely a
repetition of the known. In that sense, there is tautology.
Thus tautology is the intellectual amusement of the
Infinite.
    Also in the same sense, the selection of the particular
item for emphasis is equally arbitrary. It is the convention
by means of which the Infinite governs its concentration
of attention.
     For the finite individual there is penetration to novelty
in its own experience; and the selection of detail is sub-
ject to the causation from which that individual originates.
                                                           51
                                                Creative Impulse
Philosophy tends to oscillate between the points of view
belonging to the infinite and to the finite. Thus under-
standing, however imperfect, is the self-evidence of pattern,
so far as it has been discriminated. Also for the finite
experience, inference is the achievement of further pene-
tration into such self-evidence.
    A partially understood pattern is more definite as to
what it excludes than as to what its completion would
include. As to inclusion there are an infinitude of alterna-
tive modes of completion. But so far as there is any defi-
niteness attaching to the incomplete disclosure, certain fac-
tors are definitely excluded. The foundation of logic upon
the notion of inconsistency was first discovered and devel-
oped by Professor Henry Sheffer of Harvard, about twenty
years ago. Professor Sheffer also emphasized the notion of
pattern, as fundamental to logic. In this way, one of the
great advances in mathematical logic was accomplished.
    In the first place, by basing logic upon the concept of
inconsistency, the notion of the finite is definitely intro-
duced. For as Spinoza pointed out, the finite is that which
excludes other things comparable to itself. Thus incon-
sistency bases logic upon Spinoza's concept of finitude.
    In the second place, as Sheffer pointed out, the notions
of negation and of inference can be derived from that of
inconsistency. Thus the whole movement of logic is pro-
vided for. We may notice that this basis for logic suggests
that the notion of frustration is more akin to finite men-
tality; while the notion of harmonious conjunction is
derived from the concept of a monistic universe. It is for
philosophy to coordinate the two aspects which the world
presents.
    In the third place, this basis for logic enlightens our
understanding of process, which is a fundamental fact in
our experience. We are in the present; the present is always
shifting; it is derived from the past; it is shaping the future;
                                                             52
                                               Understanding
it is passing into the future. This is process, and in the
universe it is an inexorable fact.
    5. But if all things can be together, why should there
be process? One answer to this question embodies a
denial of process. According to this answer process is mere
appearance, devoid of significance for ultimate reality.
This solution seems to me to be very inadequate. How can
the unchanging unity of fact generate the delusion of
change? Surely, the satisfactory answer must embody an
understanding of the interweaving of change and perma-
nence, each required by the other. This interweaving is a
primary fact of experience. It is at the base of our concepts
of personal identity, of social identity, and of all socio-
logical functionings.
     Meanwhile, another aspect of the relationship between
inconsistency and process must now occupy us. Incon-
sistency is the fact that the two states of things which
constitute the respective meanings of a pair of propositions
cannot exist together. It denies a possible conjunction be-
tween these meanings. But these meanings have been
brought together in the very judgment of inconsistency.
This is the sort of perplexity that Plato alluded to, when
he makes one of his characters say, "Not-being is a sort of
being."
    The conclusion that I draw is that the word together,
and indeed all words expressive of conjunction in general,
without definite specification, are very ambiguous. For
example, the little word and is a nest of ambiguity. It is
very astounding how slight has been the analysis of the am-
biguities of words expressive of conjunctions. Such words
are the death-traps for accuracy of reasoning. Unfortu-
nately, they occur abundantly in sentences, expressed in
the most perfect literary form. Thus an admirable literary
style is no security for logical consistency.
     In reading philosophic literature every word expres-
                                                          53
                                              Creative Impulse
sive of conjunction must be deeply pondered over. If it be
used twice in the same sentence, or in neighbouring sen-
tences, can we be sure that the two usages embody the same
meaning, at least sufficiently for the purposes of the argu-
ment?
    I suggest to you that the contradictions, famous in
ancient and in modern logic, arise from such ambiguities.
Many words which are not formally conjunctions, are ex-
pressive of a conjunctive meaning. For example, the word
class has all the manifold ambiguity of the word and. The
understanding of pattern, and of the conjunctions in-
volved in various patterns, depends upon the study of
such ambiguities. On this topic philosophic literature is
very simple-minded. So many vigorous and cogent argu-
ments fall into this trap.
    We must now return to the topic of inconsistency and
process. The concept that two propositions, which we will
name p and q, are inconsistent, must mean that in the
modes of togetherness illustrated in some presupposed en-
vironment the meanings of the propositions p and q
cannot both occur. Neither meaning may occur or either
may occur, but not both. Now process is the way by which
the universe escapes from the exclusions of inconsistency.
    Such exclusions belong to the finitude of circumstance.
By means of process, the universe escapes from the limita-
tions of the finite. Process is the immanence of the infinite
in the finite; whereby all bounds are burst, and all incon-
sistencies dissolved.
    No specific finitude is an ultimate shackle upon the
universe. In process the finite possibilities of the universe
travel towards their infinitude of realization.
    In the nature of things there are no ultimate exclu-
sions, expressive in logical terms. For if we extend the
stretch of our attention throughout the passage of time,
                                                           54
                                                Understanding
two entities which are inconsistent for occurrence on this
planet during a certain day in the long past and are incon-
sistent during another day in more recent past-these two
entities may be consistent when we embrace the whole
period involved, one entity occurring during the earlier
day, and the other during the later day. Thus inconsistency
is relative to the abstraction involved.
    An easy intellectual consistency can be attained, pro-
vided that we rest content with high abstraction. Pure
mathematics is the chief example of success by adherence
to such rigid abstraction. Again, the importance of mathe-
matics, as finally disclosed in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, illustrates the doctrine that the advance of the
finite human understanding requires the adherence to
some judicious abstraction, and the development of
thought within that abstraction. The disclosure of this
method has issued in the progressive science of modern
civilization, within the last three thousand years.
    6. But the discovery has been gradual, and the method
is even now imperfectly understood. Learned people have
handled the specialization of thought with an incredible
lack of precaution. It is almost universally assumed that
the growth of a specialism leaves unaffected the presupposi-
tions as to the perspective of the environment which were
sufficient for the initial stages. It cannot be too clearly
understood that the expansion of any special topic changes
its whole meaning from top to bottom. As the subject
matter of a science expands, its relevance to the universe
contracts. For it presupposes a more strictly defined en-
vironment.
    The definition of the environment is exactly what is
omitted from special abstraction. Such definition is an
irrelevance. It is irrelevant because it requires an under-
standing of the infinitude of things. It is therefore Im-
                                                          55
                                              Creative Impulse
possible. All that we can do is to make an abstraction, to
presuppose that it is relevant, and to push ahead within
that presupposition.
    This sharp division between the clarity of finite science
and the dark universe beyond is itself an abstraction from
concrete fact. For example, we can explore our presuppo-
sitions. Take the special c'lse of natural science, we pre-
suppose geometry. But what sort of geometry? There are
many kinds. In fact, there are an indefinite number of
alternative geometries. Which one are we to choose?
    We all know that this is a topic which has bothered, or
elated, physical science during the last thirty years. At last
the great scientists are coming to conclusions which we
will all accept. And yet a sceptical doubt intrudes. How do
we know that only one geometry is relevant to the complex
happenings of nature? Perhaps a three-dimensional geom-
etry is relevant to one sort of occurrences; and a fifteen-
dimensional geometry is required for another sort.
    Of course our more obvious sense perceptions seem to
clamour for three dimensions, especially sight. On the
other hand sound, though voluminous, is very vague as to
the dimensions of its volumes, as between three or fifteen,
for instance. Also any change in scale, to the very small or
to the very large, makes surprising changes in the charac-
ters of the happenings disclosed so far as we can observe.
    We have developed very special types of sensory obser-
vation; and in consequence we are wedded to a corre-
spondingly special set of results, true enough if we intro-
duce the proper limitations. But as our science expands the
area of relationship to other aspects of nature becomes
increasingly important.
    Perhaps our knowledge is distorted unless we can com-
prehend its essential connection with happenings which
involve spatial relationships of fifteen dimensions. The
dogmatic assumption of the trinity of nature as its sole
                                                            56
                                                 Understanding
important dimensional aspect has been useful in the past.
It is becoming dangerous in the present. In the future it
may be a fatal barrier to the advance of knowledge.
    Also, this planet, or this nebula in which our sun is
placed, may be gradually advancing towards a change in the
general character of its spatial relations. Perhaps in the
dim future mankind, if it then exists, will look back to the
queer, contracted three-dimensional universe from which
the nobler, wider existence has emerged.
    These speculations are, at present, neither proved nor
disproved. They have however a mythical value. They do
represent how concentration on coherent verbalizations of
certain aspects of human ·experience may block the ad-
vance of understanding. Too many apples from the tree
of systematized knowledge lead to the fall of progress.
     The sense of advance, of penetration, is essential to
sustain interest. Also there are two types of advance. One
is the advance in the use of assigned patterns for the coordi-
nation of an increased variety of detail.
     But the assignment of the type of pattern restricts the
choice of details. In this way the infinitude of the universe
is dismissed as irrelevant. The advance which has started
with the freshness of sunrise degenerates into a dull ac-
cumulation of minor feats of coordination. The history of
thought and the history of art illustrate this doctrine. We
cannot prescribe the pattern of progress.
     It is true that advance is partly the gathering of details
into assigned patterns. This is the safe advance of dogmatic
spirits, fearful of folly. But history discloses another type
of progress, namely the introduction of novelty of pattern
into conceptual experience. In this way, details hitherto
undiscriminated 01 dismissed as casual irrelevances are
lifted into coordinated experience. There is a new vision
of the great Beyond.
     7. Thus understanding has two modes of advance, the
                                                            57
                                              Creative Impulse
gathering of detail within assigned pattern, and the dis-
covery of novel pattern with its emphasis on novel detail.
The intelligence of mankind has been halted by dogma-
tism as to pattern of connection. Religious thought, aes-
thetic thought, the understanding of social structures, the
scientific analysis of observation, have alike been dwarfed
by this fatal virus.
    It entered European thought at the very beginning of
its brilliant foundation. Epicurus, Plato, Aristotle, were
alike convinced of the certainty of various elements in
their experience, in the exact forms in which they under-
stood them. They were unaware of the perils of abstraction.
Later on, in his Critique of Pure Reason, Kant gave a
masterly exposition of the reasons why we should be so
certain. There was a concurrence of genius as to this
certainty.
    It is a tragedy of history, that in the sense in which
these great men held these beliefs, not one of their doc-
trines has survived the wider knowledge of the last two
centuries. Mathematics is not true in the sense in which
Plato conceived it. Sense data are not clear, distinct, and
primary, in the sense in which Epicurus believed.
    The history of thought is a tragic mixture of vibrant
disclosure and of deadening closure. The sense of penetra-
tion is lost in the certainty of completed knowledge. This
dogmatism is the antichrist of learning.
    In the full concrete connection of things, the characters
of the things connected enter into the character of the
connectivity which joins them.
    Every example of friendship exhibits the particular
characters of the two friends. Two other people are in-
consistent in respect to that completely defined friendship.
Again the colours in a picture form a composition, which
is partly geometrical If we merely consider the abstract
                                                           58
                                                Understanding
geometrical relationship, a patch of red can be substituted
for a patch of blue. In this geometrical abstraction the red
is just as consistent with the remaining patches of colours
as was the blue. But if we consider the picture more con-
cretely, perhaps a masterpiece has been ruined. The red
is inconsistent with the concrete effect on the composition
produced by the blue.
     Thus in proportion as we penetrate towards concrete
apprehension, inconsistency rules. Namely, all entities,
except one, are inconsistent with the production of the
particular effect which the one entity would produce. In
proportion to our relapse towards abstraction, many en-
tities will alternatively produce the same abstract effect.
Thus consistency grows with abstraction from the con-
crete.
     There is thus an ambiguity in the notion of inconsist-
ency. There is the sheer difference produced by the dis-
tinction between entities. If the patch be scarlet, it cannot
also be pale blue. The two notions are inconsistent by
reason of the sheer distinction between red and blue, in
that they are distinct colours. There is also the distinction
in aesthetic enjoyment. The blue may be a factor in a
picture which is a masterpiece, while the substitution of
red in the same geometrical position destroys the whole
aesthetic value. On the other hand, if interest be wholly
directed to the geometrical relationships, red or blue may
do equally well to mark out that area.
     We should now understand that there are two types of
inconsistency. These may be termed respectively, the logi-
cal type, and the aesthetic type. The logical type is based
on the difference between different things, conceived as
alternative factors in a composition. It cannot be indiffer-
ent to the totality of a composition, as to which of two
distinct things fill an assigned role in the pattern of that
                                                          59
                                              Creative Impulse
composite entity. The difference in the factors will pro-
duce different compositions. Also the addition of factors
disrupts the underlying presuppositions.
    We can never understand a composition in its full
concrete effectiveness for all possibilities of environment.
We are aware only of an abstraction. For this abstraction
the change or addition of factors may be indifferent. There
is always a nemesis hanging over the equivalence, or con-
sistency, of different things. As we enlarge self-evidence
the abstraction shrinks, and our understanding penetrates
towards the concrete fact. Thus, sooner or later, growth in
knowledge leads to the evidence of antagonism involved in
difference.
    8. The doctrine of understanding, as developerl in this
lecture, applies beyond logic. The aesthetic experience is
another mode of the enjoyment of self-evidence. This
conclusion is as old as European thought. The relation of
the mathematical doctrine of proportion in its application
to music and to architecture excited interest in the Pythag-
orean and Platonic schools. Also the feeling, widespread
among mathematicians, that some proofs are more beauti-
ful than others, should excite the attention of philosophers.
    I suggest to you that the analogy between aesthetics
and logic is one of the undev.eloped topics of philoso-
phy.
    In the first place, they are both concerned with the en-
joyment of a composition, as derived from the interconnec-
tions of its factors. There is one whole, arising from the
interplay of many details. The importance arises from the
vivid grasp of the interdependence of the one and the
many. If either side of this antithesis sinks into the back-
ground, there is trivialization of experience, logical and
aesthetic.
    The distinction between logic and aesthetics consists
in the degree of abstraction involved. Logic concentrates
                                                           60
                                                 Understanding
attention upon high abstraction, and aesthetics keeps as
close to the concrete as the necessities of finite understand-
ing permit. Thus logic and aesthetics are at the two ex-
tremes of the dilemma of the finite mentality in its partial
penetration of the infinite.
     Either of these topics can be considered from two
points of view. There is the discovery of a logical complex,
and the enjoyment of that complex when discovered. Also
there is the construction of an aesthetic composition, and
the enjoyment of that composition when composed. This
distinction between creation and enjoyment must not be
overstressed. But it is there; and the close of this lecture is
concerned with the enjoyment and not with creation.
    The characteristic attitude of logical understanding is
to start with the details, and to pass to the construction
achieved. Logical enjoyment passes from the many to the
one. The characters of the many are understood as per-
mitting that unity of construction.
    Logic employs symbols; but only as symbols. For ex-
ample, the difference in the spacing of the lines, in the
width of the margin, in the size of the page-octavo, or
quarto, or duodecimo, has not as yet entered into the sym-
bolism.
    The understanding of logic is the enjoyment of the
abstracted details as permitting that abstract unity. As the
enjoyment develops, the revelation is the unity of the
construct. We are facing a possibility for the universe,
namely how the abstract in its own nature harbours that
approach to concretion. Logic starts with primitive ideas,
and puts them together.
    The movement of aesthetic enjoyment is in the oppo-
site direction. We are overwhelmed by the beauty of the
building, by the delight of the picture, by the exquisite
balance of the sentence. The whole precedes the details.
    We then pass to discrimination. As in a moment, the
                                                            61
                                               Creative Impulse
details force themselves upon us as the reasons for the
totality of the effect. In aesthetics, there is a totality dis-
closing its component parts.
    In the history of European thought, the discussion of
aesthetics has been almost ruined by the emphasis upon
the harmony of the details. The enjoyment of Greek art is
always haunted by a longing for the details to exhibit some
rugged independence apart from the oppressive harmony.
    In the greatest examples of any form of art, a miraculous
balance is achieved. The whole displays its component
parts, each with its own value enhanced; and the parts lead
up to a whole, which is beyond themselves, and yet not
destructive of themselves. It is however remarkable how
often the preliminary studies of the details-if preserved
-are more interesting than the final details as they appear
in the complete work. Even the greatest works of art fall
short of perfection.
    By reason of the greater concreteness of the aesthetic
experience, it is a wider topic than that of the logical ex-
perience. Indeed, when the topic of aesthetics has been
sufficiently explored, it is doubtful whether there will be
anything left over for discussion. But this doubt is unjusti-
fied. For the essence of great experience is penetration into
the unknown, the unexperienced.
    Both logic and aesthetics concentrate on the closed fact.
Our lives are passed in the experience of disclosure. As we
lose this sense of disclosure, we are shedding that mode of
functioning which is the soul. We are descending to mere
conformity with the average of the past. Complete con-
formity means the loss of life. There remains the barren
existence of inorganic nature.
    In the three lectures now concluded, the assemblage
of these ideas, most fundamental for philosophic thought,
has been attempted. The systematization has been of the
                                                            62
                                              Understanding
slightest; and under the guise of three headings a variety
of notions has been introduced.
     There is one moral to be drawn. Apart from detail,
and apart from system, a philosophic outlook is the very
foundation of thought and of life. The sort of ideas we
attend to, and the sort of ideas which we push into the
negligible background, govern our hopes, our fears, our
control of behaviour. As we think, we live. This is why
the assemblage of philosophic ideas is more than a special-
ist study. It moulds our type of civilization.




                                                        63
II.
ACTIVITY




                                           LECTURE FOUR



                              Perspective


here is reason to believe that human genius reached its
culmination in the twelve hundred years preceding and
including the initiation of the Christian Epoch. Within
that period the main concepts of aesthetic experience, of
religion, of humane social relations, of political wisdom,
of mathematical deduction, and of observational science,
were developed and discussed. Of course, each one of these
aspects of civilization has an immensely longer history,
stretching back to the animals. But within that period, the
achievements of mankind attained an amplitude of effective-
ness. Also their relevance to the ideals of human life
was consciously entertained. In the earlier stages of this
period, the Homeric poems and various Confuscian modes
of thought emerged, and in the final stage, Virgil, the
Gospel of St. John, and the political structure of the
Roman Empire.
    The techniques of life flourished. The initiation of
each was earlier than this period. For example, the tech-
nique of writing gradually developed through many ages.
But its facility of use so as to be a medium for the preser-
                                                         65
                                                     Activity
vation of intimate thoughts of individual people belongs
to this epoch. Antecedently to this period it recorded the
orders of kings and the boasts of conquerors. Analogous
considerations apply to the development of metals, of
horses, of roads, of navigation: civilization was in its in-
fancy. Within the period we find achievement. Of course,
since then, there has been progress in knowledge and
technique. But it has been along the path laid down by
the activities of that golden age. The history of Europe
during the past eighteen hundred years is the sequel.
    One unfortunate result of this derivation from a bril-
liant past has been that defective insights of the earlier
period have been rooted in language and literature. Also
language dictates our unconscious presuppositions of
thought.
    For example, single words, each with its dictionary
meaning, and single sentences, each bounded by full stops,
suggest the possibility of complete abstraction from any
environment. Thus the problem of philosophy is apt to be
conceived as the understanding of the interconnections of
things, each understandable, apart from reference to any-
thing else.
    2. This presupposition is erroneous. Let us dismiss it,
and assume that each entity, of .whatever type, essentially
involves its own connection with the universe of other
things. This connection can be viewed as being what the
universe is for that entity either in the way of accomplish-
ment or in the way of potentiality. It can be termed the
perspective of the universe for that entity. For example,
these are the perspectives of the universe for the number
three, and for the colour blue, and for any one definite oc-
casion of realized fact.
    Each perspective for any one qualitative abstraction
such as a number, or a colour, involves an infinitude of
                                                          66
                                                    Perspective
:!ltemative potentialities. On the other hand, the perspec-
tive for a factual occasion involves the elimination of
alternatives in respect to the matter-of-fact realization
involved in that present occasion, and the reduction of
alternatives as to the future; since that occasion, as a mem-
ber of its own contemporary world, is one of the factors
conditioning the future beyond itself.
     This question of the meanings of our current abstrac-
tions of all types of entities is more than a metaphysical
puzzle for learned people. It is a question of practical good
sense in our everyday judgments of affairs. Our danger is
to take notions which are valid for one perspective of the
universe involved in one _group of events and to apply
them uncritically to other events involving some discrep-
ancy of perspective. A correction is wanted by reason of this
discrepancy. In the three lectures of this second Part, I shall
be discussing various applications of this doctrine of the
perspective involved in every entity. Also it will be neces-
sary to refer to the misconceptions which arise from its
neglect.
     This notion of perspectives of the universe is dis-
cussed in my Science and The Modern World, under the
heading "Relational Essence." But in that discussion the
perspectives of qualitative entities are alone considered.
Here the notion has been broadened.
     3. The most simple doctrine about types of being is
that some extreme type exists independently of the rest of
things. For example, Greek philosophers, and in particular
Plato, seem to have held this doctrine in respect to qualita-
tive abstractions, such as number, geometrical relations,
moral characteristics, and the qualitative disclosures of the
higher sense perceptions. Namely, according to this tradi-
tion in so far as we abstract from our experience the brute
particularity of happening here, and now, amid this envi-
                                                            67
                                                          Activity
ronment, there remains a residue with self-identities,
differences, and essential interconnections, which seems to
have no essential reference to the passage of events. Accord-
ing to this doctrine, as the result of this discard of the factor
of transition we rivet our attention on the eternal realm of
forms. In this imagined realm there is no passage, no loss,
no gain. It is complete in itself. It is self-sustaining. It is
therefore the realm of the "completely real."
    This is the notion that has haunted philosophy. It was
never far from Greek thought. Later, it transformed the
Hebraic elements in Christian Theology.
    We must admit that in some sense or other, we inevi-
tably presuppose this realm of forms, in abstraction from
passage, loss, and gain. For example, the multiplication
table up to "twelve-times-twelve" is a humble member of it.
In all our thoughts of what has happened and can happen,
we presuppose the multiplication table as essentially quali-
fying the course of history, whenever it is relevant. It is
always at hand, and there is no escape. So far as our vision is
clear, there is that element of certain knowledge. But, how
clear is our vision?
    This notion of the realm of timeless forms leads to rhe-
torical, question-begging phrases, such as "self-sustaining,"
"completely-real," "perfection," "certainty."
    Let us take these phrases in reverse order. We make mis-
takes in arithmetic. We can misconceive the very meaning
of number and of the interconnections of number. The
great mathematicians of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries misconceived the subject matter of their studies.
For example, in respect to the notions of infinitesimals, of
the necessary precautions in the use of infinite series, and
the doctrine of complex numbers, their discoveries were
suffused with error.
    The notion of a sphere of human knowledge character-
                                                               68
                                                   Perspective
ized by unalloyed truth is the pet delusion of dogmatists,
whether they be theologians, scientists, or humanistic schol-
ars.
     Again, perfection is a notion which haunts human
imagination. It cannot be ignored. But its naive attach-
ment to the realm of forms is entirely without justification.
How about the form of mud, and the forms of evil, and
other forms of imperfection? In the house of forms, there
are many mansions.
     Finally, consider together the two notions, self-sus-
taining and complete reality. Every form in its very nature
refers to some sort of realization. The numerical notions,
such as "five" and "six,"       to concepts of things which
may exemplify them. The notion of the numbers up to
six, as existing in a vacuum is idiotic. The muddiness is
referent to mud, and forms of evil require evil things, in
some sense or other.
     Thus the forms are essentially referent beyond them-
selves. It is mere phantasy to impute to them any "abso-
lute reality," which is devoid of implications beyond itself.
The realm of forms is the realm of potentiality, and the
very notion of potentiality has an external meaning. It
refers to life and motion. It refers to inclusion and exclu-
sion. It refers to hope, fear, and intention. Phrasing this
statement more generally,-it refers to appetition. It refers
to the development of actuality, which realizes form
and is yet more than form. It refers to past, present, and
future.
     Again everything is something, which in its own way is
real. When you refer to something as unreal, you are
merely conceiving a type of reality to which that "some-
thing" does not belong. But to be real is not to be self-
sustaining. Also modes of reality require each other. It is
the task of philosophy to elucidate the relevance to each
                                                           69
                                                        Activity
other of various types of existence. We cannot exhaust
such types because there are an unending number of them.
But we can start with two types which to us seen as ex-
tremes; and can then discern these types as requiring
other types to express their mutual relevance to each
other.
     I do not affirm that these two types are fundamentally
more ultimate, or more simple, than other derivative
types. But I do maintain that for human experience, they
are natural starting points for the understanding of types
of existence.
    The two types in question can be named respectively,
"The Type of Actuality," and "The Type of Pure Poten-
tiality."
    These types require each other, namely actuality is
the exemplification of potentiality, and potentiality is the
characterization of actuality, either in fact or in concept.
    Also the interconnections of the two extreme types
involve the introduction of other types, namely type upon
type, each type expressing some mode of composition. I
suggest to you that the traditions of linguistic expression
are singularly nai've in the handling of modes of composi-
tion. Some blessed word, such as the word composition
itself, covers up all the perplexities that reflection dis-
closes.
    At this point we had better ask ourselves, What are we
appealing to in the development of philosophic thought?
Where is the evidence?
    The answer is evidently human experience, as shared
by civilized intercommunication. The expression of such
evidence, so far as it is widely shared, is to be found in law,
in moral and sociological habits, in literature and art as
ministering to human satisfactions, in historical judgments
on the rise and decay of social systems, and in science. It
                                                             70
                                                    Perspective
is also diffused throughout the meanings of words and
linguistic expressions.
     Philosophy is a secondary activity. It meditates on this
variety of expression. It finds types of things, each type
exemplifying a mode of existence, with its own character-
istic reality. Also all its sources of information express
various aspects of the interfusion of things. Thus the task
of philosophy is the understanding of the interfusion of
modes of existence.
     There is also one final consideration, namely that
philosophy is limited in its sources to the world as dis-
closed in human experience.
     4. With this                recalling our evidence, we
return to the question, What is the meaning of actuality
conceived as the extreme contrast to potentiality? We
recur to the statement: actuality and potentiality require
each other in the reciprocal roles of example and character.
Thus in order to understand actuality, we must ask, what
is character, and what is it that has character?
     To the latter half of this question many answers have
been given, each answer referent to some important aspect
of human experience. They can be grouped under three
titles, namely, "Substances," "Happenings," "The Abso-
lute." But these titles refer to the discussions of the learned
world prolonged through centuries of civilization. They
are important, though they are far from naive experience.
     Our more direct experience groups itself into two large
divisions, each capable of further analysis. One division is
formed by the sense of qualitative experience derived from
antecedent fact, enjoyed in the personal unity of present
fact, and conditioning future fact. In this division of ex-
perience, there are the sense of derivation from without,
the sense of immediate enjoyment within, and the sense
of transmission beyond. This complex sense of enjoyment
                                                            71
                                                       Activity
involves the past, the present, the future. It is at once com-
plex, vague, and imperative. It is the realization of our
essential connection with the world without, and also of
our own individual existence now. It carries with it the
placing of our immediate experience as a fact in history,
derivative, actual, and effective. It also carries with it the
sense of immediate experience as the essence of an indi-
vidual fact with its own qualities. The main characteristic
of such experience is complexity, vagueness, and compul-
sive intensity. In one respect the vagueness yields a com-
paratively sharp cut division, namely, the differentiation
of the world into the animal body which is the region of
intimate, intense, mutual expression, and the rest of nature
where the intimacy and intensity of feeling fails to pene-
trate. My brain, my heart, my bowels, my lungs, are mine,
with an intimacy of mutual adjustment. The sunrise is a
message from the world beyond such directness of relation.
The behaviour system of the body has an element of
direct relationship with the transitions of quality in per-
sonal experience. This directness is lacking in the relation-
ship of the external world to the flux of feeling. For this
reason psychology and physiology are difficult to dissociate
from each other, either for the purposes of abstract science
or for the purposes of the medical practitioner. The be-
haviour systems of the human bOdy and of intimate experi-
ence are closely entangled.
    5. The second division of human experience has a
character very different from the first division of bodily
feelings. It lacks the intimacy, the intensity, and the vague-
ness. It consists of the discrimination of forms as expressing
external natural facts in their relationship to the body. Let
this division be termed sense perception.
    Now sense perception belongs to the higher animals.
We will consider it as we know it; that is to say, as m
                                                            72
                                                   Perspective
human experience. It is a sophisticated derivative from the
more primitive bodily experience which constituted the
division of experience first considered. But it has out-
grown its origin, and has inverted every emphasis. Its
primary characteristic is clarity, distinctness, and indiffer-
ence. Its emotional effects are secondary derivatives,
achieved by awakening reactions other than itself. This is
Hume's doctrine. Only Hume neglected the primary
experiences of bodily intimacy; although he used these
primary experiences in describing our reactions to sense
perceptions.
    In sense perception we discern the external world with
its various parts characterized by form of quality, and
interrelated by forms which express both separation and
connection. These forms of quality are the sensa, such as
shades of blue, and tones of sound. The forms expressing
distinction and connection are the spatial and temporal
forms. The world, as interpreted by exclusive attention to
such forms of sense perception, I will term nature.
    These forms, qualitative and spatio-temporal, dominate
this experience. They are indifferent to emotion, being
just themselves, namely the vivid realization of things
capable of abstraction from that instance of actuality with
its cargo of emotion. Nature is devoid of impulse.
    Sense perception is the triumph of abstraction in
animal experience. Such abstraction arises from the
growth of selective emphasis. It endows human life with
three gifts, namely, an approach to accuracy, a sense of the
qualitative differentiation of external activities, a neglect
of essential connections.
    These three characters of the higher animal experience
-namely, approximate accuracy, qualitative assignment,
essential omission-together constitute the focus of con-
sciousness, as in human experience.
                                                           73
                                                      Activity
    Aristotelian logic is founded on this primary deliver-
ance of abstractive consciousness, namely, "that entity
exemplifying this quality, apart from any reference to
things beyond."
    Also scientific practice is founded upon the same char-
acteristic of omission. In order to observe accurately, con-
centrate on that observation, dismissing from consciousness
all irrelevant modes of experience. But there is no irrele-
vance. Thus the whole of science is based upon neglected
modes of relevance, which nevertheless dominate the social
group entertaining those scientific modes of thought. For
this reason the progress of systematized knowledge has a
double aspect. There is progress in the discovery of the
intricacies of composition which that system admits. There
is also progress in the discovery of the limitations of the
system in its omission to indicate its dependence upon
environmental coordinations of modes of existence which
have essential relevance to the entities within the system.
Since all things are connected, any system which omits some
things must necessarily suffer from such limitations.
    The emphasis upon the higher sense percepta, such as
sights and sounds, has damaged the philosophic develop-
ment of the preceding two centuries. The question, What
do we know?, has been transformed into the question,
What can we know? This latter question has been dogmati-
cally solved by the presupposition that all knowledge starts
from the consciousness of spatio-temporal patterns of such
sense percepta.
    6. The study of human knowledge should start with a
survey of the vague variety, discernible in the transitions
of human experience. It cannot safely base itself upon
simple arbitrary assumptions, such as this assumption of
spatio-temporal patterns of sensa as the source of all knowl-
edge. There is something very special about such spatio-
                                                           74
                                                   Perspective
temporal patterns, and also about arithmetic patterns.
Speaking from my own frame of mind, I revolt against this
concentration upon the multiplication table and the regu-
lar solids: in other words, against the notion that topology,
based upon numerical relations, contains in itself the one
fundamental key to the understanding of the nature of
things. Surely we should start from principles which are
larger, more penetrating. Arithmetic and topology are
specialties.
    What are the general principles of division which domi-
nate that creative process which we term our lives? We can
only appeal to our direct insight-to what Descartes termed,
our inspectio. Our                 that is, our judicium to
which Descartes also appealed, requires an inspection to
provide the material from which decision arises. The ques-
tion therefore is as to those fundamental modes dominating
experience. Such modes are modes of division, each divi-
sion involving differences with essential contrasts.
    I suggest to you as fundamental characterizations of our
experience, three principles of division expressed by the
three pairs of opposites-"Clarity and Vagueness," "Order
and Disorder," "The Good and the Bad." Our endeavour
to understand creation should start from these modes of
experience.
    There is a natural affinity between order and goodness.
It is not usual to accuse people of "orderly conduct." Un-
doubtedly there are limits to the excellence of mere order.
It can be overdone. But there can be no excellence except
upon some basis of order. Mere disorder results in a non-
entity of achievement. It is one purpose of this lecture to
examine this affinity between order and goodness, and to
note its limitations.
    This is an ambitious aim, when we remember that the
most famous lecture in the whole history of European
                                                           75
                                                     Adivity
 thought was devoted to this topic. It was delivered nearly
two thousand three hundred years ago. The title of this
lecture did not allude to order. But we do know that the
subject matter was largely concerned with mathematics. It
is worth considering, from our own point of view today,
why Plato naturally thought of mathematics when he sat
down to write a lecture on "The Good." We are not con-
cerned with the precise mathematical doctrines which were
enunciated in that lecture, nor even with the precise rela-
tion of mathematics to the forms as conceived, or miscon-
ceived, by Plato. My topic is the relation of order to the
good, and the relation of mathematics to the notion of
order.
    At first sight, the notion of any important connection
between the multiplication table and the moral beauty
of the Sermon on the Mount is fantastic. And yet, consid-
eration of the development of human clarity of experience
from its foundation of confused animal satisfactions dis-
closes mathematical understanding as the primary example
of insight into the nature of the good. Also we must re-
member that morals constitute only one aspect of the good,
an aspect often overstressed.
    The animals enjoy structure. They can build nests and
dams: they can follow the trail of scent through the forest.
The concrete realized facts, confused and intermixed, dom-
inate animal life. Man understands structure. He abstracts
its dominating principle from the welter of detail. He can
imagine alternative illustration. He constructs distant ob-
jectives. He can compare the variety of issues. He can aim
at the best. But the essence of this human control of pur-
poses depends on the understanding of structure in its
variety of applications.
    To be human requires the study of structure. To be
animal merely requires its enjoyment. An animal enjoys
                                                         76
                                                    Perspedive
social relations; a human being has the capacity to know
the exact number of individuals involved in such social
relations, and also can conceive the exact relevance of num-
ber to enjoyment. In other words, in the passage from our
lower type of animal experience to our higher type of hu-
man experience, we have acquired a selective emphasis
whereby the finite occasions of experience receive clear
definition.
    This clarity of human vision both enhances the unique-
ness of each individual occasion, and at the same time dis-
closes its essential relationships to occasions other than
itself. It emphasizes both finite individuality and also to
relationship to other individualities.
     Further, it discloses some analysis of the matter-of-fact
in immediate realization. And yet, by this disclosure it
brings into prominence the potentialities for alternative
realizations, in the past, in the future, in the present. It
tells what may be, and what may have been. It lays bare
diversities and analogies. Mankind enjoys a vision of the
function of form within fact, and of the issue of value from
this interplay. That day in the history of mankind when
the vague appreciation of multitude was transformed into
the exact observation of number, human beings made a
long stride in the comprehension of that interweaving of
form necessary for the higher life which is the disclosure of
the good.
    I remember an incident proving that at least some
squirrels have not crossed this borderline of civilization.
We were in a charming camp situated amidst woodland
bordering a Vermont lake. A squirrel had made its nest
in our main sitting room, placing it in a hole in brick-
work around the fireplace. She came in and out to her
young ones, ignoring the presence of the human family.
One day, she decided that her family had grown up
                                                           77
                                                      Activ;ty
beyond the nursery stage. So, one by one, she carried
them out to the edge of the woodland. As I remember
across the years, there were three children. But when the
mother had placed them on the rock outside, the family
group looked to her very different from its grouping within
the nest. She was vaguely disturbed, and ran backwards and
f01wards two or three times to make quite sure that no
young squirrel had been left behind. She was unable to
count, nor had she identified them by christening them
with names. All she knew was that the vague multitude on
the rock seemed very unlike the vague multitude in the
nest. Her family experiences lacked the perception of the
exact limitation imposed by number. As a result she was
mildly and vaguely disturbed. If the mother could have
counted, she would have experienced the determinate satis-
faction of a job well-done in the rearing of three children;
or, in the case of loss, she would have suffered vivid
pain from the absence of a determinate child. But she
lacked adequate experience of any precise form of limi-
tation.
    Thus the rise in vivid experience of the good and of the
bad depends upon the intuition of exact forms of limita-
tion. Among such forms number has a chief place.
    7. In the discussion of our deeper experiences, religious
and mystic, an unbalanced emphasis has been placed upon
the mere sense of infinitude. Any being, overwhelmed with
this sense, would rank lower than the squirrel. All forms of
realization express some aspect of finitude. Such a form
expresses its nature as being this, and not that. In other
words, it expresses exclusion; and exclusion means finitude.
    The full solemnity of the world arises from the sense
of positive achievement within the finite, combined with
the sense of modes of infinitude stretching beyond each
finite fact. This infinitude is required by each fact to ex-
                                                           78
                                                    Perspective

press its necessary relevance beyond its own limitations. It
expresses a perspective of the universe.
    Importance arises from this fusion of the finite and the
infinite. The cry, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we
die," expresses the triviality of the merely finite. The
mystic, ineffective slumber expresses the vacuity of the
merely infinite. Those theologians do religion a bad service
who emphasize infinitude at the expense of the finite transi-
tions within history. With the foregoing discussion in
mind, we recur to the three pairs of opposites: clarity and
vagueness, order and disorder, the good and the bad. It is
natural to associate clarity and order with the attainment
of the good; and to associate vagueness and disorder with
the bad. For example, in writing a testimonial, the phrase
"Her mind is clear and orderly" would be taken as praise;
while the phrase "Her mind is vague and disorderly" would
be read as condemnation. The reason for such judgment is
based upon the fact that clarity and orderliness enable the
possessor to deal with foreseen situations. They are neces-
sary foundations for the maintenance of existing social situ-
ations. And yet they are not enough. Transcendence of
mere clarity and order is necessary for dealing with the un-
foreseen, for progress, for excitement. Life degenerates
when enclosed within the shackles of mere conformation.
A power of incorporating vague and disorderly elements
of experience is essential for the advance into novelty.
    The understanding of the universe is rooted in the im-
plications of this advance. Apart from it, creation is mean-
ingless, divorced from change. Time has then no applica-
tion to the static nature of things. Existence is meaningless.
The universe is reduced to static futility-devoid of life and
motion.
    In the history of European philosophic thought, in the
history of great thinkers, a curious wavering can be de-
                                                            79
                                                      Activity
tected on this question. The appeal to life and motion is
interwoven with the presupposition of the supreme reality
as devoid of change. Changeless order is conceived as the
final perfection, with the result that the historic universe
is degraded to a status of partial reality, issuing into the
notion of mere appearance. The result has been that the
most evident characteristic of our experience has been dis-
missed into a subordinate role in metaphysical construc-
tion. We live in a world of turmoil. Philosophy, and re-
ligion, as influenced by orthodox philosophic thought,
dismiss turmoil. Such dismissal is the outcome of tired
decadence. We should beware of philosophies which ex-
press the dominant emotions of periods of slow social decay.
Our inheritance of philosophic thought is infected with
the decline and fall of the Roman Empire, and with the
decadence of eastern civilizations. It expresses the exhaus-
tion following upon the first three thousand years of ad-
vancing civilization. A better balance is required. For
civilizations rise as well as fall. We require philosophy to
explain the rise of types of order, the transitions from type
to type, and the mixtures of good and bad involved in the
universe as it stands self-evident in our experience. Such
a universe is the locus of importance. A frozen, motionless
universe can at most be the topic of pure knowledge, with
the bare comment-That is so.
    Emphasis limited to special aspects of things explicitly
experienced has advanced science, and has hampered phi-
losophy. Consider for example the effect on European
thought of the rise of mathematical science, about four
centuries before the Christian Era. Mathematics was con-
cerned with notions which at that time introduced no sense
either of transition or of creation. Numbers and geometri-
cal forms constituted the sole content of Greek mathe-
matics.
                                                           80
                                                   Perspedive
    It is unnecessary to dwell on the importance of the
science of these special mathematical forms. It has trans-
formed civilization. But its effect on Greek thought was
very mixed. As the Greeks understood that science, the
notion of transition was in the background. Each number,
each ratio, each geometric form exhibited a static attain-
ment. The number twelve (in their conception of it) had
no reference to creation; neither had the ratio six to two;
neither had the geometric form of the circle. These ideal
forms are for them motionless, impervious, and self-
sufficient-each representing a perfection peculiar to itself.
Such was the reaction of Greek thought to the fundamental
notions of mathematics. The human mind was dazzled by
this glimpse of eternity. The result of this revelation was
that Greek philosophy-at least in its most influential
school-conceived ultimate reality in the guise of static
existences with timeless interrelations. Perfection was un-
related to transition. Creation, with its world in change,
was an inferior avocation of a static absolute.
    8. The effect on subsequent European thought of this
impulse from the golden age of Greece has been threefold.
In the first place, the static absolute has been passed over
to philosophic theology, as a primary presupposition.
    In the second place, the abstractions of structure, such
as mathematical notions and all notions involving ways
of composition, have been endowed with an eminent
reality, apart from individual compositions in which they
occur.
    In the third place, these abstractions of structure have
been conceived as carrying, in their own natures, no refer-
ence to creation. The process has been lost.
    The final outcome has been that philosophy and the-
ology have been saddled with the problem of deriving the
historic world of change from a changeless world of ulti-
                                                          8J
                                                      Adivity
mate reality. Our whole conception of knowledge has been
vitiated. The final wisdom has been pictured as the change-
less contemplation of changeless reality. Knowledge in ab-
straction from action has been exalted. Action is thereby
conceived as being concerned with a world of shadows.
Plato's lecture on the "Good," with its emphasis on mathe-
matics as then understood, is symbolic of this attitude
which has haunted philosophy.
    In those days, mathematics was the science of a static
universe. Any transition was conceived as a transition of
static forms. Today we conceive of forms of transition. The
modern concept of an infinite series is the concept of a form
of transition, namely, the character of the series as a whole
is such a form. The notion of the sum of such a series is the
notion of a final issue indicated by this form of transition.
    The distorted attitude of attention to static forms has
haunted philosophy, but it has not exclusively dominated
it. The outstanding figures in the philosophic tradition
have not achieved eminence solely by their championship
of systems peculiar to themselves. Systematic thought has
clarified insights, and has directed attention to aspects of
experiencte which exemplify special systems. But the uni-
verse stretches beyond our finite powers of understanding.
The great thinkers from whom we derive inspiration en-
joyed insights beyond their own systems. They made state-
ments hard to reconcile with the neat little ways of thought
which we pin on to their names. For example, the same
philosopher who emphasized the changeless mathematical
entities as characteristic components of supreme reality,
also elsewhere declared "life and motion" to belong to the
essential character of reality. He thus asked "How do things
function?" as a way of understanding how those things
exist. Again, another philosopher who reduces the connec-
tion between the data of experience to mere succession of
                                                          82
                                                   Perspedive

sense data, also appeals to the fact of "expectation." This
derivation of expectation from succession is an intelligible
fact to Hume, although his own system provides no eluci-
dation of it. We do not experience mere succession. We
discern forms of succession; and the presupposition of such
forms haunts philosophic thought and dominates our daily
experience.
    Plato and Hume illustrate that system is essential for
rational thought. But they also illustrate that the closed
system is the death of living understanding. In their ex-
planations they wander beyond all system. They thus illus-
trate in their own procedures that our primary insight is a
mixture of clarity and vagueness. The finite focus of
clarity fades into an environment of vagueness stretching
into the darkness of what is merely beyond. The partly
comprehended forms of succession dimly illuminate this
environment within experience.
    9. We require to understand how the mere existence of
unchanging form requires its own immersion in the cre-
ation of a changing historic world. There is a form of
creation. We require to understand how the unity of the
universe requires its multiplicity. We require to under-
stand how infinitude requires the finite.
    We require to understand how each immediately pres-
ent existence requires its past, antecedent to itself; and
requires its future, an essential factor in its own existence.
There are thus three factors within immediate existence-
namely, past, present, and future. In this way immediacy of
finite existence refuses to be deprived of that infinitude of
extension which is its perspective.
    Again we require to understand how mere matter-of-
fact refuses to be deprived of its relevance to potentialities
beyond its own actuality of realization. The very character
of concrete realization-that is to say, of historic fact-is
                                                           83
                                                       Adivity
suffused with the potentialities which it excludes with vary-
ing types of relevance. In the present fact there are the
various characteristics of the past, partly reproduced and
partly excluded; there are the characteristics of concurrent
facts in the present, partly shared in and partly excluded;
there are the possibilities for the future, partly prepared
for and partly excluded. The discussion of present fact
apart from reference to past, to concurrent present, and to
future, and from reference to the preservation or destruc-
tion of forms of creation is to rob the universe of essential
importance. In the absence of perspective there is triviality.
    For example, in some concert hall there is the imme-
diate volume of sound in the immediate specious present.
There is the symphonic form which is dominating the
successive moments of experience. There is the sense of
creative genius from which this realized example of sym-
phonic form is derived. There is the sense of multiplicity
of creative genius-the artists in the orchestra, the conduc-
tor, the composer. There is the sense of the variety of static
forms immediately realized: the forms of instruments, the
spatial distribution of the orchestra, the mathematical
analysis of each momentary sound, the musical score. In
the end we are left with four main modes of characterizing
experience. There are, in the first place, three main aspects
within aesthetic experience: the sense of genius, the sense
of disclosure, the sense of frustration. We also retain three
aspects of matter-of-fact: namely, the experiences of unity,
of multitude, of transition.
    We discern three primary grounds of division, namely,
clarity and vagueness, order and disorder, the good and the
bad.
    Finally, there are two ultimate types of existence im-
plicated in the creative process, the eternal forms with their
dual existence in potential appetition and in realized fact,
                                                           84
                                                   Perspective

and realized fact with its dual ways of existence as the past
in the present and as the immediacy of the present. Also
the immediacy of the present harbours an appetition
towards the unrealized future. How the thinker deals with
these four modes of experience determines the shape of
philosophy, and the influence of thought upon the practice
of life.




                                                           85
                                              LECTURE FIVE




                 Forms of Process


fJze topic of this, and of the next, lecture originates in the
consideration of the various modes of unity exhibited by
compositions within the historic world. Examples of such
organizations are throbs of pulsation, molecules, stones,
lives of plants, lives of animals, lives of men. The discus-
sion then passes into the vaguer forms of unity, such as
sociology in its widest meaning, laws of nature, spatia-
temporal connections.
    The argument passes to the consideration of that final
mode of unity in virtue of which there exists stability of
aim amid the multiple forms of potentiality, and in virtue
of which there exists importance beyond the finite impor-
tance for the finite actuality. In other words, How does im-
portance for the finite require importance for the infinite?
    In this connection, Descartes discusses perfection. He
chose a notion which is too limited and too ambiguous.
He slipped into his discussion a false premise, namely, that
one final perfection with static existence constitutes a no-
tion which is relevant to our experience. He should have
taken the wider notion of importance. In what sense is
there "importance for the universe"? Does not "impor-
                                                           86
                                              Forms   of Process
tance for the finite" involve the notion of "importance for
the infinite"?
    2. The first point to make is the transition from acci-
dent towards necessity as we pass from the smaller to the
larger units of composition. There is a large element of
accident in a single sentence of a lecture. The lecture as a
whole reflects with some necessity the character of the
lecturer as he composes it. The character of the lecturer
arises from the moulding it receives from the social circum-
stances of his whole life. These social circumstances depend
on the historic epoch, and this epoch is derivative from the
evolution of life on this planet. Life on this planet depends
on the order observed throughout the spatio-temporal
stellar system, as disclosed in our experience. These spe-
cial forms of order exhibit no final necessity whatsover.
The laws of nature are forms of activity which happen to
prevail within the vast epoch of activity which we dimly
discern. A problem now arises. There are forms of order
with vast extension throughout time. There is no necessity
in their nature. But there is necessity that the importance
of experience requires adequate stability of order. Com-
plete confusion can be equated with complete frustration.
And yet the transitions of history exhibit transitions of
forms of order. Epoch gives way to epoch. If we insist on
construing the new epoch in terms of the forms of order in
its predecessor we see mere confusion. Also there is no
sharp division. There are always forms of order partially
dominant, and partially frustrated. Order is never com-
plete; frustration is never complete. There is transition
within the dominant order; and there is transition to new
forms of dominant order. Such transition is a frustration
of the prevalent dominance. And yet it is the realization
of that vibrant novelty which elicits the excitement of life.
    The essence of life is to be found in the frustrations of
established order. The Universe refuses the deadening in-
                                                             87
                                                      Adivity
fluence of complete conformity. And yet in its refusal, it
passes towards novel order as a primary requisite for im-
portant experience. We have to explain the aim at forms
of order, and the aim at novelty of order, and the measure
of success, and the measure of failure. Apart from some
understanding, however dim, of these characteristics of the
historic process, we enjoy no rationality of experience.
    The development of western philosophy has been
hampered by the tacit presupposition of the necessity of
static spatio-temporal, and physical forms of order. The
development of scientific knowledge in the last two hun-
dred years has completely swept away any ground for the
assumption of such necessity. But the presupposition re-
mains even among men of science. It is a tacit presupposi-
tion, among those who explicitly deny it. In current
literature we find the same authors denying infractions of
natural order, and denying any reason for such denial, and
denying any justification for a philosophical search for
reasons justifying their own denials.
    What we have to explain is the trend towards order
which is the overwhelming deliverance of experience.
What we have also to explain is the frustration of order,
and the absence of necessity in any particular form of
order.
    3. We must first examine the notion of "Process." The
comprehension of this notion requires an analysis of the
interweaving of data, form, transition, and issue. There is
a rhythm of process whereby creation produces natural
pulsation, each pulsation forming a natural unit of his-
toric fact. In this way, amid the infinitude of the connected
universe, we can discern vaguely finite units of fact. If
process be fundamental to actuality, then each ultimate
individual fact must be describable as process. The New-
tonian description of matter abstracts matter from time.
It conceives matter "at an instant." So does Descartes'
                                                          88
                                              Forms   of Process
description. If process be fundamental such abstraction is
erroneous.
    We have now to consider in more detail this inter-
weaving of data, form, transition, and issue which charac-
terizes each unit of fact. We must however proceed by
violent abstraction. Each fully realized fact has an infini-
tude of relations in the historic world and in the realm of
form; namely, its perspective of the universe. We can only
conceive it with respect to a minute selection of these rela-
tions. These relations, thus abstracted, require for their
full understanding the infinitude from which we abstract.
We experience more than we can analyse. For we experi-
ence the universe, and we analyse in our consciousness a
minute selection of its details.
    The data for any one pulsation of actuality consist of
the full content of the antecedent universe as it exists in
relevance to that pulsation. They are this universe con-
ceived in its multiplicity of details. These multiplicities
are antecedent pulsations, and also there are the variety of
forms harboured in the nature of things, either as realized
form or as potentialities for realization. Thus the data con-
sist in what has been, what might have been, and what may
be. And in these phrases the verb to be means some mode
of relevance to historic actualities.
     Such are the data; and from these data there emerges
a process with a form of transition. This unit of process is
the "specious present" of the actuality in question. It is a
process of composition, of gradation, and of elimination.
Every detail in the process of being actual involves its own
gradation in reference to the other details. The effective-
ness of any one such factor involves the elimination of ele-
ments in the data not to be reconciled with that detail
playing that part in the process. Now elimination is a posi-
tive fact, so that the background of discarded data adds a
tone of feeling to the whole pulsation. No fact of history,
                                                             89
                                                       Adivity
personal or social, is understood until we know what it has
escaped and the narrowness of the escape. You cannot fully
understand the history of the European races in North
America, without reference to the double failure of Spanish
domination over California in the nineteenth century, and
over England in the sixteenth century.
     All actuality involves the realization of form derived
from factual data. It is both a composition of qualities, and
it is also a form of composition. The form of composition
dictates how those forms as thus realized in the data enter
into a finite process of composition, thus achieving new
actuality with its own exemplifications and discards. There
is a form of process dealing with a complex form of data
and issuing into a novel completion of actuality. But no
actuality is a static fact. The historic character of the uni-
verse belongs to its essence. The completed fact is only to
be understood as taking its place among the active data
forming the future.
     When we consider the process under examination as
completed, we are already analysing an active datum for
other creations. The universe is not a museum with its
specimens in glass cases. Nor is the universe a perfectly
drilled regiment with its ranks in step, marching forward
with undisturbed poise. Such notions belong to the fable
of modern science-a very useful fable when understood
for what it is. Science deals with large average effects, im-
portant within certain modes of observation. But in the
history of human thought no scientific conclusion has ever
survived unmodified by radical increase in our subtleties of
relevant knowledge.
     4. In order to examine the notion of a form of transi-
tion, we will dwell on its simplest example. Consider arith-
metic as being concerned with special forms of process. We
shall here be contradicting the fashionable notion of
"tautology." Conceive the fusion of two groups, each char-
                                                           90
                                              Forms   of Process
acterized by triplicity, into a single group. The whole
essence of the notion of "twice-three" is process, and "twice-
three" expresses its special form of process. This form de-
rives its peculiar character from two sources. One source is
the triplicity of each of the two groups in process of fusion.
This triplicity arises from some principle of individuation
dominating the process of aggregation of each group. As a
result of this principle, each group exemplifies three-ness.
There is then a process of fusion of both groups into one.
We are considering the characterization of this resultant
group in terms of number. It is not true that this process
of fusion necessarily issues in a group of six, in which the
same principle of identifying individual things is pre-
served.
    For example, consider drops of water, each drop with
its own skin of surface tension. Let there be two groups,
each of three drops. The process of fusion may result in
coalescence so that one drop results; or it may result in
shattering the original drops, so that a group of fifty drops
appears. The process, normally presupposed in the phrase
"twice-three," is such that the relevant principle of indi-
viduation is kept undisturbed. In such a case, twice-three
is six. But this phrase "principle of individuation" has a
vague interpretation. A doctor orders a dose of two tea-
spoonfuls. The dose is in fact taken in one dessert spoon.
Thus the actual individualization into teaspoons may be
unimportant, and may never be achieved.
    The statement "twice-three is six" is referent to an un-
specified principle of sustenance of character which is sup-
posed to be maintained during the process of fusion. The
phrase "twice-three" refers to a form of process of fusion
sustaining this principle of individuation. Putting this in
a more general statement, arithmetical phrases refer to
special forms of process, issuing in a group characterized by
some definite arithmetical character. The process has its
                                                             91
                                                        Adivity
 strict form, and in the circumstances mentioned it issues
in a complex entity with that character.
     I am sorry to insist on this triviality at such wearisome
length. Perhaps some of you will have recognized that I am
contradicting a widespread belief. A prevalent modern doc-
trine is that the phrase "twice-three is six" is a tautology.
This means that "twice-three" says the same thing as "six";
so that no new truth is arrived at in the sentence. My con-
tention is that the sentence considers a process and its issue.
Of course, the issue of one process is part of the material
for processes beyond itself. But in respect to the abstrac-
tion "twice-three is six," the phrase "twice-three" indicates
a form of fluent process and "six" indicates a characteriza-
tion of the completed fact.
     We are naive in our interpretation of language and of
symbolism. We neglect subtle differences of meaning. If we
say that "six is not equal to seven," we are denying the
identity of "six" and "seven." In this phrase, the word
equality means identity. If we say that "twice-three is
six," we are saying that the issue of a process is an en-
tity with the character "six." If we are saying that "twice-
three is equal to the sum of two and four," we are say-
ing that two distinct processes issue in compositions
with the same numerical character. The meanings of
equality-or of the word is-differ in each of these cases.
My final point is that mathematics is concerned with cer-
tain forms of process issuing into forms which are com-
ponents for further process. In the previous lecture, we
noted that the concept of a form of process gave its meaning
to the concept of an infinite series, as employed in mathe-
matics.
     This discussion is a belated reminder to Plato that
his eternal mathematical forms are essentially referent to
process. This is his own doctrine when he refers to the
necessity of life and motion. But only intermittently did
                                                            92
                                              Forms of Process
he keep it in mind. He was apt to identify process with
mere appearance, and to conceive of absolute reality as
devoid of transition. For him, in this mood, mathematics
belonged to changeless eternity. He then has accepted tau-
tology.
    5. The nature of any type of existence can only be ex-
plained by reference to its implication in creative activity,
essentially involving three factors: namely, data, process
with its form relevant to these data, and issue into datum
for further process-data, process, issue.
    The alternative is the reduction of the universe to a
barren tautological absolute, with a dream of life and
motion. The discovery of mathematics, like all discoveries,
both advanced human understanding, and also produced
novel modes of error. Its error was the introduction of the
doctrine of form, devoid of life and motion.
    The "supreme being" of Greek philosophy was con-
ceived by thinkers under the influence of the then re-
cent development of mathematics, when the active-minded
Greeks came into contact with Egyptian thought. They
misconceived the relevance of mathematical notions. All
mathematical             have reference to process of inter-
mingling. The very notion of number refers to the process
from the individual units to the compound group. The
final number belongs to no one of the units; it character-
izes the way in which the group unity has been attained.
Thus even the statement "six equals six" need not be
construed as a mere tautology. It can be taken to mean
that six as dominating a special form of combination issues
in six as a character of a datum for further process. There
is no such entity as a mere static number. There are only
numbers playing their parts in various processes conceived
in abstraction from the world-process.
    The notion of the world-process is therefore to be con-
ceived as the notion of the totality of process. The notion
                                                           93
                                                        Adivity
of a supreme being must apply to an actuality in process
of composition, an actuality not confined to the data of any
special epoch in the historic field. Its actuality is founded
on the infinitude of its conceptual appetition, and its form
of process is derived from the fusion of this appetition with
the data received from the world-process. Its function in the
world is to sustain the aim at vivid experience. It is the
reservoir of potentiality and the coordination of achieve-
ment. The form of its process is relevant to the data from
which the process is initiated. The issue is the unified com-
position which assumes its function as a datum operative
in the future historic world.
    The data of our experience are of two kinds. They can
be analysed into realized matter-of-fact and into potential-
ities for matter-of-fact. Further, these potentialities can be
analysed into pure abstract potentialities apart from special
relevance to realization in the data or the issue, and into
potentialities entertained by reason of some closeness of
relevance to such realization. These potentialities enter-
tained in respect to their close relevance are the agents
dictating the form of composition which produces the
issue. This dictation of a form of composition involves the
birth of an energetic determination whereby the data are
subject to preservation and discard.
     In so far as there is large mutual conformity in the data,
the energetic form of composition is such as to transmit
this conformity to the issue, thereby preserving that uni-
formity for the future. We have here the basis of the large-
scale preservation of identities, amid minor changes. The
planets, the stones, the living things all witness to the wide
preservation of identity. But equally they witness to the
partiality of such preservation. Nothing in realized matter-
of-fact retains complete identity with its antecedent self.
This self-identity in the sphere of realized fact is only
partial. It holds for certain purposes. It dominates certain
                                                            94
                                                  Forms   of   Process

kinds of process. But in other sorts of process, the differ-
ences are important, and the self-identity is an interesting
fable. For the purpose of inheriting real estate, the identity
of the man of thirty years of age with the former baby of
ten months is dominant. For the purpose of navigating a
yacht, the differences between the man and the child are
essential; the identity then sinks into a metaphysical irrele-
vancy. In so far as identities are preserved, there are orderly
laws of nature. In so far as identities decay, these laws are
subject to modification. But the modification itself may be
lawful. The change in the individual may exhibit a law of
change, as, for example, the change from baby to fully-
grown animal. And yet such laws of change are themselves
liable to change. For example, species flourish and decay;
civilizations rise and fall; heavenly bodies gradually form,
and pass through sequences of stages.
     In any of these examples, as the changes occur, new
types of existence are rendered possible, subject to new laws
of nature dependent upon that new environment. In other
words, the data, the forms of process, and the issues into
new data, are all dependent upon their epoch and upon
the forms of process dominant in that epoch.
     Nothing is more interesting to watch than the emo-
tional disturbance produced by any unusual disturbance
of the forms of process. The slow drift is accepted. But
when for human experience quick changes arrive, human
nature passes into hysteria. For example, gales, thunder-
storms, earthquakes, revolutions in social habits, violent
illnesses, destructive fires, battles, are all occasions of special
excitement. There are perfectly good reasons for this ener-
getic reaction to quick change. My point is the exhibition
of our emotional reactions to the dominance of lawful
order, and to the breakdown of such order. When funda-
mental change arrives, sometimes heaven dawns, some-
times hell yawns open.
                                                                  95
                                                      Adivity
    6. Too much attention has been directed to the mere
datum and the mere issue. The essence of existence lies
in the transition from datum to issue. This is the process of
self-determination. We must not conceive of a dead datum
with passive form. The datum is impressing itself upon this
process, conditioning its forms. We must not dwell mainly
on the issue. The immediacy of existence is then past and
over. The vividness of life lies in the transition, with its
forms aiming at the issue. Actuality in its essence is aim at
self-formation.
    One main doctrine, developed in these lectures, is that
"existence" (in any of its senses) cannot be abstracted from
"process." The notions of process and existence presup-
pose each other. One deduction from this thesis is that
the notion of a point in process is fallacious. The concept
of point is here meant to imply that process can be analysed
into compositions of final realities, themselves devoid of
process.
    For example, consider the notion of a moment of time
devoid of any temporal spread-for example, at noon on
such and such a day. Such a notion is the concept of a point
devoid of process. Again, a point in space is another such
example. On the contrary, the extension of space is the
ghost of transition. It is only to be experienced by some
process of transition. This truth has, within the last thirty
years, conquered modern physics in the somewhat nai've
form of doctrines about light.
    The general principle, underlying these special cases,
is that the erroneous notions of process devoid of indi-
vidualities, and of individualities devoid of process, can
never be adjusted to each other. If you start with either of
these falsehoods, you must dismiss the other as meaningless.
    The notion of number, as elaborated in arithmetic, has
been traditionally treated with this bias towards such an
erroneous separation. Each individual thing is devoid of
                                                          96
                                               Forms of Process
numerosity; whereas, a static group is characterized by
number. In this way process seems to be absent in our treat-
ment of arithmetic. Thus mathematics has been conceived
as the test case, which is the citadel for a false metaphysics.
    When Plato thought of mathematics he conceived of a
changeless world of form, and contrasted it with the mere
imitation in the world of transition. Yet when Plato
thought of the realities of action, he swayed to the opposite
point of view. He called for life and motion to rescue
forms from a meaningless void.
    In these lectures Plato's second doctrine, of life and
motion, has been adopted. The mathematical modes of
fusion, such as "addition," ·"multiplication," "serial form,"
and so on, have been construed as forms of process. The
very notion of "multiplicity" itself has been construed as
abstraction from the form of process whereby data acquire
a unity of issue into a novel datum.
    7. Process and individuality require each other. In
separation all meaning evaporates. The form of process (or,
in other words, the appetition) derives its character from
the individuals involved, and the characters of the indi-
viduals can only be understood in terms of the process in
which they are implicated.
    A difficult problem arises from this doctrine. How can
the notion of any generality of reasoning be justified? For
if the process depends on the individuals, then with dif-
ferent individuals the form of process differs. Accordingly,
what has been said of one process cannot be said of another
process. The same difficulty applies to the notion of the
identity of an individual conceived as involved in different
processes. Our doctrine seems to have destroyed the very
basis of rationality.
    The point is that every individual thing infects any
process in which it is involved, and thus any process cannot
be considered in abstraction from particular things m-
                                                             97
                                                       Adivity
volved. Also the converse holds. Hence the absolute gen-
erality of logic and of mathematics vanish. Also induction
loses any security. For in other circumstances, there will be
other results.
    In approaching this problem, the first point to notice
is that its difficulty is in accordance with common sense.
The distinctions between various sciences, and various
topics for study, illustrate this point. No one would study
geology as a preparation for appreciation of the sonnets of
Shakespeare or the fugues of Bach. The things discussed in
geology are so different from sonnets and so different from
fugues. The result is that the interconnections discussed in
a treatise on geology are very different from those disclosed
in the structure of a sonnet or of a fugue. But faint anal-
ogies do occur. Sometimes these analogies rise in im-
portance. For example, the Greeks discovered analogies
between the lengths of strings and the harmonies of musi-
cal notes, and between the measurements of the dimensions
of a building and the beauty of the structure.
    Thus the differences arising from diversities are not
absolute. Analogies survive amid diversity. The procedure
of rationalism is the discussion of analogy. The limitation
of rationalism is the inescapable diversity. The develop-
ment of civilized thought can be. described as the discovery
of identities amid diversity. For example, the discovery of
identities of number as between a group of days and a
group of fishes.
    The whole understanding of the world consists in the
analysis of process in terms of the identities and diversities
of the individuals involved. The peculiarities of the indi-
viduals are reflected in the peculiarities of the common
process which is their interconnection. We can start our
investigation from either end; namely, we can understand
the process and thence consider the characterization of the
individuals; or we can characterize the individuals and con-
                                                           98
                                               Forms of Process
ceive them as formative of the relevant process. In truth,
the distinction is only one of emphasis.
    But this possibility of abstraction, whereby individuals
and the forms of process constituting their existence can
be considered separately, brings out a fundamental intu-
ition which lies at the basis of all thought. This intuition
consists in the essential passage from experience of indi-
vidual fact to the conception of character. Thence we pro-
ceed to the concept of the stability of character amidst the
succession of facts. Thence we proceed to the concept of
the partial identity of successive facts in a given route of
succession. Thence we proceed to the potentiality of the
facts for maintaining such partial identity amid such suc-
cession.
    In other words, as soon as we abstract, so as to separate
the notions of serial forms and of individual facts involved,
we necessarily introduce the notion of potentiality: namely,
the potentiality of the facts for the series and of the series
for the facts. All our knowledge consists in conceiving
possible adjustments of series and of individual facts to
each other. We say in effect, such and such facts are con-
sistent with such and such serial forms. We are considering
possibilities for individuals and possibilities for series. The
mere immediate exemplification is only one aspect of our
experience.
    8. The notion of potentiality is fundamental for the
understanding of existence, as soon as the notion of process
is admitted. If the universe be interpreted in terms of static
actuality, then potentiality vanishes. Everything is just
what it is. Succession is mere appearance, rising from the
limitation of perception. But if we start with process as
fundamental, then the actualities of the present are de-
riving their characters from the process, and are bestowing
their characters upon the future. Immediacy is the realiza-
 tion of the potentialities of the past, and is the storehouse
                                                             99
                                                       Adivity
of the potentialities of the future. Hope and fear, joy and
disillusion, obtain their meaning from the potentialities
essential in the nature of things. We are following a trail
in hope, or are fleeing from the pursuit in fear. The poten-
tialities in immediate fact constitute the driving force of
process.
    At this point the discussion must be halted. It has run
into exaggeration. The essence of the universe is more than
process. The alternative metaphysical doctrine, of reality
devoid of process, would never have held the belief of great
men, unless it expressed some fundamental aspect of our
experience. For example, Newton's belief in absolute space
may be mistaken. All the same it bears witness to the fact of
the obviousness to him of factors in the universe to which
the notion of process does not apply. At least the poten-
tiality of spatial relations among the realizations of history
stood for him as a timeless fact. He did not state it in this
way. This formulation tones down his own belief in the
independent actuality of space.
    But as expressed in this way, the notion of spatial rela-
tions is an example of connected forms with overwhelming
relevance to the present epoch of history. Also it illustrates
the main principle on which induction is based. This prin-
ciple is that form of process chiefly derives from the domi-
nant facts involved and thence tends to sustain itself so as
to govern realizations in its own future. This is the doctrine
of the varying relevance of potential forms. Thus the doc-
trine of the potentiality of the present to characterize the
realizations of the future lies hidden in the beliefs of
Bacon and of Newton. It is the sense of the form having a
dual activity in the present. It characterizes the present
and it thereby fashions the form of process in the future.
    Two other names must be added. Plato with his su-
preme realm of forms, and Leibniz with his monads each
with its form of process. Leibniz's doctrine is curiously
                                                          100
                                                Forms of Process
remtmscent of Descartes' science of analytical geometry
with its curves, each expressed by an algebraic equation,
which is the form for the description of the curve. The
difficulty is to relate the static form to the active process.
There is an analogous difficulty in relating the static im-
mediacy of fact to the historic process with its past and its
future. There is the further problem to express the inter-
connections of facts, each with its measure of self-sufficiency.
Each fact is just that limited thing that it is. How then do
facts require each other? Finally, each immediate fact is a
realization of itself. In what sense, then, can a fact harbour
potentiality, which is the capacity of form for realization?
In other words, how can the realization of form involve in
its own nature reference to the realization of other forms
in other occasions?
    The topics thus enumerated are generalized statements
of the commonplaces of experience. They merely express
what of course our lives mean to us in every moment of ex-
perience. For this very reason language fails in its analysis.
We do not have to indicate for each other the necessities of
existence. Language mainly presupposes the necessities and
emphasizes the accidents. We rarely mention what must be
present. We do mention what might be absent. The whole
difficulty of philosophic discussion is this feebleness of
language. The title of one outstanding philosophic treatise
in the English language, belonging to the generation now
passing, is "Space, Time, and Deity." By this phrase,
Samuel Alexander places before us the problem which
haunts the serious thought of mankind. "Time" refers to
the transitions of process, "space" refers to the static neces-
sity of each form of interwoven existence, and "deity" ex-
presses the lure of the ideal which is the potentiality beyond
immediate fact.
    9. Apart from time there is no meaning for purpose,
hope, fear, energy. If there be no historic process, then
                                                            101
                                                       Adivity
everything is what it is, namely, a mere fact. Life and mo-
tion are lost. Apart from space, there is no consummation.
Space expresses the halt for attainment. It symbolizes the
complexity of immediate realization. It is the fact of ac-
complishment. Time and space express the universe as
including the essence of transition and the success of
achievement. The transition is real, and the achievement
is real. The difficulty is for language to express one of them
without explaining away the other.
     Finally, there is deity, which is that factor in the uni-
verse whereby there is importance, value, and ideal beyond
the actual. It is by reference of the spatial immediacies to
the ideals of deity that the sense of worth beyond ourselves
arises. The unity of a transcendent universe, and the mul-
tiplicity of realized actualities, both enter into our ex-
perience by this sense of deity. Apart from this sense of
transcendent worth, the otherness of reality would not
enter into our consciousness. There must be value beyond
ourselves. Otherwise every thing experienced would be
merely a barren detail in our own solipsist mode of exist-
ence. We owe to the sense of deity the obviousness of the
many actualities of the world, and the obviousness of the
unity of the world for the preservation of the values real-
ized and for the transition to ide.als beyond realized fact.
     Thus, space, time, and deity are general terms which
indicate three types of reflective notions. The understand-
ing of the nature of things in terms of such concepts is what
distinguishes the human species from the other animals.
The distinction is not absolute. The higher animals show
every sign of understandings and of devotions which pass
beyond the immediate enjoyments of immediate fact. Also
the life of each human being is mainly a dumb passage from
immediacy to immediacy devoid of the illumination of
higher reflection. But when all analogies between animal
life and human nature have been stressed, there remains
                                                          102
                                             Forms   of Process
the vast gap in respect to the influence of reflective ex-
perience. This reflective experience exhibits three main
characteristics which require each other for their full un-
derstanding. There are the experiences of joint association,
which are the spatial experiences. There are the experi-
ences of origination from a past and of determination
towards a future. These are temporal experiences.
    There are experiences of ideals-of ideals entertained,
of ideals aimed at, of ideals achieved, of ideals defaced.
This is the experience of the deity of the universe. The
intertwining of success and failure in respect to this final
experience is essential. We thereby experience a relation-
ship to a universe other .than ourselves. We are essen-
tially measuring ourselves in respect to what we are not.
A solipsist experience cannot succeed or fail, for it would
be all that exists. There would be no standard of compari-
son. Human experience explicitly relates itself to an exter-
nal standard. The universe is thus understood as including
a source of ideals.
    The effective aspect of this source is deity as immanent
in the present experience. The sense of historic importance
is the intuition of the universe as everlasting process, un-
fading in its deistic unity of ideals.
    Thus there is an essential relevance between deity and
historic process. For this reason, the form of process is
not wholly dependent upon derivation from the past. As
epochs decay amid futility and frustration, the form of
process derives other ideals involving novel forms of order.
    Science investigates the past, and predicts the future
in terms of the forms of past achievement. But as the
present becomes self-destructive of its inherited modes of
importance, then the deistic influence implants in the his-
toric process new aims at other ideals.
    Science is concerned with the facts of bygone transi-
tion. History relates the aim at ideals. And between science
                                                           103
                                                   Adivity
and history, lies the operation of the deistic impulse of
energy. It is the religious impulse in the world which
transforms the dead facts of science into the living drama
of history. For this reason science can never foretell the
perpetual novelty of history.




                                                       104
                                               LECTURE SIX



              Civilized Universe


Jn this lecture we seek   the evidence for that conception of
the universe which is the justification for the ideals charac-
terizing the civilized phases of human society.
     We have been assuming as self-evident the many actu-
alities, their forms of coordination in the historic process,
their separate importance, and their joint importance for
the universe in its unity. It must be clearly understood, as
stated in the earlier lectures, that we are not arguing from
well-defined premises. Philosophy is the search for prem-
ises. It is not deduction. Such deductions as occur are for
the purpose of testing the starting points by the evidence
of the conclusions.
     A special science takes the philosophic assumptions and
transforms them into comparative clarity by narrowing
them to the forms of the special topic in question. Also
even in reasoning thus limited to special topics, there is
no absolute conclusiveness in the deductive logic. The
premises have assumed their limited clarity by reason of
presuming the irrelevance of considerations extraneous to
the assigned topic. The premises are conceived in the
simplicity of their individual isolation. But there can be
                                                          105
                                                       Adivity
no logical test for the possibility that deductive procedure,
leading to the elaboration of compositions, may introduce
into relevance considerations from which the primitive
notions of the topic have been abstracted. The mutual
conformity of the various perspectives can never be ade-
quately determined.
    The history of science is full of such examples of
sciences bursting through the bounds of their original
assumptions. Even in pure abstract logic as applied to arith-
metic, it has within the last half century been found neces-
sary to introduce a doctrine of types in order to correct
the omissions of the original premises.
    Thus deductive logic has not the coercive supremacy
which is conventionally conceded to it. When applied to
concrete instances, it is a tentative procedure, finally to be
judged by the self-evidence of its issues. This doctrine
places philosophy on a pragmatic basis. But the meaning of
"pragmatism" must be given its widest extension. In much
modem thought, it has been limited by arbitrary specialist
assumptions. There should be no pragmatic exclusion of
self-evidence by dogmatic denial. Pragmatism is simply an
appeal to that self-evidence which sustains itself in civi-
lized experience. Thus pragmatism ultimately appeals to
the wide self-evidence of civilization, and to the self-evi-
dence of what we mean by "civilization."
    Before we finally dismiss deductive logic, it is well to
note the function of the "variable" in logical reason. In
this connection the term variable is applied to a symbol,
occurring in a propositional form which merely indicates
any entity to which the propositional form can be validly
applied, so as to constitute a determinate proposition.
Also the variable, though undetermined, sustains its iden-
tity throughout the arguments. The notion originally as-
sumed importance in algebra, in the familiar letters such
as x} y} z indicating any numbers. It also appears somewhat
                                                          106
                                             Civilized Universe
tentatively in the Aristotelian syllogisms, where names
such as "Socrates," indicate "any man, the same through-
out the argument."
    The use of the variable is to indicate the self-identity
of some use of "any" throughout a train of reasoning. For
example in elementary algebra when x first appears it
means "any number." But in that train of reasoning, the
reappearance of x always means "the same number" as in
that original appearance. Thus the variable is an ingenious
combination of the vagueness of any with the definiteness
of a particular indication.
    In logical reasoning, which proceeds by the use of the
variable, there are always two tacit presuppositions-one is
that the definite symbols of composition can retain the
same meaning as the reasoning elaborates novel composi-
tions. The other presupposition is that this self-identity of
each variable can be preserved when the variable is re-
placed by some definite instance. Complete self-identity
can never be preserved in any advance to novelty. The
only question is, as to whether the loss is relevant to the
purposes of the argument. The baby in the cradle, and the
grown man in middle age, are in some senses identical and
in other senses diverse. Is the train of argument in its
conclusions substantiated by the identity or vitiated by the
diversity?
    We thus dismiss deductive logic as a major instrument
for metaphysical discussion. Such discussion is concerned
with the eliciting of self-evidence. Apart from such self-
evidence, deduction fails. Thus logic presupposes meta-
physics.
    2. What is the dominating insight whereby we pre-
suppose ourselves as actualities within a world of actuali-
ties? There can be no argument from a purely subjective
experience of qualitative details so as validly to infer a
world of actualities coordinate with ourselves. A "form of
                                                           J07
                                                         Adivity
reception" will then be simply a mode of make-belief. In
other words, a form of reception is reduced to an account
of our solipsist existence. It describes our individual ex-
perience of a display of qualitative pattern. It gives an
account of an activity within us. It gives no account of our-
selves as activities among other activities. It misses the
point that we know ourselves as creatures in a world of
creatures. We are reduced to an enjoyment of mere ap-
pearance. With such assumptions there are no data for
the insight into a world of many coordinated actualities.
     In the discussion of our experience, the first point for
notice is the superficial variability in our clear conscious-
ness of qualitative detail. The decisive consciousness that
this is red, and that is loud, and this other is square, results
from an effort of concentration and elimination. Also it
is never sustained. There is always a flickering variation,
varied by large scale transference of attention. Conscious-
ness is an ever-shifting process of abstracting shifting
quality from a massive process of essential existence. It em-
phasizes. And yet, if we forget the background, the result
is triviality.
     Concentration of attention on sheer qualitative detail
can result in consciousness of mere succession of such detail.
For example, we record a red-and-green pattern succeeded
by a blue-and-grey pattern, the experience being closed by
a clear bell-like sound. There is a qualitative subjective
experience. That and nothing more. The whole meaning-
less. This is the rt!sult of obtaining a clear-cut experience
by concentrating on the abstractions of consciousness.
     But we are conscious of more than clarity. The impor-
tance of clarity does not arise until we have interpreted it
in terms of the vast issues vaguely haunting the fullness of
existence.
     It is here that the prominent epistemology of the mod-
ern centuries has been so weak. It has interpreted the
                                                            JOB
                                               Civilized Universe
totality of experience as a mere reaction to an initial clarity
of sensa. The result is that the reaction is limited to the
data provided by the sensa. Such modern schools of philo-
sophic thought can simply ask, What is the sensible emo-
tional reaction to a red-and-green pattern, succeeded by a
blue-and-grey pattern, succeeded by a clear bell-like sound?
The answer is, what you like, except you are a highbrow
intellectual when you will follow the current reactions of
Greenwich Village and Harvard, if you are American, and
of Bloomsbury and Oxford, if you are English.
    In other words, the mass of our moral, emotional, and
purposive experience is rendered trivial and accidental.
The whole notion of our massive experience conceived as a
reaction to clearly envisaged details is fallacious. The rela-
tionship should be inverted. The details are a reaction to
the totality. They add definition. They introduce powers
of judgment. They exalt men above animals, and animals
above vegetables, and vegetables beyond stones, always
provided that they are kept in their proper relation to the
soil from which they originate. They are interpretive and
not originative. What is original is the vague totality.
    Of course, the clarity of experience does originate
further experience, by reason of its very clarity. But this
origination is a secondary fact, and is not the basis of the
whole. We enter the room already equipped with an active
aesthetic experience, and we are charmed with the forms
and colouring of the furniture. The sensory experience of
the room adds vividness and point to an activity of feeling
already possessed.
    3. At the base of our existence is the sense of "worth."
Now worth essentially presupposes that which is worthy.
Here the notion of worth is not to be construed in a purely
eulogistic sense. It is the sense of existence for its own sake,
of existence which is its own justification, of existence with
its own character.
                                                             109
                                                         Adivity
    The discrimination of detail is definitely a secondary
process, which may or may not assume importance. There
is the germ of discrimination, which may or may not flower
into a varied experience. The dim decision is a large-scale
judgment-namely, avoidance or maintenance. The stage
of analysis into details, of which some are to be discarded,
others are to be maintained, has not arrived. There is
simply the large-scale feeling as to the totality-avoid it or
maintain it.
     Again the primitive stage of discrimination is not pri-
marily qualitative. It is the vague grasp of reality, dissecting
it into a threefold scheme, namely, "The Whole," "That
Other,"· and "This-My-Self."
    This is primarily a dim division. The sense of totality ob-
scures the analysis into self and others. Also this division is
primarily based on the sense of existence as a value experi-
ence. Namely, the total value experience is discriminated
into this value experience and those value experiences.
There is the vague sense of many which are one; and of
one which includes the many. Also there are two senses of
the one-namely, the sense of the one which is all, and the
sense of the one among the many.
     The fundamental basis of this description is that our
experience is a value experience, expressing a vague sense
of maintenance or discard; and that this value experience
differentiates itself in the sense of many existences with
value experience; and that this sense of the multiplicity of
value experiences again differentiates it into the totality
of value experience, and the many other value experiences,
and the egoistic value experience. There is the feeling of
the ego, the others, the totality. This is the vague, basic
presentation of the differentiation of existence, in its
enjoyment of discard and maintenance. We are, each of
us, one among others; and all of us are embraced in the
unity of the whole.
                                                             JJO
                                              Civilized Universe
     The basis of democracy is the common fact of value
experience, as constituting the essential nature of each
pulsation of actuality. Everything has some value for itself,
for others, and for the whole. This characterizes the mean-
ing of actuality. By reason of this character, constituting
reality, the conception of morals arises. We have no right
to deface the value experience which is the very essence of
the universe. Existence, in its own nature, is the uphold-
ing of value intensity. Also no unit can separate itself from
the others, and from the whole. And yet each unit exists
in its own right. It upholds value intensity for itself, and
this involves sharing value intensity with the universe.
Everything that in any sense exists has two sides, namely,
its individual self and its signification in the universe. Also
either of these aspects is a factor in the other.
     So far, we have been considering the dim foundation
of experience. In animal experience there supervenes a
process of keen discrimination of quality. The sense experi-
ences, such as sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, and so on,
are distinguished. Also within each such species of quality,
clear distinctions are discerned, for example, red and green,
distinctions of note, distinctions of taste.
     With the rise of clear sensations relating themselves to
the universe of value-feeling, the world of human experi-
ence is defined.
     4. At this point, the preceding exposition must be
reviewed. It is evident that the current doctrine of episte-
mology has been completely inverted. This current doc-
trine culminated in the eighteenth century with Hume's
Treatise. It bases itself upon the well-defined factors in our
experience. Undoubtedly there are these sensa, such as
sensations of colour, sound, and so on. It is then assumed
that because they are definite, therefore they are funda-
mental.
     The other factors in experiences are therefore to be
                                                            JJJ
                                                       Adivity
construed as derivative, in the sense of owing their origin
to these sensa. Emotions, aspirations, hopes, fears, love,
and hate, intentions, and recollections are merely con-
cerned with sensa. Apart from sensa, they would be non-
existent.
    This is the doctrine which in this lecture is being de-
nied. The only mode of decision can be by an appeal to
the self-evidence of experience. In Hume's Treatise, this
appeal is the basis on which he founds his doctrine.
    In opposition to Hume's interpretation of experience,
the first point to notice is that these distinct sensa are the
most variable elements in our lives. We can shut our eyes,
or be permanently blind. None the less we are alive. We
can be deaf. And yet we are alive. We can shift and trans-
mute these details of experience almost at will.
     Further, in the course of a day our experience varies
with respect to its entertainment of sensa. We are wide-
awake, we doze, we meditate, we sleep. There is nothing
basic in the clarity of our entertainment of sensa. Also
in the course of our lives, we start in the womb, in the
cradle, and we gradually acquire the art of correlating our
fundamental experience to the clarity of newly-acquired
sensa.
    Again, human beings are merely one species in the
throng of existences. There are the animals, the vegetables,
the microbes, the living cells, the inorganic physical activi-
ties. At the beginning of science, nature was surveyed as
including diversities of species and genera, separated by
impassable boundaries. Today the doctrine of evolution
reigns. We need not necessarily conceive this doctrine as
implying evolution upwards. What we do observe is the
historic transition from species to species, and genera to
genera. The qualitative experiences of the various animals
seem to be vastly different. In some respects, more keenly
felt than among human beings-for example, the sense of
                                                           JJ2
                                              Civilized Universe
smell by some dogs. In other respects, there is reason to
suspect a certain dimness of such experience in living
things with low types of bodily organization. And yet they
react to the external world.
     In other words, reaction to the environment is not in
proportion to clarity of sensory experience. Any such
doctrine would sweep away the whole of modern physical
science as being expressed in terms of irrelevancies. Re-
action does not depend upon sense experience for its initi-
ation.
     Now confine the argument to human experience, which
we know at first hand. This experience does not depend
for its excellence simply upon clarity of sense experience.
The specialist in clarity sinks to an animal level-the hound
for smell, the eagle for sight.
     Human beings are amateurs in sense experience. The
direct, vivid clarity does not dominate so as to obscure the
infinite variety involved in the composition of reality. The
sense experience is an abstraction which illustrates and
stimulates the completeness of actuality. It increases im-
portance. But the importance thus elicited is more than a
colour scheme of red, white, and blue. It involves the
infinitude of actuality, hidden in its finitude of realization.
     5. Descartes, following a tradition stretching back to
the very origin of philosophy, derives a proof of the exist-
ence of God from the notion of perfection. His argument
fails, because he abstracts God from the historic universe.
Thus the conclusion depends upon meaningless phrases
respecting the unknown. We and our relationships are in
the universe.
     The starting point of philosophy is the determination
of that aspect of experience which most fully exhibits the
universal necessities of existence. In answer to this prob-
lem Descartes gave the formula "clarity and distinctness."
He thereby inevitably prepared the way for Hume in the
                                                            113
                                                       Adivity
next century. The immense value of the philosophic dis-
cussions produced by Descartes and by Hume, arises from
the fact that neither of them consistently followed this
formula. Undoubtedly the clear and distinct factors in
human experience are the high-grade sensa. We have been
considering the reasons for the conclusion that these dis-
tinct sensory factors are comparatively superficial elements
in our lives.
    Nothing is more astonishing in the history of philo-
sophic thought than the naive way in which our association
with our human bodies is assumed. The unity of man and
his body is taken for granted. Where does my body end and
the external world begin? For example, my pen is external;
my hand is part of my body; and my finger nails are part
of my body. Also the breath as it passes in and out of my
lungs from my mouth and throat fluctuates in its bodily
relationship. Undoubtedly the body is very vaguely distin-
guishable from external nature. It is in fact merely one
among other natural objects.
    And yet, the unity "body and mind" is the obvious com-
plex which constitutes the one human being. Our bodily
experience is the basis of existence. How is it to be charac-
terized? In the first place, it is not primarily an experience
of sense data, in the clear and distinct sense of that term.
The internal functioning of a healthy body provides sin-
gularly few sense data, primarily associated with itself.
When such sense data appear, we send for a doctor. They
are mostly aches and pains. And yet our feeling of bodily
unity is a primary experience. It is an experience so habit-
ual and so completely a matter of course that we rarely
mention it. No one ever says, Here am I, and I have
brought my body with me.
    In what does this intimacy of relationship consist? The
body is the basis of our emotional and purposive experi-
ence. It determines the way in which we react to· the clear
                                                          114
                                            Civilized Universe
sensa. It determines the fact that we enjoy sensa. But the
eye strain in sight is not the eye sight. We see with our
eyes; we do not see our eyes.
     The body is that portion of nature with which each
moment of human experience intimately cooperates.
There is an inflow and outflow of factors between the
bodily actuality and the human experience, so that each
shares in the existence of the other. The human body
provides our closest experience of the interplay of actu-
alities in nature.
     Ordinary language, and the sciences of physiology
and psychology, supply the evidence. This evidence is
three fold: namely, the body is part of nature, the body
supplies the basis of emotional and sensory activities, and
the agitations of human experience pass into subsequent
bodily functionings.
     The body is that part of nature whose functionings
are so coordinated as to be reciprocally coordinated with
the functionings of the corresponding human experience.
There is a transfer of types of agitation.
     So long as nature was conceived in terms of the passive,
instantaneous existence of bits of matter, according to
Newton or Democritus, a difficulty arises. For there is an
essential distinction between matter at an instant and
the agitations of experience. But this conception of matter
has now been swept away. Analogous notions of activity,
and of forms of transition, apply to human experience and
to the human body. Thus bodily activities and forms of
experience can be construed in terms of each other. Also
the body is part of nature. Thus we finally construe the
world in terms of the type of activities disclosed in our
intimate experience.
     6. This conclusion must not be distorted. The falla-
cious notion of passive matter has by a reaction led to a
distorted account of human experience. Human nature
                                                          115
                                                         Adivity
has been described in terms of its vivid accidents, and not
of its existential essence. The description of its essence
must apply to the unborn child, to the baby in its cradle,
to the state of sleep, and to that vast background of feeling
hardly touched by consciousness. Clear, conscious discrimi-
nation is an accident of human existence. It makes us
human. But it does not make us exist. It is of the essence of
our humanity. But it is an accident of our existence.
    What is our primary experience which lies below
and gives its meaning to our conscious analysis of qualita-
tive detail? In our analysis of detail we are presupposing a
background which supplies a meaning. These vivid acci-
dents accentuate something which is already there. We
require to describe that factor in our experience which,
being a matter of course, does not enter prominently into
conversation. There is no need to mention it. For this
reason language is very ineffective for the exposition of
metaphysics.
    Our enjoyment of actuality is a realization of worth,
good or bad. It is a value experience. Its basic expression
is-Have a care, here is something that matters! Yes-that
is the best phrase-the primary glimmering of conscious-
ness reveals, something that matters.
    This experience provokes attention, dim and, all but,
subconscious. Attention yields a three-fold character in the
"Something that matters." "Totality," "Externality," and
"Internality" are the primary characterizations of "that
which matters." They are not to be conceived as clear,
analytic concepts. Experience awakes with these dim pre-
suppositions to guide its rising clarity of detailed analysis.
They are presuppositions in the sense of expressing the
sort of obviousness which experience exhibits. There is the
totality of actual fact; there is the externality of many facts;
there is the internality of this experiencing which lies
within the totality.
                                                            116
                                              Civilized Universe
    These three divisions are on a level. No one in any
sense precedes the other. There is the whole fact containing
within itself my fact and the other facts. Also the dim mean-
ing of fact-or actuality-is intrinsic importance for itself,
for the others, and for the whole.
    7. Of course all our terms of speech are too special,
and refer too explicitly to higher stages of experience. For
this reason, philosophy is analogous to imaginative art. It
suggests meaning beyond its mere statements. On the
whole, elaborate phrases enshrine the more primitive
meanings.
    Also as disclosure develops, facts disclose themselves as
stages in the transitions of history. Importance reveals itself
as transitions of emotion. My importance is my emotional
worth now, embodying in itself derivations from the whole,
and from the other facts, and embodying in itself reference
to future creativity.
    These embodiments both unify the many facts in the
experiencing self, and at the same time differentiate these
facts by their variety of reference to that self. Some facts
have such closeness of reference to the immediate self that
an intimate unity with them is claimed. In this way, the
concept of self-identical enduring personal existence
dawns. It is the concept of one person with many stages
of existence. But the basis of all experience is this imme-
diate stage of experiencing, which is myself now. Also the
external facts, as disclosed in experiencing, tend more
vaguely and ftittingly to group themselves in the same way.
    But the sense of importance is not exclusively referent
to the experiencing self. It is exactly this vague sense which
differentiates itself into the disclosure of the whole, the
many, and the self. It is the importance of the others which
melts into the importance of the self. Actuality is the self-
enjoyment of importance. But this self-enjoyment has the
character of the self-enjoyment of others melting into the
                                                            JJ7
                                                     Adivity
enjoyment of the one self. The most explicit example of
this is our realization of those other actualities, which we
conceive as ourselves in our recent past, fusing their self-
enjoyment with our immediate present. This is only the
most vivid instance of the unity of the universe in each
individual actuality.
    The main point of this description is the concept of
actuality as something that matters, by reason of its own
self-enjoyment, which includes enjoyment of others and
transitions towards the future.
    Qualitative discrimination now arrives in the forma-
tion of the completed experience. The variety of quality is
infinite. Thus every description is narrowed by some
specialty of quality which is unconsciously presupposed.
    There is the dim qualification enjoyed by the lowest
types of actuality. There are the clear, distinct qualities
enjoyed in human experience. There is every stage in
between, and there are numberless stages which human ex-
perience has never touched. Undoubtedly, if we may trust
our memories of the variety of human experience, the
discrimination of quality immensely increases the inten-
sity of experience. The sense of importance is a function of
the analysis of experienced quality. It is hardly too much
to say this. But it is too much; or rather, it is too simple
an explanation. It does seem invariably the case, that the
intrinsic importance of an experience requires a large
clarity of analysis for one of its factors. Here the phrase
"intrinsic importance" means "importance for itself."
    But the whole point of this exposition is that our dis-
crimination is exercised upon an experienced world. This
world is the subject matter for qualitative discrimination.
Civilization involves the understanding of the given world
in respect to its qualifications.
    8. This doctrine exactly inverts Hume's point of view,
and the variant points of view derived from his doctrines.
                                                         JJ8
                                              Civilized Universe
Hume makes the qualifications primary; and the world is
introduced as a secondary conjecture. It is to be noticed
that our exposition is nothing else than the expansion of
the insight that power is the basis of our notions of sub-
stance. This notion of power is to be found in Locke and
in Plato, ftittingly expressed and never developed. Our
experience starts with a sense of power, and proceeds to the
discrimination of individualities and their qualities.
    Another consequence is that actuality is in its essence
composition. Power is the compulsion of composition.
Every other type of composition is a halfway stage in the
attainment of actuality. The final actuality has the unity
of power. The essence of power is the drive towards aes-
thetic worth for its own sake. All power is a derivative from
this fact of composition attaining worth for itself. There
is no other fact. Power and importance are aspects of this
fact. It constitutes the drive of the universe. It is efficient
cause, maintaining its power of survival. It is final cause,
maintaining in the creature its appetition for creation.
    The sense of externality is based on the primary self-
analysis of the process of composition. This analysis dis-
closes factors in the composition, with their own self-
enjoyment and contributing that self-enjoyment to the
immediate composition in which they are factors.
    There are two types of such factors. In one type there
are the many factors which form the historic environment
for the new creation in the historic process. They are
factors in the new composition which in its completion is
one of themselves. This is a primary deliverance of experi-
ence, and if philosophical dictionaries have no single words
to express it-so much the worse for the dictionaries.
    9. The second type of factor has, by the nature of the
case, only one example. It is that factor disclosed in our
sense of the value, for its own sake, of the totality of
historic fact in respect to its essential unity. There is a
                                                            JJ9
                                                        Adivity
unity in the universe, enjoying value and (by its imma-
nence) sharing value. For example, take the subtle beauty
of a flower in some isolated glade of a primeval forest.
No animal has ever had the subtlety of experience to enjoy
its full beauty. And yet this beauty is a grand fact in the
universe. When we survey nature and think however
flitting and superficial has been the animal enjoyment of
its wonders, and when we realize how incapable the sepa-
rate cells and pulsations of each flower are of enjoying the
total effect-then our sense of the value of the details for
the totality dawns upon our consciousness. This is the
intuition of holiness, the intuition of the sacred, which is
at the foundation of all religion. In every advancing civili-
zation this sense of sacredness has found vigorous expres-
sion. It tends to retire into a recessive factor in experience,
as each phase of civilization enters upon its decay.
     We are now discussing an alternative rendering of
Descartes' notion of perfection. It is the notion of that
power in history which implants into the form of process,
belonging to each historic epoch, the character of a drive
towards some ideal, to be realized within that period. This
ideal is never realized, it is beyond realization, and yet it
moulds the form of what is realized.
     For example, there is an ideal of human liberty, activ-
ity, and cooperation dimly adumbrated in the American
Constitution. It has never been realized in its perfection;
and by its lack of characterization of the variety of possi-
bilities open for humanity, it is limited and imperfect.
And yet, such as it is, the Constitution vaguely discloses
the immanence in this epoch of that one energy of idealiza-
tion, whereby bare process is transformed into glowing
history.
     In this discussion we are upholding the thesis that the
sense of external reality-that is to say, the sense of being
one actuality in a world of actualities-is the gift of aes-
                                                           J20
                                              Civilized Universe
 thetic significance. This experience claims a relevance be-
yond the finite immediacy of any one occasion of experience.
If in that occasion, there is a failure consciously to discern
that significance, so much the worse for that occasion. This
doctrine applies to all experience, great and small. Our
intuitions of righteousness disclose an absoluteness in the
nature of things, and so does the taste of a lump of sugar.
    The variations of importance are beyond our weak
imaginations; and yet aesthetic importance in any factor
of experience carries its proof of existence beyond present
immediacy. The ego enjoys an importance stretching
beyond itself.
    The rise of animal, and then of human, consciousness
is the triumph of specialization. It is closely connected
with the evolution of clear and distinct sensory experience.
There is abstraction from the vague mass of primary feel-
ings, and concentration upon the comparative clarity of a
few qualitative details. These are the sensa.
    Unless the physical and physiological sciences are
fables, the qualitative experiences which are the sensations,
such as sight, hearing, etc., are involved in an intricate flux
of reactions within and without the animal body. These are
all hidden below consciousness in the vague sense of per-
sonal experience of an external world. This feeling is
massive and vague-so vague that the pretentious phrase,
namely, personal experience of an external world, sounds
nonsense. A particular instance can be explained more
simply. For example, "I see a blue stain out there," implies
the privacy of the ego and the externality of "out there."
There is the presupposition of "me" and the world beyond.
But consciousness is concentrated on the quality blue in
that position.            can be more simple or more ab-
stract. And yet unless the physicist and physiologist are
talking nonsense, there is a terrific tale of complex activity
omitted in the abstraction.
                                                            J2J
                                                        Activity
    Further, our subsequent actions confonn to the tales of
the scientists, and not primarily to the blueness of the stain.
We may want to preserve or modify the experience. But
inexorably our actions are directive of our bodies. We do
not touch the quality blue. We stretch out our anns to
modify the relations of the blue thing to the various activi-
ties in its environment.
    In so far as we are merely conscious of the formal re-
lationships of qualities, there is aesthetic failure. It is the
recognition of the arid fact of the possibility of relation-
ship. The sense of reality is the sense of effectiveness, and
the sense of effectiveness is the drive towards the satisfac-
tion of appetition. There is a past, real in its own right,
satisfying itself in the present.
    10. Fact includes in its own nature something which
is not fact, although it constitutes a realized item within
fact. This is the conceptual side of fact. But, as usual, the
philosophic tradition is too abstract. There is no such
independent item in actuality as "mere concept." The
concept is always clothed with emotion, that is to say, with
hope, or with fear, or with hatred, or with eager aspiration,
or with the pleasure of analysis. The variations in the
quality of appetition are infinite. But the notion of mere
concept, or of mere realization, apart from a relevant emo-
tional derivation, which is its emotional origin, is falla-
cious. The doctrine here maintained is to be found in
Hume, except that he oversimplifies the problem by con-
ceiving an initial bare occurrence of sense-impressions
devoid of essential relationship to other factors in experi-
ence. In his subsequent argument he is apt fortunately to
forget his explicit premises. So it is possible to construe
his meaning in many ways. But in his controversy with
antagonistic modes of thought, he judges them by the
strict consequences of these premises.
                                                            J22
                                              Civilized Universe
    The final conclusion from the discussions included in
this course of lectures is the importance of a right adjust-
ment of the process of abstraction. Those characteristics
of experience which separate the higher from the lower
species of actualities all depend upon abstraction. The
living germs are distinguished from lifeless physical ac-
tivities by the abstractions inherent in their existence.
The higher animals are distinguished from mere life, by
their abstractions, and by their use of them. Mankind is
distinguished from animal life by its emphasis on abstrac-
tions. The degeneracy of mankind is distinguished from
its uprise by the dominance of chill abstractions, divorced
from aesthetic content.
    The growth of consciousness is the uprise of abstrac-
tions. It is the growth of emphasis. The totality is charac-
terized by a selection from its details. That selection claims
attention, enjoyment, action, and purpose, all relative to
itself. This concentration evokes an energy of self-realiza-
tion. It is a step towards unification with that drive towards
realization which discloses the unity of aim in the historic
process.
    But this enhancement of energy presupposes that the
abstraction is preserved with its adequate relevance to the
concrete sense of value attainment from which it is derived.
In this way, the effect of the abstraction stimulates the
vividness and depth of the whole of experience. It stirs
the depths.
    Thus a fortunate use of abstractions is of the essence of
upward evolution. But there is no necessity of such good
use. Abstractions may function in experience so as to
separate them from their relevance to the totality. In that
case, the abstractive experience is a flicker of interest which
is destroying its own massive basis for survival.
    It is interesting to note that in the entertainment of
                                                            J23
                                                      Activity
abstractions there is always present a preservative instinct
aiming at the renewal of connection, which is the reverse
of abstraction. This reverse process, partly instinctive and
 partly conscious, is wisdom of that higher life made pos-
sible by abstraction.
    For example, in the consciousness of sense experience,
we first fix attention on some sensory detail. We then
glance around and attend to the environment of sights
and sounds. We endeavour to lift into consciousness mean·
 ingful units, such as the whole picture, the whole building,
 the living animal, the stone, the mountain, the tree.
    Such vivid conscious experience is a return to the
concrete. The return may be misconceived. The abstrac-
tion may misdirect us as to the real complex from which it
originates. But, in the dim recesses behind consciousness
there is the sense of realities behind abstractions. The
sense of process is always present. There is the process of
abstraction arising from the concrete totality of value
experience, and this process points back to its origin.
    11. But consciousness, which is the supreme vividness
of experience, does not rest content with the dumb sense
of importance behind the veil. Its next procedure is to
seek the essential connections within its own conscious
area. This is the process of rationalization. This process is
the recognition of essential connection within the ap-
parent isolation of abstracted details. Thus rationalization
is the reverse of abstraction, so far as abstraction can be
reversed within the area of consciousness.
    Our powers are finite. So, although no item in this
process of reversion is necessarily beyond us, it is con-
fined within the environment accidentally presented to us
by our immediate area of consciousness. Thus rationaliza-
tion is the partial fulfilment of the ideal to recover con-
crete reality within the disjunction of abstraction.
    This disjunction is the appearance which has been
                                                         124
                                             Civilized Universe
introduced as price of finite conscious discrimination. The
concrete reality is the starting-point of the process of indi-
vidual experience, and it is the goal in the rationalization
of consciousness. The prize at the goal is the enhancement
of experience by consciousness and rationality.




                                                           125
Ill.
NATURE AND LIFE




                                           LECTURE SEVEN



                       Nature Lifeless


Philosophy is the product of wonder. The effort after
the general characterization of the world around us is the
romance of human thought. The correct statement seems
so easy, so obvious, and yet it is always eluding us. We
inherit the traditional doctrine: we can detect the over-
sights, the superstitions, the rash generalizations of the
past ages. We know so well what we mean and yet we
remain so curiously uncertain about the formulation of
any detail of our knowledge. This word detail lies at the
heart of the whole difficulty. You cannot talk vaguely
about "Nature" in general. We must fix upon details
within nature and discuss their essences and their types of
inter-connection. The world around is complex, composed
of details. We have to settle upon the primary types of
detail in terms of which we endeavour to express our
understanding of nature. We have to analyse and to ab-
stract, and to understand the natural status of our abstrac-
tions. At first sight there are sharp-cut classes within which
we can sort the various types of things and characters of
things which we find in nature. Every age manages to find
modes of classification which seem fundamental starting
                                                          J27
                                               Nature and Life
 points for the researches of the special sciences. Each
succeeding age discovers that the primary classifications of
its predecessors will not work. In this way a doubt is thrown
upon all formulations of laws of nature which assume
these classifications as firm starting points. A problem
arises. Philosophy is the search for the solution.
     Our first step must be to define the term nature as
here used. Nature, in these chapters, means the world as
interpreted by reliance on clear and distinct sensory ex-
periences, visual, auditory, and tactile. Obviously, such an
interpretation is of the highest importance for human
understanding. These final chapters are concerned with
the question,-How far does it take us?
    For example, we can conceive nature as composed of
permanent things, namely bits of matter, moving about
in space which otherwise is empty. This way of thinking
about nature has an obvious consonance with common-
sense observation. There are chairs, tables, bits of rock,
oceans, animal bodies, vegetable bodies, planets, and suns.
The enduring self-identity of a house, of a farm, of an
animal body, is a presupposition of social intercourse. It
is assumed in legal theory. It lies at the base of all litera-
ture. A bit of matter is thus conceived as a passive fact, an
individual reality which is the same at an instant, or
throughout a second, an hour, or a year. Such a material,
individual reality supports its various qualifications such
as shape, locomotion, colour, or smell, etc. The occurrences
of nature consist in the changes in these qualifications,
and more particularly in the changes of motion. The con-
nection between such bits of matter consists purely of
spatial relations. Thus the importance of motion arises
from its change of the sole mode of interconnection of
material things. Mankind then proceeds to discuss these
spatial relations and discovers geometry. The geometrical
                                                          J28
                                               Nature Lifeless
character of space is conceived as the one way in which
nature imposes determinate relations upon all bits of mat-
ter which are the sole occupants of space. In itself, space
is conceived as unchanging from eternity to eternity, and
as homogeneous from infinity to infinity. Thus we com-
pose a straight-forward characterization of nature, which is
consonant to common sense, and can be verified at each
moment of our existence. We sit for hours in the same
chair, in the same house, with the same animal body. The
dimensions of the room are defined by its spatial relations.
There are colours, sounds, scents, partly abiding and
partly changing. Also the major facts of change are de-
fined by locomotion of the animal bodies and of the inor-
ganic furniture. Within this general concept of nature,
there have somehow to be interwoven the further con-
cepts of "Life" and "Mind."
    I have been endeavouring to sketch the general com-
mon-sense notion of the universe, which about the begin-
ning of the sixteenth century, say in the year 1500 A.D.,
was in process of formation among the more progressive
thinkers of the European population. It was partly an in-
heritance from Greek thought and from medieval thought.
Partly it was based on the deliverance of direct observa-
tion, at any moment verified in the world around us. It
was the presupposed support supplying the terms in which
the answers to all further questions were found. Among
these further questions, the most fundamental and the
most obvious are those concerning the laws of locomotion,
the meaning of life, the meaning of mentality, and the
interrelations of matter, life, and mentality. When we ex-
amine the procedures of the great men in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, we find them presupposing this gen-
eral common-sense notion of the universe, and endeavour-
ing to answer all questions in the terms it supplies.
                                                          J29
                                               Nature and Life
     I suggest that there can be no doubt, but that this
general notion expresses large, all-pervading truths about
the world around us. The only question is as to how funda-
mental these truths may be. In other words, we have to ask
what large features of the universe cannot be expressed in
these terms. We have also to ask whether we cannot find
some other set of notions which will explain the impor-
tance of this common-sense notion, and will also explain
its relations to those other features ignored by the com-
mon-sense notion.
     When we survey the subsequent course of scientific
thought throughout the seventeenth century up to the
present day, two curious facts emerge. In the first place, the
development of natural science has gradually discarded
every single feature of the original common-sense notion.
Nothing whatever remains of it, considered as expressing
the primary features in terms of which the universe is to
be interpreted. The obvious common-sense notion has
been entirely destroyed, so far as concerns its function as
the basis for all interpretation. One by one, every item has
been dethroned.
     There is a second characteristic of subsequent thought
which is equally prominent. This common-sense notion
still reigns supreme in the workaday life of mankind. It
dominates the marketplace, the playgrounds, the law
courts, and in fact the whole sociological intercourse of
mankind. It is supreme in literature and is assumed in all
the humanistic sciences. Thus the science of nature stands
opposed to the presuppositions of humanism. Where some
conciliation is attempted, it often assumes some sort of
mysticism. But in general there is no conciliation.
     Indeed, even when we confine attention to natural
science, no special science ever is grounded upon the con-
ciliation of presuppositions belonging to all the various
                                                           J30
                                                 Nature Lifeless
sciences of nature. Each science confines itself to a frag-
ment of the evidence and weaves its theories in terms of
notions suggested by that fragment. Such a procedure is
necessary by reason of the limitations of human ability.
But its dangers should always be kept in mind. For ex-
ample, the increasing departmentalization of universities
during the last hundred years, however necessary for ad-
ministrative purposes, tends to trivialize the mentality of
the teaching profession. The result of this effective survival
of two ways of thought is a patchwork procedure.
    Presuppositions from the two points of view are inter-
woven sporadically. Every special science has to assume
results from other sciences. For example, biology presup-
poses physics. It will usually be the case that these loans
from one specialism to another really belong to the state
of science thirty or forty years earlier. The presuppositions
of the physics of my boyhood are today powerful influences
in the mentality of physiologists. Indeed we do not need
even to bring in the physiologists. The presuppositions of
yesterday's physics remain in the minds of physicists, al-
though their explicit doctrines taken in detail deny them.
     In order to understand this sporadic interweaving of
old and new in modern thought, I will recur to the main
principles of the old common-sense doctrine, which even
today is the common doctrine of ordinary life because in
some sense it is true. There are bits of matter, enduring
self-identically in space which is otherwise empty. Each bit
of matter occupies a definite limited region. Each such
particle of matter has its own private qualifications, such
as its shape, its motion, its mass, its colour, its scent. Some
of these qualifications change, others are persistent. The
essential relationship between bits of matter is purely
spatial. Space itself is eternally unchanging, always includ-
ing in itself this capacity for the relationship of bits of
                                                            J3J
                                                Nature and Lile
 matter. Geometry is the science which investigates this
 spatial capacity for imposing relationship upon matter.
 Locomotion of matter involves change in spatial relation-
 ship. It involves nothing more than that. Matter involves
 nothing more than spatiality, and the passive support of
 qualifications. It can be qualified, and it must be qualified.
But qualification is a bare fact, which is just itself. This
 is the grand doctrine of nature as a self-sufficient, meaning-
 less complex of facts. It is the doctrine of the autonomy of
physical science. It is the doctrine which in these lectures I
am denying.
     The state of modern thought is that every single item
in this general doctrine is denied, but that the general
conclusions from the doctrine as a whole are tenaciously
retained. The result is a complete muddle in scientific
thought, in philosophic cosmology, and in epistemology.
But any doctrine which does not implicitly presuppose this
point of view is assailed as unintelligible.
     The first item to be abandoned was the set of qualifi-
cations which we distinguish in sense-perception, namely
colour, sound, scent, and analogous qualifications. The
transmission theories for light and sound, introduced the
doctrine of secondary qualities. The colour and the sound
were no longer in nature. They are the mental reactions of
the percipient to internal bodily locomotions. Thus nature
is left with bits pf matter, qualified by mass, spatial rela-
tions, and the change of such relations.
     This loss of the secondary qualities was a severe
restriction to nature. For its value to the percipient was
reduced to its function as a mere agent of excitement.
Also the derived mental excitement was not primarily con-
cerned with factors in nature. The colours and the sounds
were secondary factors supplied by the mental reaction.
But the curious fact remained that these secondary factors
                                                           132
                                               Nature Lifeless

are perceived as related by the spatiality which is the grand
substratum of nature. Hume was, I think, the first philoso-
pher who explictly pointed out this curious hybrid char-
acter of our perceptions, according to the current doctrine
of the perception of secondary qualities. Though of course
this hybrid characteristic was tacitly presupposed by Locke
when he conceived colour as a secondary quality of the
things in nature. I believe that any cosmological doctrine
which is faithful to the facts has to admit this artificial
character of sense perception. Namely, when we perceive
the red rose we are associating our enjoyment of red de-
rived from one source with our enjoyment of a spatial
region derived from another source. The conclusion that
I draw is that sense perception for all its practical impor-
tance is very superficial in its disclosure of the nature of
things. This conclusion is supported by the character of
delusiveness-that is, of illusion-which persistently clings
to sense perception. For example, our perception of stars
which years ago may have vanished, our perceptions of
images in mirrors or by refraction, our double vision, our
visions under the influence of drugs. My quarrel with
modern epistemology concerns its exclusive stress upon
sense perception for the provision of data respecting
nature. Sense perception does not provide the data in
terms of which we interpret it.
    This conclusion that pure sense perception does not
provide the data for its own interpretation was the great
discovery embodied inHume's philosophy. This discovery
is the reason why Hume's Treatise will remain as the irref-
utable basis for all subsequent philosophic thought.
    Another item in the common-sense doctrine concerns
empty space and locomotion. In the first place, the trans-
mission of light and sound shows that space apparently
empty is the theatre of activities which we do not directly
                                                          133
                                               Nature and   Lile
perceive. This conclusion was explained by the supposi-
tion of types of subtle matter, namely the ether, which we
cannot directly perceive. In the second place, this conclu-
sion, and the obvious behaviour of gross ordinary matter,
show us that the motions of matter are in some way condi-
tioned by the spatial relations of material bodies to each
other. It was here that Newton supplied the great synthesis
upon which science was based for more than two centuries.
Newton's laws of motion provided a skeleton framework
within which more particular laws for the interconnection
of bodily motions could be inserted. He also supplied one
example of such a particular law in his great law of
gravitation, which depended upon mutual distances.
     Newton's methodology for physics was an overwhelm-
ing success. But the forces which he introduced left nature
still without meaning or value. In the essence of a material
body-in its mass, motion, and shape-there was no reason
for the law of gravitation. Even if the particular forces
could be conceived as the accidents of a cosmic epoch, there
was no reason in the Newtonian concepts of mass and
motion why material bodies should be connected by any
stress between them. Yet the notion of stresses, as essential
connections between bodies, was a fundamental factor in
the Newtonian concept of nature. What Newton left for
empirical investigation was the determination of the par-
ticular stresses now existing. In this determination he made
a magnificent beginning by isolating the stresses indicated
by his law of gravitation. But he left no hint, why in the
nature of things there should be any stresses at all. The
arbitrary motions of the bodies were thus explained by
the arbitrary stresses between material bodies, conjoined
with their spatiality, their mass, and their initial states of
motion. By introducing stresses-in particular the law of
gravitation-instead of the welter of detailed transforma-
                                                            J34
                                                   Nature Lifeless

tions of motion, he greatly increased the systematic aspect
of nature. But he left all the factors of the system-more
particularly, mass and stress-in the position of detached
facts devoid of any reason for their compresence. He thus
illustrated a great philosophic truth, that a dead nature
can give no reasons. All ultimate reasons are in terms of
aim at value. A dead nature aims at nothing. It is the
essence of life that it exists for its own sake, as the intrinsic
reaping of value.
    Thus for Newtonians, nature yielded no reasons: it
could yield no reasons. Combining Newton and Hume we
obtain a barren concept, namely a field of perception de-
void of any data for its own interpretation, and a system of
interpretation, devoid of any reason for the concurrence
of its factors. It is this situation that modem philosophy
from Kant onwards has in its various ways sought to render
intelligible. My own belief is that this situation is a
reductio ad absurdum} and should not be accepted as the
basis for philosophic speculation. Kant was the first philos-
opher who in this way combined Newton and Hume. He
accepted them both, and his three Critiques were his en-
deavour to render intelligible this Hume-Newton situa-
tion. But the Hume-Newton situation is the primary
presupposition for all modem philosophic thought. Any
endeavour to go behind it is, in philosophic discussion,
almost angrily rejected as unintelligible.
    My aim in these lectures is briefly to point out how
both Newton's contribution and Hume's contribution are,
each in their way, gravely defective. They are right as far
as they go. But they omit those aspects of the universe as
experienced, and of our modes of experiencing, which
jointly lead to the more penetrating ways of understanding.
In the recent situations at Washington, D.C., the Hume-
Newton modes of thought can only discern a complex
                                                              135
                                              Nature and   Lile
transition of sensa, and an entangled locomotion of mole-
cules, while the deepest intuition of the whole world dis-
cerns the President of the United States inaugurating a
new chapter in the history of mankind. In such ways the
Hume-Newton interpretation omits our intuitive modes
of understanding.
    I now pass on to the influence of modern science in dis-
crediting the remaining items of the primary common-
sense notion with which science in the sixteenth century
started its career. But in the present-day reconstruction of
physics fragments of the Newtonian concepts are stub-
bornly retained. The result is to reduce modern physics to
a sort of mystic chant over an unintelligible universe. This
chant has the exact merits of the old magic ceremonies
which flourished in ancient Mesopotamia and later in
Europe. One of the earliest fragments of writing which
has survived is a report from a Babylonian astrologer to
the King, stating the favourable days to turn cattle into
the fields, as deduced by his observations of the stars. This
mystic relation of observation, theory, and practice, is
exactly the present position of science in modern life,
according to the prevalent scientific philosophy.
    The notion of empty space, the mere vehicle of spatial
interconnections, has been eliminated from recent science.
The whole spatial universe is a field of force, or in other
words, a field of incessant activity. The mathematical for-
mulae of physics express the mathematical relations re-
alized in this activity.
    The unexpected result has been the elimination of bits
of matter, as the self-identical supports for physical prop-
erties. At first, throughout the nineteenth century, the
notion of matter was extended. The empty space was con-
ceived as filled with ether. This ether was nothing else
than the ordinary matter of the original common-sense
                                                           136
                                                 Nature Lifeless

notion. It had the properties of a jelly, with its continuity,
its cohesion, its flexibility, and its inertia. The ordinary
matter of common sense then merely represented certain
exceptional entanglements in the ether-that is to say,
knots in the ether. These entanglements, which are rela-
tively infrequent throughout space, impose stresses and
strains throughout the whole of the jelly-like ether. Also
the agitations of ordinary matter are transmitted through
the ether as agitations of the stresses and strains. In this
way an immense unification was effected of the various
doctrines of light, heat, electricity, and energy, which now
coalesced into the one science of the ether. The theory was
gradually elaborated throughout the nineteenth century
by a brilliant group of physicists and mathematicians,
French, German, Dutch, Scandinavian, British, Italian,
American. The details of their work, and the relative con-
tributions of various individuals are not to the point here.
    The final result is that the activities of the ether are
very different from any of the modes of activity which the
common-sense analysis ascribes to ordinary matter. If the
doctrine of ether be correct, then our ordinary notions of
matter are derived from observations of certain average
results which cloak the real nature of the activities of ether.
The more recent revolution which has culminated in the
physics of the present day has only carried one step further
this trend of nineteenth century science. Its moral is the
extreme superficiality of the broad generalizations which
mankind acquires on the basis of sense perception. The
continuous effort to understand the world has carried us
far away from all those obvious ideas. Matter has been
identified with energy, and energy is sheer activity; the
passive substratum composed of self-identical enduring
bits of matter has been abandoned, so far as concerns any
fundamental description. Obviously this notion expresses
                                                            137
                                              Nature and   Lile
an important derivative fact. But it has ceased to be the
presupposed basis of theory. The modem point of view
is expressed in terms of energy, activity, and the vibratory
differentiations of space-time. Any local agitation shakes
the whole universe. The distant effects are minute, but
they are there. The concept of matter presupposed simple
location. Each bit of matter was self-contained, localized in
a region with a passive, static network of spatial relations,
entwined in a uniform relational system from infinity to
infinity and from eternity to eternity. But in the modem
concept the group of agitations which we term matter is
fused into its environment. There is no possibility of a
detached, self-contained local existence. The environment
enters into the nature of each thing. Some elements in the
nature of a complete set of agitations may remain stable
as those agitations are propelled through a changing envi-
ronment. But such stability is only the case in a general,
average way. This average fact is the reason why we find
the same chair, the same rock, and the same planet, endur-
ing for days, or for centuries, or for millions of years. In
this average fact, then, time-factor takes the aspect of
endurance, and change is a detail. The fundamental fact,
according to the physics of the present day, is that the
environment with its peculiarities seeps into the group-
agitation which we term matter, and the group-agitations
extend their character to the environment. In truth, the
notion of the self-contained particle of matter, self-suffi-
cient within its local habitation, is an abstraction. Now an
abstraction is nothing else than the omission of part of the
truth. The abstraction is well-founded when the conclu-
sions drawn from it are not vitiated by the omitted truth.
    This general deduction from the modem doctrine of
physics vitiates many conclusions drawn from the applica-
tions of physics to other sciences, such as physiology, or
                                                           138
                                               Nature Lifeless

even such as physics itself. For example, when geneticists
conceive genes as the determinants of heredity. The anal-
ogy of the old concept of matter sometimes leads them to
ignore the influence of the particular animal body in
which they are functioning. They presuppose that a pellet
of matter remains in all respects self-identical whatever be
its changes of environment. So far as modern physics is con-
cerned, any characteristics may, or may not, effect changes
in the genes, changes which are as important in certain
respects, though not in others. Thus no a priori argument
as to the inheritance of characters can be drawn from
the mere doctrine of genes. In fact recently physiologists
have found that genes are modified in some respects by
their environment. The presuppositions of the old com-
mon sense view survive, even when the view itself has
been abandoned as a fundamental description.
     This survival of fragments of older doctrines is also
exemplified in the modern use of the term space-time. The
notion of space with its geometry is strictly coordinated to
the notion of material bodies with simple location in space.
A bit of matter is then conceived as self-sufficient with
the simple location of the region which it occupies. It is
just there, in that region where it is; and it can be de-
scribed without reference to the goings on in any other
region of space. The empty space is the substratum for
the passive geometrical relationships between material
bodies. These relationships are bare, static facts and carry
no consequences which are essentially necessary. For ex-
ample, Newton's law of gravitation expresses the changes
of locomotion which are associated with the spatial rela-
tions of material bodies with each other. But this law of
gravitation does not result from the Newtonian notion of
mass combined with the notion of the occupancy of space,
together with the Euclidean geometry. None of these
                                                         139
                                                Nature and Life

notions either singly or in combination give the slightest
warrant for the law of gravitation. Neither Archimedes,
nor Galileo, by puzzling over these notions could have
derived any suggestion for the gravitational law. Accord-
ing to the doctrine, space was the substratum for the great
all-pervading passive relationship of the natural world. It
conditioned all the active relationships, but it did not
necessitate them.
    The new view is entirely different. The fundamental
concepts are activity and process. Nature is divisible and
thus extensive. But any division, including some activities
and excluding others, also severs the patterns of process
which extend beyond all boundaries. The mathematical
formulae indicate a logical completeness about such pat-
terns, a completeness which boundaries destroy. For ex-
ample, half a wave tells only half the story. The notion of
self-sufficient isolation is not exemplified in modem
physics. There are no essentially self-contained activities
within limited regions. These passive geometrical rela-
tionships between substrata passively occupying regions
have passed out of the picture. Nature is a theatre for the
interrelations of activities. All things change, the activities
and their interrelations. To this new concept, the notion
of space with its passive, systematic, geometric relationship
is entirely inappropriate. The fashionable notion that the
new physics has reduced all physical laws to the statement
of geometrical relations is quite ridiculous. It has done the
opposite. In the place of the Aristotelian notion of the
procession of forms, it has substituted the notion of the
forms of process. It has thus swept away space and matter,
and has substituted the study of the internal relations
within a complex state of activity. This complex state is
in one sense a unity. There is the whole universe of physi-
cal action extending to the remotest star duster. In another
                                                           140
                                               Nature Lifeless

sense it is divisible into parts. We can trace interrelations
within a selected group of activities, and ignore all other
activities. By such an abstraction, we shall fail to explain
those internal activities which are affected by changes in
the external system which has been ignored. Also, in any
fundamental sense, we shall fail to understand the re-
tained activities. For these activities will depend upon a
comparatively unchanging systematic environment.
     In all discussions of nature we must remember the
differences of scale, and in particular the differences of
time-span. We are apt to take modes of observable func-
tioning of the human body as setting an absolute scale. It
is extremely rash to extend conclusions derived from
observation far beyond the scale of magnitude to which
observation was confined. For example, to exhibit appar-
ent absence of change within a second of time tells nothing
as to the change within a thousand years. Also no apparent
change within a thousand years tells anything as to a mil-
lion years; and no apparent change within a million years
tells anything about a million million years. We can ex-
tend this progression indefinitely. There is no absolute
standard of magnitude. Any term in this progression is
large compared to its predecessor and is small compared to
its successor.
     Again, all special sciences presuppose certain funda-
mental types of things. Here I am using the word thing
in its most general sense, which can include activities,
colours and other sensa, and values. In this sense thing is
whatever we can talk about. A science is concerned with a
a limited set of various types of things. There is thus in
the first place this variety of types. In the second place,
there is the determination as to what types are exhibited in
any indicated situation. For example, there is the singular
proposition,-This is green; and the more general propo-
                                                          J4J
                                               Nature and life
sition,-All those things are green. This type of enquiry
is what the traditional Aristotelian logic takes care of.
Undoubtedly such enquiries are essential in the initial
stage of any science. But every science strives to get beyond
it. Unfortunately, owing to the way in which for over two
thousand years philosophic thought has been dominated
by its background of Aristotelian logic, all attempts to
combine the set of special sciences into a philosophic cos-
mology, giving some understanding of the universe-all
these attempts are vitiated by an unconscious relapse into
these Aristotelian forms as the sole mode of expression.
The disease of philosophy is its itch to express itself in the
forms, "Some S is P," or "All S is P."
     Returning to the special sciences, the third step is the
endeavour to obtain quantitative decisions. In this stage,
the typical questions are, "How much Pis involved inS" and
"How many S's are P?" In other words, number, quantity,
and measurement, have been introduced. A simple-minded
handling of these quantitative notions can be just as mis-
leading as undue trust in the Aristotelian forms for propo-
sitions.
    The fourth stage in the development of the science is
the introduction of the notion of pattern. Apart from
attention to this concept of pattern, our understanding of
nature is crude in the extreme. For example, given an aggre-
gate of carbon atoms and oxygen atoms, and given that the
number of oxygen atoms and the number of carbon atoms
are known, the properties of the mixture are unknown until
the question of pattern is settled. How much free oxygen is
there,-How much free carbon,-How much carbon mon-
oxide,-How much carbon dioxide? The answers to some
of these questions, with the total quantities of oxygen and
of carbon presupposed, will determine the answer to the
rest. But even allowing for this mutual determination,
                                                          142
                                               Nature Lifeless

there will be an enormous number of alternative patterns
for a mixture of any reasonable amount of carbon and
oxygen. And even when the purely chemical pattern is
settled, and when the region containing the mixture is
given, there are an indefinite number of regional patterns
for the distribution of the chemical substances within the
containing region. Thus beyond all questions of quantity,
there lie questions of pattern, which are essential for the
understanding of nature. Apart from a presupposed pat-
tern, quantity determines nothing. Indeed quantity itself
is nothing other than analogy of functions within analo-
gous patterns.
    Also this example, involving mere chemical mixture,
and chemical combination, and the seclusion of different
substances in different subregions of the container, shows
us that notion of pattern involves the concept of different
modes of togetherness. This is obviously a fundamental
concept which we ought to have thought of as soon as we
started with the notion of various types of fundamental
things. The danger of all these fundamental notions is that
we are apt to assume them unconsciously. When we ask
ourselves any question we will usually find that we are
assuming certain types of entities involved, that we are
assuming certain modes of togetherness of these entities,
and that we are even assuming certain widely spread gen-
eralities of pattern. Our attention is concerned with details
of pattern, and measurement, and proportionate magni-
tude. Thus the laws of nature are merely all-pervading
patterns of behaviour, of which the shift and discontin-
uance lie beyond our ken. Again, the topic of every science
is an abstraction from the full concrete happenings of
natures. But every abstraction neglects the influx of the
factors omitted into the factors retained. Thus a single
pattern discerned by vision limited to the abstractions
                                                          143
                                                Nature and Life

 within a special science differentiates itself into a subordi-
 nate factor in an indefinite number of wider patterns
 when we consider its possibilities of relatedness to the
 omitted universe. Even within the circle of the special
 science we may find diversities of functioning not to be
 explained in terms of that science. But these diversities can
 be explained when we consider the variety of wider rela-
 tionships of the pattern in question.
     Today the attitude among many leaders in natural
science is a vehement denial of the considerations which
 have been put forward. Their attitude seems to me to be
 a touching example of baseless faith. This judgment is
strengthened when we reflect that their position of the
autonomy of the natural sciences has its origin in a concept
of the world of nature, now discarded.
     Finally, we are left with a fundamental question as
yet undiscussed. What are those primary types of things in
terms of which the process of the universe is to be under-
stood? Suppose we agree that nature discloses to the scien-
tific scrutiny merely activities and process. What does this
mean? These activities fade into each other. They arise
and then pass away. What is being enacted? What is ef-
fected? It cannot be that these are merely the formulae of
the multiplication table-in the words of a great philoso-
pher, merely a bloodless dance of categories. Nature is full-
blooded. Real facts are happening. Physical nature, as
studied in science, is to be looked upon as a complex of
the more stable interrelations betwen the real facts of the
real universe.
     This lecture has been confined to nature under an
abstraction in which all reference to life was suppressed.
The effect of this abstraction has been that dynamics,
physics, and chemistry were the sciences which guided
our gradual transition from the full common-sense notions
                                                           144
                                                Nature Lifeless
 of the sixteenth century to the concept of nature suggested
 by the speculative physics of the present day.
     This change of view, occupying four centuries, may be
characterized as the transition from space and matter, as
 the fundamental notions to process conceived, as a complex
of activity with internal relations between its various fac-
tors. The older point of view enables us to abstract from
change and to conceive of the full reality of nature at an
instant, in abstraction from any temporal duration and
characterized as to its interrelations solely by the instan-
taneous distribution of matter in space. According to the
Newtonian view, what had thus been omitted was the
change of distribution at neighbouring instants. But such
change was, on this view, plainly irrelevant to the essential
reality of the material universe at the instant considered.
Locomotion, and change of relative distribution, was acci-
dental and not essential.
     Equally accidental was endurance. Nature at an instant
is, in this view, equally real whether or not there be no
nature at any other instant, or indeed whether or not
there be any other instant. Descartes, who with Galileo
and Newton, cooperated in the construction of the final
Newtonian view, accepted this conclusion. For he ex-
plained endurance as perpetual re-creation at each instant.
Thus the matter of fact was, for him, to be seen in the
instant and not in the endurance. For him, endurance was
a mere succession of instantaneous facts. There were other
sides to Descartes' cosmology which might have led him
to a greater emphasis on motion. For example, his doc-
trines of extension and vortices. But in fact, by anticipa-
tion, he drew the conclusion which fitted the Newtonian
concepts.
    There is a fatal contradiction inherent in the N ewto-
nian cosmology. Only one mode of the occupancy of space
                                                          145
                                                Nature and Life

is allowed for-namely, this bit of matter occupying this
region at this durationless instant. This occupation of
space is the final real fact, without reference to any other
instant, or to any other piece of matter, or to any other
region of space. Now assuming this Newtonian doctrine,
we ask-What becomes of velocity, at an instant? Again we
ask-What becomes of momentum at an instant? These
notions are essential for Newtonian physics, and yet they
are without any meaning for it. Velocity and momentum
require the concept that the state of things at other times
and other places enter into the essential character of the
material occupancy of space at any selected instant. But
the Newtonian concept allows for not such modification
of the relation of occupancy. Thus the cosmological
scheme is inherently inconsistent. The mathematical sub-
tleties of the differential calculus afford no help for the
removal of this difficulty. We can indeed phrase the point
at issue in mathematical terms. The Newtonian notion
of occupancy corresponds to the value of a function at a
selected point. But the Newtonian physics requires solely
the limit of the function at that point. And the Newtonian
cosmology gives no hint why the bare fact which is the
value should be replaced by the reference to other times
and places which is the limit.
    For the modern view process, activity, and change are
the matter of fact. At an instant there is nothing. Each
instant is only a way of grouping matters of fact. Thus
since there are no instants, conceived as simple primary
entities, there is no nature at an instant. Thus all the inter-
relations of matters of fact must involve transition in their
essence. All realization involves implication in the creative
advance.
    The discussion in this lecture is only the prolegomenon
for the attempt to answer the fundamental question,-
                                                           146
                                               Nature Lifeless
How do we add content to the notion of bare activity?
Activity for what, producing what, activity involving
what?
    The next lecture will introduce the concept of life, and
will thus enable us to conceive of nature more concretely,
without abstraction.




                                                         147
                                            LECTURE EIGHT



                            Nature Alive


 he status of life in nature, as defined in the previous
chapter, is the modem problem of philosophy and of sci-
ence. Indeed it is the central meeting point of all the
strains of systematic thought, humanistic, naturalistic,
philosophic. The very meaning of life is in doubt. When
we understand it, we shall also understand its status in the
world. But its essence and its status are alike batHing.
    After all, this conclusion is not very different from our
conclusion respecting nature, considered in abstraction
from the notion of life. We were left with the notion of
an activity in which nothing is effected. Also this activity,
thus considered, discloses no ground for its own coherence.
There is merely a formula for succession. But there is an
absence of understandable causation to give a reason for
that formula for that succession. Of course it is always pos-
sible to work oneself into a state of complete contentment
with an ultimate irrationality. The popular positivistic
philosophy adopts this attitude.
    The weakness of this positivism is the way in which we
all welcome the detached fragments of explanation at-
tained in our present stage of civilization. Suppose that a
                                                         148
                                                   Nature Alive

hundred thousand years ago our ancestors had been wise
positivists. They sought for no reasons. What they had ob-
served was sheer matter of fact. It was the development of
no necessity. They would have searched for no reasons
underlying facts immediately observed. Civilization would
never have developed. Our varied powers of detailed obser-
vation of the world would have remained dormant. For the
peculiarity of a reason is that the intellectual development
of its consequences suggests consequences beyond the topics
already observed. The extension of observation waits upon
some dim apprehension of reasonable connection. For ex-
ample, the observation of insects on flowers dimly suggests
some congruity between the natures of insects and of
flowers, and thus leads to a wealth of observation from
which whole branches of science have developed. But a
consistent positivist should be content with the observed
facts, namely insects visiting flowers. It is a fact of charming
simplicity. There is nothing further to be said upon the
matter, according to the doctrine of a positivist. At present
the scientific world is suffering from a bad attack of
muddle-headed positivism, which arbitrarily applies its
doctrine and arbitrarily escapes from it. The whole doc-
trine of life in nature has suffered from this positivist taint.
We are told that there is the routine described in physical
and chemical formulae, and that in the process of nature
there is nothing else.
     The origin of this persuasion is the dualism which
gradually developed in European thought in respect to
mind and nature. At the beginning of the modern period
Descartes expresses this dualism with the utmost distinct-
 ness. For him, there are material substances with spatial
relations, and mental substances. The mental substances
 are external to the material substances. Neither type re-
 quires the other type for the completion of its essence.
 Their unexplained interrelations are unnecessary for their
                                                            149
                                              Nature and Life

respective existences. In truth, this formulation of the
problem in terms of minds and matter is unfortunate. It
omits the lower forms of life, such as vegetation and the
lower animal types. These forms touch upon human men-
tality at their highest, and upon inorganic nature at their
lowest.
    The effect of this sharp division between nature and
life has poisoned all subsequent philosophy. Even when the
coordinate existence of the two types of actualities is aban-
doned, there is no proper fusion of the two in most modern
schools of thought. For some, nature is mere appearance
and mind is the sole reality. For others, physical nature is
the sole reality and mind is an epiphenomenon. Here the
phrases "mere appearance" and "epiphenomenon" obvi-
ously carry the implication of slight importance for the
understanding of the final nature of things.
    The doctrine that I am maintaining is that neither
physical nature nor life can be understood unless we fuse
them together as essential factors in the composition of
"really real" things whose interconnections and individual
characters constitute the universe.
    The first step in the argument must be to form some
concept of what life can mean. Also we require that the
deficiencies in our concept of physical nature should be
supplied by its fusion with life. And we require that, on
the other hand, the notion of life should involve the notion
of physical nature.
     Now as a first approximation the notion of life implies
a certain absoluteness of self-enjoyment. This must mean a
certain immediate individuality, which is a complex process
of appropriating into a unity of existence the many data
presented as relevant by the physical processes of nature.
Life implies the absolute, individual self-enjoyment arising
out of this process of appropriation. I have, in my recent
writings, used the word prehension to express this process
                                                         150
                                                   Nature Alive

of appropriation. Also I have termed each individual act of
immediate self-enjoyment an occasion of experience. I hold
that these unities of existence, these occasions of experi-
ence, are the really real things which in their collective
unity compose the evolving universe, ever plunging into
the creative advance.
    But these are forward references to the issue of the
argument. As a first approximation we have conceived life
as implying absolute, individual self-enjoyment of a process
of appropriation. The data appropriated are provided by
the antecedent functioning of the universe. Thus the occa-
sion of experience is absolute in respect to its immediate
self-enjoyment. How it deals with its data is to be under-
stood without reference to any other concurrent occasions.
Thus the occasion, in reference to its internal process, re-
quires no contemporary process in order to exist. In fact
this mutual independence in the internal process of self-
adjustment is the definition of contemporaneousness.
    This concept of self-enjoyment does not exhaust that
aspect of process here termed life. Process for its intelligi-
bility involves the notion of a creative activity belonging
to the very essence of each occasion. It is the process of
eliciting into actual being factors in the universe which
antecedently to that process exist only in the mode of un-
realized potentialities. The process of self-creation is the
transformation of the potential into the actual, and the
fact of such transformation includes the immediacy of self-
enjoyment.
    Thus in conceiving the function of life in an occasion
of experience, we must discriminate the actualized data
presented by the antecedent world, the non-actualized po-
tentialities which lie ready to promote their fusion into a
new unity of experience, and the immediacy of self-enjoy-
ment which belongs to the creative fusion of those data
with those potentialities. This is the doctrine of the creative
                                                           151
                                               Nature and life
advance whereby it belongs to the essence of the universe,
that it passes into a future. It is nonsense to conceive of
nature as a static fact, even for an instant devoid of dura-
tion. There is no nature apart from transition, and there
is no transition apart from temporal duration. This is the
reason why the notion of an instant of time, conceived as a
primary simple fact, is nonsense.
     But even yet we have not exhausted the notion of
creation which is essential to the understanding of nature.
We must add yet another character to our description of
life. This missing characteristic is "aim." By this term aim
is meant the exclusion of the boundless wealth of alterna-
tive potentiality, and the inclusion of that definite factor
of novelty which constitutes the selected way of entertain-
ing those data in that process of unification. The aim is at
that complex of feeling which is the enjoyment of those
data in that way. "That way of enjoyment" is selected from
the boundless wealth of alternatives. It has been aimed at
for actualization in that process.
     Thus the characteristics of life are absolute self-enjoy-
ment, creative activity, aim. Here aim evidently involves
the entertainment of the purely ideal so as to be directive
of the creative process. Also the enjoyment belongs to the
process and is not a characteristic of any static result. The
aim is at the enjoyment belonging to the process.
     The question at once arises as to whether this factor of
life in nature, as thus interpreted, corresponds to anything
that we observe in nature. All philosophy is an endeavour
to obtain a self-consistent understanding of things observed.
Thus its development is guided in two ways, one is the
demand for a coherent self-consistency, and the other is the
elucidation of things observed. It is therefore our first task
to compare the above doctrine of life in nature with our
direct observations.
     Without doubt the sort of observations most prominent
                                                          152
                                                    Nature Alive
in our conscious experience are the sense perceptions.
Sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch, constitute a rough list
of our major modes of perception through the senses. But
there are an indefinite set of obscure bodily feelings which
form a background of feeling with items occasionally flash-
ing into prominence. The peculiarity of sense perception
is its dual character, partly irrelevant to the body and partly
referent to the body. In the case of sight, the irrelevance to
the body is at its maximum. We look at the scenery, at a
picture, or at an approaching car on the road, as an external
presentation given for our mental entertainment or mental
anxiety. There it is, exposed to view. But on reflection, we
elicit the underlying experience that we were seeing with
our eyes. Usually this fact is not in explicit consciousness at
the moment of perception. The bodily reference is reces-
sive, the visible presentation is dominant. In the other
modes of sensation, the body is more prominent. There is
great variation in this respect between the different modes.
In any doctrine as to the information derived from sense
perception this dual reference, external reference and
bodily reference, should be kept in mind. The current
philosophic doctrines, mostly derived from Hume, are de-
fective by reason of their neglect of bodily reference. Their
vice is the deduction of a sharp-cut doctrine from an as-
sumed sharp-cut mode of perception. The truth is that our
sense perceptions are extraordinarily vague and confused
modes of experience. Also there is every evidence that their
prominent side of external reference is very superficial in
its disclosure of the universe. It is important. For example,
pragmatically a paving stone is a hard, solid, static, irre-
moveable fact. This is what sense perception, on its sharp-
cut side, discloses. But if physical science be correct, this is
a very superficial account of that portion of the universe
which we call the paving stone. Modem physical science is
the issue of a coordinated effort, sustained for more than
                                                            153
                                                Nature and life
three centuries, to understand those activities of nature by
reason of which the transitions of sense perception occur.
    Two conclusions are now abundantly clear. One is that
sense perception omits any discrimination of the funda-
mental activities within nature. For example, consider the
difference between the paving stone as perceived visually,
or by falling upon it, and the molecular activities of the
paving stone as described by the physicist. The second con-
clusion is the failure of science to endow its formulae for
activity with any meaning. The divergence of the formulae
about nature from the appearance of nature has robbed the
formulae of any explanatory character. It has even robbed
us of reason for believing that the past gives any ground
for expectation of the future. In fact, science conceived as
resting on mere sense perception, with no other source of
observation, is bankrupt, so far as concerns its claim to self-
sufficiency.
    Science can find no individual enjoyment in nature:
Science can find no aim in nature: Science can find no
creativity in nature; it finds mere rules of succession. These
negations are true of natural science. They are inherent in
its methodology. The reason for this blindness of physical
science lies in the fact that such science only deals with
half the evidence provided by human experience. It divides
the seamless coat-or, to change the metaphor into a hap-
pier form, it examines the coat, which is superficial, and
neglects the body which is fundamental.
    The disastrous separation of body and mind which has
been fixed on European thought by Descartes is responsible
for this blindness of science. In one sense the abstraction
has been a happy one, in that it has allowed the simplest
things to be considered first, for about ten generations.
Now these simplest things are those widespread habits of
nature that dominate the whole stretch of the universe
within our remotest, vaguest observation. None of these
                                                           154
                                                   Nature Alive
laws of nature gives the slightest evidence of necessity. They
are the modes of procedure which within the scale of our
observations do in fact prevail. I mean, the fact that the
extensiveness of the universe is dimensional, the fact that
the number of spatial dimensions is three, the spatial laws
of geometry, the ultimate formulae for physical occurrences.
There is no necessity in any of these ways of behaviour.
They exist as average, regulative conditions because the
majority of actualities are swaying each other to modes of
interconnection exemplifying those laws. New modes of
self-expression may be gaining ground. We cannot tell.
But, to judge by all analogy, after a sufficient span of exist-
ence our present laws will fade into unimportance. New
interests will dominate. In our present sense of the term,
our spatio-physical epoch will pass into the background of
the past, which conditions all things dimly and without
evident effect on the decision of prominent relations.
    These massive laws, at present prevailing, are the gen-
eral physical laws of inorganic nature. At a certain scale
of observation they are prevalent without hint of interfer-
ence. The formation of suns, the motions of planets, the
geologic changes on the earth, seem to proceed with a
massive impetus which excludes any hint of modification
by other agencies. To this extent sense perception on which
science relies discloses no aim in nature.
    Yet it is untrue to state that the general observation of
mankind, in which sense perception is only one factor, dis-
closes no aim. The exact contrary is the case. All explana-
tions of the sociological functionings of mankind include
aim as an essential factor in explanation. For example, in
a criminal trial where the evidence is circumstantial the
demonstration of motive is one chief reliance of the prose-
cution. In such a trial would the defence plead the doctrine
that purpose could not direct the motions of the body, and
that to indict the thief for stealing was analogous to indict-
                                                           155
                                               Nature and life
ing the sun for rising? Again no statesman can conduct
international relations without some estimate-implicit or
explicit in his consciousness-of the types of patriotism re-
spectively prevalent in various nations and in the statesmen
of these nations. A lost dog can be seen trying to find his
master or trying to find his way home. In fact we are directly
conscious of our purposes as directive of our actions. Apart
from such direction no doctrine could in any sense be acted
upon. The notions entertained mentally would have no
effect upon bodily actions. Thus what happens would
happen in complete indifference to the' entertainment of
such notions.
    Scientific reasoning is completely dominated by the
presupposition that mental functionings are not properly
part of nature. Accordingly it disregards all those mental
antecedents which mankind habitually presuppose as effec-
tive in guiding cosmological functionings. As a method
this procedure is entirely justifiable, provided that we
recognize the limitations involved. These limitations are
both obvious and undefined. The gradual eliciting of their
definition is the hope of philosophy.
    The points that I would emphasize are, first, that this
sharp division between mentality and nature has no ground
in our fundamental observation. We find ourselves living
within nature. Secondly, I conclude that we should con-
ceive mental operations as among the factors which make
up the constitution of nature. Thirdly, that we should
reject the notion of idle wheels in the process of nature.
Every factor which emerges makes a difference, and that
difference can only be expressed in terms of the individual
character of that factor. Fourthly, that we have now the
task of defining natural facts, so as to understand how
mental occurrences are operative in conditioning the sub-
sequent course of nature.
    A rough division can be made of six types of occur-
                                                          156
                                                    Nature Alive

rences in nature. The first type is human existence, body
and mind. The second type includes all sorts of animal life,
insects, the vertebrates, and other genera. In fact all the
various types of animal life other than human. The third
type includes all vegetable life. The fourth type consists of
the single living cells. The fifth type consists of all large
scale inorganic aggregates, on a scale comparable to the
size of animal bodies, or larger. The sixth type is composed
of the happenings on an infinitesimal scale, disclosed by
the minute analysis of modern physics.
     Now all these functionings of nature influence each
other, require each other, and lead on to each other. The
list has purposely been made roughly, without any scien-
tific pretension. The sharp-cut scientific classifications are
essential for scientific method. But they are dangerous for
philosophy. Such classification hides the truth that the
different modes of natural existence shade off into each
other. There is the animal life with its central direction of
a society of cells, there is the vegetable life with its organ-
ized republic of cells, there is the cell life with its organized
republic of molecules, there is the large-scale inorganic
society of molecules with its passive acceptance of neces-
sities derived from spatial relations, there is the infra-
molecular activity which has lost all trace of the passivity
of inorganic nature on a larger scale.
     In this survey some main conclusions stand out. One
conclusion is the diverse modes of functioning which are
produced by diverse modes of organization. The second
conclusion is the aspect of continuity between these dif-
ferent modes. There are borderline cases, which bridge the
gaps. Often the borderline cases are unstable, and pass
quickly. But span of existence is merely relative to our
habits of human life. For inframolecular occurrence, a
second is a vast period of time. A third conclusion is the
difference in the aspects of nature according as we change
                                                             157
                                              Nature and life
the scale of observation. Each scale of observation presents
us with average effects proper to that scale.
    Again, another consideration arises. How do we ob-
serve nature? Also, what is the proper analysis of an obser-
vation? The conventional answer to this question is that
we perceive nature through our senses. Also in the analysis
of sense perception we are apt to concentrate upon its most
clear-cut instance, namely sight. Now visual perception is
the final product of evolution. It belongs to high-grade
animals-to vertebrates and to the more advanced type of
insects. There are numberless living things which afford
no evidence of possessing sight. Yet they show every sign
of taking account of their environment in the way proper
to living things. Also human beings shut off sight with
peculiar ease, by closing our eyes or by the calamity of
blindness. The information provided by mere sight is
peculiarly barren-namely external regions disclosed as
coloured. There is no necessary transition of colours, and
no necessary selection of regions, and no necessary mutual
adaptation of the display of colours. Sight at any in-
stant merely provides the passive fact of regions variously
coloured. If we have memories, we observe the transition
of colours. But there is nothing intrinsic to the mere
coloured regions which provides any hint of internal ac-
tivity whereby change can be understood. It is from this
experience that our conception of a spatial distribution of
passive material substances arises. Nature is thus described
as made up of vacuous bits of matter with no internal
values, and merely hurrying through space.
    But there are two accompaniments of this experience
which should make us suspicious of accepting it at its face
value as any direct disclosure of the metaphysical nature of
things. In the first place, even in visual experience we are
also aware of the intervention of the body. We know di-
rectly that we see with our eyes. That is a vague feeling,
                                                         158
                                                 Nature Alive
but extremely important. Secondly, every type of crucial
experiment proves that what we see, and where we see it,
depend entirely upon the physiological functioning of our
body. Any method of making our body function internally
in a given way, will provide us with an assigned visual
sensation. The body is supremely indifferent to the hap-
penings of nature a short way off, where it places its visual
sensa.
    Now the same is true of all other modes of sensation,
only to a greater extent. All sense perception is merely one
outcome of the dependence of our experience upon bodily
functionings. Thus if we wish to understand the relation
of our personal experience to the activities of nature, the
proper procedure is to examine the dependence of our per-
sonal experiences upon our personal bodies.
    Let us ask about our overwhelming persuasions as to
our own personal body-mind relation. In the first place,
there is the claim to unity. The human individual is one
fact, body and mind. This claim to unity is the funda-
mental fact, always presupposed, rarely explicitly formu-
lated. I am experiencing and my body is mine. In the
second place, the functioning of our body has a much
wider influence than the mere production of sense experi-
ence. We find ourselves in a healthy enjoyment of life by
reason of the healthy functionings of our internal organs-
heart, lungs, bowels, kidneys, etc. The emotional state
arises just because they are not providing any sensa directly
associated with themselves. Even in sight, we enjoy our
vision because there is no eyestrain. Also we enjoy our
general state of life, because we have no stomachache. I am
insisting that the enjoyment of health, good or bad, is a
positive feeling only casually associated with particular
sensa. For example, you can enjoy the ease with which your
eyes are functioning even when you are looking at a bad
picture or a vulgar building. This direct feeling of the
                                                         159
                                                Nature and life
derivation of emotion from the body is among our funda-
mental experiences. There are emotions of various types-
but every type of emotion is at least modified by derivation
from the body. It is for physiologists to analyse in detail the
modes of bodily functioning. For philosophy, the one
fundamental fact is that the whole complexity of mental
experience is either derived or modified by such function-
ing. Also our basic feeling is this sense of derivation, which
leads to our claim for unity, body and mind.
    But our immediate experience also claims derivation
from another source, and equally claims a unity founded
upon this alternative source of derivation. This second
source is our own state of mind directly preceding the
immediate present of our conscious experience. A quar-
ter of a second ago, we were entertaining such and
such ideas, we were enjoying such and such emotions, and
we were making such and such observations of external
fact. In our present state of mind, we are continuing that
previous state. The word continuing states only half the
truth. In one sense it is too weak, and in another sense it
overstates. It is too weak, because we not only continue, but
we claim absolute identity with our previous state. It was
our very identical self in that state of mind, which is of
course the basis of our present experience a quarter of a
second later. In another sense the word continuing over-
states. For we do not quite continue in our preceding state
of experience. New elements have intervened. All of these
new elements are provided by our bodily functionings. We
fuse these new elements with the basic stuff of experience
provided by our state of mind a quarter of a second ago.
Also, as we have already agreed, we claim an identification
with our body. Thus our experience in the present discloses
its own nature as with two sources of derivation, namely,
the body and the antecedent experiential functionings.
Also there is a claim for identification with each of these
                                                           160
                                                   Nature Alive
sources. The body is mine, and the antecedent experience
is mine. Still more, there is only one ego, to claim the body
and to claim the stream of experience. I submit that we
have here the fundamental basic persuasion on which we
found the whole practice of our existence. While we exist,
body and soul are inescapable elements in our being, each
with the full reality of our own immediate self. But neither
body nor soul possesses the sharp observational definition
which at first sight we attribute to them. Our knowledge of
the body places it as a complex unity of happenings within
the larger field of nature. But its demarcation from the rest
of nature is vague in the extreme. The body consists of the
coordinated functionings of billions of molecules. It be-
longs to the structural essence of the body that, in an indefi-
nite number of ways, it is always losing molecules and
gaining molecules. When we consider the question with
microscopic accuracy, there is no definite boundary to de-
termine where the body begins and external nature ends.
Again the body can lose whole limbs, and yet we claim
identity with the same body. Also the vital functions of the
cells in the amputated limb ebb slowly. Indeed the limb
survives in separation from the body for an immense time
compared to the internal vibratory periods of its molecules.
Also apart from such catastrophes, the body requires the
environment in order to exist. Thus there is a unity of the
body with the environment, as well as a unity of body and
soul into one person.
    But in conceiving our personal identity we are apt to
emphasize rather the soul than the body. The one indi-
vidual is that coordinated stream of personal experiences,
which is my thread of life or your thread of life. It is that
succession of self-realization, each occasion with its direct
memory of its past and with its anticipation of the future.
That claim to enduring self-identity is our self-assertion of
personal identity.
                                                           161
                                              Nature and Lile
    Yet when we examine this notion of the soul, it dis-
closes itself as even vaguer than our definition of the body.
First, the continuity of the soul-so far as concerns con-
sciousness-has to leap gaps in time. We sleep or we are
stunned. And yet it is the same person who recovers con-
sciousness. We trust to memory, and we ground our trust
on the continuity of the functionings of nature, more espe-
cially on the continuity of our body. Thus nature in general
and the body in particular provide the stuff for the per-
sonal endurance of the soul. Again there is a curious vari-
ation in the vividness of the successive occasions of the
soul's existence. We are living at full stretch with a keen
observation of external occurrence; then external attention
dies away and we are lost in meditation; the meditation
gradually weakens in vivid presentation: we doze; we
dream; we sleep with a total lapse of the stream of con-
sciousness. These functionings of the soul are diverse, vari-
able, and discontinuous. The claim to the unity of the soul
is analogous to the claim to the unity of the body, and is
analogous to the claim to the unity of body and soul, and is
analogous to the claim to the community of the body with
an external nature. It is the task of philosophic speculation
to conceive the happenings of the universe so as to render
understandable the outlook of physical science and to com-
bine this outlook with these direct persuasions representing
the basic facts upon which epistemology must build. The
weakness of the epistemology of the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries was that it based itself purely upon a
narrow formulation of sense perception. Also among the
various modes of sensation, visual experience was picked
out as the typical example. The result was to exclude all
the really fundamental factors constituting our experience.
     In such an epistemology we are far from the complex
data which philosophic speculation has to account for in a
system rendering the whole understandable. Consider the
                                                          162
                                                  Nature Alive
types of community of body and soul, of body and nature,
of soul and nature, or successive occasions of bodily exist-
ence, or the soul's existence. These fundamental intercon-
nections have one very remarkable characteristic. Let us
ask what is the function of the external world for the stream
of experience which constitute the soul. This world, thus
experienced, is the basic fact within those experiences. All
the emotions, and purposes, and enjoyments, proper to the
individual existence of the soul are nothing other than the
soul's reactions to this experienced world which lies at the
base of the soul's existence.
    Thus in a sense, the experienced world is one complex
factor in the composition of many factors constituting the
essence of the soul. We can phrase this shortly by saying
that in one sense the world is in the soul.
    But there is an antithetical doctrine balancing this
primary truth. Namely, our experience of the world in-
volves the exhibition of the soul itself as one of the com-
ponents within the world. Thus there is a dual aspect to
the relationship of an occasion of experience as one relatum
and the experienced world as another relatum. The world
is included within the occasion in one sense, and the occa-
sion is included in the world in another sense. For example,
I am in the room, and the room is an item in my present
experience. But my present experience is what I now am.
    But this baffling antithetical relation extends to all the
connections which we have been discussing. For example,
consider the enduring self-identity of the soul. The soul is
nothing else than the succession of my occasions of experi-
ence, extending from birth to the present moment. Now,
at this instant, I am the complete person embodying all
these occasions. They are mine. On the other hand it is
equally true that my immediate occasion of experience, at
the present moment, is only one among the stream of occa-
sions which constitutes my soul. Again, the world for me
                                                          163
                                               Nature and Lile
is nothing else than how the functionings of my body
present it for my experience. The world is thus wholly to
be discerned within those functionings. Knowledge of the
world is nothing else than an analysis of the functionings.
And yet, on the other hand, the body is merely one society
of functionings within the universal society of the world.
We have to construe the world in terms of the bodily
society, and the bodily society in terms of the general func-
tionings of the world.
    Thus, as disclosed in the fundamental essence of our
experience, the togetherness of things involves some doc-
trine of mutual immanence. In some sense or other, this
community of the actualities of the world means that each
happening is a factor in the nature of every other happen-
ing. After all, this is the only way in which we can under-
stand notions habitually employed in daily life. Consider
our notion of causation. How can one event be the cause of
another? In the first place, no event can be wholly and
solely the cause of another event. The whole antecedent
world conspires to produce a new occasion. But some one
occasion in an important way conditions the formation of
a successor. How can we understand this process of con-
ditioning?
    The mere notion of transferring a quality is entirely
unintelligible. Suppose that two occurrences may be in fact
detached so that one of them is comprehensible without
reference to the other. Then all notion of causation be-
tween them, or of conditioning, becomes unintelligible.
There is-with this supposition-no reason why the posses-
sion of any quality by one of them should in any way in-
fluence the possession of that quality, or of any other
quality, by the other. With such a doctrine the play and
interplay of qualitative succession in the world becomes a
blank fact from which no conclusions can be drawn as to
                                                          164
                                                    Nature Alive
past, present, or future, beyond the range of direct observa-
tion. Such a positivistic belief is quite self-consistent, pro-
vided that we do not include in it any hopes for the future
or regrets for the past. Science is then without any impor-
tance. Also effort is foolish, because it determines nothing.
The only intelligible doctrine of causation is founded on
the doctrine of immanence. Each occasion presupposes the
antecedent world as active in its own nature. This is the
reason why events have a determinate status relatively to
each other. Also it is the reason why the qualitative energies
of the past are combined into a pattern of qualitative ener-
gies in each present occasion. This is the doctrine of causa-
tion. It is the reason why it belongs to the essence of each
occasion that it is where it is. It is the reason for the trans-
ference of character from occasion to occasion. It is the
reason for the relative stability of laws of nature, some laws
for a wider environment, some laws for a narrower environ-
ment. It is the reason why-as we have already noted-in
our direct apprehension of the world around us we find
that curious habit of claiming a twofold unity with the
observed data. We are in the world and the world is in us.
Our immediate occasion is in the society of occasions form-
ing the soul, and our soul is in our present occasion. The
body is ours, and we are an activity within our body. This
fact of observation, vague but imperative, is the foundation
of the connexity of the world, and of the transmission of its
types of order.
    In this survey of the observational data in terms of
which our philosophic cosmology must be founded, we have
brought together the conclusions of physical science, and
those habitual persuasions dominating the sociological
functionings of mankind. These persuasions also guide the
humanism of literature, of art, and of religion. Mere exist-
ence has never entered into the consciousness of man,
                                                            165
                                                 Nature and Lile
except as the remote terminus of an abstraction in thought.
Descartes' "Cogito, ergo sum" is wrongly translated, "I
think, therefore I am." It is never bare thought or bare
existence that we are aware of. I find myself as essentially
a unity of emotions, enjoyments, hopes, fears, regrets, valu-
ations of alternatives, decisions-all of them subjective re-
actions to the environment as active in my nature. My
unity-which is Descartes' "I am" -is my process of shaping
this welter of material into a consistent pattern of feelings.
The individual enjoyment is what I am in my role of a
natural activity, as I shape the activities of the environment
into a new creation, which is myself at this moment; and
yet, as being myself, it is a continuation of the antecedent
world. If we stress the role of the environment, this process
is causation. If we stress the role of my immediate pattern
of active enjoyment, this process is                 If we stress
the role of the conceptual anticipation of the future whose
existence is a necessity in the nature of the present, this
process is the teleological aim at some ideal in the future.
This aim, however, is not really beyond the present process.
For the aim at the future is an enjoyment in the present. It
thus effectively conditions the immediate self-creation of
the new creature.
    We can now again ask the final question as put forward
at the close of the former lecture. Physical science has re-
duced nature to activity, and has discovered abstract mathe-
matical formulae which are illustrated in these activities of
nature. But the fundamental question remains, How do
we add content to the notion of bare activity? This question
can only be answered by fusing life with nature.
    In the first place, we must distinguish life from men-
tality. Mentality involves conceptual experience, and is
only one variable ingredient in life. The sort of function-
ing here termed conceptual experience is the entertain-
                                                             166
                                                   Nature Alive
ment of possibilities for ideal realization in abstraction
from any sheer physical realization. The most obvious ex-
ample of conceptual experience is the entertainment of
alternatives. Life lies below this grade of mentality. Life is
the enjoyment of emotion, derived from the past and aimed
at the future. It is the enjoyment of emotion which was
then, which is now, and which will be then. This vector
character is of the essence of such entertainment.
     The emotion transcends the present in two ways. It
issues from, and it issues towards. It is received, it is en-
joyed, and it is passed along, from moment to moment.
Each occasion is an activity of concern, in the Quaker
sense of that term. It is the conjunction of transcendence
and immanence. The occasion is concerned, in the way of
feeling and aim, with things that in their own essence lie
beyond it; although these things in their present functions
are factors in the concern of that occasion. Thus each occa-
sion, although engaged in its own immediate self-realiza-
tion, is concerned with the universe.
     The process is always a process of modification by reason
of the numberless avenues of supply, and by reason of the
numberless modes of qualitative texture. The unity of
emotion, which is the unity of the present occasion, is a
patterned texture of qualities, always shifting as it is passed
into the future. The creative activity aims at preservation
of the components and at preservation of intensity. The
modifications of pattern, the dismissal into elimination, are
in obedience to this aim.
     In so far as conceptual mentality does not intervene,
the grand patterns pervading the environment are passed
on with the inherited modes of adjustment. Here we find
the patterns of activity studied by the physicists and chem-
ists. Mentality is merely latent in all these occasions as thus
studied. In the case of inorganic nature any sporadic flashes
                                                           167
                                               Nature and Lile
are inoperative so far as our powers of discernment are con-
cerned. The lowest stages of effective mentality, controlled
by the inheritance of physical pattern, involves the faint
direction of emphasis by unconscious ideal aim. The vari-
ous examples of the higher forms of life exhibit the variety
of grades of effectiveness of mentality. In the social habits
of animals, there is evidence of flashes of mentality in the
past which have degenerated into physical habits. Finally
in the higher mammals and more particularly in mankind,
we have clear evidence of mentality habitually effective. In
our own experience, our knowledge consciously enter-
tained and systematized can only mean such mentality,
directly observed.
    The qualities entertained as objects in conceptual ac-
tivity are of the nature of catalytic agents, in the sense in
which that phrase is used in chemistry. They modify the
aesthetic process by which the occasion constitutes itself
out of the many streams of feeling received from the past.
It is not necessary to assume that conceptions introduce
additional sources of measurable energy. They may do so;
for the doctrine of the conservation of energy is not based
upon exhaustive measurements. But the operation of men-
tality is primarily to be conceived as a diversion of the flow
of energy.
    In these lectures I have not entered upon systematic
metaphysical cosmology. The object of the lectures is to
indicate those elements in our experience in terms of which
such a cosmology should be constructed. The key notion
from which such construction should start is that the ener-
getic activity considered in physics is the emotional inten-
sity entertained in life.
    Philosophy begins in wonder. And, at the end, when
philosophic thought has done its best, the wonder remains.
There have been added, however, some grasp of the im-
                                                          168
                                                Nature Alive
mensity of things, some purification of emotion by under-
standing. Yet there is a danger in such reflections. An im-
mediate good is apt to be thought of in the degenerate form
of a passive enjoyment. Existence is activity ever merging
into the future. The aim at philosophic understanding is
the aim at piercing the blindness of activity in respect to
its transcendent functions.




                                                        169
IV
EPILOGUE




                                             LECTURE NINE



  The Aim of Philosophy


7he    task of a university is the creation of the future, so
far as rational thought, and civilized modes of appreciation,
can affect the issue. The future is big with every possibility
of achievement and of tragedy.
    Amid this scene of creative action, What is the special
function of philosophy?
    In order to answer this question, we must first decide
what constitutes the philosophic character of any particular
doctrine. What makes a doctrine philosophical? No one
truth, thoroughly understood in all the infinitude of its
bearings, is more or less philosophical than any other truth.
The pursuit of philosophy is the one avocation denied to
omniscience.
    Philosophy is an attitude of mind towards doctrines
ignorantly entertained. By the phrase "ignorantly enter-
tained" I mean that the full meaning of the doctrine in
respect to the infinitude of circumstances to which it is
relevant, is not understood. The philosophic attitude is a
resolute attempt to enlarge the understanding of the scope
of application of every notion which enters into our current
thought. The philosophic attempt takes every word, and
                                                          171
                                                    Epilogue

every phrase, in the verbal expression of thought, and asks,
What does it mean? It refuses to be satisfied by the conven-
tional presupposition that every sensible person knows the
answer. As soon as you rest satisfied with primitive ideas,
and with primitive propositions, you have ceased to be a
philosopher.
     Of course you have got to start somewhere for the pur-
poses of discourse. But the philosopher, as he argues from
his premises, has already marked down every word and
phrase in them as topics for future enquiry. No philosopher
is satisfied with the concurrence of sensible people, whether
they be his colleagues, or even his own previous self. He
is always assaulting the boundaries of finitude.
     The scientist is also enlarging knowledge. He starts
with a group of primitive notions and of primitive rela-
tions between these notions, which defines the scope of his
science. For example, Newtonian dynamics assumes Eu-
clidean space, massive matter, motion, stresses and strains,
and the more general notion of force. There are also the
laws of motion, and a few other concepts added later. The
science consisted in the deduction of consequences, presup-
 posing the applicability of these ideas.
     In respect to Newtonian dynamics, the scientist and the
 philosopher face in opposite directions. The scientist asks
 for the consequences, and seeks to observe the realization
 of such consequences in the universe. The philosopher asks
 for the meaning of these ideas in terms of the welter of
 characterizations which infest the world.
     It is evident that scientists and philosophers can help
 each other. For the scientist sometimes wants a new idea,
 and the philosopher is enlightened as to meanings by the
 study of the scientific consequences. Their usual mode of
 intercommunication is by sharing in the current habits of
 cultivated thought.
                                                          172
                                         The Aim of Philosophy

    There is an insistent presupposition continually steri-
lizing philosophic thought. It is the belief, the very natural
belief, that mankind has consciously entertained all the
fundamental ideas which are applicable to its experience.
Further it is held that human language, in single words or
in phrases, explicitly expresses these ideas. I will term this
presupposition, "The Fallacy of the Perfect Dictionary."
    It is here that the philosopher, as such, parts company
with the scholar. The scholar investigates human thought
and human achievement, armed with a dictionary. He is
the main support of civilized thought. Apart from scholar-
ship, you may be moral, religious, and delightful. But you
are not wholly civilized. You will lack power of delicate
accuracy of expression.
    It is obvious that the philosopher needs scholarship,
just as he needs science. But both science and scholarship
are subsidiary weapons for philosophy.
     The fallacy of the perfect dictionary divides philoso-
phers into two schools, namely, the "Critical School," which
 repudiates speculative philosophy, and the "Speculative
 School" which includes it. The critical school confines itself
 to verbal analysis within the limits of the dictionary. The
 speculative school appeals to direct insight, and endeavours
 to indicate its meanings by further appeal to situations
 which promote such specific insights. It then enlarges the
 dictionary. The divergence between the schools is the
 quarrel between safety and adventure.
     The strength of the critical school lies in the fact that
 the doctrine of evolution never entered, in any radical
 sense, into ancient scholarship. Thus there arises the pre-
 supposition of a fixed specification of the human mind; and
 the blue print of this specification is the dictionary.
     I appeal to two great moments in the history of philoso-
 phy. Socrates spent his life in analysing the current presup-
                                                            J73
                                                    Epilogue

positions of the Athenian world. He explicitly recognized
that his philosophy was an attitude in the face of ignorance.
He was critical and yet constructive.
    Harvard is justly proud of the great period of its philo-
sophic department about thirty years ago. Josiah Royce,
William James, Santayana, George Herbert Palmer, Miin-
sterberg, constitute a group to be proud of. Among them
Palmer's achievements centre chiefly in literature and in
his brilliance as a lecturer. The group is a group of men
individually great. But as a group they are greater still. It
is a group of adventure, of speculation, of search for new
ideas. To be a philosopher is to make some humble ap-
proach to the main characterstic of this group of men.
     The use of philosophy is to maintain an active novelty
of fundamental ideas illuminating the social system. It re-
verses the slow descent of accepted thought towards the
inactive commonplace. If you like to phrase it so, philoso-
phy is mystical. For mysticism is direct insight into depths
as yet unspoken. But the purpose of philosophy is to ra-
 tionalize mysticism: not by explaining it away, but by the
 introduction of novel verbal characterizations, rationally
 coordinated.
     Philosophy is akin to poetry, and both of them seek to
 express that ultimate good sense which we term civiliza-
 tion. In each case there is reference to form beyond the
 direct meanings of words. Poetry allies itself to metre,
 philosophy to mathematic pattern.




                                                          174
Index
                                                            Index


Absolute, The, 71                        Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 5
Abstractions, 99, 123--124               Consciousness, 29, 120-121, 12!1-
Activity, 64-125                              124
  civilized universe, 105-125              experience and, 124
  forms of process, 86-104               Constantine, Emperor, 16
  perspective, 64-85                     Creative impulse, I-6!J
Actuality, 70-72                           expression, 20-41
Aeneid (Virgil), 16                        importance, 1-19
Aesthetics, 60-62                          understanding, 42-6!J
  logic and, 60-61                       Critique of Pure Reason (Kant),
Aggregations, four types of, 27               58
Anger, 22
Animals, 22-!JO, !J7, 7!J, 76-78, Ill,   Deity, 102-IO!J
     112, 121                            Democracy, basis of, Ill
Approximate accuracy, 73--74             Democritus, 115
Archimedes, 140                          Descartes, Rene, !J!J, 75, 86, 88--89,
Aristotle, 2, !J, 15, 40, 58                  101, II3-ll4, 120, 145, 149,
Arithmetic, 90-91                             154, 166
Art, II-12, II7                          Disorder, 50-5!J
Assemblage, 2
                                         Environment, II !J
Behaviourism, 2!J                        Epicurus, !Jl, 58
Being, types of, 67-71                   Epistemology, 108-109, Ill, 162
Bentley, Richard, 17                       first principle of, 29
Biographia Literaria (Coleridge),        Erasmus, Desiderius, 17
    5                                    Error, 50-5!J
Bodies, living, 21-!J2, 72, 114-         Essential omission, 73--74
    115                                  Ether, l!J6-l!J7
                                         Evil, 50-5!J
 Civilized universe, 105-125             Evolution, 112-II!J
                                                                           177
                                                                    Index
Existence, 6-7, 93--96                 Language, 5, !Jl-41, 92, 115
  potentiality and, 99-101               content of, !J!J
Experience, 108-109, 111-112,            essence of, !J4
     116, 160                            philosophy and, 49, 53-54
  conceptual, 166-167                    two functions of, !J2-!J!J
  consciousness and, 124                 two types of, !J6
  occasion of, 151
  sense, ll!J                          Learning, 5-6
  value, 110-111                       Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von,
Expression, 20-41                           2, !J, 100-101
  of feelings, 26-27                   Life, 127-129
                                       Locke, John, l!J!J
Feeling, 2!J                           Locomotion, l!J2, l!J3-l!J4
  expression and, 26-27                Logic, 2, 11-12, 52-5!J, 54-55, 74.
                                            105-106
Galileo, 140, 145                        aesthetics and, 60-61
Galois, Evariste, 47                     contradictions in, 54
Geometry, l!J2                           deductive, 105-107
Gibbon, Edward, 17                       symbols of, 61
                                       "Lycidas" (Milton), 50
Happenings, 71
"Hellas" (Shelley), 44                 Mabillon, Jean, 17
History, 17-19                         Mathematics, 45, 55, 58, 68, 80-
Homer, 16                                  82,92-9!1,97
Hume, David, 7!J, 8!J, 111, 112,        transition in, 46
     113--114, 118-119, l!J!J, l!J5-   Matter-of-fact, 6-11, 18, 19, 8!J-84
     l!J6                               in immediate realization, 77
                                        potentialities for, 94
Ideals, IO!J                            realized, 94
Iliad (Homer), 16                      Measurement, 18
Immanence, doctrine of, 165            Meditations (Descartes), !J!J
Importance, 1-19                       Mentality, 167-168
Inconsistency, 59                      Mill. John Stuart, 6
   process and, 5!J, 54-55             Milton, John, 50
Individuality, process and, 97-        Mind, 129
     99                                Morality, 11-12, 12-14, 19, 28
Inference, 52                          Multiplication table, 68, 76
   understanding and, 50               Miinsterberg, Hugo, 174
Infinitude, 78-79
Intelligence, 25                                7!J, 127-129
Interest, 8                              defined, 128
   discrimination and, !Jl                        Sir Isaac, 10, 115, l!J4-
                                           l !J5. I!J9, 145, 172
James, William, 2, !J, 174
                                       Palmer, George Herbert, 174
Kant, Immanuel, 58, l!J5               Perfection, 69, 120
                                                                       178
                                                                     Index
Perspective, 64-85                         the aesthetic experience and,
Philosophy, 48-50, 51-52, 127                 60
  the aim of, 171-174                    Sense perception, 56, 72-74, Ill2,
  as imaginative art, 117                     154
  language and, 49,                      Sermon on the Mount, 76
  pitfall of, !10                        Sheller, Henry, 52
  poetry and, 49-50, 174                 Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 44
  proof of, 49                           Socrates,
  use of, 174                            Soul, 161-162
Plato, 2-ll, 15, 16, lll, 5!1, 58, 67,   Space,            145-146
     76, 8!1, 92-9!1, 97, 100              empty, Ili6-Ill7
Poetry, philosophy and, 49-50,           Space-time, Ill9
     174                                 Speech, !16-!18, !19
Positivism, 148-149                        embryonic stage of, !17
Potentiality, 70                         Spinoza, Baruch, 50, 52
  existence and, 99-101                  Substances, 71
Power, 119                               Symbolism, !12, 92
Prehension, 2!1, 150-151                   of logic, 61
Process
  denial of, 5!1                         Tautology, 90
  forms of, 86-1 04                      Ten Commandments, 14-15
  inconsistency and, 5!1, 54--55         Thucydides, 15
  individuality and, 97-99               Treatise of Human Nature, A
  specious present, 89-90                    (Hume), Ill, Il2, Illll
Proof, 47, 48-50
  of philosophy, 49                      Understanding, 42-6!1
                                          finitude of, 44
Qualitative assignment,                   inference and, 50
                                          large-scale, 46
Ramanujan, 47                             modes of advance of, 57-58
Religion, 11-12, 19, 28                    notion of composition in, 45
Renaissance, 45
Royce, Josiah, 174                       Variables, 106-107
                                         Vegetation, 24-25, 27-28, 112
Santayana, George, 174                   Virgil, 16
Science and The Modern World             Voltaire, 17
     (Whitehead), 67
Selection, 21                            Whewell, Dr., 4!1
Self-enjoyment, 150-152                  Worth, 109-ll1
Self-evidence, 49, 50                    Writing, !16-!17




                                                                         179
