           BA	ZI
THE	FOUR	PILLARS	OF	DESTINY
Understanding	Character,	Relationships	and	Potential
            Through	Chinese	Astrology


                         Serge	Augier
 With	editorial	support	from	Henning	Cederkvist	and	Henrik	Cederkvist




                      LONDON	AND	PHILADELPHIA
Contents


Chapter	1    Introduction

Chapter	2    Ba	Zi:	The	Eight	Characters

Chapter	3    The	Heavenly	Stems

Chapter	4    The	Earthly	Branches

Chapter	5    Tools	for	Interpreting	the	Ba	Zi

CONCLUSION

INDEX
CHAPTER	1


Introduction
     He	who	knows	others	is	learned;
     He	who	knows	himself	is	wise.
                                                              Lao	Tzu,	Dao	De	Jing

The	 topic	 of	 this	 book	 is	 in	 the	 field	 of	 metaphysics,	 which	 is	 often	 hard	 to
define,	and	from	antiquity	has	changed	and	expanded	to	cover	a	wide	range	of
subjects.	 Though	 the	 topic	 and	 knowledge	 contained	 in	 this	 book	 is	 not	 of
Western	origin	but	that	of	eastern	philosophy,	it	is	the	universal	understanding	of
Being,	or	“Being	as	such,”	which	is	the	focus.	The	understanding	of	Man	and	his
position	in	the	universe	goes	beyond	the	mere	physical	manifestation.
    Chinese	 metaphysics	 is	 a	 large	 and	 profound	 field	 of	 study,	 which
encompasses	much	more	than	philosophical	thinking	and	reflections.	It	is	also	a
body	 of	 practical	 tools	 for	 very	 precise	 calculations	 and	 interpretations	 for
understanding	 our	 Being	 and	 our	 interaction	 with	 the	 world.	 The	 most	 well-
known	 of	 these	 is	 Feng	 Shui,	 which	 considers	 understanding	 how	 the
environment	and	the	surroundings	affect	us.	It	has	very	little	to	do	with	mirrors
and	plants	positioned	in	the	right	spot	of	an	apartment	to	make	the	energy	of	the
home	better!	Although	Feng	Shui	is	not	directly	within	the	scope	of	this	book,	it
will	 often	 be	 touched	 on	 because	 all	 the	 areas	 of	 Chinese	 metaphysics	 are
interrelated.	Nevertheless,	these	areas	need	to	be	addressed	separately	or	we	will
get	lost	and	confused.	Chinese	metaphysics	enables	us	to	understand	the	totality
of	a	person’s	life	and	therefore	can	get	quite	complicated;	but	if	we	follow	the
structured	steps	and	take	our	time	and	are	patient,	it	can	open	up	a	whole	new
level	of	understanding	of	our	own	life.
    The	topic	of	this	book,	Ba	Zi	(Eight	Characters),	is	far	less	well-known	than
Feng	Shui,	but	is	a	very	important	part	of	understanding	our	Being.	Here	in	the
West	most	people	have	not	heard	of	it,	though	we	have	most	likely	encountered
it	on	a	very	superficial	level.	With	every	Chinese	New	Year	we	hear	that	it	is	the
year	 of	 the	 rooster	 or	 the	 dragon,	 for	 example.	 And	 people	 who	 were	 born	 in
these	 years	 have	 such	 and	 such	 a	 type	 of	 personality.	 This	 is	 a	 very	 broad
generalization	 and	 does	 not	 hold	 much	 value.	 It	 is	 like	 reading	 the	 horoscope
section	in	the	newspaper	and	believing	that	what	it	says	will	actually	happen	to
everybody	who	is	a	Gemini.	And	we	know	from	our	own	experience	that	all	the
people	we	went	to	school	with	are	not	equal,	even	though	we	might	have	been
born	 within	 the	 same	 Chinese	 year.	 Ba	 Zi	 goes	 far	 beyond	 these	 simple
generalizations.	It	has	been	developed	over	countless	generations	and	its	depth	is
such	 that	 it	 could	 easily	 be	 studied	 at	 the	 level	 of	 a	 master’s	 degree	 at	 a
university	 today.	 However,	 from	 the	 basic	 principles	 of	 it	 we	 can	 get	 a	 lot	 of
information	that	will	help	us	in	the	pursuit	of	understanding	our	self.

     I	went	to	the	woods	because	I	wished	to	live	deliberately,	to	front	only	the
     essential	facts	of	life,	and	see	if	I	could	not	learn	what	it	had	to	teach,	and
     not,	when	I	came	to	die,	discover	that	I	had	not	lived.
                                                                            H.D.	Thoreau

Over	recent	years	we	have	seen	a	rejuvenation	in	methods	of	self-discovery	from
age-old	 systems	 such	 as	 yoga,	 or	 modern	 variations	 of	 old	 practices	 such	 as
mindfulness,	in	an	attempt	to	understand	ourselves	better	or	as	a	reaction	to	the
very	hectic	and	dispersed	life	that	we	live.	As	we	have	gone	from	basic	survival
to	 living	 very	 comfortably	 in	 this	 modern	 age,	 we	 have	 time	 to	 reflect	 on	 our
existence	 and	 the	 purpose	 of	 everything;	 but	 with	 this	 comfort	 can	 come
overthinking.	 We	 are	 easily	 drawn	 away	 from	 being	 attentive	 to	 ourselves	 and
slowing	 down,	 so	 people	 are	 realizing	 that	 we	 have	 to	 balance	 ourselves	 and
understand	 ourselves	 better	 not	 from	 an	 external	 material	 perspective	 but	 from
an	 internal	 observation.	 What	 we	 need	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 the	 traditional
practices	are	like	maps	for	the	human	being,	a	way	to	guide	us	towards	our	true
nature,	 finding	 our	 meaning	 of	 life.	 The	 maps	 are	 there	 to	 help	 us	 to	 see	 and
understand	 the	 different	 aspects	 of	 our	 personality	 (e.g.	 our	 talents	 and
capacities)	 that	 are	 sometimes	 buried	 deep	 inside	 our	 mundane	 life.	 Learning
what	talent	we	possess	helps	us	choose	what	we	have	to	give	to	the	world,	the
way	we	can	interact	with	others.	The	deeper	our	understanding	of	who	we	are,
the	easier	it	is	to	achieve	happiness	and	to	do	better	in	life.

     It	 is	 not	 only	 the	 most	 difficult	 thing	 to	 know	 oneself,	 but	 the	 most
     inconvenient	one,	too.
                                                              Josh	Billings	(H.W.	Shaw)
Ba	Zi	is	applied	psychology	in	that	we	seek	to	apply	the	theory	to	understanding
both	ourselves	and	others	not	just	on	a	theoretical	level	but	also	practically.	All
the	methods	of	Chinese	metaphysics	are	meant	to	be	used	on	a	daily	basis	in	our
lives.	With	the	eight	characters,	we	seek	to	increase	our	ability	to	communicate
and	 interact	 with	 other	 people	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 we	 can	 have	 a	 fruitful
relationship	 with	 them.	 Again,	 we	 can	 draw	 from	 our	 own	 experiences	 of	 how
we	need	to	learn.	Some	people	like	studying	by	themselves,	while	others	like	to
learn	through	group	study.	Some	are	more	into	examining	things	in	depth	and	in
detail,	 while	 others	 are	 content	 with	 only	 a	 superficial	 understanding.	 In
understanding	Ba	Zi	we	can	use	it	to	convey	what	we	need	for	the	receiver	of	the
information	to	understand	it	better.	Again,	if	we	for	example	knew	the	Ba	Zi	of	a
colleague	who	was	difficult	to	interact	with,	then	we	could	use	it	to	understand
them	better	in	such	a	way	that	would	make	things	easier	not	only	for	us	but	also
for	them.	We	need	to	emphasize	that	this	is	not	about	manipulation	or	control,
but	about	understanding	people	better.
    However,	in	the	pursuit	of	knowledge	of	others,	we	need	to	take	time	to	dig
into	 our	 own	 self.	 Ba	 Zi	 will	 help	 us	 know	 our	 tendencies,	 what	 we	 are	 most
likely	 to	 do	 in	 different	 aspects	 of	 our	 lives	 such	 as	 work	 and	 close	 personal
relationships.	 As	 you	 can	 see,	 this	 is	 a	 large	 field,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 use	 it
practically	 and	 look	 for	 the	 information	 that	 we	 need.	 With	 this	 knowledge	 of
our	self,	we	will	move	more	towards	the	Daoist	principle	of	non-resisting	(Wu
Wei),	so	that	we	do	not	resist	ourselves.	This	means	that	we	know	when	to	act
and	 when	 not	 to	 act	 because	 we	 understand	 the	 flow	 around	 us;	 we	 know	 the
best	timing	for	our	actions.

     We	are	not	permitted	to	choose	the	frame	of	our	destiny.	But	what	we	put
     into	it	is	ours.
                                                                       D.	Hammarskjöld

The	knowledge	of	who	we	are,	of	other	people	and	of	the	world,	is	really	what
Daoist	 practice	 is	 about:	 Ba	 Zi	 is	 about	 trying	 to	 understand	 our	 destiny.	 The
term	 “destiny”	 here	 is	 not	 the	 seemingly	 inevitable	 or	 necessary	 succession	 of
events—that	 our	 life	 is	 already	 clearly	 set	 and	 that,	 whatever	 we	 do,	 the	 same
things	 will	 happen.	 This	 is	 the	 Western	 or	 normal	 view	 of	 fate.	 Destiny	 in
Daoism	is	about	what	potential	we	are	given.	It	is	not	that	we	will	have	greatness
if	 we	 do	 nothing,	 nor	 is	 it	 that	 everybody	 can	 achieve	 greatness	 with
determination,	 positivity	 and	 some	 luck.	 It	 is	 about	 seeing	 what	 potential	 and
limits	we	have,	what	we	can	actually	achieve	in	life	within	our	given	frame.
    This	 means	 that	 life	 is	 not	 fair	 in	 the	 view	 of	 a	 Daoist,	 but	 we	 work	 with
what	we	have	been	given.	Life	for	some	will	be	easy,	and	we	all	know	people
who	apparently	glide	through	life	on	an	unseemingly	endless	tide	of	luck,	while
others	seem	to	be	on	an	endless	streak	of	bad	luck.	Just	by	looking	to	our	close
community	 or	 in	 the	 world	 in	 general,	 we	 see	 that	 life	 is	 not	 fair.	 Also,
seemingly	 out	 of	 nowhere,	 people	 rise	 up	 to	 achieve	 greatness	 where	 others
think	there	would	be	none.	What	potential	we	are	given	is	what	we	are	starting	to
study	and	understand	in	this	book.

     We	know	what	we	are	but	not	what	we	may	be.
                                                                          Ophelia	in	Hamlet

Hence,	with	Ba	Zi	we	can	get	a	more	in-depth	view	of	what	we	can	do	and	have
to	do	to	achieve	our	goals	in	life.	These	eight	characters	will	show	us	the	way	to
our	own	perfection,	to	the	ideal	image	of	ourselves.	We	will	discover	our	talents
and	capacities,	but	also	our	weaknesses	and	our	bad	sides	too.	Consequently,	the
Ba	Zi	map	gives	us	the	possibility	to	develop	our	aptitudes	and	at	the	same	time
avoid	 our	 worst	 aspects.	 Additionally,	 Ba	 Zi	 can	 at	 some	 point	 be	 used	 with
Feng	Shui,	both	arts	that	can	simplify	our	life	by	giving	answers	to	our	questions
—and	give	directions	to	our	everyday	life.
    Ba	 Zi	 is	 not	 easy,	 it’s	 a	 lifelong	 process,	 but	 we	 can	 learn	 to	 use	 it	 at	 an
introductory	level—this	is	for	all	of	us!



Ba	Zi	and	its	part	in	totality
Before	we	explore	Ba	Zi,	we	need	to	look	at	the	Daoist	view	of	Man	in	relation
to	 the	 world	 and	 the	 universe.	 The	 Daoist	 view	 is	 of	 Man,	 heaven	 and	 earth
being	 inseparable.	 Everything	 is	 joined	 and	 connected.	 While	 large	 outside
forces	affect	the	inner	workings	of	Man,	we	must	see	that	they	view	Man	as	a
part	of	totality	and	not	as	something	separate.	While	each	of	us	is	unique,	we	are
all	part	of	the	world	and	the	universe,	making	us	also	in	a	sense	insignificant	too.
But	the	sum	of	all	parts	makes	up	the	total.	This	view	is	not	unique	to	Daoism
but	 is	 a	 part	 of	 many	 spiritual	 traditions.	 The	 basis	 for	 Daoist	 practice	 is	 the
understanding	 of	 Man	 or	 oneself	 in	 this	 totality.	 While	 understanding	 the
uniqueness	and	insignificance	at	the	same	time,	and	being	able	to	align	oneself
between	heaven	and	earth,	then	Man	can	genuinely	be	happy.	The	image	of	this
is	Man	standing	between	heaven	and	earth.




In	 this	 image,	 Man	 is	 holding	 the	 heavens	 while	 standing	 on	 the	 earth.	 This
image	is	old	and	stems	from	the	myth	of	the	creation	of	the	universe,	with	the
mythical	being	Pan	Gu	who	was	born	in	an	egg	and	pushed	and	separated	it	into
heaven	 and	 earth.	 Heaven	 is	 pure	 spirit	 (yang)	 and	 earth	 is	 pure	 essence	 (yin),
while	Man	is	composed	of	both	energies	(yin	and	yang).	This	image	explains	the
basis	for	understanding	the	Daoist	view	of	Man	in	relationship	to	everything!
     Yin	and	yang	are	core	concepts	in	Daoism,	and	we	will	go	into	greater	detail
on	 these	 in	 later	 sections.	 We	 can	 think	 of	 yang	 as	 the	 most	 expansive	 and
volatile,	something	we	cannot	grasp;	and	yin	as	the	most	concrete	and	material,
something	which	is	real.
     With	this	image	of	Man	as	between	heaven	and	earth,	we	can	then	look	at	the
place	 of	 Ba	 Zi	 in	 the	 understanding	 of	 human	 nature.	 In	 order	 to	 do	 this,	 to
understand	better	where	Ba	Zi	fits	into	Chinese	metaphysics,	we	need	to	look	a
little	at	what	is	called	the	three	lucks	(San	Cai).



San	Cai:	the	three	lucks
Before	 we	 go	 into	 detail	 of	 the	 three	 lucks	 we	 will	 look	 at	 a	 short	 story	 that
clarifies	what	one	might	consider	luck:

     On	the	borders	of	the	barbarian	land	lived	a	farmer	with	his	family.	It	was	a
     small	 farm	 and	 he	 only	 had	 one	 horse.	 One	 day	 his	 horse	 escaped	 and
     everyone	in	the	village	pitied	him,	but	the	farmer	replied,	“Why	do	you	pity
     me?	It	might	be	a	good	thing!”
         A	long	time	went	by	and	his	horse	returned,	accompanied	by	a	majestic
     barbarian	stallion.	The	people	of	the	village	were	so	happy	for	him,	but	the
     farmer	replied,	“Maybe	it	is	a	bad	thing!”
         The	 farmer	 and	 his	 family	 enjoyed	 the	 help	 of	 the	 extra	 horse	 and	 his
     son	loved	to	ride	him.	But	one	day	he	fell	off	the	horse	and	was	disabled!
     The	 village	 pitied	 him,	 and	 again	 the	 farmer	 replied,	 “What	 makes	 you
     think	it	is	not	a	good	thing?”
         One	 day	 the	 army	 of	 the	 land	 came	 and	 called	 all	 able-bodied	 men	 to
     arms	 because	 of	 the	 invading	 barbarian	 horde.	 Most	 of	 the	 young	 men	 of
     the	 village	 died,	 while	 the	 son	 of	 the	 farmer	 was	 spared	 because	 he	 was
     disabled.

From	 this	 story	 we	 see	 that,	 depending	 on	 the	 situation,	 something	 that	 seems
good	might	turn	out	to	be	bad	and	something	bad	might	turn	out	to	be	something
good.	As	we	gain	more	understanding	of	the	study	of	Ba	Zi	we	might	see	aspects
of	our	self	that	we	might	consider	bad,	but	in	some	instances	in	our	life	these	so-
to-say	bad	aspects	of	us	might	provide	us	with	something	good,	and	vice	versa.
In	a	simple	example,	consider	that	a	person	who	is	very	good-hearted	and	likes
to	 help	 people	 might	 meet	 a	 person	 who	 sees	 this	 and	 exploits	 this.	 Then	 this
good	 trait	 is	 actually	 something	 that	 can	 be	 turned	 against	 us.	 It	 is	 valuable	 to
keep	this	in	mind	when	we	start	to	delve	deeper	into	Ba	Zi	so	that	we	do	not	get
stuck	on	our	bad	aspects	or	glorify	our	good	sides,	because	they	might	change,
depending	on	the	situation.
     We	 can	 now	 go	 into	 detail	 of	 the	 three	 lucks.	 They	 are	 Heaven	 luck,	 Man
luck	and	Earth	luck.


Heaven	luck:	Ba	Zi
Heaven	luck	is	what	is	given	to	us.	We	do	not	how	or	why,	but	it	is	our	nature.	It
will	comprise	good	aspects	and	bad	aspects.	It	ranges	from	outward	tendencies
to	deep	unconscious	behavior.	Some	people	go	through	an	easy	life	and	others
will	 struggle	 and	 have	 a	 hard	 time.	 It	 is	 not	 fair.	 This	 is	 Ba	 Zi,	 the	 heavenly
mandate.	There	is	not	much	we	can	change	about	it,	but	it	is	important	that	we
understand	it	so	that	we	can	live	life	better.


Man	luck:	the	practice
Man	 luck	 is	 what	 we	 actually	 can	 do	 for	 ourselves,	 a	 personal	 practice.	 The
image	 describes	 the	 importance	 for	 Man	 to	 be	 in	 balance	 with	 himself,	 with
himself	 and	 the	 earth,	 with	 himself	 and	 the	 heavens,	 and	 finally	 in	 balance
between	himself	and	heaven	and	earth.	In	other	words,	Man	needs	to	be	aligned
between	 heaven	 and	 earth	 to	 correctly	 respond	 to	 the	 physical,	 energetic	 and
mental	aspects	of	any	situation.
     So	what	exactly	do	we	mean	by	balance	and	alignment?	Well,	if	we	want	to
have	a	good	life,	we	need	to	take	care	of	our	body,	our	vitality	and	our	mind.	We
need	 to	 have	 the	 proper	 tools	 to	 work	 on	 ourselves.	 To	 work	 on	 the	 body	 we
need	Wai	Gong	(body),	Nei	Dan	(energy)	and	Shen	Gong	(mind).
     Wai	 Gong	 is	 physical	 exercises	 that	 are	 meant	 to	 give	 proper	 strength,
rooting	and	structure.	Nei	Dan	is	the	work	of	the	breath	and	that	which	gives	us
vitality	and	energy	in	our	daily	life.	Nei	Dan	constitutes	all	work	on	feeling	the
breath	and	getting	in	an	intimate	relation	with	our	breath.	Finally,	to	understand
how	our	mind	works	and	how	actually	we	work,	we	need	to	work	on	the	mind,
Shen	Gong.	In	Shen	Gong,	as	we	practice	Nei	Dan	we	start	getting	to	know	our
mind	and	how	it	works.
     With	Wai	Gong,	Nei	Dan	and	Shen	Gong	we	can	understand	ourselves	better
in	all	aspects	of	our	life.	We	will	live	more	healthily	and	hence	have	more	time
for	introspection	and	consequently	a	much	better	feeling	of	what	is	good	or	not
good	for	us.	Through	understanding	we	can	truly	experience	happiness.
     When	the	body	and	mind	are	balanced,	it	is	easier	to	understand	other	people
as	well,	because	a	balanced	human	being	is	more	relaxed	and	less	influenced	by
emotions	and	ego.	In	addition,	when	aligned	with	heaven	and	earth,	we	will	be
able	to	adapt	and	exchange	better	with	the	world.	In	short,	the	first	thing	we	need
to	 understand	 from	 the	 image	 is	 that	 we	 need	 to	 practice	 and	 we	 need	 to	 take
care	of	ourselves.


Earth	luck:	Feng	Shui
Feng	 Shui	 is	 the	 third	 luck	 and	 is	 about	 how	 the	 environment	 and	 natural
surroundings	affect	us.	It	is	about	how	we	organize	the	environment	around	us
so	 that	 we	 align	 it	 with	 our	 Heaven	 luck	 and	 Man	 luck,	 making	 them	 optimal.
While	Heaven	luck	is	what	is	given	to	us	and,	as	we	have	said,	there	is	not	so
much	we	can	do	with	it,	Earth	luck	is	something	we	can	do	a	lot	to	change.
     This	 means	 that	 at	 some	 point	 in	 the	 study	 of	 Ba	 Zi	 it	 is	 joined	 with	 Feng
Shui,	giving	us	all	we	need	to	situate	ourselves	in	time	and	space.	Some	people’s
actions	will	sometimes	be	very	dependent	on	timing,	while	others	can	do	mostly
what	they	want	when	they	want,	but	this	is	not	within	the	scope	of	this	book.



Before	going	further…
We	can	see	the	three	lucks	as	a	road	trip	where	Heaven	luck	is	the	vehicle	you
have	(car,	bicycle,	etc.)	during	your	travels.	The	road	is	the	Earth	luck	(highway
or	dirt	road),	and	finally,	the	driver,	which	is	us,	is	Man	luck.	So	based	upon	the
vehicle	 and	 the	 driver	 we	 have	 many	 options	 for	 traveling	 the	 road.	 It	 is
important	to	understand	that	if	the	driver	is	a	practitioner	of	the	Way	he	should
learn	 everything	 about	 driving	 (the	 car,	 the	 road,	 etc.)	 to	 make	 the	 road	 trip	 as
pleasant	as	possible.
    This	is	a	short,	but	nevertheless	important,	introduction	of	the	Daoist	image
of	 Man.	 To	 understand	 Ba	 Zi	 we	 need	 to	 understand	 how	 everything	 is
connected	 in	 Daoist	 practice	 and	 its	 tools.	 If	 one	 wants	 to	 dig	 deep	 into	 the
understanding	 of	 the	 human	 mind,	 it	 is	 very	 important	 to	 understand	 that	 not
much	comes	out	of	such	a	study	if	one	is	not	willing	to	start	with	oneself	first,
before	 trying	 to	 understand	 others.	 That	 is	 why	 Ba	 Zi	 is	 such	 a	 great	 tool.	 We
can	 use	 it	 on	 ourselves	 to	 understand	 ourselves	 better	 with	 ourselves,	 but	 also
ourselves	with	other	people.
    Finally,	 the	 image	 talks	 about	 Ba	 Zi	 and	 how	 important	 it	 is	 to	 understand
and	use	it	in	relation	with	human	beings.	Through	Ba	Zi	we	get	a	much	deeper
understanding	of	the	fundamental	laws	that	lie	behind	every	variant	of	personas
that	exist.	It	is	the	Daoist’s	system	for	applied	psychology.



The	origin	of	yin	and	yang
How	did	the	theory	start?
Daoism	 has	 a	 very	 long	 and	 rich	 history	 stretching	 back	 to	 the	 old	 shamanic
traditions.	 From	 Native	 Americans	 to	 the	 Sami	 of	 the	 northern	 countries,	 the
understanding	of	nature	and	Man’s	role	in	it	has	been	central,	as	we	have	seen
earlier	in	the	description	of	Man	between	heaven	and	earth.
     During	 the	 Yin	 Dynasty	 (c.1400–1100	 BC)	 the	 Shaman	 Wu	 developed	 a
system	of	interrogation	of	nature	through	a	patient	observation	of	the	forces	of
nature.	Through	this	careful	study	over	generations,	a	view	of	the	world	and	the
universe	developed	whereby	everything	in	the	universe	is	constantly	moving	and
changing—from	night	to	day,	from	winter	to	summer,	and	so	on;	these	gave	way
to	 the	 theory	 of	 yin	 and	 yang.	 The	 oldest	 written	 records	 of	 yin	 and	 yang	 are
probably	those	which	appear	in	the	 Book	of	Changes	(the	Yi	Jing),	whose	first
tablets	were	made	around	700	BC.	The	system	and	theory	was	put	in	writing	only
towards	 200	 BC	 and	 comprised	 64	 hexagrams	 that	 explained	 all	 phenomena
existing	in	nature.	From	the	rise	and	fall	of	nations	to	the	internal	workings	of
Man,	it	is	a	complete	theory	of	understanding	changes	in	nature.


The	Yi	Jing
It	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 talk	 about	 Chinese	 metaphysics	 without	 saying	 something
about	 the	 Yi	 Jing.	 This	 book	 is	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 known	 Chinese	 texts	 of
philosophy	and	divination.	Along	with	the	Dao	De	Jing,	the	Yi	Jing	is	the	most
well-known	 classical	 Chinese	 work	 of	 ageless	 wisdom.	 Though	 it	 is	 mostly
famous	for	divination,	the	Yi	Jing	is	a	lot	more	than	that.	Conveying	the	rhythms
and	 laws	 of	 universe	 in	 a	 specific	 structure	 of	 64	 hexagrams,	 this	 ancient	 text
opens	the	door	to	a	deep	understanding	of	our	actions	and	the	inevitable	nature
of	change.

     The	Tao	gives	birth	to	one
     one	gives	birth	to	two
     two	gives	birth	to	three
     three	gives	birth	to	ten	thousand	things
     ten	thousand	things	with	yin	at	their	backs
     and	yang	in	their	embrace
     and	breath	between	for	harmony
                                                Dao	De	Jing,	verse	42	(tr.	Bill	Porter)
In	the	figure	below,	we	see	the	development	of	yin	and	yang	from	Tai	Ji	until	the
eight	trigrams	of	heaven,	lake,	fire,	thunder,	wind,	water,	mountain	and	earth.




The	 64	 hexagrams	 are	 the	 8×8	 combinations	 of	 the	 trigrams.	 The	 four	 base
hexagrams	of	the	Yi	Jing	can	be	seen	in	the	next	figure.




These	 four	 are	 the	 nucleus	 for	 the	 remaining	 60	 and	 give	 us	 the	 base	 for	 all
situations.	As	previously	mentioned	in	the	above	extract	from	the	Dao	De	Jing,
they	 describe	 everything,	 or	 the	 ten	 thousand	 things.	 If	 we	 look	 back	 at	 the
image	of	Man	between	heaven	and	earth,	this	is	the	complete	theory,	with	Ba	Zi
and	Feng	Shui	arising	from	this.	But	know	that	the	knowledge	contained	in	the
book	 is	 deep	 and	 can	 take	 a	 lifetime	 to	 master.	 The	 difficulty	 lies	 in	 the
understanding	 of	 each	 hexagram,	 because	 very	 often	 the	 information	 and
explanation	 is	 just	 one	 example	 of	 its	 interpretation.	 Each	 of	 the	 hexagrams
should	be	adaptable	to	any	situation	that	we	might	want	to	look	at—from	work
and	 money	 to	 relationships,	 amongst	 many	 other	 things.	 So,	 from	 these	 64
things,	we	should	be	able	to	explain	everything.

Now	that	we	have	seen	how	things	are	connected,	we	must	understand	that	this
is	just	a	brief	overview.	When	it	comes	to	Feng	Shui	and	the	Yi	Jing,	these	need
to	be	handled	separately.	Next	we	go	into	the	details	of	yin	and	yang	and	five-
element	theory	(Wu	Xing),	which	together	form	the	foundation	of	Ba	Zi	and	all
of	Chinese	metaphysics!



Yin	and	yang	in	detail
     Nothing	that	is	can	pause	or	stay;
     The	moon	will	wax,	the	moon	will	wane,
     The	mist	and	cloud	will	turn	to	rain,
     The	rain	to	mist	and	cloud	again,
     Tomorrow	be	today.
                                                       Henry	Wadsworth	Longfellow

In	 nature,	 yin	 and	 yang	 are	 the	 existing	 opposites	 of	 any	 given	 phenomenon.
Every	 phenomenon	 is	 composed	 of	 two	 polarities	 that	 appear	 in	 a	 relation	 of
coherency.	Yin	and	yang	are	in	fact	a	generalization	of	the	opposite	aspects	that
appear	in	things,	the	phenomena	bound	by	mutual	relations.	The	one	cannot	exist
without	 the	 other—for	 example,	 beautiful	 vs	 ugly,	 cold	 vs	 hot,	 dark	 vs	 light.
Moreover,	 they	 are	 relative	 and	 not	 absolute.	 We	 cannot	 say	 that	 something	 is
yin	 or	 yang	 without	 comparing	 it	 to	 something	 else.	 And,	 likewise,	 something
that	was	defined	as	yang	can	again	be	divided	into	yin	and	yang.	It	is	infinite!
     This	concept	can	apply	as	things	or	phenomena	of	opposed	natures,	but	also
as	two	opposite	aspects	of	the	same	thing	or	the	same	phenomenon.	The	theory
explains	 that	 the	 shape	 and	 function	 of	 the	 phenomenon	 are	 defined	 by	 the
variance	 of	 the	 two	 different	 polarities.	 And	 it	 also	 says	 that	 no	 phenomenon
persists	 eternally	 in	 its	 own	 nature.	 For	 example,	 the	 body	 responds	 to	 the
environment	 unceasingly	 to	 find	 a	 relative	 balance	 that	 will	 reinstate	 either
health	or	disease.	Another	example	is	of	course	the	seasons.	Each	season	is	an
endless	 number	 of	 phases	 within	 itself	 but	 also	 between	 the	 different	 seasons.
When	a	season	has	begun,	it	is	already	transforming	into	something.	No	season
ever	 actually	 starts	 or	 ends	 per	 se;	 rather,	 it	 transmutes	 into	 a	 new	 version	 of
itself.
    Each	 phenomenon,	 condition,	 position	 and	 state	 is	 endlessly	 undergoing
change	 to	 retain	 balance	 of	 its	 yin	 and	 yang.	 They	 are	 not	 fixed,	 locked	 or
constant	 but	 change	 mutually;	 for	 example,	 they	 are	 transmutations.	 These
changes	do	not	occur	at	random	but	at	certain	stages	of	evolution,	regulated	by
nature.
    Another	 way	 of	 explaining	 yin	 and	 yang	 is	 to	 look	 at	 three	 superimposed
objects	in	relation	to	each	other.	The	top	object	will	then	be	yang	and	the	bottom
object	will	be	yin,	while	the	middle	will	be	composed	of	yin	and	yang.	We	see
this	 image	 also	 in	 the	 traditions	 where	 Man	 (yin	 and	 yang)	 stands	 between
heaven	(yang)	and	earth	(yin),	as	described	earlier.

     Life	is	a	series	of	natural	and	spontaneous	changes.	Do	not	resist	them;	that
     only	creates	sorrow.	Let	reality	be	reality.	Let	things	flow	naturally	forward
     in	whatever	way	they	like.
                                                                                    Lao	Tzu

On	 the	 basis	 of	 yin	 and	 yang	 theory,	 one	 can	 comprehend	 any	 phenomenon,
according	 to	 the	 context,	 by	 defining	 what	 the	 yin	 is	 and	 what	 the	 yang	 is.
Importantly,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 keep	 in	 mind	 the	 dynamic	 of	 interchange	 more
than	the	definition	of	yin	and	yang	and	to	manage	to	put	into	perspective	the	two
concepts.


The	four	laws	of	yin	and	yang
Yin	and	yang	theory	dictates	that	these	polarities	have	four	different	properties:
     1. Opposites
     2. Interdependence
     3. Balance
        4. Transformation.

OPPOSITES
This	 first	 law	 is	 most	 likely	 the	 one	 which	 people	 associate	 with	 their
understanding	of	yin	and	yang—that	yin	and	yang	are	opposites.
     Each	coexists	to	control	the	other,	and	through	their	opposition	they	maintain
the	 dynamic	 balance	 needed	 for	 a	 certain	 phenomenon,	 thing	 or	 situation	 to
exist.	 It	 is	 dynamic	 and	 provides	 the	 foundation	 for	 change	 in	 nature.	 To
understand	the	duality	of	the	world	we	must	understand	yin	and	yang.	For	there
to	 be	 good	 there	 must	 be	 bad;	 when	 something	 is	 right	 then	 the	 opposite	 is
wrong.	This	is	the	duality.

Yin                                             Yang
Darkness                                        Light
Moon                                            Sun
Sink                                            Rise
Shade                                           Brightness
Slow                                            Fast
Sunset                                          Sunrise
North                                           South
Earth                                           Heaven
Right                                           Left
Blood                                           Spirit
Matter                                          Energy
Structure                                       Function


INTERDEPENDENCE
Yin	and	yang	cannot	exist	without	the	other.	Each	polarity	has	its	own	energy,
forces	and	dynamics	that	the	other	is	dependent	upon	to	exist	individually.
    In	traditional	Chinese	medicine	it	is	as	though	each	organ	needs	a	structure
in	order	to	have	a	function.	The	structure	is	yin,	while	the	function	is	yang;	for
example,	 the	 heart	 could	 not	 pump	 blood	 through	 the	 body	 if	 it	 was	 not
constructed	 as	 it	 is.	 We	 see	 this	 also	 in	 the	 transportation	 of	 electricity:	 power
lines	 give	 the	 structure	 and	 are	 yin,	 while	 energy	 is	 yang.	 There	 are	 numerous
other	 examples:	 one	 is	 that	 a	 car	 could	 not	 transport	 us	 (yang)	 somewhere
without	 an	 engine	 and	 wheels	 (yin).	 One	 thing	 to	 note	 regarding	 our
understanding	of	yin	and	yang	is	that	yin	is	structure	and	yang	is	function.

BALANCE
When	one	of	the	polarities	shrinks,	the	other	needs	to	grow,	and	vice	versa.	This
is	 to	 keep	 the	 phenomenon	 existing	 within	 its	 given	 limits.	 It	 is	 like	 a
mathematical	equation	such	as	x+y=1.	The	variables	x	and	y	can	be	anything	as
long	 as	 they	 sum	 to	 one.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 as	 when	 you	 spend	 money	 to	 buy
something.	 By	 paying	 for	 something	 (decrease),	 you	 gain	 something	 else
(increase).
     From	a	Ba	Zi	standpoint,	we	will,	for	example,	be	looking	at	the	balance	of
yin	and	yang.	Too	much	yin	or	yang	will	often	indicate	a	need	for	more	balance.
And	in	Chinese	medicine,	an	excess	of	yin	or	yang	will	lead	to	disease.

TRANSFORMATION
When	 yang	 becomes	 too	 much	 it	 will	 change	 into	 its	 opposite,	 yin.	 If	 yin
becomes	too	much	it	will	change	into	yang.	This	means	that	both	polarities	can
create	the	other.	However,	for	the	transformation	to	occur,	the	conditions	need	to
be	right	and	the	timing	needs	to	be	correct.	Things	always	fluctuate	with	varied
amplitude,	 and	 it	 is	 only	 when	 optimal	 amplitude	 is	 timed	 with	 the	 correct
conditions	that	a	transformation	is	possible.	For	example,	as	a	season	reaches	its
peak,	it	consequently	starts	to	change	into	its	opposite;	summer	becomes	winter.
We	see	that	summer	is	absolute	yang	and	therefore	is	at	its	maximum.	Then	the
lower	line	changes	to	yin	and	we	are	in	fall.	As	the	last	yang	rises,	it	gives	way
to	 a	 final	 yin	 that	 gives	 us	 winter.	 Winter	 is	 the	 absolute	 of	 yin	 and	 therefore
must	change.	Moreover,	when	we	get	to	spring,	yang	starts	to	rise	and	we	return
to	summer;	the	cycle	repeats	itself.
     This	 change	 from	 yin	 to	 yang	 or	 vice	 versa	 can	 be	 seen	 when	 training	 to
develop	 one’s	 strength	 and	 more	 muscles.	 You	 train	 and	 train—yang	 action—
and	when	you	have	trained	long	enough	(amplitude)	and	taken	into	account	the
correct	diet	and	rest	(conditions),	you	pass	a	threshold	and	obtain	more	muscles
(yin);	that	is,	yang	action	has	produced	more	yin.
     From	this,	we	can	see	that	yin	and	yang	theory	is	the	foundation	that	makes	it
possible	to	know	and	explain	the	world.



Wu	Xing:	the	five	elements
To	understand	Ba	Zi	we	have	to	have	a	basic	understanding	not	only	of	yin	and
yang,	but	also	of	the	theory	of	the	five	elements	(Wu	Xing).	Wu	Xing	can	also
be	 translated	 as	 five	 movements,	 phases	 or	 dynamics.	 This	 just	 simply	 restates
that	the	five	elements	are	not	fixed	conditions,	but	are	always	changing	due	to
the	 natural	 evolution	 of	 things	 or	 in	 response	 to	 being	 forced	 in	 another
direction.	 To	 simplify	 the	 concept	 we	 will	 use	 the	 five	 elements	 from	 now	 on,
but	 remember	 that	 the	 elements	 are	 based	 upon	 yin/yang	 theory	 and	 hence
always	 change	 relative	 to	 each	 other	 in	 order	 to	 maintain	 balance	 from	 either
internal	 or	 external	 forces,	 or	 even	 an	 interplay	 between	 external	 and	 internal
forces.	 That	 is	 why	 Wu	 Xing	 is	 also	 called	 the	 five	 phases,	 movements	 or
dynamics.
    The	five	elements	are:
     •   wood	(Mu)
     •   fire	(Huo)
     •   earth	(Tu)
     •   metal	(Jin)
     •   water	(Shui).
Compared	with	the	theory	of	yin	and	yang,	Wu	Xing	was	invented	rather	more
recently	(300	 BC).	It	was	developed	to	rationalize	and	systemize	the	connection
that	 could	 exist	 between	 different	 aspects	 in	 accordance	 with	 their	 properties,
movements	 and	 interactions,	 like	 the	 theory	 of	 yin	 and	 yang.	 However,	 in
contrast	 to	 yin/yang	 theory,	 which	 points	 to	 an	 infinite	 description	 of	 a
phenomenon,	 Wu	 Xing	 was	 never	 meant	 to	 be	 rigidly	 accurate,	 but	 rather	 a
general	objective	description	of	natural	phenomena.	Hence,	five	elements	theory
can	only	be	understood	by	observing	one	element	in	relationship	with	the	others.
All	 Chinese	 metaphysics,	 for	 example	 Ba	 Zi	 and	 Feng	 Shui,	 uses	 Wu	 Xing	 to
describe	 situations	 and	 relations	 to	 other	 people,	 places,	 circumstances,
personalities	and	so	on.
    Interestingly,	 Wu	 Xing	 has	 been	 adopted	 by	 traditional	 Chinese	 medicine
(TCM).	In	TCM,	the	theory	of	Wu	Xing	has	been	implemented	by	relating	each
of	the	five	energetic	organs—Liver,	Spleen/Stomach,	Kidney,	Heart	and	Lungs
—to	a	certain	element:	Liver	is	wood,	Spleen/Stomach	is	earth,	Kidney	is	water,
Heart	is	fire	and	Lungs	are	metal.	By	placing	each	organ	in	relation	to	the	Wu
Xing	it	is	possible	to	determine	the	physiological	and	pathological	dynamics	that
exist	in	a	patient,	with	each	element	generating	another,	controlling	another	and
even	being	controlled	by	another.

Before	we	start	to	look	more	closely	at	Wu	Xing	we	will	provide	an	introduction
to	the	different	elements	and	their	properties	and	examples	of	personality	traits
that	these	elements	represent	in	Ba	Zi.	We	will	then	describe	the	five	cycles	of
Wu	 Xing	 and	 how	 Ba	 Zi	 uses	 this	 theory	 for	 understanding	 the	 relationship
between	people.


Wood
Wood	is	the	expansive	force	that	goes	in	all	directions	and	towards	the	outside.
It	 is	 not	 a	 finely	 directed	 energy	 like	 a	 laser	 beam,	 but	 more	 like	 light	 being
deflected	 in	 all	 directions	 when	 it	 hits	 a	 reflective	 surface.	 It	 always	 wants	 to
grow	and	expand	and	it	needs	freedom/space.	That	is	why	the	image	of	a	huge
tree	with	its	trunk,	branches	and	roots	is	such	a	good	example.	The	tree	can	only
achieve	this	size	if	it	has	been	given	the	space	and	time	to	develop.	As	the	tree,
the	element	of	wood	embodies	the	properties	of	stability,	flexibility	(but	limited
at	the	same	time),	growth	and	free	expansion.	In	many	ways	the	energy	of	wood
is	very	similar	to	the	expanding	nature	of	fire.
     Since	the	energy	of	wood	is	always	expanding	in	 all	directions,	it	 makes	 it
difficult	for	this	energy	to	be	centered	and	focused	on	one	thing.
     The	 element	 of	 wood	 embodies	 knowledge.	 Knowledge	 is	 something	 that
has	taken	time	to	seek	and	acquire,	just	as	it	takes	time	for	a	tree	to	grow.	The
branches	of	the	tree	reach	out	in	all	directions	to	cover	an	area	as	large	as	needed
to	 get	 as	 much	 sunlight	 as	 needed	 to	 sustain	 the	 ever-growing	 trunk	 that	 is	 its
core.	The	trunk	is	the	growing	knowledge	that	is	fed	by	the	branches.
     In	 wood	 we	 also	 have	 intelligence,	 intuition	 and	 the	 development	 of	 the
potential	 of	 the	 individual.	 To	 have	 strong	 intuition	 you	 need	 a	 sound	 level	 of
knowledge.	 These	 properties	 are	 the	 yin	 and	 yang	 elements	 in	 the	 energy	 of
wood.
     Similar	 to	 the	 tree	 from	 the	 start	 of	 its	 development,	 there	 is	 already	 a
defined	 potential.	 This	 means	 that	 as	 long	 as	 the	 tree	 is	 given	 its	 space	 and
nutrients	 it	 will	 grow	 into	 whatever	 it	 was	 supposed	 to	 become.	 This	 is	 the
energy	of	wood,	the	potential	of	becoming	whatever	it	is	supposed	to	grow	into
under	the	right	circumstances.	We	can	see	this	also	in	children	when	they	grow
up.	The	right	upbringing	and	education	give	the	child	the	possibility	of	evolving
into	what	is	deep	inside	of	them.
     All	 this	 expanding	 energy	 is	 strongly	 associated	 with	 creativity	 and	 the
expression	 of	 oneself.	 The	 potential	 of	 what	 is	 inside	 needs	 to	 come	 out	 and
blossom.
     The	element	of	wood	represents	the	Liver	in	TCM	and	it	is	an	essential	part
of	the	mind	(Hun)	for	managing	emotions.	The	function	of	the	Liver	is	to	make
the	qi	flow	smoothly	in	the	body.	So	when	the	Liver	energy	or	wood	energy	is
stagnating	 or	 being	 obstructed,	 people	 get	 frustrated	 and	 agitated—the
expanding	 wood	 energy	 is	 being	 stopped	 from	 growing,	 and	 hence	 friction
occurs.
     Finally,	water	produces	wood,	and	wood	produces	fire.

A	WOOD	PERSON
A	 wood	 person	 is	 straight	 and	 clear	 in	 their	 way	 and	 thus	 very	 honest.	 As	 the
tree	they	need	stability	and	to	stay	in	one	place.	Being	the	tall	tree,	they	easily
get	a	good	overview	of	things	and	thus	are	good	at	seeing	the	bigger	picture.
    The	expansive	energy	of	wood	makes	these	people	easily	frustrated	if	things
are	in	their	way	or	if	things	are	not	going	fast	enough.	They	also	have	a	tendency
to	want	to	be	recognized,	since	they	are	the	tallest	tree	and	everyone	should	look
up	to	them.	They	need	to	have	a	direction	or	they	will	get	confused.


Fire
Fire	 is	 the	 ascending	 movement.	 That	 is,	 fire	 is	 the	 energy/movement	 that	 is
always	rising	towards	the	sky,	top	or	peak.	Its	momentum	is	constantly	upwards
to	 go	 beyond	 wherever	 it	 started.	 It	 has	 to	 reach	 new	 heights	 all	 the	 time	 or	 it
will	weaken.	It	is	like	making	a	camp	fire.	From	the	first	spark	that	has	ignited
the	wood	the	fire	will	always	continue	to	burn	and	stretch	itself	from	the	wood
as	long	as	it	has	fuel	to	burn.	But	you	will	also	see	that	putting	something	on	top
of	the	camp	fire	will	quell	the	fire	or	even	quench	it	if	there	is	too	much	on	top.
The	fire	therefore	needs	space	to	expand/ascend	and	it	also	continuously	needs
to	be	fueled	or	it	will	eventually	consume	itself.
     Fire	is	also	what	cleanses	and	makes	things	possible	to	come	back	from	the
ashes/be	 reborn.	 For	 example,	 after	 a	 blazing	 forest	 fire,	 everything	 has	 been
burned	 to	 the	 ground,	 but	 from	 all	 that	 ash	 plants	 grow	 back,	 and	 even	 new
plants	that	were	not	existing	there	before	are	given	a	possibility	to	take	root	and
grow	there.	Even	the	animals	and	insects	come	back,	taking	up	their	residences
and	 prospering.	 Fire	 can	 make	 old	 things	 go	 away	 and	 enable	 new	 things	 to
enter.
     This	 also	 means	 that	 fire	 is	 the	 element	 that	 brings	 heat,	 light,	 life	 and
illumination.	 Fire	 replaces	 the	 darkness	 with	 light	 and	 brings	 forth	 that	 which
was	not	seen.	Fire	is	what	rises	to	the	sky	and,	hence,	gets	a	good	perspective	of
the	earth,	while	being	able	to	shine	upon	everything	that	is	below.
     Fire	 is	 of	 course	 also	 the	 sun!	 It	 is	 the	 center	 of	 attention	 in	 the	 blue	 sky
while	it	is	shining	down	upon	the	earth	with	all	its	intensity	and	power.	There	is
nothing	more	captivating	in	the	sky	than	the	sun.	And	even	during	cloudy	days
the	heat	from	the	sun	will	eventually	burn	through	and	again	cast	its	light	upon
what	lies	below.	The	sun	is	also	something	we	can	use	as	a	compass.	We	know
that	it	rises	in	the	east	in	the	morning	and	descends	in	the	west	in	the	evening,
and	at	noon	it	points	us	towards	the	south.	Of	course	it	is	a	bit	more	complicated
than	that,	but	in	short	the	sun	always	gives	us	a	direction	and	lights	up	the	path
to	go	there.
     Even	 during	 the	 night	 the	 sun	 is	 indirectly	 showing	 us	 the	 way	 by	 shining
upon	the	moon.	If	the	moon	rises	before	the	sun	has	set,	the	illuminated	side	will
be	 the	 west.	 If	 the	 moon	 rises	 after	 midnight,	 the	 illuminated	 side	 will	 be	 the
east.	This	obvious	discovery	provides	us	with	a	rough	east–west	reference	during
the	night	using	the	moon	that	is	directly	under	the	control	of	the	sun.	You	can
say	that	the	moon	is	the	yin	of	the	sun.	The	sun	is	always	present	in	its	entirety.
    In	 the	 context	 of	 light,	 fire	 also	 promotes	 communication,	 ideas	 and	 social
interaction.	 Illumination	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 awakening,	 quickening	 and
understanding.	From	fire	the	light	is	produced,	and	from	the	light	everything	that
was	difficult	to	discern	since	it	was	obscured	by	the	shadows	is	revealed.	When
things	 are	 obvious	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 approach	 and	 sociably	 interact.	 It	 is	 so	 much
easier	to	understand	a	topic	when	things	are	made	clear;	and	when	it	is	clear	you
can	 build	 upon	 this	 understanding	 and	 create	 something	 new	 from	 what	 is
already	there.	Ideas	can	come	so	much	more	easily	when	we	see	things	clearly.
    Fire	 is	 the	 Heart,	 and	 hence	 fire	 reaches	 out	 to	 connect	 people,	 making	 it
possible	to	open	conversation	and	communication.
    Fire	is	created	from	wood	and	produces	earth.	In	the	process	of	consuming,	it
also	produces	something,	that	is,	it	leaves	something	behind	that	has	the	capacity
to	be	a	source	for	something	new.
    Since	fire	is	linked	to	the	Heart	in	TCM	we	also	find	everything	concerning
love,	 joy,	 unity,	 the	 spirit	 (Shen),	 conscience	 and	 inspiration	 in	 the	 element	 of
fire.	The	capacity	to	enjoy	life	and	to	know	what	makes	one	happy	lies	in	fire.
As	long	as	the	fire	is	burning	strongly	enough,	the	light	can	illuminate	all	dark
corners	 and	 consequently	 make	 all	 possibilities	 visible.	 It	 is	 like	 hiking	 in	 the
dark.	If	you	have	low	light	conditions	it	is	very	difficult	to	see	any	further	than
your	feet	sometimes,	but	as	soon	as	you	turn	on	your	torch	the	whole	landscape
opens	up	to	you	and	you	can	take	the	right	route	based	upon	what	you	want	and
need	to	do.	You	can	even	go	into	detail	of	how	you	want	to	organize	the	rest	of
the	trip	based	upon	this	“little”	step	of	lighting	up	the	terrain.
    The	ideogram	for	fire	is	a	central	flame	and	two	sparks.

A	FIRE	PERSON
In	general,	a	fire	person	is	warm,	passionate	and	loving.	As	explained	earlier,	the
rising	and	ascending	flame	makes	it	impossible	for	a	fire	person	not	to	want	to
be	 the	 center	 of	 attention.	 It	 is	 impossible	 for	 him/her	 not	 to	 be	 seen.	 A	 fire
person	has	an	innate	need	to	be	noticed	or	the	fire	will	be	quelled,	as	in	the	camp
fire	 analogy.	 Actually,	 being	 recognized	 is	 more	 inclined	 to	 happen	 to	 a	 fire
person	because	they	will	always	rise	higher	than	anyone	else.	They	will	always
be	 the	 innovator	 and	 communicator	 that	 demands	 attention.	 Their	 captivating
personality	is	mainly	due	to	their	radiant	appearance,	but	also	because	they	are
excellent	 communicators.	 They	 have	 the	 capacity	 to	 make	 things	 clear
(illuminating	 the	 situation).	 People	 easily	 recognize	 them	 since	 they	 have	 the
tendency	to	be	very	outspoken	and	loud.	Also,	fire	people	always	want	to	help
people	by	telling	them	what	they	feel	is	right.
     They	can	easily	become	loners	if	they	don’t	take	care	since	they	are	always
going	 towards	 new	 things	 (the	 continuous	 ascending	 movement).	 This	 means
that	in	relationships	they	have	a	tendency	to	want	to	move	on	to	another	when
they	see	something	new	that	they	want	to	get,	achieve	or	apprehend.	It	is	not	that
they	do	not	have	the	capacity	to	love;	on	the	contrary,	they	are	very	passionate
and	 caring—it	 is	 just	 that	 when	 they	 see	 something	 better	 or	 see	 something
wrong,	they	have	the	tendency	to	go	towards	the	new.
     Since	fire	always	consumes	its	source,	a	fire	person	will	deplete	themselves
of	energy	very	easily.	The	fire	person	needs	continual	replenishment	of	the	fuel
they	 have	 burned	 away;	 just	 as	 when	 the	 fuel	 tank	 is	 empty,	 the	 car	 will	 no
longer	drive!	They	need	to	take	care	not	to	do	too	much	or	eventually	they	will
hit	 the	 wall	 and	 suffer	 burn-out.	 The	 trick	 for	 a	 fire	 person	 is	 to	 have	 the
optimum	camp	fire	that	can	keep	them	warm	and	make	the	food	they	need,	while
at	the	same	time	not	consuming	too	much	wood.	It	is	energy	economics	in	real
life!


Earth
The	element	of	earth	is	the	movement	that	stabilizes	and	goes	from	outward	to
inward.	Earth	is	movement/phase/energy	that	goes	inwards	and	condenses.	It	is
the	 element	 that	 makes	 it	 possible	 to	 sow	 and	 harvest.	 Earth	 represents	 the
intellectual	work	to	consequently	do	or	get	something	later.	The	energy	of	earth
is	the	capacity	to	plan	and	discern	what	is	needed.
     For	example,	you	live	in	a	secluded	area	and	you	need	to	be	able	to	take	care
of	 yourself.	 What	 do	 you	 do?	 Well,	 you	 start	 to	 consider	 all	 the	 options	 you
have,	 and	 what	 is	 really	 important	 to	 have	 (food,	 communication)	 and	 what	 is
not	so	important	(access	to	a	soda	machine).	This	is	part	of	earth,	to	rationalize
and	 discern,	 and	 to	 make	 the	 right	 choices—if	 you	 want	 corn,	 you	 plant	 corn
seeds	 and	 not	 potatoes.	 If	 you	 want	 a	 healthy	 body,	 you	 eat	 (sow)	 a	 well-
balanced	 diet	 to	 balance	 out	 what	 your	 body	 needs	 (harvest).	 If	 you	 want	 a
successful	business,	you	put	in	the	effort	of	building	a	good	foundation	for	your
business.
     As	in	nature,	earth	represents	production	and	transformation.	For	example,	in
the	 deepest	 parts	 of	 the	 earth	 we	 find	 riches	 that	 have	 been	 transformed	 over
millennia	from	simple	minerals/elements	to	valuable	diamonds	and	other	gems.
This	is	the	property	of	the	earth	to	transform	things.	And	remember	the	quality
of	what	you	have—or	put	in	the	earth—determines	what	it	can	be	transformed
into.	If	you	want	good	wine	you	need	to	sow	seeds	from	good	grapes	or	else	the
wine	will	not	become	good.	It	is	that	simple.
     Earth	 also	 represents	 the	 qualities	 of	 rooting	 and	 having	 a	 practical	 spirit.
The	 earth	 condenses	 and	 keeps	 you	 grounded	 and	 sound	 like	 the	 base	 of	 a
building.	Earth	is	like	a	mountain:	it	stands	there	immovable	and	towering.	The
mountain	is	unyielding	and	will	even	stand	the	test	of	time.	This	is	the	energy	of
earth.	It	concretizes	things,	making	them	more	clear	and	understandable.	It	is	the
logic	 of	 things	 and	 not	 creativity	 or	 phantasm.	 Hence,	 that	 which	 is	 logic	 can
consequently	become	a	practical	thing.	Earth	is	everything	that	is	represented	in
all	the	laws	and	principles	that	you	can	find	in	science,	engineering,	mechanics
and	 so	 on.	 Again,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 see	 that	 earth	 is	 the	 base	 and	 foundation	 for
making	 something	 and	 seeing	 things	 clearly	 for	 what	 they	 are.	 This	 ability	 to
analyze	and	to	make	critical	judgments	is	a	part	of	earth.	Earth	lies	in	the	art	of
contemplation	and	hence	in	the	Yi	part	of	the	mind.
     The	 organ	 for	 this	 element	 in	 TCM	 is	 the	 Spleen/Stomach.	 So	 when	 the
Spleen/Stomach	 functions	 well,	 you	 have	 a	 clear	 mind	 and	 it	 is	 easy	 to
understand/comprehend	 things.	 By	 contrast,	 too	 much	 earth	 energy	 brings
indifference,	laziness	and	casualness.	Remember	that	the	image	of	earth	is	also
the	mountain.	The	mountain	does	not	have	a	tendency	to	move.	The	mountain	is
the	epitome	of	stillness.	So	too	much	earth	also	signifies	that	there	is	too	much
mental	 regurgitation/activity/repeating	 thoughts,	 and	 this	 consequently	 very
often	leads	to	anxiety	and	worrying.

AN	EARTH	PERSON
Now,	 as	 the	 mountain,	 earth	 people	 are	 quiet	 and	 resilient	 people.	 They	 will
endure	hardship	without	complaint	and	they	just	wait	for	things	to	pass	by.	On
the	other	hand,	they	will	have	difficulty	responding	quickly	to	situations.	They
are	 generally	 a	 bit	 slow	 on	 the	 trigger.	 The	 situation	 will	 come	 over	 them	 and
then	they	will	act.	They	will	plan	things	and	think	a	bit	too	much	before	deciding
what	 to	 do.	 They	 will	 know	 what	 to	 do,	 but	 fast	 decision	 making	 is	 not	 their
thing.	 If	 it	 seems	 like	 they	 are	 reacting	 quickly	 it	 just	 means	 that	 they	 already
have	thought	about	it	for	a	long	time.	Being	earth	means	being	slow,	but	at	the
same	time	they	find	their	center	very	easily.	It	is	like	a	well-anchored	ship.	The
ship	 will	 stay	 where	 it	 is	 since	 it	 has	 been	 properly	 secured	 to	 the	 bottom.
Therefore,	 being	 earth	 makes	 you	 a	 very	 stable	 and	 strong-willed	 person,	 but
also	quite	egotistical	at	the	same	time.
    As	the	soil	that	can	absorb	a	lot	of	water,	it	also	has	a	certain	capacity	before
the	 ground	 cannot	 take	 any	 more.	 The	 amount	 of	 water	 after	 a	 while	 starts	 to
dissolve	 and	 move	 the	 earth.	 This	 image	 explains	 how	 earth	 people	 digest
emotions	 and	 thoughts.	 They	 have	 difficulties	 handling	 their	 own	 and	 others’
emotions	and	consequently	are	easily	prone	to	worries	and	anxiety.	And	finally,
as	the	mountain	or	earth,	they	prefer	to	stay	still	and	consequently	need	to	ensure
they	have	movement	in	their	life	or	they	can	become	very	lazy.


Metal
The	 element	 of	 metal	 represents	 that	 which	 is	 malleable	 and	 hard	 at	 the	 same
time.	It	is	what	produces	water	and	as	such	has	the	capacity	to	be	malleable	and
strong.	 Metal	 is	 what	 gathers,	 collects,	 cuts	 and	 slices.	 Metal	 is	 justice	 and
righteousness.	 Metal	 defines	 the	 distinction	 between	 two	 sources—right	 and
wrong,	left	and	right	or	up	and	down.	For	example,	the	energy	of	metal	is	what
sets	the	boundaries	of	things—what	should	be	there	or	not.	In	a	social	aspect	it	is
what	 defines	 the	 boundaries	 between	 countries,	 communities,	 counties,
neighbors	and	so	on.
    Metal	defines	the	differences	between	cultures,	people	and	social	settings.	It
defines	what	is	socially	acceptable.	It	tells	you	what	values	lie	within	a	person,	a
group,	 a	 country	 and	 the	 world,	 relative	 to	 each	 other.	 Everything	 that	 defines
human	interrelationships	is	part	of	the	energy	of	metal.
    Metal	represents	the	wisdom	and	capacity	to	see	the	truth	and	face	up	to	it—
for	example,	what	is	good	for	us,	and	what	is	not.	As	metal,	it	defines	a	form	of
rigidity	that	has	difficulty	seeing	the	more	subtle	and	detailed	parts	of	things.	It
cannot	 distinguish	 the	 finer	 things	 where	 differences	 between	 right	 and	 wrong,
high	and	low	or	yes	or	no	have	a	very	fine	line	or	lie	in	the	gray	area.	Metal	is
generally	very	black-and-white.
    Metal	has	the	quality	to	restore	the	essence	but	also	to	restrict.	In	addition,
metal	 is	 hard	 and	 resists	 things	 easily.	 It	 will	 take	 a	 large	 amount	 of	 force	 to
break	metal,	but	over	time	it	can	wither	due	to	corrosion	and	rust.	It	needs	to	be
taken	care	of	or	it	will	eventually	lose	its	strength.
    A	very	important	aspect	of	metal	is	that	it	reflects	light—whatever	you	shine
on	it	will	reflect	the	same	back.	It	is	therefore	important	to	take	care	of	metal	and
keep	it	shiny,	so	whatever	you	shine	upon	it	will	be	reflected	back	with	at	least
the	 same	 strength	 and	 purity.	 If	 you	 want	 metal	 to	 discern	 and	 separate	 things
correctly,	 it	 needs	 to	 be	 properly	 sharp	 so	 that	 it	 does	 not	 cut	 imprecisely	 and
clumsily.	If	you	want	the	butcher	to	cut	your	meat	correctly	and	even	be	able	to
trim	and	clean	the	meat,	he	will	need	a	good,	strong	and	sharp	blade.
    Regarding	the	organs	in	TCM,	metal	represents	the	Lungs	(Po),	and	hence	it
is	associated	with	the	breath,	body	energy	and	the	ability	to	condense	and	emit.
Strong	 Lungs	 give	 strong	 qi	 and	 consequently	 strong	 health.	 If	 the	 Lungs	 are
weakened	(e.g.	the	metal	blade	becomes	dull),	you	will	consequently	suffer	from
fatigue	 and	 have	 difficulties	 digesting	 emotions.	 The	 quality	 of	 the	 Lungs
defines	the	quality	of	the	metal	blade	to	work	properly.

A	METAL	PERSON
People	 of	 the	 element	 of	 metal	 are	 known	 to	 be	 altruistic	 and	 care	 for	 other
people.	 They	 are	 tough	 and	 have	 a	 strong	 sense	 of	 justice.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 for
them	 to	 cut	 through	 situations	 and	 tell	 people	 exactly	 how	 things	 should	 be	 or
how	 they	 are.	 But	 since	 their	 view	 is	 very	 much	 black-and-white,	 they	 are	 not
always	 the	 best	 diplomats	 when	 there	 needs	 to	 be	 a	 bit	 more	 subtlety	 in
communication.	 Metal	 people	 are	 excellent	 soldiers	 due	 to	 their	 hardness	 and
ability	to	handle	life-and-death	situations.
    Additionally,	metal	people	need	to	be	careful	regarding	their	behavior.	They
can	 very	 easily	 become	 too	 hard	 and	 non-forgiving,	 so	 they	 need	 to	 tame
themselves.	 They	 easily	 forget	 that	 metal	 can	 also	 be	 malleable,	 but	 of	 course
metal	 is	 never	 like	 water.	 Finally,	 metal	 people	 have	 a	 tendency	 to	 think	 too
much	and	hence	be	susceptible	to	worries.


Water
The	 element	 of	 water	 defines	 everything	 that	 is	 fluid,	 in	 constant	 change	 and
moving.	 Like	 a	 river	 it	 will	 always	 find	 a	 way	 to	 travel	 through	 terrain	 and
always	have	momentum.	Water	needs	to	circulate/move	or,	like	a	pool	that	has
nowhere	 to	 go,	 will	 become	 stagnant	 and	 filled	 with	 algae	 and	 sediment.	 The
energy	 of	 water	 needs	 to	 move	 or	 it	 will	 become	 polluted.	 Water	 is	 also	 the
source	of	life	in	nature.	Even	the	driest	desert	will	come	to	life	after	a	rainfall.
Water	is	the	basis	for	all	life	and	it	nourishes	the	earth.	But	equally,	as	important
as	it	is	for	sustaining	life,	it	is	also	capable	of	destroying	it.	If	too	much	water
moves,	then	floods	occur,	the	dam	breaks	or	a	huge	tsunami	will	hit	the	shore.
     These	properties	of	water	are	the	primal	source	for	adaptation	in	life.	It	has
the	capacity	to	change	in	any	given	situation;	but	within	movement	lies	the	fear
of	stopping,	and	hence	the	energy	of	water	is	limited	by	fear.	Therefore,	we	say
that	 stagnant	 water	 is	 the	 source	 of	 disease,	 confusion	 or	 hindrance	 in	 life.
Things	 need	 to	 always	 move	 or	 they	 are	 dead,	 as	 in	 yin/yang	 theory.	 The
ideogram	is	the	current	of	water.
     As	a	force,	water	is	descending	(to	the	bottom)	like	a	waterfall	or	like	a	river
coming	down	from	the	mountains.	In	water	lies	the	energetic	potential	of	doing
things	or	creating	things.	Water	is	the	underlying	potential	to	make	things	come
to	 life.	 It	 is	 the	 source	 of	 life	 and	 is	 directly	 coupled	 to	 sexual	 energy	 and	 to
procreation.
     Water	preserves	energy,	knowledge,	wisdom	and	 secrets	in	 the	depth	of	 its
form.	But	to	get	access	to	these	treasures	the	water	needs	to	be	calm.	If	you	are
looking	 for	 a	 shipwreck	 in	 a	 turbulent	 sea	 you	 will	 have	 difficulty	 locating	 it
between	all	the	powerful	movements	on	the	surface	and	the	huge	difficulties	of
seeing	through	the	water	that	has	stirred	up	all	the	particles	from	the	sea	bottom.
It	 is	 only	 in	 a	 tranquil	 lake	 or	 sea	 that	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 things
properly/clearly.
     Water	is	also	the	energy	executed	by	the	will	to	reach	its	aims.	Water	is	the
capacity	to	act	and	do,	and	the	only	thing	that	hinders	it	from	acting	is	fear.	In
water	 we	 also	 find	 introspection,	 insightfulness,	 self-assurance	 and	 internal
force.
     The	water	element	represents	the	Kidneys	in	TCM,	the	force	of	will	to	take
action	and	the	ability	to	survive	(Zhi).	It	is	in	the	Kidneys	that	your	life	essence
is	 contained,	 but	 also	 all	 of	 your	 potential	 in	 life.	 Your	 life	 force	 and	 your
heritage	lie	in	the	Kidneys.	So	if	your	Kidneys	start	to	fail	it	actually	touches	all
of	 the	 other	 energetic	 organs	 as	 described	 in	 TCM,	 just	 as	 in	 nature	 when	 life
does	 not	 flourish	 if	 there	 is	 little	 clean	 water.	 The	 absence	 of	 water	 affects
everything,	and	this	is	also	described	in	the	TCM	for	the	Kidneys,	as	represented
by	 the	 water	 element.	 Metal	 creates	 water,	 and	 water	 creates	 and	 nourishes
wood.

A	WATER	PERSON
A	water	person	is	considered	wise	and	intuitive	and	able	to	understand	people	on
a	deep	level.	They	easily	adapt	to	new	situations	and	circumstances,	but	as	water
they	 always	 move	 to	 prevent	 themselves	 from	 stagnating.	 Consequently	 they
need	to	take	care	so	that	they	do	not	lose	their	perspective	on	things.	Being	the
element	 that	 contains	 knowledge,	 they	 are	 excellent	 at	 teaching	 people	 and
touching	them.
    As	this	element,	they	need	to	stay	in	motion	or	they	will	not	be	happy.	They
also	 need	 to	 stay	 focused	 because	 they	 are	 easily	 dispersed	 and	 not	 very
centered;	 water	 always	 wants	 to	 move	 and	 not	 stay	 at	 the	 same	 place	 for	 too
long.	 Like	 the	 river	 running	 down	 a	 valley,	 water	 will	 turn	 and	 bend	 at	 any
obstacle	 or	 sometimes	 just	 run	 through	 the	 hindrance	 if	 it	 can.	 The	 river	 very
seldom	runs	straight.


Reinforcing	is	another	important	part:	The	relationship	between	the
elements
     The	 meeting	 of	 two	 personalities	 is	 like	 the	 contact	 of	 two	 chemical
     substances:	if	there	is	any	reaction,	both	are	transformed.
                                                                                  C.G.	Jung

As	 mentioned	 above,	 Wu	 Xing	 explains	 the	 five	 elements	 and	 their	 possible
interaction	patterns	or	cycles.	There	are	four	different	cycles	in	Wu	Xing	and	we
need	to	understand	them	to	be	able	to	interpret	Ba	Zi.	Generally	speaking,	Ba	Zi
takes	 into	 account	 that	 all	 people	 portray	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 persona	 that	 can	 be
explained	 by	 one	 of	 the	 elements.	 And	 these	 different	 personas	 interact
differently	 with	 each	 other,	 depending	 upon	 which	 elements	 they	 are.	 For
example,	 a	 fire	 person	 interacts	 differently	 with	 an	 earth	 person	 than	 they	 do
with	a	water	person.
    The	 Wu	 Xing	 cycles	 describe	 how	 things	 normally	 should	 flow	 (creation
cycle),	 go	 against	 what	 is	 normally	 situated	 (insulting	 cycle),	 dominate	 over
certain	 aspects	 (controlling	 cycle),	 and	 finally	 how	 one	 element	 can	 drain
another	(exhausting	cycle).	Reinforcing	is	another	important	part.
     1. The	creation	cycle	(Xiang	Sheng).	Wood	creates	fire,	fire	creates
        earth,	earth	creates	metal,	metal	creates	water,	and	water	creates
        wood.
2. The	insulting	cycle	(Xiang	Wu).	Earth	insults	wood,	wood	insults
   metal,	metal	insults	fire,	fire	insults	water,	and	water	insults	earth.
3. The	controlling	cycle	(Xiang	Ke).	Wood	controls	earth,	earth	controls
   water,	water	controls	fire,	fire	controls	metal,	and	metal	controls
   wood.
4. The	exhausting	cycle	(Xiang	Cheng).	Fire	exhausts	wood,	wood
   exhausts	water,	water	exhausts	metal,	metal	exhausts	earth,	and	earth
   exhausts	fire.
5. Reinforcing.	The	same	element	reinforces	the	same	element.	For
   example,	if	you	have	two	fires	it	is	reinforced	in	Ba	Zi,	but	if	you
   have	six	fires	it	is	too	much.
Now	that	we	have	introduced	the	different	cycles	we	can	start	to	understand	how
different	personas	interact	with	each	other	depending	upon	which	element	they
are.	Let	us	choose	the	example	of	a	fire	person	interacting	with	different	kinds	of
people	and	see	how	that	fire	person	responds	to	the	different	situations.
    The	 natural	 cycle	 of	 things	 is	 what	 we	 can	 observe	 in	 the	 creation	 cycle.
Every	element	is	produced	from	another	element.	Or,	explained	in	another	way,
every	element	is	nourished	by	another	element.	So	in	this	context	we	see	that	a
fire	 person	 is	 nourished	 by	 the	 interaction	 with	 a	 wood	 person,	 since	 wood
creates	fire.	We	can	also	see	that	what	is	nourishing	the	other	is	also	exhausted
by	doing	so:	for	example,	wood	creates	fire	(creation	cycle);	fire	exhausts	wood
(exhausting	cycle).
    From	 the	 controlling	 cycle	 the	 fire	 person	 would	 be	 dominated	 and
controlled	by	a	water	person.	This	may	sound	a	bit	negative	but	it	actually	is	not.
Being	under	control	means	that	there	is	one	that	is	yin	and	the	other	that	is	yang
—a	natural	coexisting	partnership.
    The	opposite	of	the	controlling	cycle	is	the	insulting	cycle.	Here	we	have	a
fire	 person	 that	 is	 too	 strong	 for	 the	 water	 person	 to	 handle,	 and	 in	 this	 case
things	are	not	in	balance	or	natural.



Wu	Xing	and	yin/yang
Though	we	will	not	yet	go	into	detail	on	this	topic,	it	is	important	here	to	have
some	 understanding	 of	 how	 Wu	 Xing	 and	 yin/yang	 interact	 together.	 In	 the
theory	 of	 yin	 and	 yang	 we	 stated	 that	 yin	 and	 yang	 are	 opposites,	 so	 for
everything	there	is	a	polarity.	So	too	for	the	elements.	These	are	also	referred	to
in	 Ba	 Zi	 as	 the	 Tian	 Gan	 (Heavenly	 Stems).	 For	 now	 we	 will	 just	 give	 a	 brief
summary	of	the	ten	different	combinations	(see	the	next	table).
     These	 Tian	 Gan	 will	 then	 have	 their	 own	 variations	 of	 the	 elements	 with
their	strengths	and	weaknesses.	It	is	good	to	think	a	little	about	these	images	and
what	they	actually	mean	in	relation	to	a	person	and	their	behavior	because	they
will	enable	a	better	understanding	of	Ba	Zi	later	on.

Element             Polarity          Chinese	name                   Image
Wood                Yang              Jia                            A	huge	tree
                    Yin               Yi                             Bamboo
Fire                Yang              Bing                           The	sun
                    Yin               Ding                           A	candle
Earth               Yang              Wu                             A	mountain
                    Yin               Ji                             A	candle
Metal               Yang              Geng                           An	axe
                    Yin               Xin                            Jewelry
Water               Yang              Ren                            Tsunami
                    Yin               Gui                            Mist
What	is	Ba	Zi?
Up	to	now	we	have	discussed	several	aspects	of	the	Daoist	view	of	Man,	but	also
which	tools	are	primarily	applied	in	a	Daoist	practice.	As	mentioned	earlier,	the
basic	 concepts	 of	 yin	 and	 yang	 and	 the	 five	 elements	 are	 essential	 theories	 for
understanding	Ba	Zi.
     We	will	now	give	a	short	overview	of	Ba	Zi	and	how	a	chart	actually	looks
on	paper.
     Ba	Zi	is	a	tool	that	was	developed	to	understand	the	different	psychological
traits	of	Man,	and	for	this	purpose	the	traditions	applied	their	knowledge	of	yin
and	yang	and	the	elements	to	a	whole	new	context.	They	saw	that	each	person
has	 one	 major	 characteristic	 trait	 that	 is	 given	 by	 one	 of	 the	 five	 elements	 (the
Wu	 Xing),	 and	 is	 called	 the	 Day	 Master	 in	 Ba	 Zi	 terms.	 In	 general,	 the	 Day
Master	describes	around	70	percent	of	a	person’s	psychology.	The	Day	Master
explains	 the	 person’s	 behavioral	 attributes	 in	 any	 given	 situation	 with	 other
people,	and	also	how	the	person	is	looking	at	the	world	and	feels	about	the	world
and	himself.
     In	 addition	 to	 a	 personal	 element	 that	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 Day	 Master,
we	 also	 have	 a	 polarity	 to	 the	 element	 that	 can	 be	 either	 yin	 or	 yang.	 This
polarity	 is	 very	 interesting,	 because	 it	 explains	 two	 ways	 in	 which	 an	 element,
and	 hence	 a	 persona,	 can	 express	 itself.	 Take	 for	 example	 a	 yang	 fire	 person
versus	a	yin	fire	person.	Since	they	both	are	of	the	fire	element,	they	have	a	lot
of	 common	 characteristics.	 For	 example,	 they	 can	 be	 warm	 and	 friendly,
generous	and	passionate.	But	they	also	have	the	tendencies	of	becoming	lonely
and	 being	 very	 emotional.	 In	 contrast,	 the	 yang	 fire	 person	 is	 more	 extreme	 in
their	behavior	and	will	take	much	more	space	than	a	yin	fire	person.	In	addition,
a	 yin	 fire	 person	 will	 have	 a	 much	 more	 subtle	 way	 of	 telling	 people	 things,
while	the	yang	fire	person	will	not	be	so	refined.
     Ba	 Zi	 (eight	 characters	 or	 eight	 palaces)	 consists	 of	 eight	 elements—from
now	 on	 called	 characters—with	 their	 different	 polarities.	 And	 these	 eight
characters	are	divided	into	two	rows	and	four	pillars:

Tian	Gan           	                  	                  	                  	
(Heavenly	Stems)
Di	Zhi	(Earthly    	                  	                  	                  	
Branches)
The	 upper	 row	 is	 called	 the	 Tian	 Gan	 (Heavenly	 Stems)	 and	 the	 lower	 row	 is
called	 the	 Di	 Zhi	 (Earthly	 Branches).	 The	 Tian	 Gan	 represents	 what	 you	 as	 a
person	have	been	given	by	the	heavens	as	attributes,	and	it	is	also	here	that	the
Day	Master	resides.
    The	Di	Zhi,	on	the	other	hand,	is	what	your	incarnation	on	earth	has	at	their
disposal	or,	put	another	way,	how	your	incarnation	interacts	with	the	world.	In
general,	it	is	more	interesting	to	understand	your	Di	Zhi	since	it	has	much	more
to	do	with	your	daily	life.
    The	four	pillars	are	four	columns	that	contain	one	character	for	the	Tian	Gan
and	one	for	the	Di	Zhi.	The	four	pillars	are	known	from	left	to	the	right	as	the
Hour	 pillar,	 Day	 pillar,	 Month	 pillar	 and	 Year	 pillar,	 respectively.	 In	 the	 Tian
Gan	of	the	Day	pillar	you	find	your	Day	Master.

Tian	Gan
(Heavenly	Stems)
Di	Zhi	(Earthly
                   HOUR                DAY                MONTH YEAR
Branches)


This	Ba	Zi	map	shows	a	structure	that	details	a	person’s	psychological	profile.	In
each	of	the	palaces,	we	will	have	an	element	with	its	specific	polarity.	Each	box
will	in	itself	have	a	certain	amount	of	information	with	regard	to	its	position	in
the	four	pillars,	but	also	in	relationship	to	which	element	and	polarity	it	has.	In
addition,	 every	 palace	 interacts	 with	 other	 palaces	 in	 the	 same	 pillar	 or
neighboring	pillars.	Also,	each	palace	has	more	subtle	interactions	with	palaces
that	are	not	adjacent	to	each	other.	Even	though	the	Ba	Zi	map	looks	simple,	it	is
far	from	being	so—it	is	a	combinatorial	masterpiece	of	the	human	psyche.
    Let	us	here	give	a	short	overview	of	the	Ba	Zi	map.	This	will	make	it	easier
to	 follow	 when	 we	 start	 to	 go	 into	 the	 map	 in	 more	 detail	 and	 in	 its
interpretation.	 The	 first	 thing	 we	 need	 to	 realize	 about	 the	 map	 is	 that	 it	 is	 of
course	 specific	 to	 every	 person.	 And	 this	 is	 actually	 explained	 in	 the	 names	 of
the	 pillars.	 In	 each	 pillar	 you	 will	 have	 elements	 with	 polarities	 specific	 to	 the
person’s	hour,	day,	month	and	year	of	birth.
    The	 next	 layer	 of	 interpreting	 the	 map	 is	 that	 it	 shows	 the	 dominant	 pillar
with	 regard	 to	 one’s	 age.	 This	 means	 that	 during	 the	 different	 stages	 of	 our
mortal	life	we	will	have	new	Tian	Gan	and	Di	Zhi	combinations	that	we	can	say
will	 work	 as	 our	 Day	 Master	 for	 now.	 This	 is	 actually	 quite	 easy	 to	 see	 in	 the
personalities	 of	 children	 and	 how	 they	 develop	 before	 adulthood.	 As	 they	 go
through	different	stages,	their	personality	is	actually	a	little	different.	They	have
their	 core	 which	 does	 not	 change,	 but	 they	 are	 still	 influenced	 by	 things	 that
make	 them	 different	 from	 what	 they	 were	 at	 an	 earlier	 age.	 This	 is	 where	 the
pillar	 of	 that	 certain	 age	 comes	 into	 play.	 Another	 interesting	 function	 that	 a
pillar	has	regarding	a	person’s	age	is	that	it	also	changes	the	total	picture	of	the
map	in	terms	of	understanding	age-related	questions.
    We	can	also	look	at	the	Ba	Zi	map	from	the	core	of	our	profile	to	the	more
superficial	or	least	personal	aspects	of	our	person.	This	would	be	to	read	the	map
from	the	Hour	pillar	(innermost	traits)	to	the	Year	pillar	(outermost	traits).	For
example,	as	a	human	being	we	have	different	layers	of	intimacy	in	terms	of	how
we	 relate	 to	 colleagues,	 friends,	 family	 and	 spouse.	 We	 just	 behave	 differently
towards	people	depending	upon	which	social	circle	they	belong	to	in	our	lives.
People	 we	 do	 not	 know	 will	 be	 dominated	 by	 the	 characteristics	 of	 our	 Year
pillar,	while	colleagues	will	be	more	prone	to	interact	with	our	Month	pillar,	for
example.	And	in	contrast,	there	is	always	the	deepest	part	of	us	that	we	do	not
share	with	anyone,	and	that	would	be	represented	by	our	Hour	pillar.
    Another	aspect	that	we	can	understand	from	the	Ba	Zi	map	is	actually	how
we	perceive	our	self	with	regard	to	our	own	spiritual	development,	relationships
and	goals	in	life.
    As	you	can	see,	there	is	so	much	that	can	be	understood	from	the	Ba	Zi	map.
You	 just	 need	 to	 understand	 in	 detail	 what	 each	 pillar	 and	 box	 tell	 you	 by
themselves	and	in	all	the	possible	combinations	they	can	exist	in.
    As	a	general	rule	for	interpreting	the	Ba	Zi	map,	we	can	say	the	following:
each	 situation	 that	 either	 is	 between	 you	 and	 another	 person,	 or	 you	 with
yourself,	can	be	divided	into	four	levels	(the	pillars)	depending	upon	the	depth	of
the	situation	(with	hour	being	the	innermost	level).	The	boxes	in	that	level	will
then	give	you	an	explanation	of	how	a	situation	can	be	resolved	in	terms	of	the
person	you	are.
    This	is	the	structure	of	the	Ba	Zi	map	(four	pillars	and	two	rows).	And	it	is
from	this	map	that	we	learn	how	to	discern	personal	traits.	You	will	also	see	that
from	this	map	you	will	immediately	get	a	general	understanding	of	people	that
will	 amaze	 you,	 but	you	 will	 also	 find	 that	the	 map	 is	a	 very	 practical	 tool	 for
resolving	issues.
CHAPTER	2
Ba	Zi
The	Eight	Characters


Ba	 Zi,	 or	 the	 eight	 characters	 (sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 eight	 palaces),
provides	us	with	an	understanding	of	our	deepest	secrets	that	are	shown	in	our
outward	 behavior.	 The	 methodology	 rests	 on	 a	 multidimensional	 meaning	 that
has	 many	 areas	 of	 application,	 from	 understanding	 ourselves	 in	 relationship	 to
ourselves,	to	our	relationship	and	interaction	with	other	people.	In	addition,	there
are	numerous	other	applications.	Essentially,	Ba	Zi	reveals	our	tendencies	in	life.
    As	with	all	Daoist	tools	and	practices,	using	Ba	Zi	is	of	utmost	importance,
and	treating	it	as	just	a	piece	of	interesting	information	is	not	valuable.	We	need
to	actually	use	Ba	Zi	to	understand	a	situation	and	act	on	it.
    The	table	below	gives	the	basic	outline	of	Ba	Zi:

	
Hour
Day
Month
Year
Tian	Gan	(Heavenly	Stems)   	
Day	Master                                                              	     	
Di	Zhi	(Earthly	Branches)                                               	     	     	     	

The	 Day	 Master	 is	 the	 day	 palace	 of	 the	 heavenly	 stem.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 important
palace	and	we	will	use	it	in	many	comparisons	and	interpretations.
    The	Day	Master	is	who	we	believe	we	are,	and	understanding	it	reveals	70
percent	 of	 our	 personality.	 In	 later	 sections,	 we	 will	 look	 at	 the	 strength	 of	 the
Day	 Master.	 This	 will	 give	 us	 valuable	 information	 in	 regard	 to	 being	 able	 to
understand	our	personality,	because	time	will	affect	a	weak	Day	Master	and	the
information	it	gives	will	not	be	enough.
    There	are	three	levels	to	Ba	Zi:
     1. Who	we	are.	Our	deep	personality	has	tendencies	which	are	given
        from	birth	and	which	we	cannot	change	very	much.	Moreover,	it	is
        not	always	very	practical	to	try	to	change	them.	Knowing	our
        tendencies	might	enable	us	to	prepare	better	for	life	events,	but
        essentially	it	shows	who	we	really	are.	However,	when	we	have	this
        understanding	of	ourselves,	we	can	change	how	we	see	the	world.
     2. How	we	see	the	world.	Because	of	who	we	are,	we	will	see	the	world
        in	a	specific	way.
     3. How	we	interact	with	the	world.	When	we	know	who	we	deeply	are
        and	how	we	interact	in	the	world,	we	have	the	power	to	change	how
        we	do	this.

These	three	levels	are	the	Heaven,	Man	and	Earth	levels.	It	is	important	that	we
understand	these,	and	the	fact	that	they	interact.
    For	 the	 foundation	 of	 your	 own	 Ba	 Zi	 and	 that	 of	 others,	 you	 need	 to
understand	 who	 you	 really	 are.	 The	 real	 basis	 for	 this	 are	 the	 ten	 Day	 Masters
(the	ten	Tian	Gan).	These	will	be	explained	in	more	detail	later,	but	in	short	they
are	the	five	elements,	with	yin	and	yang	polarity.
Understanding	the	palaces
In	this	section,	we	will	explore	a	few	different	ways	to	look	at	Ba	Zi	and	how	it
affects	our	life.	What	we	want	to	develop	is	a	feel	for	the	subject,	and	not	just	a
regurgitation	of	information.	As	mentioned	earlier,	using	it	as	a	practical	method
will	help	us	develop	this	more	intuitive	feeling	that	we	are	looking	for.
    The	first	thing	to	look	at,	and	this	is	a	traditional	view,	is	how	the	columns
relate	to	different	stages	of	a	person’s	life.	The	table	below	gives	a	more	detailed
description:
Hour
Retirement       The	time	when	we	stop	being	productive	and	we	start	reflecting	on	our	life.
(52	and	above)
Day
Adulthood When	we	are	responsible	and	independent	in	our	own	life.	This	is	after	a	marriage,	having	a
(35–51)   baby	or	separating	financially	from	the	family.
Month
Adolescence Friends,	siblings	and	other	people	will	shape	how	we	will	be	as	an	adult—the	time	when	we
(18–34)     construct	our	individuality.	It	is	a	time	when	we	want	to	know	things.	In	addition,	it	is	a
            time	when	we	realize	that	not	everybody	is	perfect,	even	family	and	ourselves.
Year
Childhood The	time	when	we	have	the	“mommy	and	daddy”	image	and	are	completely	dependent	on	our
(17	and   parents.	Even	if	our	childhood	was	bad,	we	remember	it	as	good.
below)


If	a	person	follows	a	natural	progression,	then	by	the	age	of	40	they	should	be
independent	and	mostly	influenced	by	the	Day	pillar.	However,	someone	might
not	get	to	adulthood	because	they	are	still	dependent	on	their	parents	financially
or	in	some	other	way	and	therefore	will	be	influenced	by	the	Month	pillar	more
than	normal.	How	the	pillars	relate	and	how	they	affect	each	other	will	be	looked
at	in	more	detail	later.

Here	are	a	few	more	examples:
Tian	Gan
Di	Zhi
Hour
Inside   Our	children,	us.	The	inside	of	us.	The	things	we	do   Things	that	we	do	not	know	about
the	home not	want	to	share.	The	Nei	Hun.                        ourselves,	which	are	unclear.
Day   People	we	have	a	deep	relationship	with.   	
Month
Outside	the	home   Parents	and	colleagues.	We	do	not	share	intimate	things	with	them.   	
Year Grandparents	and	outside	life.	The	people	we	know	but	don’t	care	what	they	say	about	us.   	

More	on	ourselves:

	
Tian	Gan
Di	Zhi
Hour          The	relationship	with	the	higher	(Shen).	Messages        Deep	grounding	of	our	spirituality.
Spiritual     we	will	receive.	Spirits	and	angels.                     Our	ability	to	connect.	Aspiration.
              The	quality	and	the	capacity	to	listen	to	it.	If	we      The	deep	things	we	want	in	life.	The
              have	yang	earth	or	yang	metal,	our	spiritual	side	is     relationship	with	the	Gui.	Deep
              blocked.	This	will	hinder	us	from	reaching               meaning	from	practice.	Conscious
              spirituality.	However,	this	is	different	for             dream	practice.	Cannot	come	by
              practitioners.	The	practice	gives	us	short	cuts	to	see   itself.
              things	differently.
              If	there	is	no	spiritual	practice	or	a	structured
              practice	then	we	will	feel	pressure	and	be	stuck.	Felt
              as	a	fight	and	tension	and	not	as	an	open	canal!	The
              capacity	to	listen	to	the	spiritual	side.	Intuition.
              Connection	with	Yuan	Shen.	Can	come	by	itself.
Day           Represents	us,	and	us	towards	others.	Towards       Relationship	to	other	people	or
Relationships people	in	our	home.	The	interaction	between	the     wife/husband.	How	we	behave	in
              Day	Master	and	earthly	branch	gives	us	our          our	home	behind	closed	doors.
              tendencies	for	relationships.	The	good	and	the	bad.
              What	we	look	for	in	a	relationship.	The	problems	of
              what	we	look	for.	What	we	will	expect	from	the
              other.
Month         What	we	do	with	emotions.	Our	emotional	filter.          How	we	digest	emotions.	Some
Emotional     The	way	we	have	relationships	with	others.               problems	will	always	be	there	and
              The	way	we	judge	things	in	our	mental	mind!	How          not	digested.
              others	see	the	relationship	with	us.	How	we	adapt        Deep	relationship	with	parents.
              with	our	friends.	The	way	we	filter	things	with	our      All	problems	with	parents.	Fuel	of
              perception	of	the	world.	What	we	do	with	the             our	Day	Master.	The	month	of	our
              emotions.                                                birth.	Season	aspects.	What	drives	us
              The	way	we	show	our	emotions	to	people;	how	we           emotionally.
              share	them.
Year          What	we	will	do	and	produce	in	the	world.                Family	heritage.	The	ancestral	link.
Material      Our	hobbies.                                             Our	health	capital.	What	we	got,	our
              What	we	show	to	people.                                  jing.	See	how	it	relates	to	our	Day
              The	job	we	choose	and	what	we	aspire	to.                 Master.
                                                                       Imbalance	in	health	will	be	felt.
                                                                       What	we	feel	outside	with	people.


The	earthly	branch	(Di	Zhi)	should	feed	the	heavenly	stem;	however,	sometimes
the	heavenly	stem	will	stop	the	realization	of	the	earthly	branch,	or	vice	versa.
This	is	a	very	interesting	relationship	and	we	will	look	at	it	in	more	detail	later.
     What	we	also	need	to	have	in	the	back	of	our	minds	is	that	the	earthly	branch
is	a	realization	of	heaven,	so	inside	the	earthly	branch	we	have	a	heavenly	stem.

Ba	Zi	regarding	work:
	
Tian	Gan
Di	Zhi
Hour Helps	us	do	things.	The        People	who	we	control	that	we	help.	They	also	give	us	our	drive.
     things	that	help	us	to	work.   They	push	us	to	do	more	but	we	don’t	tell	them.
Day   ME!   Assistant	or	direct	associates.	If	we	are	the	boss	it	will	be	our	right-hand	man.
Month Close	colleagues	who	carry	us,	and	friends People	who	give	us	good	ideas.	They	give	us	the
      at	work	who	help	us.                       path.	Mentors.	The	good	boss.
Year   Colleagues,	boss	or	people	we	interact	with	and	work	with.   Drive.	The	fuel	for	work.
Ba	Zi	and	Feng	Shui
With	Ba	Zi	we	have	facing	and	sitting.	We	need	this	when	we	want	to	combine
Ba	Zi	with	Feng	Shui:	• Hour:	sitting	point	→	Di	Zhi	• Year:	facing	point	→
Tian	Gan	• In	the	middle,	you	have	a	combination	of	Nei	Hun	and	Wai	Hun.



Yin	and	yang
One	of	the	first	things	we	look	for	in	Ba	Zi	is	balance.	That	is,	the	balance	of	yin
and	yang,	but	also	that	of	the	elements.	What	we	do	not	want	is	to	think	that,	for
example,	 we	 need	 more	 yang	 in	 our	 Ba	 Zi	 so	 that	 we	 start	 doing	 more	 yang
things	 when	 our	 Ba	 Zi	 has	 already	 more	 than	 enough	 yang.	 Each	 of	 the
characters	 (palaces)	 will	 have	 a	 polarity,	 yin	 or	 yang.	 We	 will	 measure	 the
balance	of	yin	and	yang	and	see	what	we	need	to	do.
    Yin/yang	is	so	huge	that,	if	we	were	very	good	at	dealing	with	it,	we	would
not	need	anything	else.	However,	it	is	so	complex	that	we	need	the	laws	of	the
five	elements.
The	five	elements
For	Ba	Zi	it	is	very	important	to	know	the	theory	of	the	five	elements.	The	five
cycles	to	remember	are:	1. Creation.	Water	→	wood	→	fire	→	earth	→	metal
→	water.
    2. Controlling.	It	is	healthy:	metal	→	wood	→	earth	→	water	→	fire	→
       metal.
    3. Insulting.	The	reverse	of	controlling:	metal	←	wood	←	earth	←
       water	←	fire	←	metal.
    4. Exhausting.	The	reverse	of	creation:	water	←	wood	←	fire	←	earth
       ←	metal	←	water.
    5. Reinforcing.	The	same	element	reinforces	the	same	element.	For
       example,	if	you	have	two	fires	it	is	reinforced	in	Ba	Zi,	but	if	you
       have	six	fires	it	is	too	much.

Out	of	these,	cycles	1,	2	and	4	are	the	most	important	to	remember.

Note:	We	are	looking	for	balance	in	Ba	Zi,	so	we	want	a	balance	of	the	elements.
CHAPTER	3
The	Heavenly	Stems


The	five	elements	and	their	polarity	form	the	basis	of	Ba	Zi.	It	is	thus	important
that	 we	 have	 a	 good	 understanding	 of	 them	 regarding	 the	 eight	 palaces.
Therefore,	in	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ten	heavenly	stems,	ranging	from
the	 general	 to	 the	 more	 polarity-specific	 tendencies,	 and	 consider	 the	 positives
and	negatives	as	they	relate	to	work	and	training.
Wood
The	 wood	 element	 is	 about	 growth	 and	 continuous	 development.	 There	 is	 also
strength	in	the	growth.	Wood	is	an	energy	that	wants	to	go	everywhere.
General
Wood	people	are	progressive,	persevering	and	stable.	They	are	straight	and	clear
in	their	manner,	which	is	good	because	this	means	they	will	be	honest.	However,
it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 change	 what	 they	 believe.	 This	 also	 relates	 to	 persuasion,
though	 they	 might	 change	 over	 time.	 Wood	 people	 are	 sentimental	 and	 do	 not
want	to	be	away	from	their	roots,	particularly	where	they	were	born	or	grew	up.
Even	 if	 they	 clash	 with	 their	 family	 or	 fall	 out	 of	 love	 with	 their	 country	 they
will	always	come	back;	or	they	will	move	very	far	away	but	re-create	their	home
or	 neighborhood	 in	 the	 new	 place.	 Stability	 and	 not	 moving	 are	 particular
tendencies	of	wood	people.	As	a	result	of	their	roots	they	are	steady	and	we	can
lean	 on	 them	 for	 help.	 They	 will	 always	 be	 somewhat	 successful;	 indeed,	 it	 is
very	difficult	for	wood	people	not	to	be	successful.
Positives
Wood	people	are	good	at	communicating	and	transmitting.	Therefore,	they	also
want	 to	 be	 the	 person	 who	 can	 explain	 things	 and	 be	 a	 messenger	 to	 other
people.	They	are	kind,	tender,	ambitious,	audacious,	optimistic,	enthusiastic	and
even	romantic.	The	ability	to	see	things	from	a	broader	perspective	or	to	see	the
big	picture	are	other	positive	qualities	of	such	people.	Because	of	this,	they	are
open	 to	 many	 things.	 Some	 qualities	 are	 based	 on	 their	 ability	 to	 “know	 who
they	are,”	such	as	being	able	to	judge	or	taking	the	initiative.	Guided	by	their	gut
feeling,	they	will	not	act	if	it	is	not	right.	We	mentioned	earlier	that	it	is	difficult
to	make	them	change	their	mind;	however,	this	is	possible	if	the	change	goes	in
the	 direction	 they	 want	 to	 go	 in.	 We	 can	 count	 on	 wood	 people	 as	 they	 are
honest	 and	 ethical	 and	 have	 a	 good	 memory.	 A	 challenge	 is	 always	 welcome,
though	 if	 they	 do	 not	 like	 advice,	 then	 they	 have	 to	 think	 about	 it.	 Having	 a
survival	 instinct	 is	 a	 known	 trait;	 and	 they	 are	 good	 at	 developing	 projects,
solving	 problems	 and	 planning	 because	 they	 know	 where	 to	 go.	 Wood	 people
have	 ideas,	 imagination,	 creativity	 and	 the	 desire	 to	 create.	 They	 have	 a	 good
capacity	 to	 learn,	 going	 deep	 into	 an	 occupation.	 In	 addition,	 as	 soon	 as	 they
want	 to	 discover	 who	 they	 are,	 they	 can	 examine	 their	 spirituality.	 In	 addition,
they	have	an	artistic	mind,	and	mobility	of	the	body	and	mind.	They	are	quick,
and	therefore	they	need	movement.
Negatives
Wood	 people	 can	 be	 frustrated,	 irritated	 and	 impatient.	 They	 need	 to	 be
recognized	 and	 can	 have	 a	 low	 self-image.	 Because	 of	 the	 growing	 energy	 of
wood,	 everything	 in	 life	 seems	 to	 be	 small;	 or	 they	 are	 impatient	 because	 they
are	not	already	where	they	want	to	be.	Since	they	expand	everywhere,	they	do
not	want	their	development	to	be	blocked	or	to	go	too	slowly;	if	that	is	the	case,
then	they	become	nervous	and	irritated,	or	even	depressed.	This	means	they	are
always	in	a	hurry,	always	in	an	“I	want,	I	want”	mood,	possibly	leading	towards
anger	and	rage.	In	addition,	wood	people	are	not	easily	satisfied	and	try	to	forget
about	 events,	 because	 they	 do	 not	 want	 to	 see	 reality.	 They	 can	 be	 aggressive,
menacing	and	unfriendly,	have	a	tendency	to	want	to	be	right,	cannot	delegate,
and	are	sometimes	moody	and	confused.	Moreover,	they	have	a	tendency	to	be
stuck	in	their	beliefs	and	can	stop	other	people	from	developing	so	that	they	can
develop	 better	 themselves.	 On	 one	 side	 they	 can	 have	 low	 self-esteem;	 on	 the
other	they	can	feel	that	they	are	so	much	more	important	than	other	people.	They
will	 “kill”	 everybody	 in	 order	 to	 go	 towards	 what	 they	 want	 to	 do,	 and	 would
rather	destroy	than	rebuild.
    A	situation	might	easily	hurt	or	vex	them.	They	are	susceptible	and	stubborn,
look	 for	 confrontation	 or	 to	 be	 provoking,	 like	 to	 upset	 people,	 and	 are	 very
demanding.	It	is	difficult	for	them	to	predict	what	they	want,	and	they	do	not	like
advice	or	orders.	Wood	people	have	the	tendency	to	be	too	emotional,	straight	or
psychologically	rigid.	They	will	not	say	“thank	you”	and	will	be	jealous.	Their
insecurity	 might	 also	 be	 because	 they	 do	 not	 know	 where	 they	 want	 to	 go.	 At
least	most	of	the	time,	people	have	to	adapt	to	them	rather	than	them	adapting	to
other	people.
Training
Wood	 people	 need	 strong	 muscles	 and	 tendons.	 In	 addition,	 they	 need	 to	 keep
their	neck,	shoulder	and	trapezius	muscles	very	flexible.	Tai	Ji	and	any	kind	of
conscious	walking	will	be	good	for	this.	Other	recommended	training	should	be
yin	in	nature,	such	as	the	Dao.	They	also	need	to	take	care	not	to	eat	too	much
acidic	food.
Work
Architecture,	 Woodworking,	 Development	 and	 communication,	 Education	 and
teaching,	Research,	Psychology,	Human	research,	Rational	therapy,	Philosophy,
Medicine	 (mostly	 exotic	 medicine),	 Re-education,	 Optics	 and	 eyes,	 Herbs	 and
biology,	 Work	 involving	 the	 earth,	 Plants	 and	 flowers,	 Botany,	 Forest	 ranger,
Fashion,	 Hairdresser,	 Clothes	 design,	 Writing,	 Bookselling,	 Media,
Documentation,	Biotech,	Music,	Singing,	Poetry,	Ecology,	Energy	linked	to	the
wind	or	wood,	Renewable	technology,	Political	strategy.


Jia	(yang	wood)	qualities
Jia	 people	 will	 be	 flexible	 but	 also	 stubborn	 and	 rigid.	 They	 will	 stand	 their
ground	 and	 stick	 to	 their	 beliefs.	 Whereas	 yin	 wood	 needs	 yang	 wood,	 yang
wood	does	not	need	yin	wood.	Yang	wood	people	are	good,	but	they	can	easily
upset	 others	 because	 of	 their	 straight	 and	 righteous	 manner.	 In	 addition,	 they
may	 not	 be	 very	 tactful	 or	 are	 just	 too	 outspoken.	 They	 can	 be	 boring	 and
conservative,	but	they	are	the	best	people	to	rely	on	and	have	a	relationship	with
because	they	are	steady	and	clear.	Because	they	are	very	smart,	they	have	a	great
capacity	 for	 learning.	 Like	 a	 rigid	 tree,	 they	 will	 always	 continue	 to	 grow	 and
progress.	 They	 will	 never	 stop.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 they	 do	 not	 like	 ambition.
They	are	 very	thorough,	and	 they	will	always	be	successful	once	they	find	 out
what	they	want	to	do.	We	can	never	stop	the	successful	growth	of	a	yang	wood
person.	They	are	straightforward	people,	but	a	little	obsessive.	As	they	are	loyal,
you	 can	 charge	 into	 war	 with	 them.	 The	 yang	 wood	 person	 might	 not	 look
sentimental	but	they	are	very	much	so—sometimes	too	much.
     •   Famous	people:	Napoleon,	Bruce	Lee,	Richard	Branson	(Virgin
         Records,	etc.),	Ralph	Lauren.


Yi	(yin	wood)	qualities
Yi	 people	 are	 survivalists,	 and	 are	 flexible	 and	 subtle.	 They	 are	 attached	 to
others	and	need	yang	wood.	They	are	pretty,	soft,	gentle	and	elegant	and	like	the
finer	things	of	life.	Yi	men	will	be	talented	and	Yi	women	beautiful,	elegant	and
refined.	 Yin	 wood	 people	 will	 be	 smart,	 witty	 and	 adaptive.	 Life	 is	 about
survival,	 and	 they	 will	 even	 do	 bad	 things	 to	 survive.	 They	 do	 not	 have	 the
straightness	of	Jia	(yang	wood).	However,	they	are	very	difficult	to	break	(like
bamboo).	As	with	wood,	in	general	they	like	to	expand,	so	because	of	this	they
like	to	be	everywhere,	but	they	do	not	like	to	be	controlled	by	other	people.	They
are	 patient	 and	 straightforward	 in	 their	 behavior,	 but	 primarily	 they	 want	 to
survive.	In	addition,	being	pushed	around	is	something	that	they	do	not	tolerate.
Yin	 wood	 people	 need	 some	 fire	 for	 talent	 and	 happiness	 because	 they	 will
sometimes	be	locked	into	their	own	minds.
     •   Famous	people:	Bill	Clinton.
Fire
Life,	being	alive,	and	the	basic	energy	of	survival—this	is	fire.
General
Fire	 people	 are	 warm,	 friendly,	 expressive,	 passionate,	 loving,	 compassionate
and	empathetic.
Positives
Some	 positive	 aspects	 of	 fire	 people	 are	 politeness,	 good	 manners,	 patience,
generosity,	 willingness	 to	 help	 others,	 passion	 and	 intelligence.	 They	 are
illuminating	 and	 give	 light	 to	 other	 people’s	 lives,	 stimulating	 people.	 In
addition,	they	like	to	extend	their	knowledge	to	other	people.	Like	the	sun,	they
have	good	powers	of	attraction.	Often	they	will	also	have	a	good	appearance	and
like	to	be	attractive.	Since	fire	is	about	living,	they	will	aim	to	be	happy	and	do
what	they	can	to	achieve	this.	As	a	result,	they	know	how	to	live	and	do	not	say
no	 to	 partying.	 Fire	 people	 need	 to	 do	 something	 important	 and	 contribute.
Moreover,	 they	 need	 to	 show	 on	 the	 outside	 what	 is	 on	 the	 inside.	 They	 are
expansive,	 dynamic,	 action	 oriented,	 productive	 and	 spontaneous	 and	 will
express	 themselves	 strongly.	 In	 addition,	 they	 will	 talk	 loudly,	 do	 things,
explain,	 and	 might	 even	 make	 a	 discovery.	 Fire	 people	 are	 attentive	 to	 other
people,	 bringing	 people	 together,	 and	 they	 can	 mediate.	 They	 have	 mental
clarity,	 are	 lucid,	 good	 teachers	 and	 can	 easily	 absorb	 knowledge.	 Therefore,
they	learn	quickly	and	are	very	intelligent.	People	of	the	fire	element	like	things
to	stay	the	same	and,	similar	to	the	sun,	will	never	lack	power	and	can	have	an
intense	 nature.	 The	 more	 you	 go	 against	 them,	 the	 more	 they	 will	 come	 back.
Fire	 is	 about	 dynamic	 movement	 and	 power,	 but	 also	 about	 warmth	 and
attention.	Fire	people	like	attention.
Negatives
The	 negative	 aspects	 of	 fire	 people	 are	 that	 they	 are	 lonely	 and	 do	 not	 like
surprises.	They	will	be	independent	as	long	as	people	are	dependent	on	them.	As
fire	 is	 the	 only	 element	 that	 can	 consume	 itself	 and	 therefore	 needs	 resources,
fire	people	need	to	feed	on	something,	otherwise	they	will	feed	on	themselves.
Fire	 people	 can	 be	 egocentric,	 attached	 to	 things,	 jealous	 and	 destructive	 (self-
destructive),	 and	 have	 difficulties	 seeing	 things	 through	 to	 the	 end.	 Moreover,
they	can	also	do	too	many	things	at	the	same	time.	Being	the	sun,	they	are	more
fragile	than	you	think,	and	feelings	and	emotions	can	consume	them.	In	the	end,
they	can	also	be	very	superficial	because	they	can	attract	more	people	that	way.
Training
Fire	 people	 need	 to	 have	 a	 good	 balance	 between	 mind	 and	 spirit.	 In	 addition,
they	need	to	breathe;	the	breath	will	feed	the	fire	and	quieten	it.	And	they	need
to	learn	to	do	nothing.
Work
Metaphysics,	 Religion	 and	 spirituality	 (especially	 for	 yin	 fire),	 Technology,
Aeronautics,	 Chemistry,	 Petroleum	 industry,	 Electricity	 and	 electronics,
Informatics	 and	 telecommunications	 industry,	 Weapons	 (Bing:	 yang	 fire),	 Fire
service,	 Esthetics,	 Public	 relations,	 publicity	 and	 media,	 Performance	 arts	 and
dance,	Art,	Lighting	and	sound,	Communication,	Foods	industry,	Barkeeper	(but
would	drink	all	the	alcohol!).


Bing	(yang	fire)	qualities
Bing	people	are	regarded	as	the	only	one	or	like	the	sun.	They	are	solitary;	they
like	routine	and	for	things	to	stay	the	same.	They	do	not	like	surprises	and	are
not	 very	 adaptable.	 As	 the	 sun,	 they	 are	 very	 independent	 and	 will	 never	 be
destroyed,	but	will	be	there	if	people	need	them.	However,	they	have	to	be	at	the
center	of	things,	the	most	important	person	that	people	look	at—though	do	not
get	too	close	or	they	will	burn	you.	Even	if	they	live	a	simple	and	sheltered	life,
they	will	influence	or	touch	people	around	them.	Yang	fire	people	are	talented,
hardworking	 and	 confident.	 They	 like	 to	 teach	 and	 show	 people	 things,	 but
might	 not	 be	 subtle	 in	 the	 way	 they	 teach	 because	 they	 think	 they	 know	 best.
Like	 a	 volcano,	 yang	 fire	 has	 lots	 of	 emotion	 that	 will	 burst	 out	 all	 the	 time.
Yang	fire	people	will	get	angry	and	scream,	even	resorting	to	violence	if	needed.
Finally,	they	will	be	exceptional	actors	and	performers.
     •    Famous	people:	Steve	Jobs,	Nelson	Mandela.


Ding	(yin	fire)	qualities
Yin	fire	is	 candle	light	or	a	torch.	As	fire	 people,	they	need	something	to	 feed
their	fire	(resources).	A	candle	is	fragile	and	can	be	sentimental,	but	it	lights	up,
so	therefore	they	learn	and	teach	fast	and	are	like	a	sponge	regarding	knowledge,
but	will	in	turn	burn	out	quickly.	They	are	open	to	others	because	they	always
guide	 people.	 Thus,	 they	 will	 know	 people	 and	 consequently	 will	 always	 be
suspicious	since	they	know	how	people	work	and	function.	Yin	fire	people	are
generous	and	benevolent	(kind)	and	will	always	help	others.	However,	they	can
do	too	much	and,	because	of	this,	they	will	be	good	martyrs.	Leaders	by	nature,
they	will	easily	become	so	even	without	people	realizing	it.	People	will	just	start
following	 them.	 They	 are	 excellent	 motivators,	 but	 the	 fire	 is	 fragile	 and	 they
can	easily	destroy	themselves	by	giving	too	much.	Yin	fire	people	get	bored	if
they	do	not	have	one	clear	thing	to	do.	And	on	a	few	occasions	and	for	a	small
amount	of	time	the	Ding	can	create	a	huge	fire	bigger	than	the	Bing.
     •   Famous	people:	Tony	Robbins	(motivational	speaker),	Walt	Disney,
         Phil	Knight	(co-founder	of	Nike).
Earth
General
Earth	people	do	not	have	it	easy	because	the	main	thing	for	them	is	silence,	and
this	is	inside.	Silence	is	golden,	they	would	say.	Slow,	quiet	and	thorough	would
be	a	way	to	describe	earth	people.	With	their	silence,	they	are	good	at	keeping
secrets.	However,	things	will	take	time,	and	getting	information	is	like	digging
for	 gold.	 When	 they	 finally	 say	 something,	 they	 will	 go	 into	 very	 little	 detail.
One	thing	about	earth	is	that	yin	and	yang	are	very	different.
Positives
The	positive	aspects	of	earth	people	are	balance,	stability,	confidence,	sincerity,
respectability,	viability	and	receptivity.	They	are	often	old-fashioned,	preferring
home	and	staying	there,	are	sentimental,	strong	but	slow,	and	will	resist	through
the	 passage	 of	 time.	 If	 things	 please	 the	 earth	 person,	 they	 will	 not	 move
anymore	 and	 therefore	 they	 need	 to	 be	 stimulated	 to	 move.	 In	 line	 with	 their
preference	to	be	at	home,	earth	people	also	like	protection	(security),	shelter	and
that	things	stay	as	they	are	for	a	long	time.	They	are	sentimental	(“it	was	better
before”	 kind	 of	 thinking),	 have	 a	 very	 good	 sense	 of	 family	 and	 home,	 can	 be
very	 devoted	 and	 are	 very	 welcoming.	 Earth	 people	 will	 nourish	 those	 around
them;	they	are	the	first	to	help	and	are	good	at	organizing	their	life.	They	know
instinctively	how	to	go	to	the	heart	of	a	matter	and,	because	of	that,	they	are	very
grounded.	This	also	leads	to	a	good	sense	of	balance	and	harmony.	Earth	people
will	help	others	with	their	fertility;	they	like	to	touch	(massage).	They	are	also
empathetic,	 good	 mediators	 and	 coaches	 and	 just	 good	 at	 doing	 things.	 With
their	 mental	 capacity,	 they	 will	 think	 a	 lot,	 concentrate	 a	 lot	 and	 memorize
things.	They	assimilate	quite	easily	and	will	look	into	things	to	understand	them
better.	Earth	people	love	to	do	familiar	activities	and	are	very	sharing.
Negatives
A	negative	aspect	of	earth	people	is	that	they	accumulate	not	just	things	but	also
emotions.	 They	 will	 be	 confused,	 inattentive,	 distracted,	 worried	 and	 anxious,
and	are	obsessive	thinkers.
    Earth	 people	 will	 also	 be	 immobile	 if	 they	 are	 comfortable	 or	 they	 do	 too
much.	 They	 can	 easily	 end	 up	 just	 sitting	 on	 the	 couch	 doing	 nothing	 and
waiting	for	things	to	happen,	even	if	nothing	happens.	In	other	words,	they	are
lazy	 and	 slow.	 They	 will	 also	 have	 the	 same	 immobility	 of	 mind,	 resulting	 in
very	fixed	ideas	and	lack	of	creativity.	Other	negative	aspects	are	that	they	can
be	 manipulated	 into	 doing	 bad	 things.	 They	 will	 be	 mean,	 negligent	 and
nostalgic,	 turn	 to	 self-pity	 and	 isolate	 themselves.	 Being	 comfortable	 results	 in
the	love	of	habits,	and	because	of	this	they	will	be	discouraged	easily.


Training
Earth	 people	 need	 to	 walk	 a	 lot	 (move)	 and	 to	 be	 in	 retreat	 or	 to	 be	 alone.
Resting	 is	 also	 important,	 as	 is	 working	 on	 the	 breath!	 They	 also	 need	 to	 push
themselves	regarding	physical	activity.
Work
Real	estate,	Insurance,	Security,	Natural	resources,	Construction	(e.g.	masons	or
builders),	 Ceramics,	 Sculptures,	 Antiquities	 and	 selling	 art,	 Gardening,
Archeology,	 Geology,	 Farming,	 Food	 industry,	 Teaching	 physical	 education,
Occidental	 medicine,	 Massage,	 Helping	 and	 curing	 people,	 Human	 resources,
Social	 work,	 Helping	 and	 working	 with	 animals,	 Stone	 work,	 Mining,
Archiving,	Tourism	industry.


Wu	(yang	earth)	qualities
Yang	earth	is	about	the	home,	the	familiar,	protection	and	shelter.	It	is	also	about
things	that	make	you	slow.	An	image	for	yang	earth	is	the	mountain.	Yang	earth
people	 are	 solid,	 trustworthy,	 stubborn,	 inflexible,	 unyielding	 and	 very
confident,	will	make	good	soldiers	and	guardians,	and	will	be	one’s	best	friends
because	they	will	be	there	for	us.	Yang	earth	people	value	their	honor,	reputation
and	 what	 they	 say.	 Whatever	 they	 do,	 it	 will	 take	 time.	 They	 are	 tough	 on	 the
outside	and	full	of	emotions	on	the	inside.	They	tend	to	be	best	friends	and	good
parents	 because	 they	 have	 a	 real	 concern	 for	 other	 people.	 These	 will	 be	 the
people	who	defend	society.


Ji	(yin	earth)	qualities
Yin	earth	is	the	master	of	ego!	Yin	earth	people	really	think	they	are	smart	and
that	they	know	best.	However,	they	are	very	resourceful	and	multi-talented.	This
is	the	only	Day	Master	that	can	do	everything	in	life.	Yin	earth	is	the	image	of
the	 fertile	 soil;	 yin	 earth	 people	 will	 be	 neutering,	 nourishing	 and	 very
productive	and	they	can	pretty	much	produce	what	they	want.	They	will	be	good
at	 listening	 and	 saying	 yes	 while	 doing	 and	 saying	 things	 behind	 our	 back.	 In
addition,	 they	 are	 very	 good	 at	 taking	 a	 situation	 and	 moving	 it	 towards	 what
they	want.	Moreover,	they	love	to	discuss	and	have	arguments	and	just	talking
for	 talking’s	 sake,	 which	 makes	 them	 good	 at	 politics.	 Yin	 earth	 is	 the	 mental
mind,	and	therefore	they	will	always	analyze	and	think	about	everything	that	can
happen	and	why	people	do	things,	even	if	nothing	has	happened.	This	is	good	for
research	and	study	but	unnecessary	for	many	other	things.	They	make	very	good
religious	people.	We	just	send	them	on	their	path	and	they	will	do	it;	however,
they	 need	 to	 focus	 on	 a	 higher	 goal	 in	 life	 or	 they	 will	 never	 gain	 money.	 In
addition,	if	they	are	 put	in	 a	situation	where	they	are	not	certain,	they	 will	ask
many	questions.	As	with	all	earth	characteristics,	things	take	time.	They	are	also
very	sensitive	to	water	because	it	carries	disease	and	provides	dispersion;	despite
this,	they	have	very	good	health.
     •    Famous	people:	Barack	Obama,	Abraham	Lincoln.



Metal
General
Metal	people	are	tough	and	resilient	but	altruistic	and	humane.	In	addition,	they
need	things	to	be	fair,	just	and	right.
Positives
A	 positive	 aspect	 of	 metal	 is	 that	 it	 is	 basic	 ego—the	 capacity	 to	 choose	 and
judge,	and	the	ability	to	cut	through.	Metal	people	are	also	to	the	fore	in	decision
making,	altruism	(selflessness),	justice	(law),	pride	and	organization	(planning),
but	will	also	be	animalistic,	instinctive,	combative,	courageous	and	clear.	Metal
people	will	never	forget	anything;	if	we	have	done	something	wrong,	they	will
make	us	pay.	They	will	also	be	straight,	practical,	proud,	strong	(resilient),	loyal,
elegant,	smart,	clever,	structured,	precise	and	careful.
    Other	 qualities	 are	 that	 metal	 people	 can	 make	 others	 change,	 and	 they
always	 try	 to	 do	 better,	 seeking	 perfection.	 Furthermore,	 they	 look	 for	 quality
and	 like	 to	 express	 themselves	 creatively.	 This	 sense	 of	 creativity	 comes	 not
only	 from	 metal	 but	 also	 the	 interaction	 with	 fire,	 so	 they	 need	 to	 have	 fire	 in
their	 Ba	 Zi	 for	 this.	 They	 will	 be	 law	 abiding,	 very	 constant,	 make	 good
defensive	 strategists,	 conformist	 (traditional),	 very	 romantic	 and	 strong	 on
distribution	 and	 control.	 Driving	 is	 about	 decision	 making,	 and	 consequently
they	will	be	good	drivers.	A	metal	person	will	be	a	master	of	what	he	is	doing,
good	at	cleaning	up	things,	organizing	files	and	bringing	things	together.	Lastly,
they	love	pleasure,	but	in	a	smart	way.
Negatives
Metal	 people	 can	 be	 brutish,	 barbarian,	 intolerant,	 perfectionistic	 and
authoritarian.	They	need	to	be	tamed	and	forged	because	they	give	100	percent
all	 of	 the	 time.	 Furthermore,	 they	 will	 think	 a	 lot	 (old	 memories)	 and	 can
withdraw	 into	 themselves	 and	 want	 to	 be	 alone.	 Metal	 is	 related	 to	 the	 lungs,
which	is	related	to	sadness;	therefore	they	can	be	very	sad	and	cry	over	nothing!
They	might	look	strong	but	can	be	very	fragile.	Other	negative	aspects	are	that
they	might	not	like	change,	they	will	say	no	all	the	time,	and	be	psychologically
rigid.	Other	characteristics	might	be	difficulty	in	forgiving	people,	while	having
a	 bad	 memory	 while	 thinking	 that	 it	 is	 good.	 They	 can	 destroy	 everything	 just
because	of	some	little	thing.	In	addition,	they	might	also	not	take	care	of	things
and	be	obsessed	with	a	future	that	is	never	real.
Training
For	training	and	practice,	metal	people	should	do	mind	work	(Shen	Gong)	and
always	 walk	 around,	 not	 staying	 inside.	 They	 should	 never	 smoke,	 due	 to	 the
relation	of	metal	to	the	lungs	in	Chinese	medicine.
Work
Justice,	 Law,	 Police	 and	 army,	 Metal	 work	 including	 jewelry,	 Mechanics,
Anything	 precise,	 Medicine	 (surgery),	 Interior	 design	 or	 similar	 where	 they
make	things	look	better,	Finances,	Banking,	Accountancy,	Money,	Martial	arts,
Anything	metal-related,	Maintenance,	Inspection,	Electronics.


Geng	(yang	metal)	qualities
Yang	 metal	 is	 like	 a	 heavy	 ax.	 Pure	 strength	 and	 brutal,	 yang	 metal	 is	 the
toughest	 of	 all	 the	 Day	 Masters.	 Furthermore,	 yang	 metal	 people	 easily
withstand	 hardship	 and	 go	 on	 directly	 and	 powerfully	 without	 thinking.
Consequently,	some	power	is	needed	to	forge	and	refine	them.	In	life,	they	will
be	 happier	 if	 they	 can	 deal	 with	 big	 problems.	 Therefore,	 problems	 such	 as
confronting	life	and	death	are	easy,	but	small	things	are	not.	This	might	get	them
depressed.	Metal	is	about	decision	making	and	action	and	that	is	especially	true
for	yang	metal	people;	so	if	we	help	them	too	much,	they	will	not	like	it.	They
are	 also	 very	 hands-on,	 use	 tools	 and	 get	 their	 hands	 dirty.	 This	 roughness	 of
yang	metal	people	means	also	that	they	are	often	impolite,	brash	and	impulsive.
On	the	other	hand,	they	will	be	playful	with	a	little	bit	of	craziness.	These	people
are	the	old	stubborn	warriors	who	will	not	take	advice.	Making	decisions	is	one
of	 their	 key	 characteristics,	 which	 works	 very	 well	 for	 chaotic	 and	 difficult
situations	but	not	as	well	for	simple	trivial	tasks.	As	a	result	they	need	to	believe
in	big	principles	or	they	will	not	function	properly.	Even	with	this	hardness,	they
need	 people	 around	 them,	 especially	 family	 and	 people	 they	 like.	 In	 addition,
they	will	not	forget	us!
     •   Famous	people:	Queen	Elizabeth,	Muhammad	Ali,	Margaret
         Thatcher.


Xin	(yin	metal)	qualities
Yin	 metal,	 unlike	 yang	 metal,	 is	 worked	 metal,	 a	 piece	 of	 jewelry.	 It	 is	 about
appearance,	 beauty,	 artistic	 expression	 and	 attention.	 Yin	 metal	 people	 love
attention	and	like	to	grab	it.	But	in	their	ability	to	shine	they	need	success,	and
this	is	only	possible	if	they	have	fire	(genius)	or	water	(wisdom)	in	their	Ba	Zi.
This	 will	 give	 them	 abilities.	 Without	 these	 abilities,	 they	 can	 be	 depressed.
Sometimes	 they	 want	 the	 ability,	 power	 or	 authority	 so	 badly	 that	 they	 lose
themselves	 in	 it	 so	 that	 they	 do	 not	 have	 it.	 When	 they	 have	 abilities,	 they	 are
very	 talented;	 they	 like	 doing	 things,	 but	 sometimes	 get	 caught	 up	 and	 do	 not
finish	 them.	 But	 when	 they	 see	 a	 solution	 they	 grab	 it	 and	 use	 it	 at	 once.	 Yin
metal	people	are	very	sentimental	and	value	family	and	relationships.	Compared
to	yang	metal	people,	they	are	much	more	easily	influenced	by	others.	They	are
proud	 (the	 most	 proud	 Day	 Master),	 jealous,	 noisy	 and	 difficult	 to	 handle.	 In
addition,	they	are	tough	but	nicer	in	character	than	yang	metal	people.	And	they
will	forget	us!
     •    Famous	people:	Gordon	Ramsay	(chef),	Sacha	Baron	Cohen	(actor).
Water
General
Water	 is	 about	 wisdom	 and	 intelligence.	 It	 is	 the	 capacity	 to	 use	 knowledge.
Water	people	are	adaptive	and	imaginative	and	the	keepers	of	secrets.	However,
they	need	be	in	motion	to	be	happy.


Positives
A	positive	aspect	of	water	is	that	it	is	the	source	of	power	and	wisdom	of	human
beings.	 Water	 is	 knowledge,	 devotion,	 determination	 (will-power),
sentimentality,	introspection	and	resilience.	Water	people	have	the	ability	to	go
in	every	direction,	but	they	need	to	be	focused.	With	this	innate	knowledge,	and
ability	 to	 recognize	 love	 in	 others,	 they	 will	 easily	 nourish	 and	 teach	 people.
They	will	have	good	communication	skills,	not	just	towards	others	but	inward	as
well.	 Their	 minds	 will	 be	 active,	 and	 they	 will	 have	 good	 memory	 and
concentration	 and	 be	 curious.	 Furthermore,	 they	 will	 think	 before	 they	 act	 and
look	at	things	for	a	long	time.	However,	they	will	always	be	in	motion.	They	are
mysterious	(like	a	mystery),	focused,	deep,	complex,	very	careful	and	intuitive.
Generally,	 they	 will	 have	 plenty	 of	 possibilities,	 be	 fragile	 but	 strong,	 and
always	 find	 a	 solution.	 With	 their	 ability	 to	 teach,	 they	 will	 also	 be	 good	 with
children	 and	 students	 and	 will	 help	 people.	 Water	 people	 also	 have	 bad	 habits
(for	example,	being	liars).
Negatives
The	negative	aspects	of	water	people	are	that	they	are	not	very	centered	and	are
dispersed,	 unstable	 and	 restless.	 They	 will	 often	 be	 fearful,	 distressed,	 phobic,
nervous	and	stressed.	Furthermore,	they	can	be	depressed,	emotional,	vulnerable
and	stagnant	(doing	nothing).	They	can	also	be	silent	and	introverted	and	think
too	 much.	 They	 can	 be	 slow	 (but	 not	 as	 slow	 as	 earth	 people),	 complain	 and
easily	 lose	 energy.	 Often	 they	 will	 do	 things	 the	 wrong	 way.	 They	 will	 not
express	 their	 emotions	 or	 show	 what	 is	 on	 the	 inside.	 In	 addition,	 they	 can	 be
impractical	and	difficult	to	approach.
Training
Water	people	need	to	move	and	do	yang-type	exercises,	for	example	Gong	Fu.
Too	much	static	work	will	not	be	good	for	them.
Work
All	work	related	to	the	sea,	such	as	being	in	the	Navy	or	being	a	sailor,	Selling
and	buying	(retail),	Postal	work,	Moving	things,	Removals,	Tourism,	Analysis,
Strategy,	 Journalism,	 Transportation,	 Anything	 to	 help	 creativity,	 Hygiene	 and
cleaning,	 Politics	 (because	 they	 are	 good	 at	 lying	 and	 selling),	 Spirituality	 and
meditation,	Astronomy,	Hydrology.


Ren	(yang	water)	qualities
Yang	 water	 is	 a	 tsunami,	 never	 stopping.	 It	 is	 a	 huge	 power	 that	 drives	 in	 one
direction.	Yang	water	people	are	very	intelligent,	but	they	might	not	seem	that
way	sometimes	because	they	go	so	fast	in	one	direction	and	do	not	stop	to	think.
Furthermore,	they	can	be	unstoppable	as	soon	as	they	choose	where	to	go.	They
have	the	capacity	to	drive	people.	Water	people	are	extrovert,	outspoken,	quick-
tempered,	 forceful	 and	 brash.	 In	 their	 forceful	 motion	 they	 might	 get	 lost	 and
therefore	become	unfocused	and	get	distracted.	They	move	in	all	directions	but
can	 also	 change	 their	 direction	 very	 easily.	 They	 are	 very	 opportunistic,
adventurous	and	courageous.	In	their	confusion,	they	can	lose	track	of	what	they
believe	 in	 and	 behave	 in	 a	 mischievous	 and	 manipulating	 way.	 However,	 they
are	deeply	honest	and	straight.	Finally,	yang	water	people	will	be	successful.
     •    Famous	people:	Bill	Gates,	Queen	Victoria,	Charles	Merrill	(Merrill
          Lynch	Wealth	Management).


Gui	(yin	water)	qualities
Yin	water	is	mist.	Yin	water	people	look	passive	but	are	not.	A	mist	engulfs	us
without	us	realizing	it	and	suddenly	we	have	signed	the	contract.	Although	they
do	 not	 look	 like	 teachers,	 they	 will	 talk	 and	 then	 we	 will	 realize	 that	 we	 have
learned	 something.	 Yin	 water	 is	 also	 about	 intuition	 and	 instinct.	 Yin	 water
people	 have	 lots	 on	 their	 mind	 and	 can	 be	 very	 dreamy	 and	 fantasize	 about
things.	On	the	other	hand,	they	are	imaginative	and	have	the	capacity	to	see	the
big	picture.	Sometimes	they	are	paranoid	and	can	be	perverted	and	sadistic.	They
are	 nourishing,	 calm,	 slow-moving	 and	 interacting.	 They	 can	 look	 timid	 and
emotional	 but	 still	 be	 strong.	 Yin	 water	 people	 solve	 things	 in	 a	 soft	 way	 and
will	be	very	romantic.	Their	softness	makes	them	good	with	children.
•   Famous	people:	Stephen	King,	Jamie	Oliver	(chef).
CHAPTER	4


The	Earthly	Branches


The	twelve	animals	Now	that	we	have	talked	a	little
bit	about	the	heavenly	stems,	in	this	chapter	we	look
at	the	manifestation	they	have	on	earth,	the	earthly
branches.	The	earthly	branches,	referred	to	as	the
twelve	animals,	make	up	the	lower	row	in	the	eight
palaces.	We	are	not	actually	concerned	with	the
animal	image	because	the	names	are	not	the	correct
Chinese	names	for	the	animals.	They	are	more
important	than	the	heavenly	stems	and,	furthermore,
they	have	rhythm	and	season.	The	animals	are	as
follows:
Spring      Yang	wood    Yin    Tiger      Feb	4–Mar	5
            Yin	wood     Mao    Rabbit     Mar	6–Apr	4
            Yang	earth   Chen   Dragon     Apr	5–May	5
Summer      Yin	fire     Si     Snake      May	6–Jun	5
            Yang	fire    Wu     Horse      Jun	6–Jul	6
            Yin	earth    Wei    Goat       Jul	7–Aug	7
Fall        Yang	metal   Shen   Monkey     Aug	8–Sep	7
            Yin	metal    You    Rooster    Sep	8–Oct	7
            Yang	earth   Xu     Dog        Oct	8–Nov	6
Winter      Yin	water    Hai    Pig        Nov	7–Dec	6
            Yang	water   Zi     Rat        Dec	7–Jan	5
                  Yin	earth        Chou             Ox                Jan	6–Feb	3


We	 need	 to	 know	 the	 animals	 and	 their	 Chinese	 names.	 One	 simple	 way	 to
memorize	the	Chinese	names	is	by	the	seasons:	• Spring:	Yin,	Mao,	Chen	•
Summer:	Si,	Wu,	Wei	• Fall:	Shen,	You,	Xu	• Winter:	Hai,	Zi,	Chou.

Note:	We	also	need	to	learn	the	heavenly	stems	as	well.	Therefore,	in	total	we
will	have	22	Chinese	names	to	learn.


An	example
This	 basic	 structure	 of	 Ba	 Zi	 provides	 us	 with	 some	 information	 regarding	 a
person.	Below	we	give	an	example	of	Ba	Zi	for	a	person	born	on	23	November
2013	at	10	o’clock.

	                 Hour             Day              Month             Year

Tian	Gan

                  DING             GUI              GUI               GUI
                  Yin	fire         Yin	water        Yin	water         Yin	water
Di	Zhi

                  SI               SI               HAI               SI
                  Snake            Snake            Pig               Snake
                  Yin	fire         Yin	fire         Yin	water         Yin	fire


The	first	thing	we	can	see	is	that	there	is	a	serious	imbalance	of	yin	and	yang	in
this	Ba	Zi.	It	only	consists	of	yin	elements.	Furthermore,	these	elements	are	just
fire	and	water.	What	does	this	mean?	It	means	the	person’s	thinking	will	be	in
conflict.	 This	 is	 bad!	 So,	 already	 we	 know	 something	 about	 this	 person—life
will	be	hard	for	them.



Hidden	stems
There	is	more	information	connected	to	the	earthly	branches.	Each	of	the	earthly
branches	can	have	one	to	three	hidden	heavenly	stems	depending	on	the	earthly
branch.	 These	 hidden	 stems	 consist	 of	 one	 major	 stem	 and	 zero	 to	 two
supporting	 stems.	 In	 each	 of	 the	 hidden	 stems	 you	 have	 the	 root	 of	 your	 Day
Master.	 This	 is	 very	 important!	 These	 hidden	 stems	 are	 the	 human	 part	 of	 us,
which	comes	from	our	family,	country	of	birth	and	so	on.	Moreover,	they	will
help	balance	the	Ba	Zi.
     The	energy	of	the	hidden	stems	is	dependent	on	where	the	earthly	branch	is
in	 the	 season.	 Consequently,	 branches	 at	 the	 beginning	 will	 be	 in	 growth.	 The
cardinals	are	in	the	middle	of	the	season,	and	the	graveyards	are	at	the	end:	•
The	 growth.	 The	 growth	 is	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 season.	 The	 energy	 is
growing.	The	branch	will	have	2–3	hidden	stems	because	they	have	more	energy
and	give	more	information.
     •      The	cardinals.	The	cardinals	are	in	the	middle	of	the	season.	The
            energy	is	there	but	it	is	not	weak.	Most	of	the	branches	have	one
            hidden	stem,	except	Wu	(Horse),	which	has	two.
     •      The	graveyards.	The	graveyards	are	at	the	end	of	the	season.	The
            energy	is	going	down.

	            Earthly	branches                 Hidden	heavenly	stems

The          Yin      Tiger     Yang	wood     Jia	–	Yang	wood    Bing	–	Yang      Wu	–	Yang
growth                                                           fire             earth
             Shen     Monkey Yang	metal       Geng	–	Yang        Ren	–	Yang       Wu	–	Yang
                                              metal              water            earth
             Si       Snake     Yin	fire      Bing	–	Yang	fire   Wu	–	Yang        Geng	–	Yang
                                                                 earth            metal
             Hai      Pig       Yin	water     Ren	–	Yang	water Jia	–	Yang         	
                                                               wood
The          Zi       Rat       Yang	water    Gui	–	Yin	water    	                	
cardinals
             Wu       Horse     Yang	fire     Ding	–	Yin	fire    Ji	–	Yin	earth   	
             Mao      Rabbit    Yin	wood      Yi	–	Yin	wood      	                	
             You      Rooster   Yin	metal     Xin	–	Yin	metal    	                	
The        Chen       Dragon    Yang	earth    Wu	–	Yang	earth    Yi	–	Yin         Gui	–	Yin
graveyards                                                       wood             water
             Xu       Dog       Yang	earth    Wu	–	Yang	earth    Xin	–	Yin        Ding	–	Yin
                                                                 metal            fire
             Chou     Ox        Yin	earth     Ji	–	Yin	earth     Gui	–	Yin        Xin	–	Yin
                                                                 water            metal
           Wei      Goat    Yin	earth          Ji	–	Yin	earth   Ding	–	Yin   Yi	–	Yin
                                                                fire         wood




An	example

	                                       Day	column

Tian	Gan                                Gui	(Yin	water)
Di	Zhi                                  Si	(Yin	fire)
Hidden	stem                             Bing	(Yang	fire)


Since	there	is	yin	water	in	the	stems	and	yang	fire	as	the	hidden	stem,	this	is	not
so	good.



Determining	the	strength	of	the	Day	Master	It	is
important	to	determine	the	strength	of	the	Day
Master	because	if	it	is	strong	then	we	will	have	all	its
qualities,	but	if	it	is	weak	we	will	have	all	the	negative
aspects	of	it.	There	are	three	parts	to	determining	the
strength	of	the	Day	Master:	1. Season	(70%)	2.
Root	(25%)	3. Formation	(5%).
The	 percentages	 give	 the	 importance	 of	 the	 three	 parts.	 Therefore,	 timing
(season)	is	the	most	important,	while	formation	is	the	least	important.


Season
Each	of	the	heavenly	stems	has	one	element	and	one	polarity.	Each	of	them	will
then	 have	 a	 perfect	 fit	 in	 the	 season	 (see	 the	 table	 below).	 Here	 are	 some
examples:	• Example	I	° Day	Master:	Ding	(yin	fire)	° Born:	Summer,	Si
(Snake)	 yin	 fire	 ° Comment:	 Si	 is	 in	 the	 growth	 of	 the	 hidden	 stems	 and	 is
therefore	very	good.
       •   Example	II	° Day	Master:	Bing	(yang	fire)	° Born:	Summer,	Wu
           (Horse)	yang	fire	° Comment:	Here	you	do	not	want	the	energy	to
           be	growing	because	you	are	already	the	sun.	Therefore,	Wu	is	the
           best	fit	because	it	is	in	the	cardinals	of	the	hidden	stems.

So,	 if	 you	 are	 wood	 you	 want	 to	 be	 born	 in	 the	 spring,	 likewise	 fire	 in	 the
summer,	metal	in	the	fall	and	water	in	the	winter.	But	for	earth	it	doesn’t	matter
too	much	because	it	will	never	be	weak;	it	will	always	be	medium	strength.

Strength         Dead           Very	weak      Weak          Strong         Prosperous
Season
Spring           Earth          Metal          Water         Fire           Wood
Summer           Metal          Water          Wood          Earth          Fire
Fall             Wood           Fire           Earth         Water          Metal
Winter           Fire           Earth          Metal         Wood           Water




Root
There	are	two	kinds	of	root	connected	to	the	Day	Master.

THE	NORMAL
This	is	where	the	hidden	stem	of	the	day	should	be	the	same	as	the	Day	Master:	
• Example	I	° Day	Tian	Gan:	Ding	(yin	fire)	° Day	Di	Zhi:	Hai	(yin	water)
° Hidden:	yang	water	and	yang	wood	° Comment:	This	might	not	look	good
because	 you	 think	 that	 yin	 fire	 is	 only	 supported	 by	 water.	 However,	 in	 the
hidden	stem	there	is	also	yang	wood.	Wood	creates	fire	(cycle	of	creation).	It	is
quite	good	but	not	great.
       •   Example	II	° Day	Tian	Gan:	Ding	(yin	fire)	° Day	Di	Zhi:	Si	(yin
           fire)	° Hidden:	yang	fire	° Comment:	Here	we	see	that	yin	fire	is
           supported	by	yang	fire,	which	is	even	better.

THE	SECRET
This	is	where	the	hidden	stem	of	the	hour	should	be	the	same	as	the	Day	Master:
• Example:	° Day	Tian	Gan:	Ding	(yin	fire)	° Hour	Tian	Gan:	Bing	(yang
fire)	° Hour	Di	Zhi:	Wu	(Horse,	yang	fire)	°           Hidden:	yin	fire	and	yin	earth	
° Comment:	This	is	really	good.


Formation
Look	at	everything	that	supports	the	Day	Master	in	the	eight	palaces	and	hidden
stems.



Luck	pillars
Luck	pillars	are	about	the	period	of	time	from	your	date	of	birth	and	a	specific
time	in	the	future,	even	after	death.	If	you	miss	elements	or	qualities	in	your	Ba
Zi	with	regard	to	doing	something,	you	can	look	at	the	Luck	pillars	to	find	the
right	time	to	do	them.


Finding	the	pillars
Take	the	month	column	of	the	Ba	Zi.	This	will	be	the	basis	of	the	calculation	of
the	Luck	pillars.

We	will	start	with	ten	pillars	going	from	right	to	left.	The	month	column	we	put
to	the	right	of	the	first	Luck	pillar.	The	Tian	Gan	and	Di	Zhi	of	the	month	gives
us	the	starting	point	of	setting	the	Tian	Gan	and	Di	Zhi	of	the	Luck	pillars.

The	year	column	of	the	Ba	Zi	is	either	yin	or	yang.	This	will	give	us	the	order	in
which	the	Tian	Gan	and	the	Di	Zhi	are	added	for	each	column	in	the	Luck	pillars
with	regard	to	the	gender	of	the	person:	• Tian	Gan:	Jia,	Yi,	Bing,	Ding,	Wu,
Ji,	 Geng,	 Xin,	 Ren	 and	 Gui	 • Di	 Zhi:	 Yin,	 Mao,	 Chen,	 Si,	 Wu,	 Wei,	 Shen,
You,	 Xu,	 Hai,	 Zi	 and	 Chou	 • If	 man:	 ° Yang:	 Right	 order.	 Jia	 →	 Gui	 °
Yin:	Reverse	order.	Gui	→	Jia	• If	woman:	° Yin:	Right	order.	Jia	→	Gui	
° Yang:	Reverse	order.	Gui	→	Jia	• Note:	The	starting	point	will	be	the	Tian
Gan	 or	 Di	 Zhi	 after	 the	 month	 column.	 For	 example,	 if	 the	 Tian	 Gan	 is	 Ding,
then	you	start	with	Wu	in	the	first	column	if	it	is	in	the	right	order,	or	Bing	if	it	is
in	the	reverse	order.	For	the	Di	Zhi	it	will	be	that	if	we	are	Shen	then	we	start
with	You	in	the	right	order,	or	Wei	if	it	is	in	the	reverse	order.

Finding	the	age	of	the	pillars:
     •   For	this	you	need	the	ten-thousand-year	calendar.
     •   Take	the	date	of	birth.	The	next	day	will	be	where	we	start	counting,
         that	is	1.
     •   We	then	count	the	days	until	the	next	change	of	the	solar	month.
     •   Divide	this	number	by	3	and	leave	out	the	remainder.	This	will	be	the
         first	number	in	the	first	pillar	(a1	in	the	table	below).
     •   Then	for	each	column,	you	add	10	years.	This	will	be	on	top	of	the
         pillars.
     •   At	the	bottom	there	will	also	be	a	five-year	interval.	This	is	based	on
         taking	the	age	on	top	and	adding	5.

             	                      Tian	Gan             Di	Zhi        	
             a10=a9+10              	                    	             a10+5

             a9=a8+10               	                    	             a9+5

             a8=a7+10               	                    	             a8+5

             a7=a6+10               	                    	             a7+5

             a6=a5+10               	                    	             a6+5

             a5=a4+10               	                    	             a5+5

             a4=a3+10               	                    	             a4+5

             a3=a2+10               	                    	             a3+5

             a2=a1+10               	                    	             a2+5

             a1                     	                    	             a1+5

Ba	Zi        Month                  	                    	
             Year                   	                    	


Understanding	the	pillars
From	 the	 building	 of	 the	 pillars,	 we	 have	 ten-year	 intervals	 and	 five-year
intervals.	From	the	time	of	birth	until	a1	age,	the	first	Luck	pillar	will	influence
us.	The	Ba	Zi	will	then	not	be	four	pillars	but	five:	the	four	from	the	Ba	Zi	plus
the	first	Luck	pillar.	We	add	this	to	the	interpretation	of	Ba	Zi.
    Then	from	age	a1	until	a1+5	we	will	mostly	be	influenced	by	the	element	of
the	Tian	Gan	of	the	first	pillar.	Then	from	a1+5	until	a2	the	Di	Zhi	of	the	first
pillar	 will	 influence	 us.	 Then	 from	 a2	 until	 a2+5	 the	 Tian	 Gan	 of	 the	 second
pillar	will	influence	us,	and	so	on.
    This	means	that	your	Ba	Zi	will	always	be	five	pillars	and	that	no	Ba	Zi	will
always	be	bad.	Therefore,	timing	is	a	big	thing.

Note:	 If	 one	 of	 the	 Luck	 pillars	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 as	 your	 birth	 pillars	 (hour,
day,	month	or	year),	it	means	this	is	a	time	of	change.	The	significance	of	this
change	depends	on	which	column	of	the	Ba	Zi	it	is.
CHAPTER	5


Tools	for	Interpreting	the	Ba	Zi


The	five	factors	and	the	ten	gods
The	five	factors	are	linked	to	the	understanding	of	the	cycle	of	creation	and	the
cycle	of	control,	while	the	ten	gods	add	polarity	(yin	and	yang).


The	five	factors
For	 the	 five	 factors	 we	 need	 to	 look	 at	 the	 cycle	 of	 creation	 and	 the	 cycle	 of
control.	We	look	at	five	factors	in	our	lives	and	see	the	element	linked	to	each.
The	five	factors	are:	1. Parallel/friends/brothers:
            °   The	 parallel	 is	 us	 and	 the	 people	 that	 will	 be	 close	 to	 us—the
                people	that	we	are	close	to.
            °   Element:	Same	as	the	Day	Master.
     2. Work/output/children:
            °   This	what	we	produce—what	we	do	for	work.	This	will	also	be	our
                capacity	for	doing	things	in	the	world.
            °   Element:	 This	 will	 be	 the	 element	 that	 our	 Day	 Master	 creates
                (produces).
     3. Wealth/wife:
            °   Wealth	is	what	we	control—money	and	things	that	we	own.	This	is
                not	 only	 money	 that	 we	 have	 produced	 but	 also	 money	 from	 our
                parents.	However,	this	is	not	about	whether	or	not	we	have	money,
                but	our	relationship	to	it.
            °   Element:	The	element	that	our	Day	Master	controls.
     4. Influence/power/ghost	officer:
           °   This	 is	 our	 power—the	 thing	 that	 controls	 us.	 It	 will	 also	 be	 our
               ability	to	touch	people.	What	does	control	us	is	the	greed	for	power
               and	 our	 wish	 to	 be	 important.	 In	 this	 factor	 parts	 of	 our	 shadows
               are	present.
           °   Element:	The	element	that	controls	our	Day	Master.
     5. Resources/education/parents:
           °   Resources	 are	 the	 things	 that	 produce	 us—what	 makes	 or	 creates
               us.	 It	 is	 also	 our	 thinking	 and	 feeling.	 This	 will	 be	 from	 our	 own
               studies	and	research.	This	will	give	us	our	sense	of	happiness.	That
               is	why	seeking	knowledge	and	studying	is	so	important	because	it
               produces	us!
           °   Element:	 The	 element	 that	 creates	 (produces)	 the	 Day	 Master
               element.


The	ten	gods
The	ten	gods	are	the	most	important	aspect	of	Ba	Zi	with	regard	to	looking	for
specific	 information.	 As	 stated	 earlier,	 they	 are	 the	 five	 factors	 with	 polarity,
hence	 the	 ten	 gods.	 The	 ten	 gods	 represent	 the	 relationship	 the	 heavenly	 stems
have	with	the	Day	Master.	Since	this	is	about	the	heavenly	stems,	we	will	have
three	 ten	 gods	 in	 the	 main	 eight	 mansions,	 but	 also	 we	 have	 to	 remember	 the
hidden	stems.	Here	we	can	have	a	number	of	ten	gods	depending	on	which	of	the
stems	we	have.	Remember	that	the	hidden	stems	could	range	from	one	to	three,
depending	on	the	earthly	branch!	There	is	a	wealth	of	information	with	regard	to
them	and	we	will	consider	only	a	condensed	version	of	it	here.	The	names	are
not	important	in	themselves,	but	we	need	to	know	them	so	that	we	know	which
aspect	they	are.



Finding	the	ten	gods
To	 find	 the	 ten	 gods	 we	 first	 need	 to	 look	 at	 our	 Day	 Master	 and	 see	 what
element	 it	 is	 and	 what	 polarity	 it	 has.	 There	 are	 five	 groups	 of	 the	 gods,	 and
therefore	 there	 will	 be	 two	 in	 each.	 These	 five	 groups	 are	 the	 five	 factors	 we
presented	earlier.	In	addition,	the	polarity	of	a	god	will	be	either	the	same	or	the
opposite.	 For	 example,	 if	 our	 Day	 Master	 is	 yang	 wood	 (Jia)	 and	 we	 are
comparing	it	with	yin	earth	(Ji),	then	we	know	that	wood	controls	earth	(cycle	of
control)—therefore	 the	 ten	 god	 is	 in	 wealth.	 Moreover,	 as	 we	 readily	 see,	 they
are	 of	 opposite	 polarity.	 Therefore,	 the	 ten	 god	 is	 Direct	 Wealth.	 Given	 below
are	the	names	of	all	of	the	ten	gods:	1. Friends:
           °   Same	polarity:	Friends
           °   Opposite	polarity:	Rob	Wealth
     2. Work:
           °   Same	polarity:	Eating	God
           °   Opposite	polarity:	Hurting	Officer
     3. Wealth:
           °   Same	polarity:	Indirect	Wealth
           °   Opposite	polarity:	Direct	Wealth
     4. Influence:
           °   Same	polarity:	Seven	Killings
           °   Opposite	polarity:	Direct	Officer
     5. Resources:
           °   Same	polarity:	Indirect	Resource
           °   Opposite	polarity:	Direct	Resource

For	each	of	the	ten	gods	there	will	be	three	different	descriptions:	a	basic	one,
which	we	always	read;	and	then	there	will	be	either	a	positive	or	a	negative	one.
Whether	a	god	is	positive	or	negative	depends	on	clashes	and	the	stars—this	will
be	discussed	later.


Friends	(Social	Circles	and	Emotion)
     •   Basic	description.	The	basic	aspects	of	Friends	individuals	are	that
         they	will	take	initiative	and	be	brave.	They	have	trust	in	themselves
         and	will	look	for	people	with	the	same	values.
     •   Positive	description.	They	are	independent,	honorable	and	strong-
         willed	and	will	deal	well	with	emotions.	They	will	also	have	a	good
        relationship	with	people.
    •   Negative	description.	The	negative	aspects	of	Friends	individuals	are
        being	impulsive,	having	a	big	ego	and	people	not	understanding
        them.	They	will	have	problems	with	personal	relationships	and	will
        be	easily	betrayed.


Rob	Wealth	(Social	Circles	and	Emotion)
    •   Basic	description.	Rob	Wealth	individuals	are	passionate	and
        opinionated	and	will	have	strong	desires.	Such	individuals	are	very
        clear	and	are	good	at	expressing	their	emotions.	Additionally,	they
        are	good	at	socializing.
    •   Positive	description.	If	they	are	positive,	they	will	be	independent,
        ambitious,	convincing	and	eloquent.	They	have	a	strong	presence—
        hence	they	will	dominate	a	room	easily.	Furthermore,	they	adapt
        socially	and	are	good	talkers.	In	addition,	they	have	the	ability	to	help
        other	people	make	money.
    •   Negative	description.	They	will	be	jealous	and	anxious	and	have
        problems	with	friends,	brothers	and	family.	Furthermore,	people	will
        betray	them.	The	negative	Rob	Wealth	individual	will	have	a	double
        personality,	one	for	inside	and	one	for	outside	people.	They	will
        gamble	and	do	bad	things	with	money.	They	can	easily	lose
        everything	at	once.


Eating	God	(Knowledge	and	Intelligence)
    •   Basic	description.	Eating	God	individuals	are	beautiful	people	on	the
        inside	with	lots	of	talent,	but	still	they	stay	humble.	They	have	a
        strong	artistic	sense	and	can	express	things	clearly.	Furthermore,	they
        have	a	good	expression	of	knowledge,	are	good	writers	and	are	very
        creative.	It	is	the	basic	energy	for	prosperity	and	happiness.	These
        people	will	have	a	tendency	to	travel,	and	things	they	do	will	stay
        strong	over	time.
    •   Positive	description.	They	are	humble	and	honest.	In	addition,	they
        know	how	to	appreciate	things	and	are	therefore	always	happy.	They
        are	very	strong	in	strategy	and	good	with	metaphysical	things.
        Moreover,	they	are	very	respectful	of	traditions.
    •   Negative	description.	The	negative	aspect	of	Eating	God	individuals
        is	that	they	are	consuming	all	the	time.	They	are	idealists	and
        perfectionists.	They	will	never	listen	to	people	and	are	always
        frustrated	with	their	career	because	they	are	always	disappointed	with
        things.	They	dream	of	a	better	life	and	a	better	world.	Sometimes
        they	cannot	do	what	they	want	because	it	is	only	in	their	mind	and
        not	in	reality.	This	can	give	them	the	feeling	of	being	blocked.	If	the
        individual	is	a	woman,	she	will	have	a	problem	with	children	or	a
        difficult	relationship.


Hurting	Officer	(Knowledge	and	Intelligence)
    •   Basic	description.	Hurting	Officer	individuals	will	be	very	good	at
        their	work	and	career	but	not	at	relationships.	They	like	celebrity	and
        fame.	They	will	fool	around	but	will	do	good	things;	however,	they
        want	people	to	see	that	they	are	doing	this.	Moreover,	they	will	be
        very	creative,	spontaneous	and	visibly	talented,	and	can	even	be
        geniuses.
    •   Positive	description.	They	know	everything	by	thinking;	they	have	no
        intuition	but	are	quick	to	understand	and	learn	things.	Hurting	Officer
        individuals	are	innovators,	very	ambitious	and	combative,	and	like
        money.	They	want	to	be	different	but,	on	the	other	hand,	they	like	a
        good	appearance	and	to	present	themselves	well.
    •   Negative	description.	They	will	go	against	the	law	and	they	will	not
        care	if	they	do	something	bad	to	get	things	done.	Other	negative
        aspects	are	stubbornness,	having	a	superiority	complex	and	being
        egotistical.	They	will	do	too	many	things	and	have	difficulty
        developing	basic	qualities.	Since	they	will	also	repeat	their	mistakes,
        they	will	have	chronic	diseases.	In	addition,	they	will	have
        difficulties	with	people	they	have	to	work	with.


Indirect	Wealth	(Action,	Prosperity	and	Responsibility)
    •   Basic	description.	Indirect	Wealth	individuals	will	look	for	instant
        and	secondary	money.	Furthermore,	they	will	play	and	gamble	but
        will	also	have	a	talent	for	investing.	They	will	enjoy	action.
    •   Positive	description.	If	they	are	positive	they	will	be	very	competent
        and	adult	but	also	like	to	take	risks.	They	are	good	gamblers	and	also
        have	the	ability	to	find	good	opportunities.
    •   Negative	description.	The	negative	aspect	will	be	instability	and
        being	too	fast,	with	no	respect	for	money.	Indirect	Wealth	individuals
        will	be	liars	and	will	say	yes	even	if	they	mean	no.	Furthermore,	they
        can	easily	be	cheated	themselves.	If	it	is	a	man,	they	will	have	a
        conflict	with	their	father.


Direct	Wealth	(Action,	Prosperity	and	Responsibility)
    •   Basic	description.	Those	who	are	Direct	Wealth	like	things	that	are
        clear	and	balanced	and	do	not	like	to	be	in	the	spotlight.	The	balance
        makes	them	also	want	things	to	feel	good.	As	for	money,	it	needs	to
        be	regular	and	simple.	Furthermore,	they	are	classic	and	like	nice
        furniture.
    •   Positive	description.	They	will	work	hard	and	save	money.	Other
        positive	aspects	will	be	responsibility,	but	they	also	like	things	to	be
        the	way	that	they	should	be.
    •   Negative	description.	They	like	to	save	money	but,	with	the	negative,
        they	can	become	mean	and	will	even	have	little	money.	Action	will
        be	a	problem	for	them,	and	as	a	result	they	will	be	careful	in	doing
        things,	performing,	and	will	never	try	to	do	more.	They	will	think
        before	doing	anything.	If	it	is	a	man,	they	will	have	problems	with
        women,	their	wife	or	marriage.


Seven	Killings	(Power,	Discipline	and	Organization)
    •   Basic	description.	These	people	are	authoritative	and	very	energetic.
        They	like	to	use	their	power.	Furthermore,	they	are	tough	people	and
        like	this	to	do	with	the	military	and	weaponry.	They	think	things
        should	be	done	the	way	they	are	supposed	to	be	done.	However,	at
        the	same	time,	they	do	not	like	normality,	and	they	even	like	to	be	a
        little	bit	different.
    •   Positive	description.	Seven	Killings	individuals	are	altruistic,
        persevering	and	ambitious.	They	are	always	alert	and	looking,	never
        asleep.	In	addition,	they	do	not	like	people	who	do	not	look	straight
        or	are	not	clear	in	character.	Action	and	adrenaline	are	what	they	like,
        and	they	are	always	up	for	a	challenge.	They	are	charismatic	leaders
        and	will	use	their	power	in	a	good	way.
    •   Negative	description.	These	people	will	either	charge	into	battle	or	be
        scared	of	everything.	Seven	Killings	individuals	will	have	bad	habits
        and	will	not	understand	why	people	do	not	like	the	same	things	as
        them.	Moreover,	they	are	competitive,	unstable,	vengeful,	destructive
        and	defensive.	Their	energy	is	very	reactive	and	they	can	easily	lose
        control	in	life.


Direct	Officer	(Power,	Discipline	and	Organization)
    •   Basic	description.	Direct	Officer	individuals	are	loyal,	rational,
        moralistic	and	responsible	and	have	a	critical	eye	about	themselves.
        These	people	are	traditional,	have	values	and	defend	the	law.
    •   Positive	description.	They	are	objective,	and	respect	rules	and
        society.	Furthermore,	they	respect	other	people’s	opinions.	Direct
        Officer	individuals	are	very	calm	and	tranquil	people.	We	can	depend
        on	them	and	they	work	very	well	with	people.	They	will	do	what	they
        are	taught	and	can	talk	under	pressure.	In	addition,	they	can	only	use
        good	money	or	money	that	they	have	deserved.
    •   Negative	description.	These	people	will	have	an	inferiority	complex
        and	be	a	little	soft	and	too	nice.	They	are	not	good	leaders	and	will
        always	follow,	even	to	the	point	of	going	against	the	law.	Other
        negative	aspects	of	Direct	Officer	individuals	are	difficulty	in
        planning	and	acting	because	of	rules,	and	they	will	have	no	initiative
        or	creativity.	Moreover,	they	will	not	be	recognized	by	society	and
        can	only	do	things	they	are	taught.	If	the	individual	is	a	woman,	she
        will	have	problems	with	people	she	lives	with.
Indirect	Resource	(Knowledge,	Wisdom	and	Intuition)
    •   Basic	description.	Indirect	Resource	individuals	will	experience
        weird	things	such	as	magic	and	ghosts.	Luck	and	accidents	will	affect
        them,	as	will	unexplained	events	in	life.	They	will	like	esotericism
        and	spirits,	but	these	will	most	likely	live	in	their	mind.	They	will
        have	very	strong	dreams.
    •   Positive	description.	They	will	be	strong,	and	clear	in	their	thinking.
        They	will	have	a	talent	for	learning.	Furthermore,	they	will	have	and
        be	spiritual	guides.	At	the	same	time,	they	will	feel	things	and	use
        this	feeling	to	know	about	things.	In	addition,	they	will	look	for
        comfort	and	money	and	won’t	bother	with	basic	needs.	Other
        qualities	they	have	are	calmness	and	the	ability	to	adapt.
    •   Negative	description.	They	will	take	short	cuts	but	cannot	finish
        things.	The	negative	Indirect	Resource	individual	will	be	eccentric,
        weird,	a	loner	and	superstitious.	Moreover,	there	is	a	tendency	to	be
        suicidal	if	things	do	not	go	their	way.	A	woman	will	have	problems
        with	her	mother,	or	her	mother	will	be	sick.


Direct	Resource	(Knowledge,	Wisdom	and	Intuition)
    •   Basic	description.	Those	who	are	Direct	Resource	individuals	have	a
        very	precise	image	of	themselves.	They	will	seek	and	get	a	good
        reputation.	They	will	have	a	tendency	to	go	towards	spirituality.	They
        will	be	nice,	calm,	patient,	responsible	and	polite.	Moreover,	they
        will	normally	move	slowly	and	will	look	for	knowledge	in	order	to	be
        cultivated	and	wise.
    •   Positive	description.	Cultivation	and	education	are	key	words	for
        Direct	Resource	individuals.	They	will	have	a	good	head	and	be
        generous.	They	love	everything	that	increases	the	quality	of	the	world
        and	will	want	to	help	people.	In	addition,	they	will	be	very	politically
        correct.
    •   Negative	description.	Negative	aspects	are	that	they	will	have
        problems	learning	things	and	even	may	be	dyslexic.	Negative	Direct
        Resource	individuals	will	be	too	satisfied	with	themselves	and	abuse
          their	power.	They	will	be	lazy,	depend	on	others,	and	will	always	try
          to	look	for	comfort	and	luxury.	Furthermore,	they	will	do	bad	things
          to	get	money	and	will	be	bad	in	business.	They	have	a	tendency	to	be
          forced	to	take	on	many	jobs.



The	ten	gods	and	the	Day	Master
Use	 the	 strength	 of	 the	 Day	 Master	 in	 relationship	 with	 the	 season	 to	 see	 the
strength	of	the	other	elements,	which	in	combination	with	the	five	factors	gives
us	the	relationship	of	the	ten	gods.
    The	ten	gods	will	be	more	dependent	on	where	you	are	age-wise	in	the	pillar.
For	example,	a	child	will	be	more	affected	by	the	Year	pillar,	because	they	are	at
the	start	of	their	lives.	The	ten	gods	each	represent	a	different	Day	Master,	and
this	is	in	relationship	with	the	‘active’	pillar	representing	your	stage	of	life.



The	relationships	in	the	heavenly	stems	and	earthly
branches
In	 this	 section,	 we	 look	 at	 some	 of	 the	 relationships	 that	 are	 important	 with
regard	 to	 gaining	 a	 deeper	 understanding	 of	 the	 Ba	 Zi.	 These	 will	 be	 the
relationships	between	the	elements	of	the	heavenly	stems	and	also	for	the	earthly
branches.	 What	 is	 important	 to	 note	 is	 that	 the	 Ba	 Zi	 is	 firmly	 set!	 If	 there	 is
anything	wrong,	for	example	all	elements	are	yin	or	there	is	just	water	present,	it
is	very	difficult	to	correct.	This	is	in	some	ways	unfair,	but	we	need	to	make	a
big	effort	to	change	it.
     Remember	 that	 in	 the	 previous	 sections	 we	 also	 looked	 at	 the	 Luck	 pillars.
We	can	also	find	the	relationships	here	with	regard	to	the	Day	pillar.	Hence,	for
a	 period	 we	 will	 have	 extra	 things	 affecting	 us.	 In	 terms	 of	 how	 to	 interpret
them,	 these	 will	 always	 be	 considered	 as	 indirect.	 This	 will	 be	 more	 clearly
explained	below.	At	this	point	we	will	only	look	at	the	eight	palaces	and	not	the
hidden	stems.


Combinations
The	combinations	create	an	element.	Again,	we	are	looking	at	balance	in	the	Ba
Zi.	 Therefore,	 an	 extra	 element	 can	 balance	 or	 unbalance	 it.	 They	 will	 be
considered	 a	 combination	 if	 they	 are	 in	 adjacent	 columns	 or	 separated	 by	 one
column.

HEAVENLY	STEMS	COMBINATIONS
     •   Jia	and	Ji:	earth
     •   Yi	and	Gen:	metal
     •   Bing	and	Xin:	water
     •   Ding	and	Ren:	wood
     •   Wu	and	Gui:	fire

EARTHLY	BRANCHES	COMBINATIONS
     •   Zi	(Rat)	and	Chou	(Ox):	earth
     •   Yin	(Tiger)	and	Hai	(Pig):	wood
     •   Mao	(Rabbit)	and	Xu	(Dog):	fire
     •   Chen	(Dragon)	and	You	(Rooster):	metal
     •   Shen	(Monkey)	and	Si	(Snake):	water
     •   Wei	(Goat)	and	Wu	(Horse):	fire

EARTHLY	BRANCHES	THREE	COMBINATIONS
     •   Yin	(Tiger),	Wu	(Horse)	and	Xu	(Dog):	fire
     •   Hai	(Pig),	Mao	(Rabbit)	and	Wei	(Goat):	wood
     •   Shen	(Monkey),	Zi	(Rat)	and	Chen	(Dragon):	water
     •   Si	(Snake),	You	(Rooster)	and	Chou	(Ox):	metal

THREE	ANIMALS	OF	THE	SEASON	COMBINATIONS
These	combinations	create	a	very	strong	element	and	again	can	be	either	good	or
bad:
    •   Spring:	Yin	Mao	Chen:	wood
    •   Summer:	Si	Wu	Wei:	fire
    •   Fall:	Shen	You	Xu:	metal
    •   Winter:	Hai	Zi	Chou:	water


Clashes
Clashes	are	a	kind	of	opposing	and	repelling	relationship.	There	are	two	kinds	of
clashes:
    •   Direct:	Adjacent	palaces	(very	strong).
    •   Indirect:	Separated	by	one	or	two	palaces	(weak	and	subtle).

For	clashes	in	the	Luck	pillars	(Day	pillar	vs	Luck	pillars),	we	will	always	look
at	them	as	indirect.

EARTHLY	BRANCHES	CLASHES
    •   Zi	(Rat)	and	Wu	(Horse).	This	gives	us	worries	and	uneasiness.
        Things	will	trouble	us	and	we	will	not	be	peaceful.
    •   Chou	(Ox)	and	Wei	(Goat).	There	will	be	obstacles	and	blockages.
        Things	or	people	always	block	us.
    •   Shen	(Monkey)	and	Yin	(Tiger).	This	will	bring	strong	emotions	and
        will	stop	us	from	doing	what	we	are	supposed	to	do.
    •   Mao	(Rabbit)	and	You	(Rooster).	A	clash	of	these	animals	will	be
        about	betrayal,	and	people	close	to	us	will	betray	us.	Alternatively,
        we	will	lose	the	trust	of	close	friends	or	family.
    •   Chen	(Dragon)	and	Xu	(Dog).	This	will	be	about	bad	relationships
        with	our	children	or	spouse.	It	can	also	be	about	a	shorter	life	span,
        for	example	an	accident,	or	a	bad	habit	for	a	time.
     •   Si	(Snake)	and	Hai	(Pig).	Somebody	will	interfere	with	our	business
         or	personal	life.	People	bother	us	and	try	to	help	us	even	if	we	do	not
         want	it.	Who	it	is	depends	on	which	column	it	is	in.


The	harm
This	relationship	is	about	large	emotions.	It	is	what	we	feel	inside	of	us.	It	can	be
emotional	 harm	 or	 immature	 emotions.	 Additionally,	 it	 might	 also	 be	 about
betrayal	or	bad	relationships	with	people.	We	will	also	need	to	look	at	where	it	is
in	our	Ba	Zi	to	see	which	relationship	will	be	affected.
     •   Indirect	clash.	It	is	okay	and	can	be	sorted	out	by	logic.
     •   Direct	clash.	The	emotions	are	stronger	than	the	thinking.

The	clashes	are:
     •   Zi	(Rat)	and	Wei	(Goat)
     •   Yin	(Tiger)	and	Si	(Snake)
     •   Shen	(Monkey)	and	Hai	(Pig)
     •   Chou	(Ox)	and	Wu	(Horse)
     •   Mao	(Rabbit)	and	Chen	(Dragon)
     •   You	(Rooster)	and	Xu	(Dog).


Ungrateful	punishment
Ungrateful	 punishment	 is	 about	 not	 being	 recognized,	 the	 feeling	 of
abandonment	and	being	unappreciated.
   The	clashes	are:
     •   Yin	(Tiger)	and	Si	(Snake)
     •   Si	(Snake)	and	Shen	(Monkey)
     •   Shen	(Monkey)	and	Yin	(Tiger).


Bullying	punishment
This	punishment	manifests	itself	as	a	feeling	within	us	that	the	world	is	bullying
us—that	the	world	is	aggressive	toward	us.
   The	clashes	are:
     •   Wei	(Goat)	and	Chou	(Ox)
     •   Chou	(Ox)	and	Xu	(Dog)
     •   Xu	(Dog)	and	Wei	(Goat).


Uncivilized	punishment
This	is	about	a	situation	that	threatens	us.	It	can	be	a	physical	threat	or	us	being
disloyal	 to	 other	 people.	 Alternatively,	 it	 can	 be	 something	 perceived	 as	 being
unfair.
    The	clashes	are:
     •   Mao	(Rabbit)	and	Si	(Snake).


Self-punishment
This	comprises	bad	habits	that	we	cannot	stop	or	are	very	difficult	to	stop,	such
as	 smoking,	 eating,	 taking	 drugs	 and	 getting	 too	 little	 sleep.	 These	 are	 very
difficult	to	get	rid	of	because	they	are	really	us.
     The	clashes	are:
     •   2×Chen	(Dragon)
     •   2×Wu	(Horse)
     •   2×You	(Rooster)
     •   2×Hai	(Pig).


Earthly	branches	destruction
When	 two	 specific	 animals	 appear	 together,	 they	 will	 destroy	 each	 other.	 As
with	the	creation	of	an	element,	this	will	either	balance	or	unbalance	our	Ba	Zi.
   The	destructions	are:
     •   Zi	(Rat)	and	You	(Rooster):	yang	water	and	yin	metal
     •   Shen	(Monkey)	and	Si	(Snake):	yang	metal	and	yin	fire
     •   Chen	(Dragon)	and	Chou	(Ox):	yang	earth	and	yin	earth
     •   Wu	(Horse)	and	Mao	(Rabbit):	yang	fire	and	yin	wood
     •   Yin	(Tiger)	and	Hai	(Pig):	yang	wood	and	yin	water
     •   Xu	(Dog)	and	Wei	(Goat):	yang	earth	and	yin	earth.	This	also	appears
         in	bullying	punishment	and	they	negate	each	other.


Three	crosses
The	 three	 crosses	 are	 three	 exceptional	 combinations	 of	 four	 earthly	 branches.
They	are:
     •   Love-success	cross.	Zi	(Rat),	Wu	(Horse),	You	(Rooster)	and	Mao
         (Rabbit).	Such	individuals	will	be	attracted	to	power,	celebrity,	love
         and	so	on.	These	people	will	have	a	great	capacity	to	attract	other
         people	(good	or	bad)	and	will	be	the	center	of	attention.
     •   Artistic-literature	cross.	Chou	(Ox),	Wei	(Goat),	Xu	(Dog)	and	Chen
         (Dragon).	Such	individuals	will	have	a	very	strong	artistic	sense	and
         will	express	their	creativity.
     •   Traveling	cross.	Hai	(Pig),	Si	(Snake),	Shen	(Monkey)	and	Yin
         (Tiger).	Such	individuals	will	feel	at	home	everywhere	and	will	move
         around	and	travel.



The	void	(emptiness)
The	void	is	specific	to	our	school	and	comprises	the	Ba	Zi	and	heavenly	systems
together.	We	take	the	Jia	Zi	(Day	pillar,	Tian	Gan	and	Di	Zhi)	and	look	it	up	in
the	table	given	below.	The	two	animals	that	are	given	will	determine	if	we	have
emptiness	in	our	Ba	Zi.	If	we	have	one	of	the	animals	present	in	our	Di	Zhi	row,
we	 have	 a	 single	 void.	 If	 we	 have	 both	 or	 one	 of	 them	 present	 twice,	 then	 we
have	a	double	void:	• Single	void.	This	will	be	a	person	thinking	too	much	and
a	person	being	upset	by	it.	Furthermore,	we	will	also	question	ourselves.
     •   Double	void.	This	is	so	strong	that	it	will	completely	block	our	Ba	Zi.
         We	need	support	from	people	and	to	ask	people	if	what	we	do	is
         good.
	                  Earthly	branches
                   Yin     Mao Chen Si             Wu      Wei     Shen You        Xu      Hai     Zi      Chou
            Jia    Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	
                   Chou            Mao             Si              Wei             You             Hai
            Yi     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	       Xu|
                           Chou            Mao             Si              Wei             You             Hai
            Bing Xu|       	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	
                 Hai               Chou            Mao             Si              Wei             You
            Ding   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|
                           Hai             Chou            Mao             Si              Wei             You
            Wu     Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	
                   You             Hai             Chou            Mao             Si              Wei
            Ji     	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	       Wu|
                           You             Hai             Chou            Mao             Si              Wei
            Geng Wu|       	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|   	
                 Wei               You             Hai             Chou            Mao             Si
            Xin    	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	       Chen|
                           Wei             You             Hai             Chou            Mao             Si
            Ren    Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|    	
                   Si              Wei             You             Hai             Chou            Mao
Heavenly    Gui    	       Chen|   	       Wu|     	       Shen|   	       Xu|     	       Zi|     	       Yin|
stems                      Si              Wei             You             Hai             Chou            Mao




Good	and	bad	pillars
In	 this	 section,	 we	 look	 further	 at	 different	 combinations	 but	 now	 in	 both	 the
heavenly	stems	and	earthly	branches.	These	combinations	are	the	strongest	when
they	 are	 in	 the	 same	 column,	 but	 can	 also	 be	 in	 adjacent	 palaces	 or	 on	 the
diagonal.	Also,	just	for	simplicity,	we	look	at	the	earthly	branches	as	heavenly
stems;	for	example,	if	we	have	Si	(Snake),	we	look	at	it	as	yin	fire.	Note	that	in
some	 cases	 it	 will	 be	 important	 to	 determine	 which	 element	 is	 at	 the	 top	 and
which	is	at	the	bottom,	though	this	will	be	stated	clearly.


Bad	pillars
The	bad	pillars	are	combinations	which	bring	outcomes	that	are	not	good.
    •   Yang	wood	↔	yang	metal	or	yin	wood	↔	yin	metal.	These	people
        will	never	be	satisfied	because	they	go	against	themselves.	They	are
        on	auto-destruct.	If	the	combination	is	in	the	spiritual	column	(hour)
        they	are	not	spiritual.	If	it	is	in	the	emotional	column	(month)	they
        love	to	dive	into	deep	emotions.
    •   Yin	earth	↔	yang	water.	The	image	is	that	of	the	great	flood.	There
        will	be	a	lot	of	anguish,	anxiety	and	insecurity.	Such	individuals	will
        never	feel	protected	or	safe.
    •   Yin	earth	↔	yin	water.	This	is	the	bad	side	of	empathy.	It	is	a
        sensitivity	issue.	Such	individuals	will	feel	that	everything	is	so	sad.
        There	is	too	much	emotion	and	they	cannot	digest	it.	Note	that	the
        primary	cause	of	internal	disease	is	emotions.
    •   Yang	fire	↔	yang	metal	or	yin	metal.	These	people	will	have	a	very
        powerful	ego	and	consequently	never	listen	to	people.	If	other	people
        do	not	tell	them	exactly	what	they	want,	they	will	be	easily	upset.
    •   Yang	fire	↔	yang	water.	The	fire	that	sinks	into	the	water.	Many	of
        these	individuals	were	born	during	the	1980s.	Being	young,	they
        think	they	can	do	many	different	things	but,	in	actuality,	they	cannot
        do	anything.	If	this	is	in	their	Month	or	Year	pillar,	everything	they
        build	will	always	be	off	or	always	wrong.
    •   Yin	fire	↔	yin	water.	If	these	individuals	are	seriously	into
        spirituality	and	if	they	have	yang	fire	in	the	hour	column,	this	takes
        them	into	non-duality.	They	have	the	capacity	to	accept	everything
        and	do	not	need	to	judge!	On	the	other	hand,	if	they	are	not	into
        spirituality,	the	effect	will	be	as	follows:	° Day	column:	They	do
        not	know	how	to	choose.
         °   Emotional	column:	They	will	have	all	their	emotions	mixed.	They
             will	 not	 know	 if	 they	 are	 happy	 or	 sad.	 Furthermore,	 they	 cannot
             make	choices	and	cannot	be	strong	in	their	decisions.


Good	pillars
Then	we	have	the	good	pillars,	which	bring	outcomes	that	are	very	good!
•   Yang	wood	↔	yin	wood.	There	will	be	a	feeling	of	protection	and
    friendship.	This	will	bring	a	good	feeling	and	it	gives	such
    individuals	the	capacity	to	build	things.	If	this	is	in	the	adjacent
    palaces	of	Day	and	Month,	it	will	make	them	very	close	to	their
    family.	Additionally,	they	will	be	very	close	to	their	friends	and	have
    the	possibility	to	build	things	together.
•   Any	wood	with	yin	earth.	This	is	about	the	capacity	for	development,
    to	make	something	big	happen	and	to	be	wealthy.	If	they	have	yin
    wood	and	yin	earth	in	the	same	pillar	they	will	have	the	capacity	to
    develop	a	lot.	For	example,	if	the	combination	is	in	their	spiritual
    column,	they	have	the	possibility	to	develop	it	to	a	very	high	extent.
    It	is	not	the	same	as	yang	fire	in	the	column	because	it	is	already
    spiritual.
•   Yang	earth	↔	yang	water.	This	is	a	very	strong	combination.	Such
    individuals	will	travel	the	world	and	be	an	explorer.	They	will	have	a
    lot	of	courage	and	stability.	It	is	the	pillar	of	possibilities!	If	the
    combination	is	in	their	Year	pillar,	they	will	always	do	new	things
    and	people	will	love	them!	Even	with	risky	things	it	will	work.	It	is
    about	strength,	energy	and	always	doing	new	things.
•   Yang	fire	↔	yin	water.	This	will	give	something	beautiful.	It	is	a
    happy	connection.	It	is	about	lightness	and	happiness.
•   Yang	fire	(on	top)	↔	yang	earth	(at	the	bottom).	The	image	is	the
    mountain	under	the	sun.	It	is	about	strong	idealism.
•   Yin	fire	(on	top)	↔	yin	metal	(at	the	bottom).	This	is	a	great	capacity
    to	produce	and	to	manifest.
•   Yang	metal	or	yang	earth	(on	top)	↔	yang	wood	or	yang	fire	(at	the
    bottom).	Yang	fire	and	yang	wood	need	power	and	space.
    Consequently,	when	they	are	at	the	bottom	and	blocked	by	something
    really	heavy	such	individuals	can	be	frustrated	and	maybe	explode
    with	frustration,	which	is	not	good!
•   Yang	wood	or	yang	water	(on	top)	↔	yang	fire	(at	the	bottom).	This
    gives	frustration	but	such	individuals	will	never	really	explode,
    except	inside	themselves.	However,	this	will	never	really	manifest
         unless	they	see	it	in	their	Ba	Zi	and	do	something	about	it.	It	will	be	a
         strange	kind	of	unsatisfactory	feeling.
     •   Some	pillars	are	just	closed.	Yang	metal	or	yin	metal	in	a	pillar	will
         block.	If	a	pillar	is	double	yang	or	yin	metal	this	will	make	a	wall.	If
         this	is	in	such	individuals’	Month	pillar,	it	will	completely	block	who
         they	are	and	what	they	do!	It	is	like	having	a	wall	between	pillars.


Double	element
Some	of	the	pillars	are	strong	but	they	need	to	be	put	into	motion,	otherwise	they
will	be	dead	energy.	To	put	them	into	motion	we	need	a	spiritual	practice.
     •   Yin	fire.	This	brings	stress,	anguish	and	anxiety.	Such	individuals
         will	never	be	able	to	open	it	by	themselves!	They	need	a	tradition	to
         do	it.
     •   Yang	fire.	This	can	be	one	of	the	greatest	pillars.	If	such	individuals
         are	able	to	channel	and	open	it,	it	will	explode	into	something	great!
         They	will	be	the	smartest	person,	the	best	at	expressing	their
         emotions,	the	best	at	their	work,	and	feel	strong	in	the	way	they
         handle	things.	It	has	huge	spiritual	possibilities.	If	they	do	not	have	a
         spiritual	practice	to	open	it,	they	will	only	think	that	they	are	the	best!
     •   Yang	water.	If	this	is	not	channeled	there	will	be	too	many	choices.
         Such	individuals	will	not	be	able	to	decide.	They	want	to	do
         everything	now!
     •   Yin	water.	Channeling	it	will	bring	a	large	capacity	for	empathy
         towards	others—the	capacity	to	link	with	people.	On	the	other	hand,
         if	they	do	not	channel	it,	they	will	have	lots	of	sensitivity	but	they	do
         not	do	anything.
     •   Yin	earth.	Always	open.	Such	individuals	say	yes	to	everything!
         They	have	no	discrimination.



The	twelve	stages	of	chi:	introduction
The	main	idea	in	Daoism	is	that	everything	changes	and	is	in	motion.	Up	to	this
point,	 there	 has	 been	 no	 concept	 of	 change	 or	 motion—a	 rhythm.	 The	 twelve
stages	of	chi	give	us	this	concept	of	rhythm.	They	give	us	information	not	only
on	the	Jia	Zi	itself	but	also	on	the	Jia	Zi	over	time—that	is,	the	time	when	it	will
have	a	strong	energy	and	when	it	will	be	weak.
    Everything	that	is	alive,	every	being,	has	a	cycle.	It	is	born,	it	gets	older	and
then	it	dies.	Chi	has	this	same	cycle.	We	have	these	waves,	these	tides	of	chi	in
the	day,	where	the	chi	goes	up—very	strong	yang,	then	yin,	and	so	on.	What	the
twelve	 stages	 will	 give	 us	 is	 a	 more	 precise	 understanding	 of	 the	 Jia	 Zi.	 For
example,	suppose	a	person	is	yang	fire	(Bing),	but	we	do	not	recognize	this	in
them;	however,	when	we	examine	the	strength	of	their	Jia	Zi	it	is	dead,	and	we
see	that	this	is	the	reason.	Therefore,	we	need	to	know	about	this	timing,	because
this	timing	will	give	us	the	reality	behind	the	energy	that	is	actually	there.
    With	the	information	given	by	the	twelve	stages,	we	will	be	able	not	only	to
see	the	strength	of	the	chi	for	our	Day	Master,	but	we	will	also	be	able	to	look	at
the	 strength	 of	 our	 Day	 Master	 for	 each	 period	 of	 our	 life	 and,	 in	 addition,	 at
each	 palace	 with	 all	 the	 associations	 and	 combinations.	 Moreover,	 we	 will	 be
able	to	do	the	same	for	each	of	the	ten	gods	in	our	Ba	Zi	and	see	the	strength	of
each	 of	 them	 compared	 to	 our	 Day	 Master.	 From	 this	 we	 can	 then	 see,	 for
example,	that	for	some	period	of	our	life	a	certain	god	is	stronger	than	our	Day
Master.	This	will	give	us	a	lot	more	information.
    We	can	use	these	twelve	stages	for	everything,	but	for	now	we	will	only	use
them	for	the	Day	Master	and	the	ten	gods.	They	are	universal	and	we	will	find
them	everywhere.	The	stages	are:	1. Growth
     2. Childhood
     3. Adulthood
     4. Accomplishment
     5. Maturity
     6. Decline
     7. Ailment
     8. Release
     9. Dormancy
     10. Completion
     11. Conception
     12. Birth.

Traditionally	 we	 always	 start	 with	 growth,	 but	 in	 real	 life	 the	 first	 one	 will	 be
conception.	Conception,	and	then	birth,	growth	and	so	on.

Note:	The	translations	of	the	twelve	stages	of	chi	can	sometimes	be	different,	so
take	care.	Look	at	the	numbering	to	make	sure	you	have	it	right.


The	power	of	the	twelve	stages
Each	of	the	stages	has	a	force	of	chi,	which	is	either	strong,	medium	or	weak:

Weak                                Medium                                   Strong
Decline                             Childhood                                Growth
Ailment                             Dormancy                                 Adulthood
Release                             Conception                               Accomplishment
Completion                          Birth                                    Maturity


It	 is,	 however,	 not	 always	 a	 blessing	 that	 we	 have	 a	 strong	 force,	 because	 too
much	 strength	 where	 we	 do	 not	 need	 it	 may	 in	 fact	 be	 worse	 than	 having	 a
weaker	 force.	 It	 might	 even	 become	 destructive.	 For	 example,	 we	 may	 have	 a
god	that	is	bad	for	us	that	pushes	us	towards	bad	things	or	even	a	clash.	If	when
we	look	at	the	twelve	stages	this	god	is	strong,	then	we	have	a	problem.


Finding	the	stages
First,	we	will	find	the	force	of	the	Jia	Zi.	In	the	table	on	the	following	page	we
have	 the	 combinations	 of	 the	 Tian	 Gan	 and	 the	 Di	 Zhi.	 By	 finding	 the
combinations,	we	find	the	stage	of	chi	for	the	Jia	Zi.
    Then	we	can	do	the	same	for	the	Jia	Zi	and	put	it	in	relationship	with	a	Di
Zhi	that	can	be	the	year,	the	month,	the	day	and	the	hour.	We	will	then	have	a
very	precise	way	to	see	each	hour,	day,	month	and	year	of	the	stage	of	chi.	These
relationships	are	given	in	the	tables	that	follow	the	table	described	above.

                            Heavenly	stems
                            Yang    Yin      Yang     Yin       Yang    Yin       Yang    Yin     Yang      Yin
                            wood    wood     fire     fire      earth   earth     metal   metal   water     water
         1.	Growth	(Chang   pig     horse    tiger    rooster   tiger   rooster   snake   rat     monkey rabbit
         Sheng)
         2.	Childhood	(Mu   rat     snake    rabbit   monkey rabbit     monkey horse      pig     rooster   tiger
            2.	Childhood	(Mu             rat            snake        rabbit        monkey rabbit      monkey horse        pig      rooster    tiger
            Yu)
            3.	Adulthood	(Guan           ox             dragon       dragon        goat     dragon    goat     goat       dog      dog        ox
            Dai)
            4.	Accomplishment            tiger          rabbit       snake         horse    snake     horse    monkey rooster      pig        rat
            (Lin	Guan)
            5.	Maturity	(Di              rabbit         tiger        horse         snake    horse     snake    rooster    monkey rat          pig
            Wang)
            6.	Decline	(Shuai)           dragon         ox           goat          dragon   goat      dragon   dog        goat     ox         dog
            7.	Ailment	(Bing)            snake          rat          monkey rabbit          monkey rabbit      pig        horse    tiger      rooster
            8.	Release	(Si)              horse          pig          rooster       tiger    rooster   tiger    rat        snake    rabbit     monkey
            9.	Dormancy	(Mu)             goat           dog          dog           ox       dog       ox       ox         dragon   dragon     goat
            10.	Completion	(Ju)          monkey rooster              pig           rat      pig       rat      tiger      rabbit   snake      horse
            11.	Conception               rooster        monkey rat                 pig      rat       pig      rabbit     tiger    horse      snake
The         (Tai)
twelve
stages      12.	Birth	(Yang)             dog            goat         ox            dog      ox        dog      dragon     ox       goat       dragon


                     Earthly	branches
                     Hai       Zi        Chou       Yin          Mao           Chen         Si        Wu       Wei       Shen      You              Xu
                     Pig       Rat       Ox         Tiger        Rabbit        Dragon       Snake     Horse    Goat      Monkey    Rooster          Dog
         Jia|Zi      1         2         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Jia|Xu      1         2         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Jia|Shen    1         2         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Jia|Wu      1         2         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Jia|Chen    1         2         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Jia|Yin     7         1         3          4            5             6            7         8        9         10        11               12
         Yi|Chou     8         7         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9
         Yi|Hai      8         7         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9
         Yi|You      8         7         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9
         Yi|Wei      8         7         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9
         Yi|Si       1         7         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9
Jia	Zi   Yi|Mao      1         5         6          5            4             3            2         1        12        11        10               9


                         Earthly	branches
                         Hai       Zi        Chou       Yin          Mao           Chen      Si        Wu      Wei       Shen       You             Xu
                         Pig       Rat       Ox         Tiger        Rabbit        Dragon    Snake     Horse   Goat      Monkey     Rooster         Dog
         Bing|Yin        10        11        12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Bing|Zi         10        11        12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Bing|Xu         10        11        12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Bing|Shen       10        11        12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Bing|Wu         8         11        12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Bing|Chen       8         4         12         1            2             3         4         5       6         7          8               9
         Ding|Mao        11        10        9          8            7             6         5         4       3         2          1               12
         Ding|Chou    11        10        9       8          7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ding|Hai     11        10        9       8          7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ding|You     11        10        9       8          7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ding|Wei     10        2         9       8          7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
Jia	Zi   Ding|Si      10        2         9       8          7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12


                     Earthly	branches
                     Hai    Zi        Chou       Yin         Mao       Chen     Si      Wu      Wei    Shen     You       Xu
                     Pig    Rat       Ox         Tiger       Rabbit    Dragon   Snake   Horse   Goat   Monkey   Rooster   Dog
         Wu|Chen     10     11        12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Wu|Yin      10     11        12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Wu|Zi       10     11        12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Wu|Xu       10     11        12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Wu|Shen     11     7         12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Wu|Wu       11     7         12         1           2         3        4       5       6      7        8         9
         Ji|Si       11     10        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ji|Mao      11     10        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ji|Chou     11     10        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ji|Hai      11     10        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
         Ji|You      10     11        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12
Jia	Zi   Ji|Wei      10     11        9          8           7         6        5       4       3      2        1         12


                      Earthly	branches
                      Hai       Zi        Chou       Yin      Mao      Chen     Si      Wu      Wei    Shen     You       Xu
                      Pig       Rat       Ox         Tiger    Rabbit   Dragon   Snake   Horse   Goat   Monkey   Rooster   Dog
         Geng|Wu      7         8         9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Geng|Chen    7         8         9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Geng|Yin     7         8         9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Geng|Zi      7         8         9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Geng|Xu      11        10        9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Geng|Shen    11        10        9          10       11       12       1       2       3      4        5         6
         Xin|Wei      2         1         12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3
         Xin|Si       2         1         12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3
         Xin|Mao      2         1         12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3
         Xin|Chou     2         1         12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3
         Xin|Hai      7         11        12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3
Jia	Zi   Xin|You      7         11        12         11       10       9        8       7       6      5        4         3


                     Earthly	branches
                     Hai    Zi        Chou       Yin         Mao       Chen     Si      Wu      Wei    Shen     You       Xu
                    Pig       Rat   Ox   Tiger   Rabbit   Dragon   Snake    Horse   Goat   Monkey     Rooster   Dog
         Ren|Shen   4         5     6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Ren|Wu     4         5     6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Ren|Chen   4         5     6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Ren|Yin    4         5     6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Ren|Zi     2         10    6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Ren|Xu     2         10    6    7       8        9        10       11      12     1          2         3
         Gui|You    5         4     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6
         Gui|Wei    5         4     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6
         Gui|Si     5         4     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6
         Gui|Mao    5         4     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6
         Gui|Chou   4         8     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6
Jia	Zi   Gui|Hai    4         8     3    2       1        12       11       10      9      8          7         6


An	example	for	comparison	is	given	below:

                          Hour                   Day                    Month                  Year
                          Retirement             Adulthood              Adolescence            Childhood
                          52+                    35–51                  18–34                  <18
Tian	Gan                  	                                             	                      	
                                                 X
Di	Zhi                    0                                             0                      0

                                                 X

We	also	have	to	remember	that	we	have	the	hidden	stems.	Therefore,	we	have
the	possibility	to	compare	these	over	time	as	well:

                          Hour                   Day                    Month                  Year
                          Retirement             Adulthood              Adolescence            Childhood
                          52+                    35–51                  18–34                  <18
Tian	Gan                  	                      	                      	                      	
Di	Zhi                    0                      0                      0

                                                                                               X
Hidden	stem       	                 	                 	                     X


With	regard	to	the	Day	Master
Again,	the	first	thing	to	see	is	the	force	and	state	of	the	Day	Master.	By	looking
at	the	Day	Master	itself,	plus	the	branch,	it	will	give	us	our	stage	of	chi.	Then	by
relating	 our	 Day	 Master	 with	 the	 branch	 of	 the	 Year,	 Month,	 Day	 or	 Hour
palace,	it	will	give	us	the	strength	of	our	Day	Master	during	our	life.

                  Hour              Day               Month                 Year
                  Retirement        Adulthood         Adolescence           Childhood
                  52+               35–51             18–34                 <18
Tian	Gan          	                                   	                     	
                                    X
Di	Zhi            0                 0                 0                     0


It	will	also	give	us	a	way	to	see	ourselves,	and	the	way	we	feel	about	ourselves,
during	the	different	parts	of	our	life:

	                              Tian	Gan                       Di	Zhi

Hour                           	                              My	own	aspiration	and	the
                                                              relationship	to	my	children.
Day                            Day	Master                     The	relationship	between	myself
                                                              and	partner.
Month                          	                              My	personal	and	close	family
                                                              relationship.
Year                           	                              My	outside	and	work
                                                              relationship.


All	 this	 gives	 us	 additional	 information	 for	 our	 Day	 Master.	 It	 will	 be	 very
interesting	 to	 see	 not	 only	 how	 the	 Day	 Master	 evolves	 or	 declines	 during	 our
life	but	how	it	will	also	explain	many	other	things	in	our	Ba	Zi.


With	regard	to	the	ten	gods
With	regard	to	the	ten	gods
Not	only	can	we	look	at	the	stage	of	our	Day	Master	but	we	can	also	look	at	it
for	the	ten	gods.	For	each	of	them	we	can	look	at	their	rhythm	over	time.	As	we
have	 seen	 before,	 we	 can	 make	 many	 comparisons,	 which	 will	 relate	 to	 the
different	aspects	of	our	lives:	job,	partner,	children	and	so	on.
    The	 table	 below	 shows	 an	 example	 of	 looking	 at	 the	 god	 in	 the	 month
column	of	the	heavenly	stem.	This	can	also	be	used	for	the	year	and	hour.

                  Hour             Day              Month             Year
                  Retirement       Adulthood        Adolescence       Childhood
                  52+              35–51            18–34             <18
Tian	Gan          	                	                                  	
                                                    X
Di	Zhi            0                0                0                 0


Remember	 that	 we	 also	 have	 the	 ten	 gods	 in	 the	 hidden	 stem.	 An	 example	 is
given	in	the	next	table:

                  Hour             Day              Month             Year
                  Retirement       Adulthood        Adolescence       Childhood
                  52+              35–51            18–34             <18
Tian	Gan          	                	                	                 	
Di	Zhi            0                0                0                 0
Hidden	stem       	                	                	
                                                                      X

We	can	then	compare	this	relationship	between	the	Day	Master	and	the	ten	gods
to	have	a	complete	idea	of	the	energy	given	to	us	at	different	times	for	our	Day
Master	and	our	ten	gods,	which	is	the	way	we	will	see	the	world.


The	Day	Master	and	the	ten	gods:	year,	month,	day	and	hour
We	cando	even	more	with	these	tables.	We	can	look	at	each	of	the	Jia	Zi	that	we
compare	to	the	Di	Zhi	of	the	hour,	day,	month	or	year.
    Let	us	say	that	we	want	to	use	one	of	the	qualities	given	to	us	by	one	of	the
ten	 gods.	 This	 god	 that	 we	 really	 need	 to	 use	 is	 not	 too	 strong	 at	 the	 time.
However,	by	looking	at	the	Jia	Zi	corresponding	to	the	god	and	its	branch	in	a
calendar,	we	can	find	the	best	year,	month,	day	or	even	hour	(if	we	are	a	little
obsessive)	for	when	the	expression	of	this	god	is	the	best	time.	By	knowing	this
we	 can	 use	 the	 energy	 of	 the	 god	 much	 more	 to	 our	 advantage.	 On	 the	 other
hand,	if	a	god	bothers	us	too	much,	we	can	find	the	time	when	it	is	weak	and	do
the	things	we	need	to	do	then.	This	is	very	interesting.	Furthermore,	we	can	even
do	this	for	longer	cycles.	In	an	earlier	section	we	talked	about	the	Luck	cycles,
which	were	ten-year	cycles.	We	can	also	apply	those	here.



The	twelve	stages	of	chi	in	detail
In	 this	 section,	 we	 give	 a	 detailed	 description	 of	 the	 twelve	 stages	 of	 chi.	 For
each	 of	 them	 we	 also	 give	 a	 short	 interpretation	 with	 regard	 to	 which	 column
they	express.	These	are	very	old	and	traditional	interpretations,	which	we	have	to
interpret	ourselves.


1.	Growth	(Strong)
Growth	is	about	production.	It	is	at	the	beginning	of	actual	life,	in	between	being
born	and	not	being	born.	Some	texts	say	that	it	is	after	Birth,	but	it	is	not.	This
energy	 is	 strong,	 but	 there	 is	 a	 conflict	 because	 it	 does	 not	 know	 where	 to	 go.
Consequently,	 it	 needs	 a	 focus,	 an	 aim.	 However,	 this	 energy	 is	 also	 very
delicate.
     Inside	Growth,	there	is	the	idea	of	invention,	creation,	creativity,	vitality	and
strength.	It	has	a	very	strong	possibility	for	doing	things.	This	we	need	to	look
for.	If	Growth	is	on	a	useful	god	for	us,	then	this	will	be	very	interesting;	on	the
other	hand,	if	we	have	Growth	on	something	bad,	then	we	have	to	take	care!
     Growth	indicates	a	very	strong	and	vibrant	level	of	competence.	We	see	that
this	 gives	 excellence	 in	 younger	 years	 because	 it	 will	 really	 stimulate	 us	 to
achieve	the	life	we	really	want.	If	this	is	at	the	beginning	of	our	Ba	Zi,	we	come
from	a	strong,	smart	and	even	rich	family.	Alternatively,	we	have	a	very	strong
and	very	clear	resource	(five	aspects)	where	we	can	do	many	things.	If	we	have
it	later,	it	tells	us	that	at	this	time	we	will	be	able	to	make	a	lot	of	progress	in
whatever	we	want	to	do—then	we	can	really	realize	what	we	want.
INTERPRETING	GROWTH	IN	THE	PILLARS
      •   Year	pillar.	If	this	is	linked	to	fire	it	will	influence	the	world.	For	a
          woman	it	can	be	a	health	problem	later	in	life—usually	after	50.
      •   Month	pillar.	They	will	not	be	very	independent.	They	will	have
          difficulties	and	will	not	be	able	to	take	advice	from	other	people.
      •   Day	pillar.	They	are	very	childish	people.	They	will	always	stay	very
          young	in	their	heads	and	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	them	to	make
          decisions.
      •   Hour	pillar.	It	is	very	difficult	for	such	individuals	to	have
          relationships	that	are	deep	because	their	aspirations	inside	them	are
          not	very	clear.


2.	Childhood/Bath	(Medium)
Childhood	is	the	English	translation;	in	Chinese	it	is	bath,	as	in	bathing.	Bath	has
the	image	of	when	a	baby	is	very	young	and	cannot	bathe	themselves	and	hence
is	dependent	on	their	mother	or	father	for	this.	This	is	when	we	absorb	energy
that	 is	 directed	 at	 us.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 receptive	 aspect	 and	 we	 do	 not	 really	 choose
other	things	very	much.	It	is	an	absorption	stage.
    It	will	be	a	time	where	we	will	have	romance	or	even	just	sex.	There	will	be
problems	 with	 our	 sexuality,	 being	 unfaithful	 and	 similar	 actions.	 It	 is	 a	 time
when	it	is	very	dangerous	for	relationships.	At	the	same	time,	it	is	a	period	when
we	are	very	open	for	relationships.	Many	people	want	to	know	about	their	love
lives—we	 need	 to	 look	 at	 Bath	 because	 it	 is	 a	 time	 when	 all	 this	 sexuality	 is
present.	Furthermore,	it	is	a	very	good	time	to	meet	and	to	attract	new	people.
    We	have	this	idea	about	sexuality	but	there	is	another	thing	as	well,	which	is
being	very	controlled	or	very	weak	in	front	of	people.	It	is	this	image	of	the	bath,
naked	child	and	no	defense;	if	the	parents	do	not	hold	them	they	will	drown.	It	is
this	very	helpless	and	very	fragile	thing.	In	addition,	sometimes	when	we	have
this	we	have	to	take	care	because,	depending	on	which	god	and	which	palace	is
active,	 we	 are	 a	 little	 helpless	 with	 this	 energy.	 In	 a	 relationship	 palace	 it	 is	 a
sexual	thing,	but	we	are	still	helpless	with	the	energy	of	that	god.	If	it	is	related
to	work	there	is	a	chance	that	we	will	be	manipulated	or	weak.

INTERPRETING	BATH	IN	THE	PILLARS
INTERPRETING	BATH	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	This	is	very	good	because	such	individuals	will	get	a	lot
          of	energy	from	their	family	or	get	good	things	from	them.	Normally
          they	will	be	quite	healthy	for	much	of	their	life.
     •    Month	pillar.	They	need	to	have	support	at	times	and	make	sure	that
          they	do	not	isolate	themselves	from	the	world.
     •    Day	pillar.	This	is	not	a	very	strong	force.	They	will	do	things	but
          they	will	always	miss	some	energy	behind	it.	They	have	to	find	ways
          to	get	more	energy.
     •    Hour	pillar.	Marriage	will	always	be	successful	for	a	woman,	and
          always	unsuccessful	for	a	man.


3.	Adulthood/Formation	(Strong)
This	is	the	time	when	we	develop	ourselves.	In	fact,	it	is	strict,	like	education—
the	time	when	we	get	our	resources.	Moreover,	it	is	a	time	when	we	know	about
basic	things.
     For	the	stage	of	Formation	it	is	very	important	that	it	has	a	resource	element
in	 its	 surrounding,	 because	 if	 it	 does	 not	 it	 means	 that	 we	 will	 be	 educated	 by
people	who	may	not	have	the	same	relationship	to	things	or	the	same	values	as
us.	 This	 means	 that	 at	 some	 point	 in	 time,	 now	 or	 later,	 it	 can	 bring	 trouble
because	we	find	ourselves	being	influenced	by	some	values	that	are	inside	us	but
in	fact	are	not	actually	ours.	At	the	same	time,	it	is	a	positive	element—in	work
or	association	it	is	very	good	because	it	means	that	someone	will	help	us	or	take
us	under	their	wing	and	help	us	do	things.

INTERPRETING	FORMATION	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	This	means	that	they	are	strong	individuals	and	that	they
          have	a	fine	family	heritage.	Additionally,	they	will	keep	this	strongly
          with	them.
     •    Month	pillar.	They	will	be	very	competitive	and	it	will	be	very
          difficult	for	them	to	admit	when	they	are	wrong.
      •   Day	pillar.	They	are	people	who	will	really	love	life,	love	things	in
          life	and	be	optimistic.
      •   Hour	pillar.	This	will	not	be	very	good	for	relationships.	Because
          they	want	too	much,	too	quickly	and	too	intensely,	they	will	be
          rejected.	Additionally,	they	will	do	things	that	other	people	cannot
          deal	with.


4.	Accomplishment/Starting/Debut	(Very	Strong)
Debut	comes	after	being	educated	and	gets	one	ready	to	do	things	in	society—a
young	adult	trying	to	be	independent.	They	may	be	even	starting	a	family.	It	is
when	we	are	really	in	charge	of	our	own	destiny	and	in	charge	of	our	own	life.
This	is	a	very	strong	energy	because	we	are	independent.
    When	 we	 are	 here,	 it	 is	 important	 for	 all	 work-related	 matters	 to	 address
questions	about	ourselves	or	for	others.	Promotion	or	being	hired	will	be	easy	for
us	 during	 this	 time,	 even	 being	 taken	 as	 someone	 better	 than	 we	 are.
Consequently,	 it	 will	 be	 a	 good	 time	 to	 apply	 for	 a	 job	 or	 to	 sell	 an	 idea	 for	 a
project.	 For	all	these	 types	 of	relationships,	 Debut	 is	very	 strong.	 Furthermore,
we	are	on	top,	we	are	strong	and	it	is	a	good	moment	to	make	ourselves	be	seen
by	others	or	to	realize	things,	since	people	will	see	us	as	strong.

INTERPRETING	DEBUT	IN	THE	PILLARS
      •   Year	pillar.	They	are	strong	and	will	be	very	independent.
      •   Month	pillar.	They	will	always	need	to	work	harder	and	a	lot	more
          than	others	if	they	want	to	succeed,	because	they	are	very	proud	and
          have	difficulty	showing	what	they	have	done	if	it	is	not	perfect.
      •   Day	pillar.	They	will	not	be	able	to	work	with	family	or	people	too
          close	to	them.	If	they	do,	it	will	not	end	well.
      •   Hour	pillar.	Their	goals	and	aspirations	will	be	too	high.	It	will	be
          difficult	because	they	will	not	have	a	clear	idea	of	what	they	can	do.


5.	Maturity/Prosperity	(Very	Strong)
Prosperity	 sounds	 good,	 but	 remember	 that	 this	 is	 Daoist	 thinking.	 It	 occurs
when	we	are	at	the	top,	which	means	we	can	only	go	down.	It	is	the	time	when
we	are	mature	but	still	have	good	vitality	and	we	are	smart	with	our	experience.
Moreover,	 we	 are	 still	 young	 in	 our	 minds.	 Again,	 it	 is	 an	 optimum	 point,	 but
from	here	we	go	to	the	next	stage,	which	is	Decline.
     When	Prosperity	is	good,	it	is	very	good,	because	we	have	so	much	energy
that	we	can	do	anything	we	want;	but	this	is	not	when	we	especially	want	to	look
at	it.	When	Prosperity	clashes,	is	unfavorable	or	becomes	a	bad	element	for	us,
then	we	need	to	examine	it,	because	a	bad	element	with	an	energy	of	Prosperity
can	really	result	in	disaster.	We	need	to	look	at	the	cycle	and	time	to	make	sure
that	we	are	prepared	for	whatever	happens.	However,	it	is	a	good	moment	for	us
to	 stand	 out	 or	 to	 realize	 things,	 because	 we	 will	 be	 helped	 and	 seen	 as
somebody	strong.

INTERPRETING	PROSPERITY	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •   Year	pillar.	They	will	have	a	very	strong	background	and	are	healthy
         people.	There	are	very	few	big	health	problems.
     •   Month	pillar.	They	have	a	strong	mind	and	will	always	need	to	be
         their	own	boss.
     •   Day	pillar.	They	are	independent	and	need	to	be	their	own	boss.	They
         are	difficult	to	handle	because	they	can	be	too	strong,	even	bordering
         on	arrogance.
     •   Hour	pillar.	They	are	very	difficult	because	they	are	independent	and
         too	proud	of	what	they	do.	This	will	also	cause	problems	in
         relationships.


6.	Decline	(Weak)
We	start	to	get	older,	which	means	we	still	have	the	Prosperity	energy	but	it	is
going	down.	We	see	that	some	things	do	not	go	as	well,	and	we	realize	that	our
chi	is	not	as	good.	Then	we	have	Sickness.
    In	Decline,	and	this	will	be	the	same	for	Sickness	and	Death,	we	have	to	look
at	negative	aspects	such	as	clashes.	These	negative	aspects	will	not	be	strong	if
we	have	any	kind	of	Wealth	Star	around,	as	this	will	neutralize	it.	However,	if
we	 do	 not,	 then	 Decline	 (Disease	 and	 Death	 also)	 is	 bad	 and	 it	 will	 bring	 us
weakness,	problems	and	trouble.

INTERPRETING	DECLINE	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •   Year	pillar.	They	will	be	fragile	and	always	a	little	sick,	especially	if
         born	in	the	wrong	season.
     •   Month	pillar.	They	will	be	gentle	people	and	will	have	difficulty	in
         imposing	themselves.
     •   Day	pillar.	They	will	be	creative,	but	it	is	difficult	for	them	to	use
         their	creativity	for	themselves.	Most	of	the	time	other	people	will	use
         or	even	steal	their	creations.
     •   Hour	pillar.	This	will	not	always	be	easy	for	business,	but	for
         marriage	it	will	be	good.	A	strong	relationship	will	always	be	very
         important	for	these	people.


7.	Ailment/Sickness/Disease	(Weak)
Sickness	is	at	the	end	of	the	energy	cycle.	The	chi	cannot	defend	us	as	well	and
consequently	we	are	more	fragile.	We	will	be	subject	to	disease	and	our	immune
system	is	not	as	good.	It	is	just	a	weaker	time.
    See	also	the	comments	above	under	Decline.

INTERPRETING	SICKNESS	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •   Year	pillar.	Most	of	the	time	they	will	be	sick,	maybe	a	little	or	a	lot,
         but	in	general	they	have	a	tendency	to	be	sick	easily.
     •   Month	pillar.	They	will	always	be	a	little	weak.
     •   Day	pillar.	They	will	worry	too	much,	suffer	from	hypochondria,	and
         lack	strength.
     •   Hour	pillar.	They	will	have	problems	with	marriage	or	intimate
         relationships,	which	will	be	recurring	during	their	life.


8.	Release/Death	(Weak)
8.	Release/Death	(Weak)
Death	is	when	we	go	back	to	unity.	It	is	a	destruction	stage.	The	body	no	longer
has	life	but	it	is	still	there.	All	the	subtle	energy	still	resides	there.
    See	also	the	comments	above	under	Decline.

INTERPRETING	DEATH	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	It	is	not	a	time	for	good	health,	especially	if	they	are	born
          in	the	wrong	season.
     •    Month	pillar.	They	do	not	listen	to	others,	but	they	themselves	have
          no	good	ideas	either.	Thus,	they	have	a	tendency	to	be	lost.
     •    Day	pillar.	They	will	be	quiet	and	have	a	very	strong	mind,	but	their
          thoughts	will	stay	inside.	This	will	be	difficult	because	they	will	be
          always	upset	or	frustrated.
     •    Hour	pillar.	A	woman	will	marry	more	than	once,	and	a	man	will
          likely	be	a	bachelor	all	his	life.


9.	Dormancy/Tomb/Grave	(Medium)
This	 is	 a	 time	 of	 retreat.	 We	 are	 in	 a	 box,	 under	 the	 earth.	 The	 energy	 is	 still
there	a	little	but	it	is	slowly	going	back	to	the	earth	and	to	heaven.	It	is	a	very
important	 time	 because	 everything	 is	 retracting	 into	 the	 grave.	 It	 is	 very
important	to	understand	that	the	energy	is	still	there,	but	in	this	period	it	is	more
a	conserving	kind	of	energy.	Essentially,	we	are	keeping	energy.
      This	idea	is	not	bad.	It	is	more	about	keeping	hold	of	things.	We	can	look	at
it	as	a	warehouse	or	as	a	big	safe	where	we	store	our	energy	for	a	little	while,
before	it	goes	to	the	next	stage	of	chi.	Dormancy	then	becomes	good	because,	if
it	 is	 in	 combination	 with	 money,	 it	 has	 a	 great	 capacity	 to	 accumulate	 and	 to
save.	For	a	relationship,	it	is	a	very	good	period	to	protect	it.	Dormancy,	because
it	talks	about	the	grave,	is	interpreted	badly	most	of	the	time,	but	it	is	actually	a
good	thing.	Of	course,	if	it	is	a	bad	god,	then	it	is	bad	because	we	are	keeping
hold	of	the	unpleasant	things.

INTERPRETING	DORMANCY	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	This	gives	good	health	and	a	tendency	to	keep	good
          health.
     •    Month	pillar.	Life	will	be	easy	going,	with	easy	living.	Things	will	be
          very	easy.
     •    Day	pillar.	They	will	have	problems	with	money	but	they	will	be
          easygoing	and	very	optimistic	in	life.
     •    Hour	pillar.	If	they	get	a	good	marriage,	then	they	will	use	this
          marriage	link	to	help	their	lives.	It	is	therefore	very	important	to	have
          a	good	marriage.


10.	Completion/Dispersion/Disappearing/Extinction	(Weak)
The	extinction	of	life.	It	is	when	we	have	nothing	and	we	go	back	to	complete
non-individuality.	We	are	starting	to	go	back	to	the	Yuan	Shen,	and	even	to	the
Hun	Dun.	Life	has	completely	disappeared	from	individuality	and	is	ready	to	do
something	else,	to	manifest	again.
   In	Dispersion	the	energy	is	not	there,	which	means	that	the	main	thing	at	this
point	 is	 that	 the	 god,	 element	 or	 polarity	 may	 no	 longer	 exist.	 If	 it	 is	 our	 Day
Master	 it	 is	 not	 good,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 look	 at	 it	 very	 seriously,	 because	 then
maybe	our	Day	Master	is	not	this	particular	Day	Master.

INTERPRETING	DISPERSION	IN	THE	PILLARS

     •    Year	pillar.	They	will	do	too	much.	They	will	easily	overindulge	in
          alcohol,	drugs	and	sex,	especially	if	they	are	born	in	the	wrong
          season.
     •    Month	pillar.	They	will	always	have	periods	of	up	and	down.	Things
          go	very	well	and	then	they	are	nearly	dead;	then	everything	is
          beautiful,	and	afterwards	they	are	depressed.	It	is	like	this	for	their
          whole	life.
     •    Day	pillar.	They	are	abused	easily	and	thus	need	to	be	careful.
     •    Hour	pillar.	They	will	have	difficulty	in	trusting	partners—thus	it	is
          very	difficult	to	have	a	good	marriage	or	a	good	relationship.


11.	Conception	(Medium)
11.	Conception	(Medium)
In	 Conception,	 we	 prepare.	 We	 are	 doing	 something	 with	 intent	 and	 we	 are
acting	to	do	something	in	our	new	life.	It	is	already	a	movement.	The	big	thing
here	is	that	everything	is	possible.	We	have	this	opening—if	it	is	on	a	good	star,
we	 can	 do	 almost	 anything	 we	 want.	 If	 it	 is	 on	 a	 bad	 star	 we	 still	 have	 hope,
because	Conception	gives	us	all	the	possibilities.	A	bad	star	in	Conception	will
be	bad	for	us,	but	we	do	have	hope.

INTERPRETING	CONCEPTION	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	They	will	have	quite	good	health	and	genes—never
          strong	or	weak,	but	in	between.
     •    Month	pillar.	They	will	normally	have	a	lot	of	illness	when	young
          but	better	health	when	grown	up.
     •    Day	pillar.	They	will	be	very	clever—it	is	very	good	to	have
          Conception	in	this	pillar.	They	will	always	be	a	little	ahead	of	the
          others.
     •    Hour	pillar.	They	will	be	nonconformist	and	very	clever	but	find	it
          difficult	to	work	hard.	However,	they	will	always	find	a	solution.


12.	Birth/Nourishing/Nutrition	(Medium)
Life	has	been	conceived.	Daoist	thinking	says	that	there	are	ten	months	of	being
pregnant,	 and	 this	 encompasses	 all	 teaching	 before	 birth.	 Before	 one	 is	 born,
parents	get	ready	to	teach	things	or	become	educated	about	raising	a	child.	It	is	a
pre-education	time	and	a	time	for	planning.
    Nourishing	it	will	bring	us	a	type	of	positivity.	If	it	is	on	a	good	star	it	will
just	tell	us	that	it	is	positive;	while	if	it	is	on	a	bad	star	it	will	just	say	that	it	is
not	too	bad.	It	is	this	type	of	positive	energy.

INTERPRETING	NOURISHING	IN	THE	PILLARS
     •    Year	pillar.	They	will	have	quite	good	health	during	their	life	but	not
          very	good	health.	It	will	always	be	in	between.
     •   Month	pillar.	They	will	have	great	difficulty	finding	themselves	in
         their	family.	They	will	always	have	a	feeling	that	it	is	not	really	their
         family.
     •   Day	pillar.	They	will	always	want	to	help	and	do	things	for	other
         people.
     •   Hour	pillar.	Their	own	life	and	accomplishment	will	be	enough.
         Consequently,	it	will	be	difficult	for	them	to	find	attraction	or
         pleasure	in	meeting	more	people	because	they	are	satisfied	in	a	very
         egocentric	way.



Comments	on	the	twelve	stages	of	chi
The	twelve	stages	of	chi	are	important	because	they	give	us	a	better	idea	of	each
of	the	palaces—why	they	are	strong	or	not,	and	how	we	can	look	at	them	to	see
their	strengths	or	weaknesses.

Note:	The	descriptions	above	give	us	some	idea	of	the	stages.	However,	here	we
have	given	only	some	simple	ways	to	teach	how	to	use	them,	using	just	very	old
and	traditional	interpretations.	In	reality,	they	are	really	much	bigger	than	this.
Conclusion	Ba	Zi	is	a	real	life	path;	unlimited
knowledge	can	be	accessed	through	its	study.
Remember	that	the	secret	of	interpretation	resides	in
a	good	understanding	of	the	basic	rules:	yin/yang,	five
elements	and	so	on.


    I	hope	you	have	enjoyed	this	book.	I	plan	to	do	a	second	book	where	I	will
reveal	 the	 personalities	 of	 the	 sixty	 Jia	 Zi	 of	 the	 Day	 pillar.	 With	 this
information,	you	will	be	able	to	get	a	good	idea	of	someone’s	personality	before
even	starting	to	study	the	chart:	it	is	an	incredible	tool!
    See	you	for	the	next	Ba	Zi	book,	and	enjoy	this	ancestral	knowledge!
Index


Page	references	to	figures	and	tables	are	in	italics	adaption	analogy,	water	42
ailment	see	Sickness
alignment	16,	17
animals
   three	animals	of	the	season	combinations	107
   twelve	animals	82–4
artistic-literature	cross	111
ascending	movement,	in	fire	element	32,	33

Ba	Zi	(Eight	Characters/Palaces)
  as	applied	psychology	10,	18
  and	astrology	8
  and	Feng	Shui	12,	17,	59
  foundation	of	22
  levels	54
  maps	51,	52
  overview	48–52,	53
  palaces,	understanding	55–9
  part	in	totality	12–14
  three	levels	54
  understanding	of	people	10
  yin	and	yang	60
bad	pillars	114–15
balance	16,	17
  yin	and	yang	26
Bath	133–4
Being	7,	8
Billings,	Josh	(H.W.	Shaw)	10
Bing	(yang	fire	qualities)	69–70,	115,	117,	118,	119
body	(Wai	Gong)	16
Book	of	Changes	(Yi	Jing)	19–22
bullying	punishment	109–10

camp	fire	analogy,	fire	element	32,	35,	36
cardinals,	hidden	stems	84
Chen	(Dragon)	108,	111
Chinese	metaphysics	7,	8,	10,	22
Chinese	New	Year	8
Chou	(Ox)	108,	111
clashes	107–8
   bullying	punishment	109–10
   harm	relationship	108–9
   self-punishment	110
   uncivilized	punishment	110
   ungrateful	punishment	109
cleansing,	in	fire	element	33
combinations	51,	106–7
   bad	pillars	114–15
   good	pillars	116–17
Conception	142–3
controlling	cycle	(Xiang	Ke)	45,	46,	47,	60
creation	cycle	(Xiang	Sheng)	44,	45,	60
crosses	(three)	111
cycles
  controlling	45,	46,	47,	60
  creation	44,	45,	60
  exhausting	45,	60
  insulting	44,	47,	60
  natural	46–7
  reinforcing	45,	60
  and	relationship	between	five	elements	44–7

Dao	De	Jing	20,	21
Daoism
   change	in	119
   history	18
   image	of	Man	18
   inseparability	of	Man,	heaven	and	earth	12,	13,	14,	16
   non-resisting	principle	11
   yin	and	yang	as	core	concepts	13
Day	Master	(major	characteristic	trait)
   behavioral	attributes	49
   determining	strength	of	54,	86–9
   formation	89
   foundation	of	49
   function	48–9
   and	Heavenly	Stems	54
   the	normal	88
   personality,	revealing	54
   root	84,	87–8
   season	86–7
   the	secret	88
   and	ten	gods	105,	129,	131
   and	twelve	stages	of	chi	128,	129,	141
Day	pillar	50,	55,	56,	57
   and	twelve	stages	of	chi	134–44
Death	138,	139–40
Debut	135–6
Decline	138,	139
descending	movement,	water	element	42
destiny,	understanding	11
destruction,	Earthly	Branches	110–11
Di	Zhi	see	Earthly	Branches	(Di	Zhi)
digestion	analogy,	earth	element	39
Ding	(yin	fire	qualities)	49,	70–1,	115,	118
Direct	Officer	individuals	(power,	discipline	and	organization)	102–3
Direct	Resource	individuals	(knowledge,	wisdom	and	intuition)	104
Direct	Wealth	individuals	(action,	prosperity	and	responsibility)	95,	100–1
disease	see	Sickness
Dispersion	141–2
Dog	(Xu)	111
Dormancy	140–1
double	void	112
Dragon	(Chen)	108,	111
duality	24

earth	element	(Tu)	28,	36–9
Earth	luck	(Feng	Shui)	17
earth	people	71–4
  characteristics/general	aspects	38–9,	71
  negatives	72
  positives	71–2
  training	aspects	73
   work	aspects	73
   yang	earth	qualities	(Wu)	73,	116,	117
   yin	earth	qualities	(Ji)	114,	116,	118
Earthly	Branches	(Di	Zhi)	51,	58,	82–92
   clashes	107–8
   combinations	106–7,	121
   destruction	110–11
   hidden	stems	84–6
   Luck	pillars	89–92
   relationships	in	105–11
   twelve	animals	82–4
Eating	God	individuals	(knowledge	and	intelligence)	98
elements	see	five	elements	(Wu	Xing)
energy	(Nei	Dan)	16
exhausting	cycle	(Xiang	Cheng)	45,	60

factors	see	five	factors
Feng	Shui	7–8
   and	Ba	Zi	12,	17,	59
   and	Yi	Jing	22
fire	element	(Huo)	28,	32–6
fire	people	67–71
   characteristics/general	aspects	35–6,	67
   negatives	68–9
   positives	67–8
   training	aspects	69
   work	aspects	69
   yang	fire	qualities	(Bing)	69–70,	115,	117,	118,	119
   yin	fire	qualities	(Ding)	49,	70–1,	115,	118
five	elements	(Wu	Xing)	28–47,	48
   and	Ba	Zi	60–1
   earth	36–9
   fire	32–6
   invention	of	29
   metal	39–41
   relationship	between	44–7
   water	41–3
   wood	30–2
   and	yin/yang	29,	47
five	energetic	organs	30
five	factors
   influence/power/ghost	officer	94
   parallel/friends/brothers	93
   resources/education/parents	94
   wealth/wife	94
   work/output/children	93
Formation	134–5
four	laws	(yin	and	yang)	24–8
   balance	26
   interdependence	25–6
   opposites	24
   transformation	26–8
Friends	individuals	(social	circles	and	emotion)	96–7

Geng	(yang	metal	qualities)	77,	114,	115
Goat	(Wei)	108,	111
gods	see	ten	gods
good	pillars	116–17
graveyards,	hidden	stems	84
Growth	132–3
growth,	hidden	stems	84
Gui	(yin	water	qualities)	81,	114,	115,	118

Hai	(Pig)	108,	111
Hammarskjöld,	D.	11
harm	relationship	108–9
Heart,	in	TCM	34–5
Heaven	luck	(Ba	Zi)	15,	17
Heavenly	Stems	(Tian	Gan)	50,	51,	62–81,	89
  combinations	106,	121
  earth	people	38–9,	71–4
  fire	people	35–6,	67–71
  metal	people	41,	75–8
  relationships	in	105–11
  water	people	43,	78–81
  wood	people	32,	62–7
hexagrams,	in	Ji	Jing	19,	20,	21
hidden	stems	84–6
hope	142
Horse	(Wu)	111
Hour	pillar	50,	52,	55,	57
  and	twelve	stages	of	chi	133–6,	138–44
Hun	(mind)	31
Hun	Dun	141
Huo	(fire	element)	28,	32–6
Hurting	Officer	individuals	(knowledge	and	intelligence)	99

Indirect	Resource	individuals	(knowledge,	wisdom	and	intuition)	103–4
Indirect	Wealth	individuals	(action,	prosperity	and	responsibility)	100
insulting	cycle	(Xiang	Wu)	44,	47,	60
interdependence,	yin	and	yang	25–6
interpretation	tools	93–170
   bullying	punishment	109–10
   clashes	107–8
   combinations	106–7
   five	factors	93–4
   harm	relationship	108–9
   relationships	in	Heavenly	Stems	and	Earthly	Branches	105–11
   self-punishment	110
   ten	gods	95–104
   three	crosses	111
   twelve	stages	of	chi	119–31,	122–7
   uncivilized	punishment	110
   ungrateful	punishment	109
   void	(emptiness)	112–13

Ji	(yin	earth	qualities)	74,	114,	116,	118
Jia	(yang	wood	qualities)	66,	95,	114,	116,	117
Jia	Zi	(Day	Pillar,	Tian	Gan	and	Di	Zhi)	112,	119,	121,	131,	145
Jin	(metal	element)	28,	39–41

Kidneys,	in	TCM	43
knowledge
  and	intelligence	98–9
  and	wisdom/intuition	103–4
  and	wood	element	30

Lao	Tzu	7,	23
laws	see	four	laws	(yin	and	yang)
light
   and	fire	element	34–5
   and	metal	element	40
Liver,	in	TCM	31–2
Longfellow,	Henry	Wadsworth	22
love-success	cross	111
Luck	pillars	89–92,	105
   finding	89–90
   understanding	91–2
   see	also	San	Cai	(three	lucks)
lucks	see	three	lucks	(San	Cai)
Lungs,	in	TCM	40
Man
  Daoist	image	of	18,	48
  image	between	heaven	and	earth	12,	13,	14,	16,	18,	21
  Man	luck	16–17
  psychological	traits	of	48
  role	in	nature	18
Mao	(Rabbit)	108,	111
metal	element	(Jin)	28,	39–41
metal	people	75–8
  characteristics/general	aspects	41,	75
  negatives	76
  positives	75–6
  training	aspects	76
  work	aspects	76–7
  yang	metal	qualities	(Geng)	77,	114,	115
  yin	metal	qualities	(Xin)	78,	114,	115,	117
metaphysics,	Chinese	7,	8,	10,	22
mind	(Hun/Shen	Gong)	16
mindfulness	9
Monkey	(Shen)	108,	111
Month	pillar	50,	55,	56,	58
  and	twelve	stages	of	chi	133–7,	139–43
moon,	and	fire	element	33–4
Mu	(wood	element)	28,	30–2

Nei	Dan	(energy)	16
non-resisting	principle	(Wu	Wei)	11
Nourishing	143–4

opposites	24
  in	yin	and	yang	22–3
Ox	(Chou)	108,	111

Pig	(Hai)	108,	111
pillars
   age,	determining	90
   bad	114–15
   closed	117
   Day	see	Day	pillar
   double	element	118
   good	116–17
   Hour	see	Hour	pillar
   interactions	in	50
  interpretations
     Bath	134
     Conception	142–3
     Death	139–40
     Debut	135–6
     Decline	138
     Dispersion	142
     Dormancy	141
     Formation	135
     Growth	132–3
     Nourishing	143–4
     Prosperity	137–8
     Sickness	139
  Luck	see	Luck	pillars
  Month	see	Month	pillar
  Year	see	Year	pillar
  see	also	twelve	stages	of	chi
polarities	50,	51,	86,	141
  five	elements	62
  ten	gods	95,	96
  yin	and	yang	22–6,	47,	49,	55,	60,	93
Prosperity	137–8
punishment
  bullying	109–10
  self-punishment	110
  uncivilized	110
  ungrateful	109

Rabbit	(Mao)	108,	111
Rat	(Zi)	111
reinforcing	cycle	45,	60
Ren	(yang	water	qualities)	80–1,	114,	115,	116,	118
retreat	140
Rob	Wealth	individuals	(social	circles	and	emotion)	97
Rooster	(You)	111

San	Cai	(three	lucks)	14–17
seasons	23,	26–7,	83
   Day	Master,	determining	strength	86–7
seed	analogy,	earth	element	37
self-discovery	9
self-punishment	110
Seven	Killings	individuals	(power,	discipline	and	organization)	101–2
sexuality	133–4
Shen	(Monkey)	108,	111
Shen	Gong	(mind)	16
Shui	(water	element)	28,	41–3
Si	(Snake)	108,	111
Sickness	138,	139
single	void	112
Snake	(Si)	108,	111
Spleen/Stomach,	in	TCM	38
sun,	and	fire	element	33,	34

Tai	Ji	20
TCM	see	traditional	Chinese	medicine	(TCM)
ten	gods	95–104,	129–30
   and	Day	Master	105,	129,	131
   Direct	Officer	individuals	(power,	discipline	and	organization)	102–3
   Direct	Resource	individuals	(knowledge,	wisdom	and	intuition)	104
   Direct	Wealth	individuals	(action,	prosperity	and	responsibility)	95,	100–1
   Eating	God	individuals	(knowledge	and	intelligence)	98
   finding	95–104
   Friends	individuals	(social	circles	and	emotion)	96–7
   Hurting	Officer	individuals	(knowledge	and	intelligence)	99
   Indirect	Resource	individuals	(knowledge,	wisdom	and	intuition)	103–4
   Indirect	Wealth	individuals	(action,	prosperity	and	responsibility)	100
   polarities	95,	96
   Rob	Wealth	individuals	(social	circles	and	emotion)	97
   Seven	Killings	individuals	(power,	discipline	and	organization)	101–2
Thoreau,	H.D.	9
three	crosses	111
three	lucks	(San	Cai)	14–17
Tian	Gan	see	Heavenly	Stems	(Tian	Gan)
Tiger	(Yin)	108,	111
traditional	Chinese	medicine	(TCM)	30
   Heart	34–5
   Kidneys	43
   Liver	31–2
   Lungs	40
   Spleen/Stomach	38
traditional	practices,	as	maps	for	the	human	being	9,	12
training/physical	training
   earth	people	73
   fire	people	69
   metal	people	76
   water	people	80
   wood	people	65
transformation	26–8
traveling	cross	111
tree	metaphor,	wood	element	30,	31,	32
Tu	(earth	element)	28,	36–9
twelve	animals	82–4
twelve	stages	of	chi	119–31,	122–7
   Bath	133–4
   Conception	142–3
   Death	138,	139–40
   Debut	135–6
   Decline	138,	139
   detailed	examination	131–44
   Dispersion	141–2
   Dormancy	140–1
   finding	121
   Formation	134–5
   Growth	132–3
   importance	144
   Nourishing	143–4
   power	121
   Prosperity	137–8
   Sickness	138,	139
   see	also	pillars

uncivilized	punishment	110
ungrateful	punishment	109
void	(emptiness)	112–13

Wai	Gong	(body)	16
water	element	(Shui)	28,	41–3
water	people	43,	78–81
  general	aspects	78
  negatives	79–80
  positives	79
  training	aspects	80
  work	aspects	80
  yang	water	qualities	(Ren)	80–1,	114,	115,	116,	118
  yin	water	qualities	(Gui)	81,	114,	115,	118
Wei	(Goat)	108,	111
wood	element	(Mu)	28,	30–2
wood	people	62–7
  characteristics/general	aspects	32,	62–3
  negatives	64–5
  positives	63–4
  training	aspects	65
  work	aspects	65–6
  yang	wood	qualities	(Jia)	66,	95,	114,	116,	117
  yin	wood	qualities	(Yi)	66–7,	114,	116
work
  earth	people	73
  fire	people	69
  metal	people	76–7
  water	people	80
  wood	people	65–6
Wu	(Horse)	111
Wu	(Shaman)	19
Wu	(yang	earth	qualities)	73,	116,	117
Wu	Wei	(non-resisting	principle)	11
Wu	Xing	(five	elements)	see	five	elements	(Wu	Xing)	Xiang	Cheng	(exhausting	cycle)	45,	60
Xiang	Ke	(controlling	cycle)	45,	46,	47,	60
Xiang	Sheng	(creation	cycle)	44,	45,	60
Xiang	Wu	(insulting	cycle)	44,	47
Xin	(yin	metal	qualities)	78,	114,	115,	117
Xu	(Dog)	111

yang	earth	qualities	(Wu)	73,	116,	117
yang	fire	qualities	(Bing)	69–70,	115,	117,	118,	119
yang	metal	qualities	(Geng)	77,	114,	115
yang	water	qualities	(Ren)	80–1,	114,	115,	116,	118
yang	wood	qualities	(Jia)	66,	95,	114,	116,	117
Year	pillar	50,	55,	58
   and	twelve	stages	of	chi	132,	134–9,	141–3
Yi	(yin	wood	qualities)	66–7,	114,	116
Yi	Jing	(Book	of	Changes)	19–22
Yin	(Tiger)	108,	111
yin	and	yang	22–8
   and	Ba	Zi	60
   as	core	concepts	in	Daoism	13
   and	five	elements	29,	47
   four	laws	24–8
   history	18–22
   imbalance	83
   interdependence	25–6
   opposites	in	22–3
   origin	of	theory	18–19
   polarities	22–6,	47,	49,	55,	60,	93
   and	Wu	Xing	(five	elements)	47
   yang	as	function	26
   yin	as	structure	26
Yin	Dynasty	(c.	1400–1100	bc)	19
yin	earth	qualities	(Ji)	74,	114,	116,	118
yin	fire	qualities	(Ding)	49,	70–1,	115,	118
yin	metal	qualities	(Xin)	78,	114,	115,	117
yin	water	qualities	(Gui)	81,	114,	115,	118
yin	wood	qualities	(Yi)	66–7,	114,	116
yoga	9
You	(Rooster)	111
Yuan	Shen	141
Zi	(Rat)	111
First	published	in	2017
by	Singing	Dragon
an	imprint	of	Jessica	Kingsley	Publishers


73	Collier	Street
London	N1	9BE,	UK
and
400	Market	Street,	Suite	400
Philadelphia,	PA	19106,	USA

www.singingdragon.com

Copyright	©	Serge	Augier	2017

Front	cover	image	source:	Wojciech	Jach	All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced
in	any	material	form	(including	photocopying	or	storing	it	in	any	medium	by	electronic	means	and	whether
or	not	transiently	or	incidentally	to	some	other	use	of	this	publication)	without	the	written	permission	of	the
copyright	owner	except	in	accordance	with	the	provisions	of	the	Copyright,	Designs	and	Patents	Act	1988
or	under	the	terms	of	a	licence	issued	by	the	Copyright	Licensing	Agency	Ltd,	Saffron	House,	6–10	Kirby
Street,	London	EC1N	8TS.	Applications	for	the	copyright	owner’s	written	permission	to	reproduce	any	part
of	this	publication	should	be	addressed	to	the	publisher.

Warning:	The	doing	of	an	unauthorised	act	in	relation	to	a	copyright	work	may	result	in	both	a	civil	claim
for	damages	and	criminal	prosecution.

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging	in	Publication	Data	Names:	Augier,	Serge,	author.
Title:	Ba	zi	-	the	four	pillars	of	destiny	:	understanding	character,	relationships	and	potential	through
    Chinese	astrology	/	Serge	Augier.
Description:	Philadelphia	:	Singing	Dragon,	2016.	|	Includes	index.
Identifiers:	LCCN	2016004356	|	ISBN	9781848192904	(alk.	paper)	Subjects:	LCSH:	Astrology,	Chinese.	|
    Fortune-telling	by	birthdays--China	Classification:	LCC	BF1714.C5	A94	2016	|	DDC	133.5/9251--dc23
    LC	record	available	at	http://lccn.loc.gov/2016004356

British	Library	Cataloguing	in	Publication	Data	A	CIP	catalogue	record	for	this	book	is	available	from
the	British	Library	ISBN	978	1	84819	290	4
eISBN	978	0	85701	241	8
by	the	same	author	Shen	Gong	and	Nei	Dan	in	Da	Xuan
A	Manual	for	Working	with	Mind,	Emotion,	and	Internal	Energy	Serge	Augier
With	translations	by	Isis	Augier	Foreword	by	Dr.	Yang,	Jwing-Ming	ISBN	978	1	84819	260	7
eISBN	978	0	85701	208	1
of	related	interest

Heavenly	Stems	and	Earthly	Branches	—TianGan	DiZhi
The	Heart	of	Chinese	Wisdom	Traditions	Master	Zhongxian	Wu	and	Dr	Karin	Taylor	Wu	Foreword	by
Fei	BingXun	ISBN	978	1	84819	151	8
eISBN	978	0	85701	158	9

Heavenly	Stems	and	Earthly	Branches	—TianGan	DiZhi
The	Keys	to	the	Sublime
Card	Set
Master	Zhongxian	Wu	and	Dr	Karin	Taylor	Wu	ISBN	978	1	84819	150	1
	

	

“As	a	specialist	in	human	behavior,	I	need	tools	that	work.	And	this	is	what	Serge	Augier’s	Ba	Zi	does!	It
gives	 impactful	 insights	 on	 people’s	 drivers	 and	 inner	 tensions,	 which	 are	 easily	 used	 to	 initiate	 change.
This	 book	 will	 provide	 you	 with	 invaluable	 information	 that	 will	 shed	 light	 on	 your	 personality	 like	 no
other.”
                                —Caroline	Chéneau,	Clinical	Psychologist,	Coach	and	Intercultural	Specialist

“Ba	 Zi	 is	 one	 of	 the	 powerful	 and	 secret	 arts	 of	 the	 Ba	 Men	 Da	 Xuan	 tradition.	 It	 allows	 us	 to	 better
understand	who	we	are,	our	strengths	and	weaknesses,	our	resources	and	aspirations,	but	also	our	potential
and	 how	 we	 manage	 our	 relationships	 with	 others.	 A	 better	 understanding	 of	 these	 elements	 allows	 us	 to
enjoy	a	smooth	life	and	to	increase	our	chances	of	success.”
                               —Sébastien	Nunes,	Head	of	Innovation	and	Fintech	at	a	leading	European	bank

“Serge	 Augier’s	 understanding	 of	 the	 Ba	 Zi	 is	 second	 to	 none.	 Not	 only	 does	 he	 make	 complex	 and
profound	 knowledge	 accessible	 to	 everyone,	 he	 also	 gives	 a	 clear	 methodology	 on	 how	 to	 use	 Ba	 Zi	 to
manage	your	everyday	life.	It	really	is	a	life-transforming	book!”
                            —Arnaud	Bouvet,	Chief	Marketing	Officer	at	Cubiks	and	Business	Psychologist
