                                 Cambridge Guide to Schema
                                 Therapy
                                 The book provides the reader with a thorough understanding of the model
                                 of Schema Therapy, methods and techniques used throughout the process
                                 of Schema Therapy treatment. Experienced trainers in Schema Therapy,
                                 the authors provide a unique understanding of the questions, challenges,
                                 and points of issue experienced by practitioners learning the model.
                                 Designed for the practitioner with a speciﬁc focus on the theory and
                                 practice of modern schema therapy, the book discusses the powerful
                                 techniques and cutting-edge developments of the Schema Therapy model,
                                 with step-by-step guidance and clinical examples. A comprehensive
                                 resource for both students and experienced practitioners providing valu-
                                 able examples of the model in clinical practice and solutions to the
                                 challenges and questions practitioners face in applying the model.
                                    Part of the Cambridge Guides to the Psychological Therapies series,
                                 oﬀering all the latest scientiﬁcally rigorous, and practical information on a
                                 range of key, evidence-based psychological interventions for clinicians.

                                 Robert N. Brockman, PhD, is a clinical psychologist and clinical academic working
                                 out of Sydney, Australia. He is Director of Schema Therapy Sydney, a small
                                 schema- and trauma-focused private practice in Sydney, and Co-director of sche-
                                 matherapytrainingonline.com, an online platform for schema therapy training.
                                 Robert also maintains an active research and teaching programme through his
                                 ongoing honorary appointment with the University of Technology Sydney. Robert
                                 regularly presents schema therapy training workshops throughout Australia, New
                                 Zealand, and Asia through his association with Schema Therapy Training
                                 Australia.

                                 Susan Simpson, PsyD, is a clinical psychologist and clinical academic based in
                                 Scotland. She is Director of Schema Therapy Scotland, and Co-director of both
                                 InhaleLifeNow.com and the Global Institute of Eating Disorders. She runs a small
                                 private practice and works in an NHS outpatient eating disorders unit.
                                 Susan is actively involved in research and teaching, with foci on the treatment of
                                 eating disorders and resilience and burnout amongst psychotherapists. She has
                                 a longstanding interest in the nexus of human well-being and connectedness to
                                 nature. She is co-author and editor of Schema Therapy for Eating Disorders
                                 (Routledge, 2019).
                                 Christopher Hayes, MA (Psych), is a clinical psychologist based in Perth, Western
                                 Australia. He is Director of Schema Therapy Training Australia and Co-director of
                                 schematherapytrainingonline.com. Christopher is a past board secretary of the



Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                  International Society for Schema Therapy (ISST), and regularly presents schema
                                  therapy training workshops throughout Europe, Asia, and Australia.
                                  Remco van der Wijngaart, MSc, is a psychotherapist in private practice in
                                  Maastricht, the Netherlands. He is Director of the Dutch Institute for Schema
                                  Therapy, where he oﬀers training courses in schema therapy, both nationally and
                                  internationally. He is also Director of Van Genderen Opleidingen, a large training
                                  centre in the Netherlands.
                                  Matthew Smout, PhD, is a clinical psychologist and Programme Director of the
                                  Master of Clinical Psychology programme at the University of South Australia,
                                  Adelaide. He is also Director of the University of South Australia Psychology
                                  Clinic, where he supervises the work of provisional psychologists.




Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Cambridge Guides to the Psychological
         Therapies
         Series Editor
         Patricia Graham
         Consultant Clinical Psychologist, NHS Lanarkshire, UK

         The go-to resource for up-to-date, scientiﬁcally rigorous, and practical information on the
         key, evidence-based psychological interventions.

         This series of clinical handbooks provides clear and concise guides to understanding and
         delivering therapy, and oﬀers clinicians a handy reference for matching a speciﬁc therapy to
         a particular patient. Each book follows a consistent style, with chapters on theory, tech-
         nique, indications and eﬃcacy, so that healthcare professionals can move seamlessly
         between diﬀerent volumes to learn about various therapies in a consistent, familiar and
         trusted format. The books also provide guidance on relevant adaptations for each therapy,
         such as for children, adolescents and older people, as well as diﬀerent methods of delivery,
         such as group interventions and digital therapy.


         Books available in the series
         Cambridge Guide to Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
         Jessica Davies, Kenneth Laidlaw and Paul Salkovskis
         Cambridge Guide to Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of Psychotherapy (CBASP)
         Massimo Tarsia, Todd Favorite and James McCullough Jr.
         Cambridge Guide to Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT)
         Jim Lyng, Christine Dunkley, Janet Feigenbaum, Amy Gaglia and Michaela Swales
         Cambridge Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)
         Laura Dietz, Fiona Duﬀy and Patricia Graham
         Cambridge Guide to Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT)
         Anthony Bateman, Peter Fonagy, Chloe Campbell, Patrick Luyten and Martin Debbané
         Cambridge Guide to Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
         Adam Polnay, Rhiannon Pugh, Victoria Barker, David Bell, Allan Beveridge, Adam Burley,
         Allyson Lumsden, C. Susan Mizen and Lauren Wilson
         Cambridge Guide to Schema Therapy
         Robert N. Brockman, Susan Simpson, Christopher Hayes, Remco van der Wijngaart and
         Matthew Smout




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                       “This handbook has some 'unique selling points': An updated and critical view
                       of the model, a comprehensive overview of the latest research, and a detailed
                       description of over-controlling coping modes. Deﬁnitely worth reading!”
                                                                                Eckhard Roediger, MD
                                                         Director, Frankfurt Schema Therapy Institute

                       "This book, based on a comprehensive and up-to-date review of research on
                       schema therapy, oﬀers practical guidance and suggestions about the subtleties
                       of the assessment and therapy process. The book reﬂects recent developments in
                       understanding and diﬀerentiating schema modes and the chapter on case
                       conceptualisation draws on new developments in the approach to case concep-
                       tualisation used in training by the ISST. Useful clinical examples in the form of
                       short vignettes and longer summaries bring the details of the practice to life.
                       This is well illustrated by the comprehensive chapter on assessment which
                       includes valuable discussion of the complexities involved in integrating a
                       range of sources of information. These include the client’s verbal and non-
                       verbal responses to interview questions, behaviours that result in avoidance of
                       straightforward answers, and responses to schema therapy inventories, where
                       the authors emphasize the importance of a qualitative perspective and the
                       exercise of clinical judgment. The book’s approach, at the same time practical,
                       and reﬂective of the complexities involved, is continued in the comprehensive
                       coverage of the range of interventions that are central to schema therapy in
                       practice. Because of its depth and sophistication, this is a book that will be
                       valuable not only for those at the early stages of development as schema
                       therapists but also for experienced schema therapists, supervisors, and trainers."
                                                                                David Edwards, PhD
                                                          Professor of Psychology, Rhodes University

                       "I am delighted to endorse this extraordinary book oﬀered by Robert Brockman,
                       Susan Simpson, Christopher Hayes, Remco van der Wijngaart, and Matthew Smout.
                             Complete with the classic theoretical concepts, guiding principles, and
                       eﬀective strategies founded in schema therapy, Cambridge Guide to Schema
                       Therapy is a comprehensive and practical resource, that also oﬀers the most up-
                       to-date, beautifully nuanced, and thoughtfully illustrated elements of this sci-
                       ence-supported model in theory and practice.
                             This book provides the wisdom, the data, and the guiding navigational
                       tools – making it one of the most valuable contributions to clinical practitioners,
                       across the globe. Informed by the work of Dr. Jeﬀrey Young (founder of schema
                       therapy) and presented by some of the most talented and experienced schema
                       therapy practitioners and educators, Cambridge Guide to Schema Therapy
                       oﬀers a robust and relevant understanding of schema theory, supported science,
                       and applications of schema therapy strategies with some of the most challenging
                       treatment populations. Hats oﬀ to my esteemed colleagues!
                             I am so pleased to conﬁdently recommend this essential resource for your
                       clinical library."
                                                                        Wendy Behary, Past-President
                                                       International Society of Schema Therapy (ISST)
                                                                      Author, Disarming the Narcissist




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                 Cambridge Guide to
                                 Schema Therapy
                                 Robert N. Brockman
                                 Schema Therapy Training Australia, University of Technology Sydney

                                 Susan Simpson
                                 Schema Therapy Training Scotland
                                 NHS Forth Valley, Scotland

                                 Christopher Hayes
                                 Schema Therapy Training Australia

                                 Remco Van Der Wijngaart
                                 Dutch Institute for Schema Therapy

                                 Matthew Smout
                                 University of South Australia




Published online by Cambridge University Press
          Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
          One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
          477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
          314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
          103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467

          Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
          a department of the University of Cambridge.
          We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
          education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.

          www.cambridge.org
          Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108927475
          DOI: 10.1017/9781108918145
          © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
          This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
          of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
          place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
          First published 2023
          Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ Books Limited, Padstow Cornwall
          A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
          ISBN 978-1-108-92747-5 Paperback
          Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
          or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
          publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
          remain, accurate or appropriate.
          Every eﬀort has been made in preparing this book to provide accurate and up-to-date information that is in
          accord with accepted standards and practice at the time of publication. Although case histories are drawn
          from actual cases, every eﬀort has been made to disguise the identities of the individuals involved.
          Nevertheless, the authors, editors, and publishers can make no warranties that the information contained
          herein is totally free from error, not least because clinical standards are constantly changing through
          research and regulation. The authors, editors, and publishers therefore disclaim all liability for direct or
          consequential damages resulting from the use of material contained in this book. Readers are strongly
          advised to pay careful attention to information provided by the manufacturer of any drugs or equipment
          that they plan to use.




Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Contents
               Foreword from Professor Arnoud Arntz   ix
               Preface xi
               A Note from the Series Editor xii
               Acknowledgements xiii



               Part I Overview of the Schema               9   Intervention Strategies for Schema
                                                               Healing 4: Behavioural
               Therapy Model                                   Pattern-Breaking Techniques 185
          1    From Core Emotional Needs to                10 Building Connection to Healthy
               Schemas, Coping Styles, and Schema             Modes: The Healthy Adult and
               Modes: The Conceptual Model of                 Happy Child Modes 212
               Schema Therapy 1
                                                           11 Bypassing Maladaptive Coping
          2    Research Support for Schema                    Modes to Support Change 226
               Therapy 16
                                                           12 Preparing for Termination and the
                                                              End Phase of Schema Therapy 241
               Part II The Model of Schema
               Therapy in Practice                             Part III Applications and
                                                               Adaptations for Mental Health
          3    Schema Therapy Assessment 39
                                                               Presentations
          4    Case Conceptualisation and
               Mode Mapping in Schema                      13 Schema Therapy for Chronic
               Therapy 86                                     Depression and Anxiety
                                                              Disorders 251
          5    Envisioning the Road Ahead:
               A Model for the Course of Schema            14 Working with Complex Trauma and
               Therapy 96                                     Dissociation in Schema Therapy 266

          6    Intervention Strategies for Schema          15 Schema Therapy for Eating
               Healing 1: Limited Reparenting 114             Disorders 279

          7    Intervention Strategies for
               Schema Healing 2: Cognitive                     Part IV Application of Schema
               Strategies 138                                  Therapy in Diﬀerent
          8    Intervention Strategies for Schema              Populations and Settings
               Healing 3: Experiential
               Techniques 150                              16 Schema Therapy for Forensic
                                                              Populations 289



                                                                                                vii


Published online by Cambridge University Press
           viii         Contents



          17 Group Schema Therapy 302              Epilogue: Continuing the
                                                   Journey 342
          18 Schema Therapy for the Schema
             Therapist: Improving Therapist        Afterword from Jeﬀrey Young, PhD,
             Well-Being and Enhancing Client       Founder of Schema Therapy 344
             Outcomes Through the Awareness
             and Healing of Therapist
             Schemas 314
           19 Supervision and the Supervisory       Appendix: Interview Questions/
              Relationship in Schema Therapy 327    Guidance for the Assessment
                                                    Process (Chapter 3) 344
           20 Schema Therapy in the Online
                                                    Index 356
              World 333




Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Foreword
         Over recent decades, schema therapy has gained increased popularity around the world as
         a treatment for chronic diﬃculties associated with characterological problems. Several
         reasons for this can be oﬀered. First, the theory underlying schema therapy – that frustra-
         tion of core emotional needs early in childhood and adolescence increases the risk of the
         development of maladaptive schemas, which in turn underlie personality disorders and
         other forms of character-related psychopathology – makes sense to most people. Moreover,
         despite empirical evidence, such early factors relevant for the development and mainten-
         ance of these forms of psychopathology have been relatively neglected in traditional cogni-
         tive-behavioural therapy models. It is therefore understandable that therapists confronted
         in their clinical practice with clients with these types of problems are interested in and even
         need such a theory. Second, the use of schema modes as a central construct in understanding
         and treating severe forms of psychopathology is extremely helpful for both clients and
         therapists. Case conceptualisations based on schema modes give clients a metacognitive
         understanding of their problems and how they link to early childhood experiences.
         Likewise, they help therapists to understand complex problems as well as sudden and
         often extreme changes in their clients’ emotional states. Moreover, understanding the
         relevant schema modes of a speciﬁc patient provides guidance for the therapist, who can
         then choose from a range of appropriate techniques as the techniques are directly linked to
         working with speciﬁc schema modes. Third, the intelligent way in which the founder of
         schema therapy integrated methods and techniques of various therapy schools in an
         overarching cognitive schema model is extremely attractive as it oﬀers diﬀerent channels
         of change (cognitive, experiential, and behavioural) in diﬀerent domains (therapeutic
         relationship, past, and present world outside the therapy room). Integrating these within
         one coherent model undoubtedly contributed to the high acceptability and eﬀectiveness of
         schema therapy. Fourth, eﬀectiveness and cost-eﬀectiveness of schema therapy is supported
         by empirical studies, which gives clients, therapists, managers, and policy makers a strong
         argument to consider schema therapy as a treatment option.
            In the dissemination and implementation of new treatments, comprehensive handbooks
         such as this are essential. Such books should discuss the theory underlying the treatment in
         a thorough yet accessible way, describe the therapeutic relationship that should be strived
         for, oﬀer clear descriptions of methods and techniques, discuss the phases of therapy,
         address diﬀerent forms of application, and oﬀer solutions for possible problems that can
         be encountered with the application of the treatment. This book oﬀers all of this. Hence, it is
         an excellent guide for learning schema therapy (along with video examples and training), as
         well as a reference for those who are more advanced practitioners. As one of the most
         comprehensive in the ﬁeld, authored by leading experts in schema therapy, it is highly
         recommended.

         Professor Arnoud Arntz




                                                                                                      ix


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Preface
         We were delighted to be invited by our colleagues at Cambridge University Press to write
         this book on schema therapy, where it could take its place alongside other established,
         evidence-based therapy approaches in this clinicians’ series. This represented, for us, further
         evidence that the popularity and reach of schema therapy is growing rapidly. It also
         underscored the fact that the research base for schema therapy has become more widely
         recognised amongst our therapist peers (see Chapter 2 for an overview of the evidence).
         Since the schema therapy model was developed by its originator, Jeﬀrey Young, during the
         1980s and 1990s, a new generation of schema therapists has emerged to further develop the
         model for application in novel treatment contexts, and to drive its empirical evaluation.
         This new generation of schema therapists, many of whom were trained directly by Jeﬀrey
         Young and colleagues through his New York Schema Therapy Institute, returned to their
         home countries and seeded much of the interest that we see today globally in the schema
         therapy approach.
              There are, of course, already many other schema therapy books and descriptions of the
         model. This led us to consider what contribution our book could make to the dissemination
         of the schema therapy model more broadly. For our team, the answer was clear. The schema
         therapy model has undergone signiﬁcant development since its early days, a process which is
         ongoing. We aimed to provide a contemporary overview of modern schema therapy as it is
         being practised today, almost three decades after Jeﬀrey Young’s seminal text [1]. Further, we
         wanted to give more attention and depth to issues not extensively addressed elsewhere in the
         literature (e.g., the phasing of schema therapy, increasing therapist attunement, ending
         therapy/termination issues, schema therapy in online settings, and schema therapy supervi-
         sion). We also wanted to showcase how the model is increasingly being extended into novel
         populations and treatment settings (e.g., complex trauma, eating disorders, chronic depres-
         sion, anxiety disorders, violent forensic oﬀenders, and via group delivery). The book is written
         in four sections. In Part I of the book, we provide an in-depth overview of the schema therapy
         model referencing its theoretical background (Chapter 1) and growing evidence base
         (Chapter 2). Part II represents the core of the book, a set of ten chapters (Chapters 3–12)
         demonstrating the model of schema therapy in practice. In Part III – Application and
         Adaptations for Mental Health Presentations (Chapters 13–15) – we provide an overview
         of the application of schema therapy to a range of mental health disorders outside of its
         traditional scope of personality disorders. Finally, in Part IV of the book – Application of
         Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations and Settings (Chapters 16–21) – we demonstrate
         how schema therapy may be applied in a diverse range of clinical contexts.

         References
         1. Young J. Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: A schema focused approach. Professional
            Resource Press; 1999.




                                                                                                            xi


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          A Note from the Series Editor
          I remember when I ﬁrst met Sarah Marsh, Editor at Cambridge University Press – it seems
          like a lifetime ago now. We met at a café in central Edinburgh in June 2017 to discuss an idea
          that she had to create a series of books focussed on evidenced based Psychological
          Therapies. The idea was simple – the books would be attractive to a trainee and simultan-
          eously to an expert clinician. We wanted to enable readers to conceptualise a psychological
          diﬃculty using diﬀerent theoretical models of understanding, but not become overwhelmed
          by the volume of information. We saw the need for a series of books that could be easily read
          and yet would examine complex concepts in a manage- able way.
             So, when Sarah asked me if I would become the Series Editor, I couldn’t say no. What
             we could never have predicted back then, when making early plans for the series, was that
          we would soon face a global pandemic. There were days when we didn’t even know whether
          we could leave our house or if our children could go to school – the world eﬀectively
          stopped. Yet through all the chaos, uncertainty and fear, I saw the determin- ation and
          successes of those around me shine through. I was in awe of the resilience of my own son,
          Patrick, who lived his adolescence in ‘lock-down’. I watch him now and the young man he
          has become – he walks tall with a quiet conﬁdence. I am so proud as he and his friends laugh
          together and now enjoy what most of us had previously taken for granted: their freedom at
          university. In a similar way, I watched the many authors of these books, most of whom are
          busy and tired clinicians, continue to dedicate their precious time to this venture – an
          incredible achievement through a most challenging time. They each welcomed me into their
          academic, clinical and theoretical worlds, from all over the globe. They have all been an
          honour to work with. I would personally like to thank every contributor and author of this
          series for their hard work, determination and humour even in the darkest of days. Despite
          all of the unknowns and the chaos, they kept going and achieved something wonderful.
             I would like to thank Sarah, and Kim Ingram at Cambridge, for giving me the opportunity
          to be Series Editor. I have loved every minute of it; it has been a longer journey than we
          anticipated but an amazing one and for that I am incredibly grateful. Sarah and Kim are my
          friends now – we have literally lived through a global pandemic together. It has been my
          absolute pleasure to work together and in collaboration with Cambridge University Press.

          Patricia Graham, Series Editor
          Consultant Clinical Psychologist, NHS Lanarkshire, UK




          xii


Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Acknowledgements
         We would like to acknowledge the many people that have supported us or contributed in
         some way to the ideas contained in this book. First, to the many clients we have had the
         pleasure of working with using schema therapy: we have learned so much from you and
         your struggles, and sincerely hope we have helped to make a diﬀerence in your lives.
             To Dr Jeﬀrey Young, who imagined this new and powerful approach to therapeutically
         working with clients who at the time were often deemed ‘untreatable’: we live in something
         of a golden age of psychotherapy these days, where we now have strong evidence that even
         the most troubled people can and should be helped. You have contributed a great deal to
         that reality. Similarly, Wendy Behary, you were also there from the start and have given so
         much to support us and the schema therapy community globally.
             Next, we would like to acknowledge all our Dutch colleagues, led by Professor Arnoud
         Artnz, who have achieved so much in pushing a research agenda to better understand the
         eﬀects and processes of schema therapy practice. This includes Professor David Bernstein,
         for sharing his knowledge and wisdom related to the emerging forensic schema therapy
         model described in Chapter 16. Dr Lars Madsen, also, for sharing his ideas and experiences
         in providing schema therapy in forensic settings and providing feedback on drafts of
         Chapter 16. Similarly, we would like to acknowledge Andrea Papitsch-Clark for her
         feedback on some early drafts and ideas for this book. Big thanks also to Clodagh Coyle
         for her editorial work on all chapters, and to Maria Brockman for the drawings and artwork
         she provided for the book.
             Thanks to the whole ISST (International Society for Schema Therapy) community for
         being a forum for creativity and support in schema therapy practice.
             Last, but not least, we all wish to thank our families for their love, support, and patience.
         Without you, writing projects like this would not be possible, and they would not mean so
         much.




                                                                                                       xiii


Published online by Cambridge University Press
Published online by Cambridge University Press
                 Part I              Overview of the Schema Therapy Model
               Chapter
                                     From Core Emotional Needs to

                        1            Schemas, Coping Styles, and
                                     Schema Modes
                                     The Conceptual Model of Schema Therapy
         Introduction
         In this chapter we provide a brief overview of the history of the development of schema
         therapy, and an overview of its model of the development of psychopathology and psycho-
         logical health. This chapter will introduce the primary theoretical constructs of schema
         therapy – core emotional needs, early maladaptive schemas (EMS), coping styles, and
         schema modes – and explain how need deprivation gives rise to EMS, how coping styles
         interact with EMS to produce schema modes, and how these concepts produce
         psychopathology.

         The Basic Schema Therapy Model
         The Heart of Schema Therapy: Core Emotional Needs
         It may be said that schema therapy could have very easily been named needs therapy, so
         central is the concept of core emotional needs to its practice. Although schema therapy began
         as an attempt by leading cognitive therapists to modify entrenched ‘core beliefs’ [1], schema
         therapy has evolved over the past three decades into a therapy whose central precept is the
         satisfaction of core emotional needs.
             A core impetus for the development of schema therapy was Jeﬀ Young and colleagues’
         observation in working with traditional cognitive therapy that, despite impressive outcomes
         in many clients, a substantial proportion (up to 50%) did not beneﬁt signiﬁcantly or
         enduringly [2]. Most of these cases appeared to have symptoms with clear links to childhood
         experiences and associated negative or traumatic memories. At the time, based on clinical
         observation, this group of therapists suspected that these ‘schema patterns’ reﬂected long-
         term ‘characterological’ issues with clear developmental antecedents.
             Informed by the burgeoning developmental literature on psychological needs [4, 5, 6],
         and clinical observation, Young and colleagues described ﬁve core emotional needs that
         emerge in the developmental period. Understanding the extent to which these needs were
         met or unmet is pivotal to understanding chronic mental health problems [2]:
         1. Secure attachments to others (includes safety, stability, nurturance, and acceptance).
         2. Autonomy, competence, and sense of identity.
         3. Freedom to express valid needs and emotions.
         4. Spontaneity and play.
         5. Realistic limits and self-control.


                                                                                                     1


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                 Part I             Overview of the Schema Therapy Model
               Chapter
                                    From Core Emotional Needs to

                        1           Schemas, Coping Styles, and
                                    Schema Modes
                                    The Conceptual Model of Schema Therapy
         Introduction
         In this chapter we provide a brief overview of the history of the development of schema
         therapy, and an overview of its model of the development of psychopathology and psycho-
         logical health. This chapter will introduce the primary theoretical constructs of schema
         therapy – core emotional needs, early maladaptive schemas (EMS), coping styles, and
         schema modes – and explain how need deprivation gives rise to EMS, how coping styles
         interact with EMS to produce schema modes, and how these concepts produce
         psychopathology.

         The Basic Schema Therapy Model
         The Heart of Schema Therapy: Core Emotional Needs
         It may be said that schema therapy could have very easily been named needs therapy, so
         central is the concept of core emotional needs to its practice. Although schema therapy began
         as an attempt by leading cognitive therapists to modify entrenched ‘core beliefs’ [1], schema
         therapy has evolved over the past three decades into a therapy whose central precept is the
         satisfaction of core emotional needs.
             A core impetus for the development of schema therapy was Jeﬀ Young and colleagues’
         observation in working with traditional cognitive therapy that, despite impressive outcomes
         in many clients, a substantial proportion (up to 50%) did not beneﬁt signiﬁcantly or
         enduringly [2]. Most of these cases appeared to have symptoms with clear links to childhood
         experiences and associated negative or traumatic memories. At the time, based on clinical
         observation, this group of therapists suspected that these ‘schema patterns’ reﬂected long-
         term ‘characterological’ issues with clear developmental antecedents.
             Informed by the burgeoning developmental literature on psychological needs [4, 5, 6],
         and clinical observation, Young and colleagues described ﬁve core emotional needs that
         emerge in the developmental period. Understanding the extent to which these needs were
         met or unmet is pivotal to understanding chronic mental health problems [2]:
         1. Secure attachments to others (includes safety, stability, nurturance, and acceptance).
         2. Autonomy, competence, and sense of identity.
         3. Freedom to express valid needs and emotions.
         4. Spontaneity and play.
         5. Realistic limits and self-control.


                                                                                                     1


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          2             Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



              The heart of Young and colleagues’ treatment model is that need satisfaction during
          childhood leads to the development of healthy schemas and related functional aﬀective and
          behavioural patterns, while early need frustration leads directly to the development of EMS
          and related negative patterns of behaviour and maladaptive coping. The emphasis on early
          childhood development and the explicit causal role of unmet core emotional needs in
          producing EMS distinguished schema therapy from the prevailing theories of cognitive
          therapy at the time. Especially relevant types of early life experience were thought to be one
          or more of the following: (a) toxic frustration of needs; (b) exposure to overt trauma or
          victimisation; (c) a lack of boundaries or limits (‘too much of a good thing’); and (d)
          selective internalisation or identiﬁcation with signiﬁcant others [2].

          The Inﬂuence of Attachment Theory in Schema Therapy
          Since their beginnings in the 1960s, theories of attachment [3] were quick to inﬂuence the
          hearts and minds of therapists in the ﬁeld. The parallels between the experiences of clients’
          early patterns of attachment and their present-day problems appeared obvious. However,
          practical applications of this powerful new theory were lacking. Young was quick to
          recognise the importance of the theory for his emerging schema therapy model, integrating
          its emphasis on secure attachment as a core emotional need. Young acknowledged that the
          most important need for the developing child was the need for safe, stable, nurturing, and
          validating attachments. For Young, attachment to others was not a preference but a core
          emotional need, required for healthy development and well-being. To the degree that this
          need was thwarted during development, EMS would ensue. As noted earlier, children have
          a range of needs but, according to Young, attachment needs are of primary importance,
          laying the groundwork for other needs to be satisﬁed. The need for attachment and its
          relationship to a set of schemas in the Disconnection and Rejection domain is a primary
          focus for schema therapy interventions, especially limited reparenting interventions (see
          Chapter 6: Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 1: Limited Reparenting for more
          detail). The original set of eighteen EMS – organised by their original domains and
          described in core belief terms – is described in Table 1.1.

          Young’s Schema Concept
          Expanding upon earlier conceptions of schemas from authors such as Piaget [7], Young and
          colleagues [2] conceptualised schemas as a normal and central human phenomenon: an
          organising principle that enables humans to interpret and make sense of their experiences
          and the world. As children navigate and interpret the world, they will generally develop
          functional scripts, or schemas, which are representations of the world that are activated
          according to situational demands. Many schemas are mundane, representing what to expect
          (expectancies) or the kind of rules likely to be operating in one’s environment, based on past
          experiences. In the broad ﬁeld of cognitive psychology, schemas can be positive or negative,
          adaptive or maladaptive, and can be formed during childhood or later in life. Young’s EMS
          refer to a core set of problematic schemas that tend to develop during childhood or
          adolescence, and which are centrally implicated in the development of various forms of
          psychopathology. For Young and colleagues [2], EMS can be deﬁned as:
          • a broad, pervasive theme or pattern
          • comprised of memories, emotions, cognitions, and bodily sensations




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model                    3



             Table 1.1 Schema domains and corresponding early maladaptive schemas*

             Disconnection and Rejection Domain
             1. Abandonment/Instability (AB): Expectation that signiﬁcant others will not be available to provide
                support, connection, strength, or protection.
             2. Mistrust/Abuse (MA): Expectation that others will hurt, abuse, humiliate, lie, cheat, steal, or
                manipulate.
             3. Emotional Deprivation (ED): Expectation that one will not receive adequate emotional support or
                be understood by others. Three major subtypes of deprivation include:
                 (a) Deprivation of Nurturance: The absence of attention, aﬀection, warmth, and companionship –
                     ‘No one cares . . .’
                 (b) Deprivation of Empathy: The absence of understanding and attunement – ‘No one really
                     gets me . . .’
                 (c) Deprivation of Protection: The absence of direction, strength, and guidance – ‘I am all alone
                     (in facing the world)’.

             4. Defectiveness/Shame (DS): Belief that one is defective, unlovable, bad, unwanted, inferior,
                inadequate, and/or shameful.
             5. Social Isolation/Alienation (SI): Belief that one is socially isolated, diﬀerent from others, and does
                not belong to any group or community.
             Impaired Autonomy and Performance Domain
             6. Dependence/Incompetence (DI): Belief that one is helpless and unable to cope with everyday
                responsibilities without signiﬁcant help from others, leading to lack of autonomy and self-
                reliance.
             7. Vulnerability to Harm or Illness (VH): Expectation that a catastrophe is imminent, and one will be
                unable to prevent it.
             8. Enmeshment/Underdeveloped Self (EM): Tendency to be overly emotionally involved with one or
                more signiﬁcant others, resulting in impaired social development, inner direction, and
                individuation.
             9. Failure (FA): Belief that one has failed or will fail in areas of achievement and that one is
                incompetent, stupid, inept, untalented, etc.
             Impaired Limits Domain
             10. Entitlement/Grandiosity (ET): Belief that one is superior to others, should receive special treatment,
                 and should not be required to follow the same rules as others.
             11. Insuﬃcient Self-Control/Self-Discipline (IS): Inability to appropriately restrain impulses and emotions;
                 diﬃculty tolerating frustration and boredom to accomplish goals.
             Other-Directedness Domain
             12. Subjugation (SB): Surrender of control to others and suppression of one’s own emotions and
                 needs to avoid anger, retaliation, or abandonment.
             13. Self-Sacriﬁce (SS): Hypersensitivity to emotional pain and suﬀering in others, and a tendency to
                 take on responsibility for their needs and feelings at one’s own expense.
             14. Approval-Seeking/Recognition-Seeking (AS): Excessive emphasis on gaining approval, recognition, or
                 attention from others, resulting in an underdeveloped authentic sense of self. Often involves
                 overemphasis on status, achievement, and/or money.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          4             Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



              Table 1.1 (cont.)

              Overvigilance and Inhibition Domain
              15. Negativity/Pessimism (NP): Exaggerated expectation that things will go wrong, or of making
                  mistakes, leading to excessive worry. Focusing on the negative aspects of life and minimising
                  positives.
              16. Emotional Inhibition (EI): Inhibiting spontaneous actions, feelings (especially anger), or
                  communication to prevent being disapproved of, ridiculed, or losing control.
              17. Unrelenting Standards/Hypercriticalness (US): Belief that whatever one does is not good enough, that
                  one must strive to meet very high standards of performance, usually to prevent criticism; and/
                  or excessive emphasis on status, power at expense of health and happiness.
              18. Punitiveness (PU): Belief that people (self and others) should be severely punished for making
                  mistakes or not meeting one’s internalised expectations or standards.
              * Adapted from Young, Klosko, & Weishaar (2003)




          •   regarding oneself and one’s relationships with others
          •   developed during childhood or adolescence
          •   elaborated throughout one’s lifetime, and
          •   dysfunctional to a signiﬁcant degree.
              EMS represent patterns of self-defeating aﬀect and cognition that begin early in devel-
          opment and are repeated and elaborated throughout one’s lifetime. They are triggered by
          current situations or circumstances relevant to the schema theme.
              Key to this deﬁnition is the emphasis not only on cognitive content (e.g., core beliefs,
          negative automatic thoughts), but the interplay between all four components of EMS
          activation: (1) cognitive content; (2) memory/imagery – negative memories and imagery
          become more salient when the schema is triggered; (3) emotions; and (4) bodily sensations.
          Young and colleagues’ deﬁnition highlights the signiﬁcance of imagery-based, aﬀective, and
          somatic processes in any approach to understanding and healing schemas. Young [2] argues
          that EMS are usually adaptive and accurate representations of the general tone of the family
          and childhood environment during the developmental period but may come to bias subse-
          quent experience outside of that family context. EMS that were relatively accurate and
          perhaps adaptive during childhood can be maladaptive later in adult life. It is worth noting
          that in Young and colleagues’ view of EMS, maladaptive coping behaviours are not
          themselves part of the EMS but are ways of coping with the EMS. These coping behaviours
          are said to be ‘schema-driven’ rather than representing a direct component of the schema
          per se.

          Three Broad Maladaptive Coping Styles
          Young argued that EMS are perpetuated through three broad styles of coping. Each
          represents a diﬀerent type of adaptation to the EMS and functions to provide some sense
          of subjective relief from the emotions involved in the activation of the EMS. The coping
          behaviour usually blocks access to information that would otherwise disconﬁrm EMS-
          driven expectancies and maintains a longer-term disconnection from the satisfaction of




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model           5



         core emotional needs. This is how coping styles reinforce and maintain schemas (schema
         perpetuation). The three main coping styles are:
                Schema Avoidance (Flight): Schema avoidance refers to coping by avoiding or escaping
             full activation of the EMS. Common examples include overt avoidance or escape from
             people, places, activities, or situations that could potentially trigger EMS, and actions that
             dull aversive emotional arousal, such as drug use or other compulsive behaviour, self-harm,
             and emotional detachment.
                Schema Overcompensation (Fight): Schema overcompensation refers to a person
             responding to the threat of schema activation by ‘ﬁghting back’ in some way against the
             core message of the EMS. This means thinking, acting, and feeling as though the opposite of
             the EMS is true. Recent authors have relabelled this coping style as schema inversion [6]. For
             example, someone with a Defectiveness/Shame EMS might overcompensate by displaying
             arrogance and acting as if they are better than others (i.e., the opposite of feeling less worthy).
                Schema Surrender (Freeze): Schema surrendering involves resignation to the EMS –
             accepting its core message and acting as though it was true [8]. For example, someone
             with an Abandonment/Instability EMS might surrender by seeking out or committing to
             relationships that are not secure or stable (i.e., believing that no partner will ever provide
             them consistent, committed emotional and physical availability). Such clients may believe
             they ‘should not expect any better’. Alternatively, they might surrender in a potentially
             healthy relationship by constantly seeking reassurance or checking up on their partner
             because they ‘believe the schema’ that tells them that ‘their partner will leave them sooner
             or later’, even in the absence of objective evidence.


         The Schema Mode Model
         Thus far we have described the ﬁrst iteration of schema therapy, which has come to be
         known as the basic schema therapy model. Treatment with the basic schema therapy model
         emphasises focusing on changing EMS. However, in applying schema therapy to the most
         complex cases, involving personality disorders and serious and chronic mental health
         problems, Young recognised the need to modify and expand the model to account for the
         issue of multiplicity of self that is a common characteristic of these clients, especially those
         with borderline personality disorder (BPD) [2]. BPD clients often presented with what
         appeared to be various – often dissociated – ‘parts’ which had the quality of rapidly shifting
         mood states. BPD challenged the conceptualisation and treatment guided by the basic
         model. In response, Young and colleagues [2] oﬀered a reformulated model – what has
         become known as the schema mode model – with schema modes as the central organising
         construct. This ‘mode model’ has become the dominant form of schema therapy and is the
         version of schema therapy that has garnered almost all of the available empirical support for
         schema therapy in clinical trials (see Chapter 2: Research Support for Schema Therapy).
             Schema modes are deﬁned by Young and colleagues [2] as ‘those schemas or schema
         operations – adaptive or maladaptive – that are currently active for an individual’ (p. 37).
         Modes are the state-like manifestation of the interaction between the person’s currently
         activated EMS and their coping response at any given time. Personality is conceptualised as
         a group of distinct ‘parts’ with potentially separate aﬀective, cognitive, behavioural, and
         motivational qualities. Young [2] initially presented four classes of modes: child modes,
         parent (critic) modes, coping modes, and the Healthy Adult mode. Research and theoretical
         development has since expanded the mode model [9, 10, 11, 12] to better account for
         a broader range of psychopathology. An up-to-date mode listing is given in Table 1.2. Our



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          6             Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



              Table 1.2 Schema modes

              Child Modes
              1. Vulnerable Child (VCM): The Vulnerable Child mode is the ‘storehouse’ of EMS, whereby the
                 person feels the emotions associated with EMS activation and unmet emotional needs but
                 without the perspective of a Healthy Adult (e.g., a stable sense of self that transcends
                 temporary emotional states, conﬁdence in ability to cope). Typical emotions include feeling
                 lonely, lost, frightened, frantic, sad, anxious, hurt, ashamed, and guilty. The core emotional
                 ‘ﬂavour’ of a Vulnerable Child mode varies according to the speciﬁc underlying EMS: for
                 example, someone with an Emotional Deprivation EMS likely has a Lonely Child mode;
                 someone with an Abandonment/Instability schema probably has an Abandoned Child mode;
                 Dependence/Incompetence EMS manifests as a Dependent Child mode, and Mistrust/Abuse
                 EMS as an Abused Child mode.




              Illustration 1.1 ‘Vulnerable (Lonely) Child mode’

              2. Angry Child (ACM): Angry Child mode involves experiencing strong feelings of anger,
                 rage, frustration, impatience, or indignation because core emotional or physical needs
                 of the vulnerable child have not adequately been met. Anger is alternately suppressed
                 and then expressed in inappropriate ways, such as through uncontrolled venting,
                 without consideration of the consequences for themselves and others. The person
                 may also act in a manner which is entitled or spoiled, expecting others to meet
                 their needs immediately and perfectly, without consideration of others’ needs or
                 feelings.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model           7



         Table 1.2 (cont.)




             Illustration 1.2 ‘Angry Child mode’

             3. Enraged Child (ECM): Enraged Child mode involves experiencing extreme feelings of anger and
                fury, leading to destructive acts towards other people and/or objects. Others are seen as
                aggressors and anger is aimed at annihilating them either directly or indirectly. The person
                may scream, yell, and act in an uncontrolled way towards another. The tone is of a child who is
                enraged and has lost control.
             4. Impulsive Child (ICM): Impulsive Child mode responds to urges, impulses, cravings, and wants in
                the moment in an impulsive, uncontrolled way, without consideration of the medium- and
                longer-term impact on themselves or others. The person struggles to resist powerful desires
                and defer gratiﬁcation. They may appear self-centred.
             5. Undisciplined Child (UCM): Undisciplined Child mode struggles to take responsibility and
                complete routine tasks. The person has diﬃculty tolerating the boredom or discomfort
                required to achieve longer-term goals.
             6. Happy Child (HCM): The person in Happy Child mode is contented, spontaneous, hopeful,
                calm, and embodied, due to having their core needs met. The person feels valued,
                cared for, understood, capable, eﬀectual, energetic, motivated, playful, conﬁdent,
                protected, and safe. The person is ﬂexible and able to adapt to the requirements of
                situations without compromising their own needs. They are emotionally and joyfully
                connected to others and to nature.
             Coping Modes
             Surrender Coping Modes (Resignation)
             7. Compliant Surrenderer (CSM): In Compliant Surrenderer mode the person is compliant, passive,
                submissive, pleasing, excessively agreeable, and allows others to take control in order to avoid
                conﬂict or criticism and/or to gain acceptance or nurturance. The person neglects their own
                needs so that they can prioritise the needs of others. They maintain a ‘downtrodden’ position
                through selecting relationships and/or behaving in a ‘one-down’ position.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          8             Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          Table 1.2 (cont.)

              8. *Helpless Surrenderer (HSM): In Helpless Surrenderer mode the person feels helpless, impotent,
                 dependent, ineﬀectual, passive, or stuck. They idealise others, perceiving them to be strong,
                 competent, and potential rescuers, able to solve their diﬃculties. They may ‘talk about’
                 struggles and needs, but authentic connection to vulnerability is missing. The person in
                 Helpless Surrenderer mode may have internalised the message that, to be worthy and
                 deserving of care, they must demonstrate their needs through observable displays such as
                 of helplessness, physical vulnerability, or frailty. The Helpless Surrenderer mode may be
                 linked to ‘learned helplessness’ from childhood experiences that resulted in them feeling
                 overpowered, helpless, overwhelmed, paralysed by fear of rejection, abandoned, or
                 humiliated.
              9. *Self-Pity Victim (SPVM): In Self-Pity Victim mode, the person sees themself as a victim. They
                 perceive the world as unfair and feel that they have been uniquely singled out and
                 persecuted. Others are perceived to hold power whilst they themselves are powerless.
                 Therefore, they refuse to take responsibility for change.
              Avoidance Coping Modes
              10. Detached Protector (DPM): The person in Detached Protector mode escapes from emotional
                  suﬀering associated with schema activation through numbing, detachment, spacing-out,
                  sleeping (excessive), dissociation, or somatisation. They may experience feelings of
                  emptiness and boredom or depersonalisation. They may continue to cope with daily life in
                  an apparently ‘normal’ or ‘autopilot’ way, whilst remaining emotionally distant from
                  others.
              11. Detached Self-Soother (DSS): In Detached Self-Soother mode, the person escapes from
                  overwhelming emotions through solitary activities designed to self-soothe, self-stimulate, or
                  divert attention away from emotions. Coping behaviours frequently have an addictive or
                  compulsive quality. Self-stimulation can include substance misuse, promiscuous sex,
                  gambling, workaholism, extreme sports, online gaming, binge eating, alcoholism, online
                  shopping, watching television (excessively), or fantasising.
              12. Avoidant Protector (AvPM): The person in Avoidant Protector mode attempts to prevent the risk
                  of activating EMS through avoiding any overt situation (people, place, conversation, activity)
                  which could potentially trigger vulnerable feelings.
              13. Angry Protector (APM): The Angry Protector mode protects the self via a wall of angry hostility,
                  due to expecting that others will threaten, humiliate, or shame them if their underlying
                  vulnerability is exposed. The anger is passive, but strategic, aimed at ensuring that others have
                  no opportunity to hurt, reject, or exert power over them.
              Overcompensation (Inversion) Modes
              14. Approval/Recognition Seeker (ASM): In the Approval/Recognition Seeker mode the person tries to
                  impress others through ostentatious, ﬂamboyant, or theatrical behaviours to overcome
                  underlying loneliness or feeling ‘unseen’.
              15. Self-Aggrandiser (SAM): The person in the Self-Aggrandiser mode seeks greater status,
                  admiration, power, and control through behaving in a grandiose, entitled, abusive, or
                  competitive manner. They devalue and diminish others in order to establish a ‘one-up’
                  position in relationships. The person in Self-Aggrandiser mode only values others insofar as
                  they contribute to their status or glorify them in some way. The person believes themselves to
                  be superior to others and expects to be treated as such. The person behaves in a self-absorbed
                  way without consideration or empathy for others, and elevates their status through boasting,
                  self-promotion, or humble-bragging.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model                  9



         Table 1.2 (cont.)
             16. Overcontroller modes: A person in one of the Overcontroller modes seeks to gain a sense of control
                 through rumination, overanalysing, ritualised behaviour, overplanning, or obsessionality. The
                 person may have a strong focus on productivity and time eﬃciency to attain a sense of
                 achievement or worth and overcome an underlying sense of helplessness, impotence, or
                 failure. People in Overcontroller modes attempt to reduce uncertainty, unpredictability, and
                 vulnerability to potential harm through excessive attention to detail and adhering to rules in
                 a rigid manner. There are several subtypes:
                 a. Perfectionistic Overcontroller (POCM): focuses on getting things ‘right’ and avoiding mistakes to
                     minimise the possibility of criticism, disappointment, and failure.
                 b. Suspicious Overcontroller (SOCM): hypervigilant, wary, and suspicious of others’ motives. The
                     person may be controlling towards others to protect against a perceived threat and
                     persecutory behaviour.
                 c. Overanalysing Overcontroller (OACM): characterised by the predominance of verbal-linguistic
                     processing of past- and/or future-oriented material (e.g., rumination, worry, or obsessive
                     thinking), at the expense of attending to the contextual and emotional qualities of present-
                     moment experience.
                 d. *Scolding Overcontroller (SOCM): attempts to control others through blaming, criticising,
                     scolding, and/or presiding over them in an overbearing manner.
                 e. *Flagellating Overcontroller (FOCM): overcompensates for fear of attack or punishment by
                     punishing and blaming oneself, with the aim of restoring the illusion of control. Self-
                     punishment or deprivation may also function as an attempt at self-improvement, to
                     appease, to reduce the risk of being humiliated or punished (either by others or their own
                     internal Critic), to increase predictability and perceived control over suﬀering and pain, or
                     to atone for unresolved guilt or shame.
                  f. *Invincible/Hyperautonomous Overcontroller (IOCM): feels invincible, indestructible, and powerful.
                     The person seeks to be completely invulnerable and eliminate or be ‘on top’ of emotional
                     needs by behaving in a manner which is self-suﬃcient and denies the need for emotional
                     connection to others.

             17. Bully and Attack (BAM): In Bully and Attack mode, the person intimidates or attacks others
                 strategically through threat or abusive acts (physical, sexual, emotional). The person attacks
                 ﬁrst to pre-empt attacks from others.
             18. Conning and Manipulative (CMM): In Conning and Manipulative mode, the person manipulates,
                 cheats, deceives, or victimises others to achieve their own objectives, including exploitation or
                 escaping consequences of their own actions.
             19. Predator (PM): The person in Predator mode plans and manoeuvres in a cold, calculating, and
                 callous manner to eliminate others who represent a potential threat, enemy, competitor, or
                 obstruction.
             Maladaptive Inner Critic (Parent) Modes
             20. Punitive Critic (PuCrM): The Punitive Critic mode stores and replays internalised messages
                 from childhood and adolescence that are harshly critical and punishing. This mode
                 conveys the belief that vulnerability, needs, and emotions are signs of weakness and
                 must be punished or eliminated. The person in the Punitive Critic mode may experience
                 repeated re-enactment of previous experiences of self-blame, criticism, punishment, or
                 deprivation.
             21. Demanding Critic (DeCrM): The Demanding Critic mode consists of the internalised voice that
                 pushes, pressures, and prioritises achievement and high standards over health, well-being,
                 and happiness. The person in Demanding Critic mode experiences thoughts containing
                 black-and-white messages about the ‘correct’ way to behave through achieving the highest


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          10            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          Table 1.2 (cont.)
                  standards; being perfect, time eﬃcient, and humble; devoting oneself to the needs of others;
                  and retaining full control over the self and expression of emotions or needs.
              22. Guilt-Inducing Critic (GICr): The person in the Guilt-Inducing Critic mode experiences
                  thoughts containing messages – received directly or implied, throughout their life – that
                  others’ needs are more important or urgent, and that the person is somehow a burden
                  and undeserving of care. The person may also have internalised the message that the
                  expression of their needs and emotions is selﬁsh, potentially harmful or a threat to
                  others and must be suppressed at all costs.
              23. Healthy Adult (HAM): In the Healthy Adult mode, the person recognises, protects, and nurtures
                  the inner Vulnerable Child and their needs, and demonstrates compassion for self and
                  others. This mode demonstrates ﬂexibility, seeking to balance prioritising the needs of self
                  and others, and can manage adult responsibilities (sustaining a job, self-care, managing
                  ﬁnances, caring for others). The Healthy Adult strives for a ﬂexible balance between pleasant
                  adult activities (intellectual/cultural/physical) and maintaining commitments. This mode
                  experiences the body and mind as integrated aspects of the self, can give and receive
                  nurturance and care, and gains meaning from authentic self-expression and connection
                  with others and the world. This mode, when activated, can step back with awareness from
                  one’s automatic schema-based reactions and choose adaptive reactions with respect to
                  one’s longer-term needs.
             **Proposed additional modes based on recent theoretical developments [8, 11, 12, 13]


          approach to schema therapy assessment and case conceptualisation using the mode model
          is described in Chapter 3: Schema Therapy Assessment, and Chapter 4: Case
          Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping in Schema Therapy, respectively.

          Schema Therapy Treatment Model
          The schema therapy model was initially formulated as an alternative conceptualisation
          to the diagnostic categorisation approach (e.g., DSM5, ICD-11) to personality dis-
          orders. Young and colleagues argued that EMS lie at the heart of personality disturb-
          ance, and that the dysregulated behaviour captured by diagnostic labels such as
          ‘borderline’ and ‘antisocial’ are primarily responses to core EMS. Schema therapy has
          been demonstrated to successfully treat personality disorders and their traits by
          targeting EMS and their related coping styles or modes. Over the past twenty years,
          the schema therapy model has increasingly been applied to a broader range of
          psychological disorders, including chronic and treatment-resistant cases of those
          formerly known as DSM Axis I disorders. See Chapter 2: Research Support for
          Schema Therapy for an overview.

          Mechanisms of Change (The Four Aims of Schema Therapy)
          The schema therapy model suggests four related, but distinct mechanisms of change that
          become the central levers for schema therapy intervention:
          1. (Re)Connect to Core Emotional Needs. Schema therapists aim to help clients
             experience increased satisfaction of their core emotional needs. Most clients referred for
             schema therapy have either disconnected from attending to their core emotional needs
             or have experienced chronic thwarting of need satisfaction during childhood and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model   11



            adolescence. Schema therapists aim to ‘kick start’ or resume the client’s emotional
            development by addressing those needs that were not adequately fulﬁlled in childhood
            and that are most connected to their set of current problems.
         2. Support Schema Healing. Young and colleagues [2] argued that the ultimate goal of
            schema therapy is schema healing. Schema healing involves weakening all aspects of
            EMS: the intrusiveness and intensity of negative memories or images, the schema’s
            emotional charge (including any bodily sensations), and maladaptive cognitions.
         3. Reverse Maladaptive Coping Responses. Because maladaptive coping responses can
            maintain EMS and threaten long-term emotional need satisfaction, these behaviour
            patterns must be identiﬁed and replaced with more adaptive behavioural repertoires.
         4. Build the Healthy Adult Mode. While schema healing and reversing maladaptive
            coping responses addresses deﬁcits in personality functioning, schema therapy also aims
            to build positive capacities of personality functioning by ‘building the Healthy Adult
            mode’ [14, 15]. The client needs a strong Healthy Adult mode in order to take care of
            their emotional functioning when therapy ﬁnishes. Throughout therapy, schema
            therapists balance developing the Healthy Adult alongside schema healing tasks.

         Four Broad Intervention Methods
         1. Therapy Relationship Strategies (Limited Reparenting): The foundation upon which
            change occurs in schema therapy is a strong limited reparenting relationship. In using
            limited reparenting strategies, the therapist aims to go beyond a ‘standard’ level of
            therapist care and warmth and makes attempts to directly meet the needs of clients,
            within the appropriate bounds of a therapy relationship. These strategies include
            providing not only care, attunement, and warmth, but also empathic confrontation and
            limit setting. These are discussed at length in Chapter 6: Intervention Strategies for
            Schema Healing 1: Limited Reparenting.
         2. Cognitive Techniques: To the extent that clients are fused with EMS-driven beliefs, they
            will struggle to make signiﬁcant change. Schema therapists initially help clients to
            challenge their negative and distorted schema-based view of themselves and the world,
            on a rational level. This will not necessarily lead to lasting emotional or behavioural
            change, but is often a necessary preparatory step to enable such change. An in-depth
            overview of cognitive strategies as they are applied in schema therapy is the focus of
            Chapter 7: Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 2: Cognitive Strategies.
         3. Experiential Techniques: Jeﬀ Young and colleagues [2] and others [16] have argued that
            EMS are encoded on an emotional and implicational level and that, as such, strategies
            that are purely cognitive or ‘cold’ or logic-based are rarely enough to provide lasting
            change. The schema therapist provides opportunities for corrective emotional
            experiences that directly heal EMS on the emotional and implicational levels. We
            describe these ‘experiential’ strategies in depth in Chapter 8: Intervention Strategies for
            Schema Healing 3: Experiential Techniques.
         4. Behavioural Pattern-Breaking Techniques: Perhaps the most important and, in some
            cases, time consuming aspects of schema change involves changing clients’ maladaptive
            patterns of coping behaviour. Often signiﬁcant work in the preceding techniques is
            required before large-scale changes can be made. Nonetheless, without changing
            maladaptive patterns of behaviour and learning more adaptive means to get needs met in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          12            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



               daily life, clients’ schemas are unlikely to fully heal and remain vulnerable to relapse.
               Behavioural Pattern-Breaking strategies are the focus of Chapter 9: Intervention
               Strategies for Schema Healing 4: Behavioural Pattern-Breaking Techniques.

          Six Flexible Developmental Treatment Phases
          We have found it useful to think of schema therapy as a set of phases of change. Young
          originally conceived of two phases: (1) an assessment and education phase, and (2) a change
          phase. Other authors have proposed further stages that include periods where there is
          a distinct focus in the therapy on rapport building, safety and bonding, and the development
          of mode awareness [17]. Here we describe a set of phases the therapist might focus on as the
          therapy (and client) progresses. Generally speaking, the phases can be seen as sets of
          developmental tasks, in which each phase supports the growth and healing capacity of the
          client and is somewhat necessary for the next step. This is not meant to be a rigid set of steps.
          In practice, the focus of therapy might move back and forth between the steps depending on
          the client and the particular issues or challenges they are facing at that time.
          1. Assessment and Education Phase. In this phase, the therapist conducts their schema and
              mode assessment (see Chapter 3: Schema Therapy Assessment) and starts the process of
              educating the client about their prominent modes and/or schemas and making links to
              their life patterns and current presenting issues. This culminates in attempts to convey
              the overall case conceptualisation and derive informed consent to start treatment in the
              change phase (i.e., focusing on steps 2–6). See Chapter 4: Case Conceptualisation and
              Mode Mapping in Schema Therapy for an overview of case conceptualisation and
              education using ‘schema mode maps’.
          2. Safety and Bonding. As the assessment unfolds and the client starts to view their
              experience in schema therapy terms, the schema therapist also works on bonding with the
              client and developing a strong limited reparenting relationship. In doing so, the therapist
              also looks for opportunities to help the client feel safe enough to be in therapy, addressing
              any therapy issues that come up early and, where possible, helping the client ﬁnd the safety
              and stability in their life to make room for therapy and commit to change.
          3. Schema/Mode Awareness. One of the initial goals of schema therapy is to help the client
              develop schema and mode awareness. Before clients can adequately beneﬁt from phases
              4–6, they must be able to understand their problems and understand the link between
              their life patterns and the underlying schemas and modes that underpin them.
          4. Schema/Mode Management. As therapy progresses and the client develops an initial
              understanding of their problems, the schema therapist starts to help the client manage
              schema activation in their daily life. This often occurs through the use of behavioural
              pattern-breaking techniques and schema/mode ﬂashcards.
          5. Schema/Mode Healing. As clients attempt to change, they will invariably encounter
              having their schemas or modes triggered. The schema therapist uses sessions to work on
              healing schemas, particularly those which have been triggered during the previous week,
              usually with a focus on limited reparenting and experiential treatment strategies.
          6. Autonomy Phase. Towards the end of treatment there is more of a focus on empowering
              the client to meet their own needs and activate their Healthy Adult mode to self-manage
              and overcome obstacles and challenges. In this stage, the therapist pushes more
              assertively for concrete behavioural change and prepares the client for eventual




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model   13



              termination of therapy (see Chapter 12: Preparing for Termination and the End Phase of
              Schema Therapy for more detail).

         Recent Developments in the Model
         The strong research focus within schema therapy means that the model is continu-
         ously undergoing development and reﬁnement. Recently, some new and potentially
         important developments to the schema therapy model have been proposed by Arntz
         and colleagues [8]. Two additional core emotional needs have been proposed, building
         on the original ﬁve core needs: (1) The need for Self-Coherence, and (2) the need for
         Fairness. These two additional needs are, in turn, directly linked to three new EMS: (1)
         Lack of a Coherent Identity (2) Lack of a Meaningful World, and (3) Unfairness.
         Further, we have proposed an additional need for Connectedness to Nature, and an
         associated EMS, Lack of Nature Connectedness [18]. Whilst research is currently
         underway to verify the validity of these newly proposed needs and EMS, we have
         included descriptions of these in Chapter 3.
             Arntz and colleagues [8] further propose that dysfunctional modes may be better
         understood as a combination of an activated EMS and coping. They propose that the
         term ‘Surrender’ be replaced with ‘Resignation’. Resignation refers to the process
         whereby the person behaves as if the EMS were completely true, and the person
         ‘acquiesces’ to the assumptions and rules associated with the active EMS. This reﬁne-
         ment of theory more explicitly states that Child and Critic modes reﬂect resignation to
         EMS. It is within these modes that the strongest EMS-associated aﬀect is experienced
         and dominates the person’s state of mind. Furthermore, all coping modes can be
         considered forms of either Avoidance or Inversion (formerly Compensation), in which
         the emotional suﬀering associated with speciﬁc EMS is either avoided or inverted. The
         two healthy functional modes described by Young, the Happy Child, and the Healthy
         Adult mode, remain within their current form.
             Recent research [19, 20, 21, 22] also proposes new taxonomies of EMS which include
         EMS clusters rather than domains. In addition, new domains related to ‘positive adaptive
         schemas’ (PAS) have also been proposed and the reader is referred to the literature in this
         ﬁeld [23]. The impact of this empirical work on EMS and PAS clusters on schema therapy
         practice has yet to be fully realised but will no doubt be of inﬂuence over time.

         Concluding Remarks
         Schema therapy aims to heal critical deﬁcits in a client’s developmental trajectory. The
         model guiding schema therapy can be daunting for therapists new to the approach, but it is
         enormously rich and can account for a comprehensive diversity of clinical presentations.
         We recommend that students of the approach take time to revise and familiarise themselves
         with concepts of core emotional needs, EMS, coping styles, and schema modes, as the
         quality of individual case formulation and treatment planning will depend on how attuned
         the therapist is to the presence of each of these in their clients. Self-help books by Young and
         Klosko [23], and Jacob, van Genderen and Seebauer [24] may be particularly helpful for
         therapists new to schema therapy and looking for elaborations of descriptions of schemas
         and modes. In the next chapter, we discuss in detail how to conduct clinical assessments of
         this critical theoretical information.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          14            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model




          References
            1. Lockwood G, Perris P. A new look at core                    12. Stavropoulos A, Haire M, Brockman R,
               emotional needs. In van Vreekswijk M,                           Meade T. A schema mode model of
               Broersen J, Nadort M, eds. The Wiley-                           repetitive negative thinking. Clinical
               Blackwell handbook of schema therapy.                           Psychologist. 2020;24(2):99–113.
               Wiley-Blackwell; 2012, pp. 41–66.                           13. Edwards D. Overcoming obstacles to
            2. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                           reparenting the inner child. Workshop
               therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                       presented at the Conference of the
               Press; 2003.                                                    International Society of Schema Therapy,
            3. Bowlby J. The Bowlby-Ainsworth                                  World Trade Center, New York; 2012.
               attachment theory. Behavioral and Brain                     14. Simpson S, Smith E. Schema therapy for
               Sciences. 1979;2(4):637–8.                                      eating disorders: Theory and practice for
            4. Maslow A. Motivation and personality.                           individual and group settings. Routledge;
               Harper & Row; 1970.                                             2019.

            5. Baumeister RF, Leary MR. The need to                        15. Aalbers A, Engels T, Haslbeck J,
               belong: Desire for interpersonal                                Boorsboom D, Arntz A. The network
               attachments as a fundamental human                              structure of schema modes. Clinical
               motivation. Psychological Bulletin.                             Psychology & Psychotherapy. 2021;28
               1995;117(3):497.                                                (5):1065–78. https://doi.org/10.1002/
                                                                               cpp.2577.
            6. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The ‘what’ and ‘why’ of
               goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-                    16. Farrell J, Reiss N, Shaw I. The schema
               determination of behavior. Psychological                        therapy clinician’s guide: A complete
               Inquiry. 2000;11(4):227–68.                                     resource for building and delivering
                                                                               individual, group and integrated schema
            7. Piaget J. Play dreams and imitation in                          mode treatment programs. John Wiley &
               childhood. Norton Libr                                          Sons; 2014.
            8. Arntz A, Rijkeboer M, Chan E, et al.                        17. ISST Environmental Awareness & Action
               Towards a reformulated theory underlying                        Group. Schema therapy and connection
               schema therapy: Position paper of an                            with nature. Schema Therapy Bulletin, issue
               international workgroup. Cognitive Therapy                      23, https://schematherapysociety.org/
               and Research. 2021; 45:1007–20. https://doi                     Schema-Therapy-Bulletin/.
               .org/10.1007/s10608-021-10209-5.
                                                                           18. Bach B, Lockwood G, Young JE. A new
            9. Bamelis LL, Renner F, Heidkamp D,                               look at the schema therapy model:
               Arntz A. Extended schema mode                                   Organization and role of early maladaptive
               conceptualizations for speciﬁc                                  schemas. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy.
               personality disorders: An empirical                             2018;47(4):328–49.
               study. Journal of Personality Disorders.
               2011;25(1):41–58.                                           19. Edwards D. Using schema modes for case
                                                                               conceptualization in schema therapy: An
          10. Bernstein DP, van den Broek E. Schema                            applied clinical approach. Frontiers in
              Mode Observer Rating Scale (SMORS).                              Psychology; 2, 763670. https://doi.org/
              Unpublished Empirical Article                                    10.3389/fpsyg.2021.763670.
              manuscript, Department of Psychology,
              Maastricht University, The Netherlands.                      20. Karaosmanoglu, A. An investigation of
              2006.                                                            the second order factor structure of the
                                                                               Young Schema Questionnaire – Short
          11. Talbot D, Smith E, Tomkins A,                                    Form 3 (YSQ-SF3); Empirical Article
              Brockman R, Simpson S. Schema modes in                           manuscript (in preparation).
              eating disorders compared to a community
              sample. Journal of Eating Disorders.                         21. Yalcin O, Lee C, Correia H. Factor
              2015;3(1):1–4.                                                   structure of the Young schema




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                         Schema Therapy Conceptual Model                15



                questionnaire (long Form-3). Australian                         Psychological Assessment. 2018 Sep;30
                Psychologist. 2020 Oct 1;55(5):546–58.                          (9):1199.
         22. Louis J, Wood A, Lockwood G, Ho M,                           23. Young J, Klosko J. Reinventing your life:
             Ferguson E. Positive clinical psychology                         How to break free from negative life patterns
             and Schema Therapy (ST): The                                     and feel good again. Penguin; 1994.
             development of the Young Positive                            24. Jacob G, van Genderen H, Seebauer L.
             Schema Questionnaire (YPSQ) to                                   Breaking negative thinking patterns:
             complement the Young Schema                                      A schema therapy self-help and support
             Questionnaire 3 Short Form (YSQ-S3).                             book. Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Research Support for Schema

                        2            Therapy


          Introduction
          From its inception, Jeﬀrey Young has actively and consistently sought to establish schema
          therapy as an empirically supported therapy, having worked alongside Aaron Beck to build
          the evidence base for cognitive therapy. Schema therapy research was bolstered in the late
          1990s and early 2000s when a group of Dutch researchers, led by Arnoud Arntz, collabor-
          ated with Young on the ﬁrst of several clinical investigations into the eﬃcacy of schema
          therapy for borderline personality disorder (BPD). This body of research has grown
          substantially over the past 20 years; we estimate there to be hundreds of empirical studies
          that now support various aspects of the schema therapy model and which have investigated
          the eﬃcacy of schema therapy, the most important of which will be summarised in this
          chapter.

          Research Supporting the Schema Therapy Conceptual Model
          Evidence for the Existence of Universal Core Emotional Needs
          When Young, Klosko, and Weishaar [1] identiﬁed the ﬁve core emotional needs they saw as
          universal (see Chapter 1), they acknowledged that the list of needs was drawn from existing
          theory and clinical observation but had limited empirical support at that time. Since then,
          multiple factor analyses have been undertaken of the various versions of the Young Schema
          Questionnaire (YSQ) which provide indirect support for the basic schema therapy model; if
          early maladaptive schemas (EMS) arise from a core set of unmet emotional needs, the EMS
          proposed to result from a common unmet need should correlate more highly together than
          EMS from diﬀerent domains (related to diﬀerent unmet needs). For example, the EMS
          thought to arise from disrupted and deprived attachments within the Disconnection and
          Rejection domain – Abandonment, Emotional Deprivation, Social Isolation, Mistrust/
          Abuse, and Defectiveness/Shame – should correlate more closely with each other than
          those thought to arise from deprivation of limit setting: Entitlement/Grandiosity and
          Insuﬃcient Self-Control/Self-Discipline. Principal component and factor analyses from
          across countries over the last 15 years have found diﬀering optimal component structures
          but more consistently supported a four-factor structure, which has become regarded as
          more theoretically coherent than the original ﬁve-domain grouping [2]. Thus, the currently
          favoured taxonomy of the need deﬁcits arising from inadequate parenting consists of
          Disconnection and Rejection; Impaired Autonomy and Performance, Excessive
          Responsibility and Standards, and Impaired Limits. However, research into the precise
          number of EMS and their factor structure remains ongoing, with recent research supporting
          16


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   17



         an alternative 4-factor structure [3], and some authors arguing for a ﬁfth Emotional
         Dysregulation domain [4]. The number of EMS and factors obtained from the YSQ appear
         to be inﬂuenced by whether the short or long form is used, which language version is used,
         whether the sample is predominantly clinical or non-clinical [4], and whether items are
         presented in random order or grouped according to their presumed EMS [5]. In summary,
         correlation patterns between EMS provide one line of support for the idea within the
         schema therapy model that a certain type of need frustration will have predictable eﬀects.
         The results of factor analyses are relatively consistent with Young’s model – especially for
         the EMS associated with disconnection and rejection – but nevertheless vary suﬃciently
         between studies that, together with proposals to investigate new EMS [3], further studies
         will be needed to solidify our understanding of unmet need–EMS relations.
             Although much of the schema therapy literature has focused on elucidating need deﬁcits
         and the resulting damage – which was understandable given the primary aim of under-
         standing severe psychopathology – complete evidence for the existence of needs requires
         demonstrating that need fulﬁlment also produces psychological well-being. In the past 10
         years, measures of early adaptive schemas – positive counterparts to EMS – have been
         developed [6]. Recently, Louis, Davidson, Lockwood and Wood’s [7] conﬁrmatory factor
         analysis of the Young Positive Schema Questionnaire (YPSQ) across cultures supported
         a four-factor structure mirroring that of the YSQ, consisting of domains of Connection and
         Acceptance, Healthy Autonomy and Performance, Realistic Standards and Reciprocity, and
         Reasonable Limits.
             Most of the research that is recognisably focused on the schema therapy model has
         employed retrospective self-report designs with adult participants. Longitudinal research
         studying children would provide stronger evidence for the role of thwarted core emotional
         needs on the development of EMS. Recently, an international schema therapy workgroup
         [3] endorsed Carol Dweck’s [8] taxonomy of needs, providing explicit recognition that the
         broader developmental psychology literature provides relevant evidence for the existence of
         core psychological needs as understood in schema therapy.
             Dweck [8] organised her taxonomy of needs to both bridge disparate theoretical
         research programmes and to reﬂect the sequence in which diﬀerent needs emerge during
         early childhood development. This extends the precision and speciﬁcity with which needs
         have been discussed in the schema therapy literature to date. Dweck [8] argued that there
         were three basic needs which are present at birth or very early in infancy: needs for
         acceptance, optimal predictability, and competence. Dweck also outlined four ‘compound’
         needs produced from combinations of basic needs after greater cognitive development has
         occurred: the need for trust (which emerges from needs for acceptance and predictability),
         the need for control (which develops from needs for competence and predictability), the
         need for self-esteem or status (which grows from needs for acceptance and competence),
         and the need for self-coherence (a stable and integrated sense of self, which emerges from
         monitoring whether all other needs are being met). Much of the evidence Dweck [8] cites to
         support the existence of these basic needs consists of observations that the stimuli infants
         are most attentive to, and the learning infants most readily achieve, is consistent with
         humans having innate propensities to form attachments, learn causal relations and operate
         on the environment.
             The clearest correspondence between Dweck’s and Young’s catalogue of needs is that of
         Dweck’s need for acceptance, which overlaps largely with Young and colleagues’ [1] need for
         secure attachment, which is met when caregivers provide acceptance, predictability, and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          18            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          trustworthiness [3]. Labelled as ‘acceptance’, Dweck saw this need as overlapping with
          what others had labelled ‘relatedness’ [9], ‘belongingness’ [10], ‘attachment’ [11]; [12],
          ‘warmth and comfort’ [13], ‘aﬀection’ [14], ‘aﬃliation’ [15], and ‘love’ [16]. Elsewhere,
          Young’s needs straddle developmental periods according to Dweck’s system. Young’s
          autonomy, competence, and sense of identity entails both the basic need for compe-
          tence – to build basic skills for acting on or in the world – and the more developed
          sense of personal agency and autonomy in the needs for control and for experiencing
          self-worth and social standing from Dweck’s model. Young’s freedom to express needs,
          opinions, and emotions is seen to overlap with basic needs for competence and accept-
          ance as well as the more developed sense of self-esteem/status in Dweck’s system.
          Young’s need for spontaneity and play was seen by the schema therapy workgroup as
          a speciﬁc means of meeting Dweck’s basic need for competence. Young’s needs for
          realistic limits and self-control were seen to be captured by Dweck’s needs for compe-
          tence, optimal predictability (to understand the orderly way that events connect in the
          world), and control. To reiterate, schema therapy experts view Young et al.’s core
          emotional needs as fully encapsulated by the list of needs which have been subject to
          research in the broader psychological literature, which we will now review.
              Although Young and colleagues [1] did not deﬁne how ‘needs’ might diﬀer from other
          psychological constructs, Baumeister and Leary [10] provided a widely accepted deﬁnition,
          wherein needs:
               a) produce eﬀects readily under all but adverse conditions; b) have aﬀective consequences;
               c) direct cognitive processing; d) lead to ill eﬀects (such as on health or adjustment) when
               thwarted; e) elicit goal-oriented behaviour designed to satisfy it; f) [are] universal in the
               sense of applying to all people; g) [are] not be derivative of other motives; h) aﬀect a broad
               variety of behaviours; and i) have implications that go beyond immediate psychological
               functioning. (p. 498)

          The challenge for needs research is that needs cannot be directly demonstrated; they must be
          inferred from the consequences that result from diﬀerent conditions and behaviours which
          aim to meet the hypothesised needs.
              The need for acceptance or secure attachments is supported by attachment theory
          research. Ainsworth and colleagues’ [11] strange situation studies provided a means to
          assess the diﬀerent attachment consequences of how well caregivers have been meeting their
          infants’ needs. During these studies, an infant’s mother temporarily left the infant in a new
          room full of toys, with an unfamiliar adult, before returning. The period of separation from
          their mother was usually a stressful experience. Infants who were ‘securely attached’ to their
          mothers sought comfort from them upon their return, and after a couple of minutes of close
          bodily contact were soothed and ready to resume exploration of the toys. Mothers were then
          observed in their homes. Mothers of securely attached infants appeared more sensitive and
          responsive to their infants’ communications; they were quicker to pick them up when they
          cried; they handled their babies tenderly and carefully and for longer periods than parents of
          children who were not securely attached; they were quicker to feed their infants when
          showing signs of hunger and kept feeding until their infant appeared satiated. This style of
          parenting has come to be called sensitive parenting. In contrast to infants whose mothers
          provide less warm comforting physical contact, who are less facially expressive, and who do
          not time their care provision according to the infant’s signals, securely attached infants
          thrive, becoming more exploratory, more cooperative, and show more positive aﬀect and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   19



         less frustration. Caregiver sensitivity has shown small to medium eﬀects on attachment by
         preschool, measured prospectively or concurrently [17].
             Mapping the need for reasonable limits to the broader psychological literature is
         increasingly challenging. Although there is widespread agreement that authoritative
         parenting is associated with superior well-being in children and adolescents compared
         to authoritarian parenting [18], the components of eﬀective limit setting within authori-
         tative parenting have often been inconsistently or inaccurately conceptualised [19].
         Permissive parenting, which is characterised by low limit-setting [20], is generally
         associated with poorer outcomes for children than authoritative parenting, including
         higher substance abuse; school misconduct and lower school engagement [21]; greater
         aﬃliation with delinquent peers and associated externalising symptoms in adolescence
         [22]; and academic entitlement, poorer well-being, and increased depressive symptoms
         among college students [23]. On the other hand, a three-year longitudinal study found
         that permissive parenting was not associated with poor adjustment in ﬁfth graders,
         although the authors expressed concerns about the quality of the permissiveness meas-
         ure [24].
             Nevertheless, the evidence seems reasonably consistent that limit setting, when done
         in a way that does not compromise the fulﬁlment of other core emotional needs (e.g.,
         acceptance), is associated with increased childhood well-being. Gray and Steinberg [25]
         found that the extent of parental supervision and limit setting had a medium–large
         eﬀect on fewer behaviour problems in adolescents (e.g., stealing, carrying a weapon) and
         was more related to number of behaviour problems than autonomy-granting or accept-
         ance. In the self-determination theory literature, limit setting is part of parents provid-
         ing structure: teaching children how their actions aﬀect outcomes (which in Dweck’s
         terminology would be an example of how a parent might contribute to meeting the
         child’s need for optimal predictability) through clear consistent rules; guidelines and
         expectations; and clear, consistent consequences contingent on actions [26]. Children of
         parents who provided more structure for unsupervised time felt more competent and in
         control of outcomes in their lives [27]. Seventh and eighth grade children whose parents
         provided more structure perceived themselves to have more control over their academic
         success or failure, were more competent at school, were more engaged, and achieved
         better grades according to school records [26]. Simultaneously meeting children’s needs
         for autonomy while meeting their need for realistic limits appears especially important.
         When parents attempted to set limits on who their adolescent children associated with
         in a controlling way, their children were more likely to associate with deviant peers than
         when the parents communicated their prohibition in an autonomy-supporting man-
         ner [28].
             Although needs as a topic of psychological research has come in and out of vogue over
         time, substantial support has amassed for the existence of several psychological needs,
         especially belongingness/secure attachment [29, 30], competence, and autonomy [19].
         Both maladaptive and adaptive schemas appear to cluster according to themes of whether
         or not early experiences provided connection, autonomy, and reasonable limits. Research
         continues to explore and reﬁne how many psychological needs must be adequately met to
         ensure healthy psychological development, but as a plank of schema theory model develop-
         ment there appears to be adequate support for the existence of basic psychological
         needs [31].




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          20            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          Evidence that Schemas Result from Unmet Needs
          A key hypothesis of the schema therapy model is that EMS occur when basic needs are
          inadequately met during childhood. Accordingly, Pilkington, Bishop, and Younan [32]
          conducted multiple meta-analyses of available studies (k = 33) investigating the association
          between EMS and two types of childhood adversity: toxic frustration of needs and trauma-
          tisation or victimisation. All but one study measured childhood adversity via adults’
          retrospective self-reports and approximately one-third of studies employed clinical samples.
          Consistent with Young and Klosko’s [33] hypothesis that the Emotional Deprivation EMS
          often has its origins in insuﬃcient maternal nurturance, the strongest correlation between
          a form of childhood adversity and an EMS was between maternal emotional neglect
          (which in these studies was indicated by low endorsement of questionnaire items
          measuring amount of parental warmth, interest, and attention) and Emotional
          Deprivation (r = 0.51, k = 9).
              Emotional abuse – being ridiculed, insulted, shamed, and ‘destructively’ criticised –
          might be expected to correlate most strongly with Defectiveness/Shame and Mistrust/Abuse
          [33]. However, Pilkington et al. [32] found emotional abuse was most strongly associated
          with Emotional Deprivation (r = 0.44 [0.35, 0.51]), and also had moderate correlations
          of similar strength (~0.3 – 0.35) with Mistrust/Abuse, Social Isolation/Alienation,
          Defectiveness/Shame, Failure, Vulnerability to Harm and Subjugation. It was also perhaps
          surprising that the correlations between other types of abuse and the Mistrust/Abuse EMS
          were not higher, with r = 0.25 (0.14, 0.35) for physical abuse and r = 0.25 (0.13, 0.38) for
          sexual abuse. Also, somewhat surprisingly, the EMS most associated with sexual and
          physical abuse was Social Isolation/Alienation. Overall, approximately half of the adver-
          sity–EMS correlations aggregated across studies were signiﬁcant. Only Entitlement/
          Grandiosity did not appear associated with toxic frustration of needs or traumatisation,
          which is consistent with Young and Klosko’s [33] hypothesis that Entitlement/Grandiosity
          results from being over-indulged or receiving insuﬃcient limit setting and coaching in
          frustration tolerance and impulse control. Establishing empirical support for unmet need–
          EMS links is a formidable exercise and retrospective reports are not the ideal methodology
          to test these hypotheses. The heterogeneity of eﬀect sizes in the meta-analyses was also
          found to be large, suggesting several unaccounted-for moderators. This body of studies is
          supportive of a central tenet of schema therapy theory: that the thwarting of basic needs in
          childhood (childhood adversity) increases the strength of most EMS, although the pattern of
          relationships between speciﬁc needs and speciﬁc EMS is not always consistent with
          predictions.
              The schema therapy model would predict that the eﬀects of unmet needs in childhood
          on later psychopathology should be mediated by maladaptive schemas or schema modes.
          Mertens, Yilmaz, and Lobbestael [34] found partial support for this idea. In their study, of
          the diﬀerent types of adversity measured, only emotional abuse had eﬀects on personality
          disorder that were mediated by schema modes. The eﬀect of emotional abuse on BPD
          symptom severity was mediated by child modes and coping modes. The eﬀect of emotional
          abuse on antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) severity was mediated by parent modes,
          and the eﬀect of emotional abuse on avoidant and dependent personality disorders (AvPD
          and DPD) severity was mediated by healthy modes (Healthy Adult and Happy Child). The
          authors interpreted these relationships as follows: In BPD, emotional abuse leads to the
          development of vulnerable and angry modes and the need to develop maladaptive coping



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   21



         strategies; In AvPD and DPD, the stronger the healthy modes, the less intense are Cluster
         C symptoms in response to emotional abuse; and in ASPD, the more overdeveloped the
         Demanding Critic, the less ASPD develops from emotional abuse. These may be reasonable
         explanations, but they await prospective testing. It should be noted that the study was
         underpowered to detect more complex relationships and so the 14 modes of the schema
         mode inventory (SMI) needed to be collapsed into only four categories. In an earlier study of
         incarcerated females looking at EMS, associations between childhood adversity and BPD
         symptoms were no longer signiﬁcant when controlling for Disconnection and Rejection and
         Impaired Limits EMS, consistent with the idea that EMS mediate the relationship between
         childhood adversity and BPD symptoms [35]. Elsewhere, The Punitive Critic and Angry
         Child modes were found to mediate the eﬀect of low parental care on early age of onset and
         longer duration of non-suicidal self-injury in psychiatric outclients [36]. More theoretically
         predictable relationships were obtained in a sample of depressed adolescents [37]. The
         association between emotional maltreatment and anxious arousal was mediated by the
         Vulnerability to Harm EMS, a threat-related schema, whereas the eﬀect of emotional
         maltreatment on anhedonic depression was mediated by Self-Sacriﬁce and Social
         Isolation/Alienation EMS. The association between physical abuse and anxious arousal
         was also mediated by Vulnerability to Harm, but the eﬀect of physical abuse on anhedonic
         depression was mediated by Emotional Deprivation. In summary, there is ample evidence
         that various forms of childhood adversity reﬂecting inadequate need fulﬁlment are associ-
         ated with various symptoms of psychopathology, and a portion of this relationship can
         consistently be accounted for by one or more EMS or maladaptive modes, although the
         speciﬁc EMS or modes involved can vary considerably between studies.

         Speciﬁc Schema and Mode Proﬁles and Their Relationship
         to Psychopathology
         Several studies have been carried out with the primary aim of establishing the schema and
         mode proﬁle of BPD. These have generally yielded consistent results. Bach and Farrell [38]
         compared large samples of clients with BPD, personality disorders other than BPD, and
         healthy non-clients and found that BPD clients showed higher scores on measures of
         Mistrust/Abuse and Defectiveness/Shame EMS, and Angry Child and Impulsive Child
         modes, and lower Happy Child mode scores than non-BPD personality disordered partici-
         pants. BPD clients also showed higher Insuﬃcient Self-Control/Self-Discipline EMS and
         Vulnerable Child and Enraged Child mode scores than non-clients. Bach and Lobbestael
         [39] examined unique associations between self-reported schemas and modes and speciﬁc
         BPD symptoms identiﬁed by diagnostic interview within a sample of mixed personality
         disorder outpatients. Although most speciﬁc BPD symptoms had unique associations with
         one or more speciﬁc modes, 43% variance in the total BPD criteria count was accounted for
         by Abandonment and Mistrust/Abuse EMS alone when just considering EMS as predictors.
         When just considering modes, 46% variance in total BPD symptom count was accounted for
         by Angry Child and Impulsive Child modes. Similar results were obtained in a study of 220
         Iranians with Cluster B personality disorders from psychiatrists’ and psychologists’ clinics:
         Vulnerable Child and Impulsive Child modes were associated with BPD but not ASPD or
         NPD [39]. Potentially, this is because ASPD and NPD involve strong overcompensator
         modes which may block awareness of underlying child modes. Furthermore, clients often
         confuse overcompensatory modes for Healthy Adult mode, which may explain why ASPD



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          22            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          clients reported higher Healthy Adult mode scores. An earlier study contradicted these
          more recent ﬁndings, with the only signiﬁcant diﬀerence between BPD and ASPD being that
          Healthy Adult mode scores were relatively high in ASPD and low in BPD; however, this
          study should perhaps be given less weight as it employed a more primitive version of the
          SMI [40]. In summary, Mistrust/Abuse EMS, Impulsive Child modes and low Healthy Adult
          modes appear characteristic of BPD, although other schemas and modes may be more or
          less prominent for any individual.
              Bamelis and colleagues [41] aimed to elucidate the distinct mode proﬁles of individuals
          with Cluster C, Paranoid, Narcissistic or Histrionic personality disorders using a newly
          expanded Schema Mode inventory (SMI-2). Personality disorder status was determined
          both by self-report and clinician interview, and the authors reported the modes which had
          high partial correlations with personality disorder pathology after controlling for the eﬀect
          of all other personality disorders: Paranoid PD was characterised by Angry Child and
          Suspicious Overcontroller modes; Histrionic PD characterised by Attention and Approval
          Seeker mode; Narcissistic PD by Undisciplined Child, Self-Aggrandiser, and Attention and
          Approval Seeker modes; Avoidant PD by Lonely Child, Abandoned Child, Compliant
          Surrenderer, Detached Protector, and Avoidant Protector modes; DPD by Abandoned
          Child, Dependent Child, Compliant Surrenderer, Punitive Critic, and a weak Healthy
          Adult mode; and OCPD by Perfectionistic Overcontroller and Demanding Critic modes.
          It should be noted that the use of partial correlations has been criticised for attenuating
          relationships and making the patterns less interpretable [41].
              Jacobs, Lenz, Wollny, and Horsch [42] demonstrated that the schema modes could be
          conceptualised as driven by three higher-order factors: internalisation (low Healthy Adult
          mode, high Vulnerable Child and Compliant Surrenderer modes); externalisation (high
          Bully and Attack, Impulsive Child, and Enraged Child modes), and compulsivity (high
          Demanding Critic and Detached Self-Soother modes). This somewhat approximates the
          hierarchical structure of personality disorders: internalising (BPD), externalising (BPD,
          NPD, HPD, ASPD, PPD) [43]. In a study of 70 forensic mental health inpatients with BPD,
          NPD, or ASPD, Keulen-de Vos et al. [44] found that ASPD was distinguished by the
          combination of low internalising modes and high externalising modes, whereas BPD was
          associated with high internalising modes.
              In summary, distinct combinations of modes for speciﬁc forms of psychopathology have
          been found in various studies; however, to date there has been considerable variation
          between studies in the mode proﬁle found for a speciﬁc personality disorder. Allowing
          the emerging consensus on the taxonomy of psychopathology [43] to guide mode model
          speciﬁcation is likely to produce more consistent ﬁndings in the future.

          Research Supporting the Eﬃcacy of Schema Therapy
          Borderline Personality Disorder
          The eﬀectiveness of schema therapy has most often been investigated in the treatment of
          BPD. A number of early uncontrolled trials established that participation in schema therapy
          was associated with improvements in BPD symptomatology [45], and stronger evidence has
          accumulated since. The ﬁrst randomised controlled trial by Giesen-Bloo and colleagues [46]
          assigned 86 participants (93% female) to three years of two individual sessions per week of
          either schema therapy or transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP). Schema therapy



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   23



         followed the approach manualised by Arntz and van Genderen [47]. More people dropped
         out of TFP (51%) than schema therapy (26%), and those who quit schema therapy com-
         pleted signiﬁcantly more sessions (Mdn = 98) than those who quit TFP (Mdn = 34). This has
         been a feature of schema therapy outcome studies generally; drop out is low, suggesting
         a high level of acceptability. Intent-to-treat (ITT) analyses showed that participants in both
         groups made signiﬁcant improvements which were evident by the end of the ﬁrst year, but
         schema therapy achieved greater reductions in BPD symptoms, general psychopathology,
         and personality disorder beliefs and ‘defence styles’. At four-year follow-up, more schema
         therapy recipients (52%) no longer met BPD diagnostic criteria than TFP recipients (27%),
         and a higher proportion had achieved reliable change on BPD symptom measures.
         Interestingly, those who had recovered within schema therapy at three-year follow-up
         achieved normal hypervigilance responses to negative emotional stimuli whereas those
         not recovered maintained high hypervigilance, suggesting that schema therapy potentially
         alters an important causal mechanism of BPD pathology [48]. Furthermore, schema therapy
         was later found to also be more cost eﬀective, mainly due to less use of informal care
         supports [49].
             The Giesen-Bloo eﬃcacy study was followed by a large-scale implementation study
         which tested whether schema therapy could be delivered more eﬃciently and remain
         eﬀective when delivered by mental health clinicians in routine practice. Individual 45-
         minute sessions were delivered twice per week for only the ﬁrst year, and once per week
         thereafter, to 62 clients diagnosed with BPD. After 18 months, 42% had recovered according
         to having Borderline Personality Disorder Severity Index scores below diagnostic thresh-
         old [50].
             The next major randomised controlled trial evaluated a group schema therapy
         protocol as described by Farrell and Shaw [51]. Participants (all female) were assigned
         to either [1] treatment as usual (TAU), which was primarily supportive psychotherapy
         or [2] Group Schema Therapy (30 weekly 90-minute group schema therapy sessions
         over 8 months) plus TAU. Farrell and colleagues’ approach to group schema therapy
         was notably distinct from previous group schema therapy formats: it emphasised
         ensuring that all group members remained involved throughout each session and
         were not merely watching the therapist work with one of the members at a time;
         there were more group rules to enhance feelings of safety and security; more structure;
         written psychoeducation materials; homework assignments; and more attention to the
         Happy Child mode [52]. Remarkably, at post-treatment there was 100% retention in
         the schema therapy group and 94% no longer met diagnostic criteria for BPD. By
         contrast, 25% had dropped out of TAU and only 16% no longer met criteria for BPD.
         The schema therapy group also achieved large reductions in general psychopathology.
         Attempts to replicate and further understand these results are underway. A 3-year
         uncontrolled study has begun in Germany with 10 BPD clients with frequent psychi-
         atric hospital admissions. Results from the ﬁrst year showed that weekly group schema
         therapy programme members experienced a reduction in BPD symptoms, schema
         mode activation, and hospitalisations [52]. Finally, a 15-site, 5-country RCT involving
         495 participants has just been completed comparing two years of treatment with
         a predominantly group schema therapy and a balanced individual plus group schema
         therapy with TAU [53]. Although all groups achieved large reductions in BPD
         symptom severity, the schema therapy groups achieved greater reduction than TAU,
         which was statistically signiﬁcant by 18 months of treatment. Furthermore, the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          24            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          balanced individual/group condition produced greater reductions than the predomin-
          antly group format which was statistically signiﬁcant by 6 months post-treatment and
          had higher retention rates.
              Recent studies have aimed to explore how brieﬂy schema therapy for BPD can be
          delivered whilst retaining eﬃcacy. Dickhaut and Arntz [52] piloted a 2-year-long combined
          weekly 60-minute individual plus 90-minute group schema therapy session programme.
          This study involved two cohorts (all female) and altered the form of group therapy
          the second cohort received to incorporate Farrell and Shaw’s [51] practises. These changes
          were associated with a higher immediate recovery rate at the end of 24 months in the second
          cohort (66.5%, n = 10, no longer met BPD criteria) compared to the ﬁrst (18.7%, n = 8).
          Combining the cohorts at 30 months, 77% no longer met BPD criteria and achieved large
          reductions in BPD symptoms, as well as improvements in happiness and quality of life.
          Hilden and colleagues [54] randomised 42 clients (83% female) to receive either a 20-session
          group schema therapy programme plus TAU (consisting of psychiatric consultations plus
          monthly therapy sessions from a psychiatric nurse) or TAU alone. The programme short-
          ened Farrell and Shaw’s [51] protocol by reducing the cognitively focused content. At
          5-month follow-up there was no diﬀerence between BPD symptoms as measured by the
          Borderline Symptom List (BSL-23) [54] and the means for both groups were in the
          ‘moderate’ range at both baseline and post-treatment. Hamid and colleagues [56] randomly
          assigned 45 BPD clients (100% male) to 12 – presumably, individual – sessions of schema
          therapy, Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT), or no treatment. After 6 months, both DBT
          and schema therapy had produced equivalent reductions in emotional and behavioural
          dysregulation symptoms compared to no treatment, but DBT produced signiﬁcantly greater
          reductions in disrupted communication symptoms. The results of this study are somewhat
          diﬃcult to compare with previous studies as a more limited range of measures was used and
          the percentage who no longer met criteria for BPD was not reported. Nevertheless, the
          reductions in BPD symptomatology in response to a relatively brief intervention are
          encouraging.
              In summary, there is reasonably strong support for the idea that long-term individual
          schema therapy for females with BPD is eﬃcacious in reducing BPD symptomatology and
          comorbid psychopathology. There is encouraging evidence that group schema therapy does
          likewise; however, critics might argue that comparisons with bona ﬁde psychotherapies,
          employing assessors blind to treatment condition, would be needed to demonstrate eﬃcacy
          conclusively. With the exception of Hamid et al. [56], the eﬃcacy of schema therapy for men
          with BPD has received little investigation. Future studies should also continue to explore the
          eﬃcacy of shorter forms of schema therapy, and it has been recognised that there is a need to
          compare schema therapy against the best alternative speciﬁc therapies for BPD such as DBT,
          with several trials underway to address these gaps. Fassbinder et al. [57] are undertaking an
          extensive comparison of 18-month schema therapy and DBT interventions.

          Other Personality Disorders
          Several uncontrolled trials have investigated brief forms of group schema therapy for mixed
          personality disorder populations. An abbreviated 20-session group schema therapy proto-
          col, Group Schema Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy (SCBT-g), was tested in a mixed out-
          patient sample of 63 people (73% female), in which 75% were assessed as having personality
          disorders [58]. SCBT-g is condensed by concentrating on the application of schema therapy



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   25



         methods to recent and present situations rather than past events. Results showed that half of
         the participants achieved clinically signiﬁcant reductions in general psychopathology, and
         maladaptive schema and mode activation, while 34% remained unchanged and 13% showed
         signiﬁcant worsening, with 24% dropping out. Skewes, Samson, Simpson, and van
         Vreeswijk [59] adapted SCBT-g to increase the experiential exercises and mode-focused
         content with a single outpatient group containing six people with AvPD and two with BPD.
         At the end of treatment, four members no longer met diagnostic threshold according to the
         Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI-III) at post-treatment and ﬁve were subthres-
         hold by six-month follow-up. Schaap, Chakhssi, and Westerhof [60] conducted an uncon-
         trolled trial of twice per week group schema therapy for 12 months in an inpatient setting
         with 65 people (72% female), 79% of which had at least one personality disorder (47% of
         which was personality disorder not otherwise speciﬁed). All clients had more than 3 months
         of previous treatment, 92% in outpatient settings and 42% in inpatient settings. The
         programme was not manualised but based on an earlier version of Farrell and Shaw’s [51]
         approach. Following group schema therapy there were signiﬁcant mean reductions at post-
         treatment and 6-month follow-up in general psychopathology, EMS, and mode frequency/
         intensity. As might be expected in a severe sample, there was a 35% dropout rate; however,
         eﬀect sizes were substantially larger for those who completed treatment. Finally, Schema
         Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (SMBCT) consists of 8 weekly 90-minute group
         sessions which educate clients about schema modes experientially through mindfulness
         exercises. Van Vreeswijk, Spinhoven, Zedlitz, and Eurelings-Bontekoe [61] randomised 58
         outpatient clients (76% female) with personality disorders (43% Cluster C, 22% BPD) to
         either SMBCT plus TAU (medication and psychiatrist consults) or TAU plus an 8-week
         competitive memory therapy (COMET) intervention, which involved clients bringing
         unhelpful personal images to mind while stimulating positive emotions through posture,
         facial expressions, and self-talk. Both groups achieved symptomatic improvements with no
         signiﬁcant diﬀerences between groups. SMBCT produced improvement or recovery from
         general psychopathology in 37% recipients, while 40% were unchanged and 23% showed
         reliable deterioration. On average, there were also small improvements in self-esteem,
         Disconnection and Rejection EMS, Other Directedness EMS, Overvigilance and
         Inhibition EMS and Critic modes, but no signiﬁcant improvements in mindfulness,
         Impaired Limits schemas, or child modes. Personality disorders are typically challenging
         to treat. These ﬁndings are promising but further research is needed to ascertain whether
         group schema therapy is more eﬀective than any other manualised approach for mixed
         personality disorders.
             The largest completed randomised controlled trial of schema therapy involved 323
         people (57% female) with a range of personality disorders other than BPD (and not
         including ASPD, schizotypal, or schizoid personality disorder) [62]. At three of the 12
         sites, people were randomised to either individual schema therapy or clariﬁcation-oriented
         psychotherapy (COP), a non-directive insight-oriented psychotherapy designed for person-
         ality disorders; at the remaining nine sites, people were randomised to schema therapy or
         TAU. Schema therapy was delivered according to Arntz and Jacob’s [63] protocol over 40
         weekly sessions plus 10 monthly booster sessions. At 3-year follow-up, a higher proportion
         of those who received schema therapy no longer met criteria for their primary personality
         disorder diagnosis (82%), compared to TAU groups (55%). Those who received schema
         therapy also had signiﬁcantly higher rates of recovery than COP when controlling for
         personality disorder type, although this diﬀerence did not hold when recovery was deﬁned



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          26            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          as the absence of subthreshold symptoms (79% [0.65, 0.88] ST v 59% [0.40, 0.75] COP).
          Although there were few diﬀerences between groups on other measures, there was a lower
          rate of depressive disorders and higher social functioning among schema therapy recipients
          at three-year follow-up. The study has been criticised for the lack of generalised improve-
          ment across measures and the use of an arguably uncommon or weak control condition
          [64]. Nevertheless, given the severity of these disorders and the dearth of empirical evalu-
          ations of psychotherapies for these conditions, the study represents an important step in the
          development of more eﬀective approaches for working with those aﬀected by personality
          disorder.

          Personality Disorders in Forensic Settings
          Bernstein and colleagues [65] randomly assigned 103 male oﬀenders from 8 high-security
          forensic hospitals in the Netherlands to 3 years of either schema therapy or TAU. This
          represented a severe sample and a stringent test of the eﬃcacy of schema therapy; 54% were
          admitted for physically violent oﬀences, 26% for sexually violent oﬀences, and 16.5% for
          threats or coercion. The psychiatric proﬁle was arguably more severe than had been seen in
          any previous psychotherapy study: 60% met criteria for ASPD, 21% NPD, and 17% BPD.
          Randomisation was eﬀective: the distribution of crime and PD was eﬀectively identical
          between conditions. No external incentives for participation were provided. Schema ther-
          apy was provided twice per week until participants began obtaining leave to reintegrate into
          the community, at which point frequency reduced to once per week. TAU received weekly
          individual psychotherapy (group therapy at one site) but overall ‘attention’ was matched by
          TAU participants receiving more hours of ancillary therapy (e.g., art therapy).
              Results indicated that both groups improved, with statistically signiﬁcant advantages for
          schema therapy recipients. A higher proportion of schema therapy recipients were granted
          both supervised and unsupervised leave throughout each year. Self-reported PD symptoms
          decreased faster over time among schema therapy recipients than in TAU alone. Schema
          therapy participants also made greater reductions in EMS scores over the study, and faster
          reductions in maladaptive schema mode scores and faster increases in healthy mode scores,
          although TAU participants had mostly ‘caught up’ by the end of the study. There was
          a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in treatment retention during the ﬁrst year favouring schema
          therapy (93% schema therapy v 80% TAU remained in treatment), but no signiﬁcant
          diﬀerence at 3 years (75% schema therapy, 68% TAU). Arguably, the most important
          ﬁndings of the study were that almost all forensic mental health clients in the study were
          able to achieve supervised leave within 3 years (97% schema therapy, 91% TAU) and the
          majority achieved unsupervised leave (67% schema therapy, 59% TAU). The diﬀerences
          between groups were reported as small to moderate, but nevertheless favoured schema
          therapy. The authors speculated that the diﬀerences between groups early in the study may
          have diminished because as schema therapy recipients achieved leave sooner, they may have
          encountered a greater range of challenges and setbacks than the TAU group. The authors
          acknowledged that group outcome diﬀerences could be due to schema therapy being
          delivered more intensively rather than to its content per se, so further studies comparing
          schema therapy with a bona ﬁde therapy are required to speak more conclusively to its
          eﬃcacy. Readers should also be aware that the study did not include clients who displayed
          psychotic symptoms; who met criteria for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, current sub-
          stance dependence, or autism spectrum disorder; who had an IQ below 80 or serious



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   27



         neurological impairment (which are common exclusion criteria in psychotherapy studies);
         or whose oﬀending was exclusively related to paedophilia. Nevertheless, the study demon-
         strates that positive outcomes using the schema therapy approach are possible even with
         a severely violent and psychiatrically disabled sample.

         Personality Disorders in the Elderly
         The application of schema therapy to elderly people is especially worth highlighting, given
         the limited eﬃcacy of psychotherapies in this population and the relatively lower rate of
         research in this area. A multiple-baseline study demonstrated the promise of individual
         schema therapy. Eight people aged over 69 with Cluster C personality disorders were
         provided 40 weekly sessions of schema therapy plus 10 booster sessions over 6 months
         using the Young et al. [1] manual. Results showed that improvement trends were evident
         during the treatment phase but not the baseline or follow-up phase. All but one participant
         no longer met diagnostic criteria according to the SCID-II and achieved improved quality of
         life scores, while ﬁve produced signiﬁcantly improved YSQ scores [66]. Previously, an
         uncontrolled trial of the 20-session SCBT-g intervention was undertaken with 42 people
         aged 60–78 (74% female) whom a multidisciplinary team agreed had either a chronic mood
         or adjustment disorder with comorbid personality disorder traits [67]. Although 26%
         dropped out, those who completed therapy achieved medium eﬀect size reductions in
         general psychopathology, EMS, and mode activation. A multi-centre randomised controlled
         trial is now underway to compare the cost-eﬀectiveness of 20 sessions combining 2 hours of
         schema therapy and an additional hour of psychomotor therapy group programme to TAU
         for elderly adults with Cluster B or C personality disorders [68].

         Anxiety and Related Disorders
         To our knowledge, only two historical comparisons and no randomised controlled trials
         have evaluated schema therapy for anxiety disorders. Gude and Hoﬀart [69] compared two
         sequential cohorts treated for 12 weeks as inpatients for agoraphobia; one received psycho-
         dynamic TAU (n = 18, 67% female) and the other TAU plus schema-focused cognitive
         therapy (n = 24, 71% female). The programme consisted of ﬁve weeks of daily group CBT
         focusing on behavioural experiments to test fears about anxiety and EMS-driven beliefs,
         followed by six weeks consisting of eight group sessions and 9–10 individual sessions
         focusing on changing EMS. Controlling for the eﬀects of phobic avoidance, those who
         received schema therapy–informed CBT showed greater reductions in interpersonal prob-
         lems. Cockram, Drummond, and Lee [70] compared a historical cohort (n = 127) of male
         Vietnam veterans who received a 190-hour CBT-only PTSD group plus individual treat-
         ment programme with a cohort (n = 54) who received a version that substituted a focus on
         EMS for six of its ﬁfteen 90-minute cognitive restructuring sessions. Those whose treatment
         included schema therapy components experienced greater reductions in PTSD symptoms,
         anxiety and depression symptoms, and YSQ scores. Finally, an open trial of schema
         therapy-enhanced exposure and response prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder
         (OCD) has been evaluated in ten inpatients (50% female) who had failed to respond to
         CBT [71]. The programme consisted of twice-weekly individual sessions for 12 weeks.
         A schema mode conceptualisation and limited reparenting-style guided preparation for
         and execution of exposure exercises. Schema therapy interventions – for example, chair
         mode dialogues – might have been used to ensure that clients undertook exposure exercises



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          28            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          in a ‘Healthy Adult mode’ state of mind. As clients became able to undertake self-guided
          exposure, therapeutic focus shifted more to schema therapy. The group achieved large
          reductions in observer-rated and self-reported OCD symptoms and depressive symptoms,
          maintained at 6-month follow-up. Although randomised controlled trials are needed to
          establish its eﬃcacy, these studies suggest that schema therapy interventions may be helpful
          for people with chronic anxiety-related problems, especially if they have not responded to
          ﬁrst-line evidence-based therapies.

          Eating Disorders
          An uncontrolled study of an adapted form of SCBT-g for a group of eight women with
          mixed eating disorders (75% Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed) was conducted by
          Simpson, Morrow, van Vreeswijk, and Reid [72]. Sessions were lengthened to two hours and
          focused on a mode conceptualisation and mode-based treatment focus of eating behaviour
          and negative body image. Although two dropped out, the remaining six members achieved
          a 43% reduction in EMS severity post-treatment and a 59% reduction by 6-month follow-
          up. Four of the completers achieved clinically signiﬁcant change in EMS activation, anxiety
          and depression symptoms, and eating disorder symptoms. A similar trial which evaluated
          a 25-session group schema therapy programme for eating disorders is currently nearing
          completion, with the protocol published by Calvert and colleagues in 2018 [73]. In a case
          report, Simpson and Slowey [74] described a brief mode formulation-informed therapy
          delivered via videconferencing for a 39-year-old woman with Eating Disorder Not
          Otherwise Speciﬁed characterised by a 15-year history of yoyo dieting and daily self-
          induced vomiting. Following one telephone and seven video appointments over 11 weeks,
          she achieved a 77% improvement in eating disorder symptoms, 28 days abstinence from
          vomiting, and improvements in general psychopathology, distress, and self-esteem. Finally,
          112 females were randomly assigned to 6 months of individual weekly sessions plus
          6-monthly booster sessions of either CBT, appetite-focused CBT, or schema therapy for
          reducing binge eating [75]. There were no diﬀerences between groups; by post-treatment,
          49% of participants had abstained from binge eating and were within one standard devi-
          ation of the mean on a measure of eating disorder symptoms. Although we would not yet
          recommend schema therapy as a ﬁrst-line treatment for anorexia nervosa or bulimia
          nervosa, these studies suggest schema therapy may be used to improve binge eating and
          transdiagnostic eating disorder symptoms, particularly if ﬁrst-line evidence-based therapies
          had been ﬁrst tried with limited success.

          Other Applications
          Research continues to explore applications of schema therapy for a myriad of concerns.
          Mohtadijafari, Ashayeri, and Banisi [76] compared a 10 × 2-hour session group schema
          therapy intervention to a no-treatment control group for Iranian women with premenstrual
          dysphoric disorder and found improvements in quality of life and reduced distress in the
          schema therapy group. Nameni, Saadat, Afshar, and Askarabady [77] compared 11 sessions
          of a weekly 2-hour group schema therapy programme plus TAU (33 sessions of counselling)
          to TAU only for Iranian women seeking divorce, which was a relatively new opportunity in
          that country, but which brought additional challenges. The schema therapy programme was
          associated with improvements in resilience (hardiness) and diﬀerentiation, and the ability
          to balance one’s own identity with maintaining relationships with others.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   29



         Caveats for Readers When Applying Schema Therapy
         in Their Own Work
         Conducting psychotherapy treatment outcome studies is an expensive and labour-intensive
         task. Schema therapy researchers are especially heroic in working with severe populations,
         intensively, and over long timeframes. The outcomes achieved are truly encouraging and are
         providing clinicians with optimism and direction for providing services with clients that
         have traditionally been viewed as being ‘treatment resistant’. Notwithstanding this progress,
         it has been our experience that clinicians learning new psychotherapy approaches can hold
         unrealistic expectations not only of themselves, but also of what can be achieved even with
         the best interventions in the hands of the world’s best therapists, so we would like to
         highlight a couple of things about the schema therapy literature so the reader can manage
         their expectations.
             Unless clinicians are working in specialised services with strict eligibility criteria, they
         may not choose – or be able – to practise much systematic selection over the clients they see.
         As described herein, most schema therapy eﬃcacy studies – as is common practice in most
         psychotherapy research – have purposely excluded people with comorbid problems that
         include bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder, ASPD, dissociative identity disorder (DID),
         attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and substance use disorders requiring
         detoxiﬁcation. In Farrell et al. (2009) [78], the schema therapy group had a lower proportion
         of people with a recent suicide plan, step, or attempt at baseline, despite randomisation. If
         the reader is considering applying schema therapy to a client who does have one or more of
         these disorders, it may not be reasonable to expect similar rates of improvement to highly
         controlled published studies. In Giesen-Bloo et al. [46] only 50.9% of those screened for the
         study were eligible and participated. In Farrell et al. [78] all participants were to remain in
         weekly outpatient psychotherapy for six months prior to being enrolled and be willing to
         remain in weekly therapy for a further eight months. Further studies of the eﬀectiveness of
         schema therapy with these complex presentations (as opposed to highly controlled studies
         of eﬃcacy) are needed to understand how well schema therapy performs in routine clinical
         practice where such comorbidity is the norm. In our experience, clinicians new to schema
         therapy are often excited to apply this new approach with clients in their caseload who have
         been least responsive to their existing repertoire of interventions. While such energy is
         probably useful in a lot of respects in treating such ‘tough cases’, therapists should be aware
         of the potential limitations in the evidence and adjust their expectations accordingly.

         Evidence That Schema and Mode Change Mediates
         Psychopathology Improvements Resulting from Schema
         Therapy
         Yakın et al. [79] examined changes in mode frequency within Bamelis and colleagues’ [62]
         study and their relationship to outcomes. Across both psychotherapies, self-reported
         increased frequency in Healthy Adult mode and decreased frequency in Vulnerable Child,
         Impulsive Child, and Avoidant Protector modes prospectively predicted improved PD
         pathology. Increases in Healthy Adult mode and decreases in Self-Aggrandiser Mode
         frequency predicted improvements in social and occupational functioning. Schema therapy
         was no more eﬀective than COP in changing Healthy Adult, Vulnerable Child, Impulsive



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          30            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          Child, and Avoidant Protector mode frequency. However, schema therapy was more
          eﬀective than COP at reducing Self-Aggrandiser mode frequency and, in turn, in improving
          social and occupational functioning. Importantly, while decreased Vulnerable Child and
          increased Healthy Adult mode frequency prospectively predicted decreased PD pathology,
          decreased PD pathology did not prospectively predict decreased Vulnerable Child mode
          and increased Healthy Adult mode frequency. These results suggest that schema modes are
          a potentially important treatment target: reductions in maladaptive modes and increases in
          adaptive modes led to reductions in psychopathology, irrespective of whether current
          schema therapy methods are especially optimised to change their frequency.

          Evidence Supporting the Eﬃcacy of Speciﬁc Components
          of Schema Therapy
          Imagery Rescripting
          Outside of schema therapy, a large and growing number of studies have evaluated imagery
          rescripting (ImRS) as a stand-alone intervention for a range of conditions, including PTSD,
          depression, social anxiety, OCD, and body dysmorphic disorder. A meta-analysis of 19 such
          studies found a large within-group eﬀect of ImRS on symptoms of the primary disorder
          at post-treatment (g = 1.22 [1.00, 1.43]), and larger at follow-up, typically 3 months later
          (g = 1.79 [1.54, 2.03]) [80]. Only ﬁve studies at that time had used a control condition (2 wait
          list, 3 attention placebos); however, within this set of studies, ImRS still produced a large
          between-group eﬀect (g = 1.00 [0.27, 1.74]).
               Since this meta-analysis, at the time of writing, at least 28 further studies have quantita-
          tively evaluated the impact of ImRS on key outcomes; only 16 were randomised controlled
          trials and only 6 of these involved clinical populations. Results mirror most psychotherapy
          studies whereby speciﬁc interventions out-perform no-treatment or wait-list controls by
          large eﬀect sizes but produce equivalent outcome changes to bona ﬁde interventions. In
          recent ImRS studies, the bona ﬁde comparisons were typically either imaginal exposure or
          cognitive restructuring. However, although ImRS may not produce superior changes in
          outcomes, there has been some evidence that ImRS produces its outcomes via diﬀerent
          processes to comparison interventions. For example, in a comparison of a single session of
          ImRS or cognitive restructuring, despite there being no consistent diﬀerences on self-report
          measures, ImRS uniquely produced reductions in heart rate variability measures [80].
          Furthermore, in a study of their eﬃcacy to reduce nightmare frequency and distress,
          ImRS and imaginal exposure were equally eﬀective, but were mediated via diﬀerent mech-
          anisms; ImRS exerted half of its eﬀect through increasing mastery over nightmare content,
          whereas imaginal exposure exerted its eﬀects via emotional tolerance [81]. Finally, Romano,
          Moscovitch, Huppert, Reimer, and Moscovitch [82] examined the relative impact of ImRS,
          imaginal exposure (IE), and supportive counselling on representations in memory of the
          event targeted by these interventions among people with social anxiety disorder. Memory
          descriptions were elicited via structured interviews 1 week, 2 weeks, and 3 months after
          receiving one of the three interventions. ImRS was found to only enhance recall of positive
          and neutral details about the event, whereas IE enhanced recall of both positive and negative
          details about the event, and supportive counselling had no eﬀect on memory detail.
          Furthermore, at the end of each intervention session, participants were asked to revise
          their core belief (assessed pre-intervention); ImRS participants were more likely to ‘update’



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy   31



         this belief (i.e., generate a new more positive and/or realistic statement about themselves or
         others). Researchers continue to work on elucidating exactly how ImRS works [81], but the
         emerging evidence suggests it has distinct eﬀects which do not merely represent a placebo
         eﬀect.
             A particularly relevant study was a large randomised controlled trial comparing twelve
         90-minute sessions of eye movement desensitisation reprocessing therapy (EMDR) com-
         pared with ImRS delivered twice per week to 155 people with PTSD associated with
         childhood sexual abuse [83]. Both conditions produced equivalent large improvements in
         the primary outcome (PTSD symptoms) after 8 weeks (d = 1.7), which were sustained at
         1-year follow-up, with very low drop out (7.7%). There was a non-signiﬁcant trend for
         EMDR to have its eﬀects a little faster, and for the superiority of ImRS at the 1-year follow-
         up mark, suggesting the two trauma-processing methods may work through separate
         mechanisms. Further analyses based on this study are currently underway to compare
         mechanisms of change and predictors of improvement. Based on the evidence to date,
         ImRS compares very well to established treatments for PTSD (e.g., prolonged exposure and
         EMDR).
             A ﬁnal study worth highlighting, given the severity of symptoms and the poverty of
         empirically supported interventions to treat them, is Paulik, Steel, and Arntz’s [84] case
         series of twelve individuals with PTSD who experienced auditory hallucinations thematic-
         ally related to traumatic events. Participants received a 10-session intervention involving
         eight sessions of ImRS in routine private practice and achieved signiﬁcant mean reductions
         in voice distress and frequency, and trauma intrusions. Signiﬁcantly, most of the sample met
         diagnostic criteria for a psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, schizoaﬀective disorder).
         This study provides initial evidence for the acceptability and potential eﬀectiveness of ImRS
         with this population.


         Evidence Regarding Therapist-led vs Client-led Rescripting
         One of the decisions schema therapists may contend with in ImRS is whether to ask the client to
         imagine their present-day self intervening to protect and comfort their past self in a
         schema-relevant memory, or to imagine a third-party helper intervening to protect their past
         self (see Chapter 8: Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 3: Experiential Techniques for an
         overview). At present, there are no studies employing clinical clients as participants, but a recent
         analogue study may be informative. University students were exposed to a traumatic movie clip
         and then randomly assigned to either (1) ImRS-A, where they were taught to imagine them-
         selves intervening to disempower the perpetrator and save the victim in the aversive ﬁlm scene;
         (2) ImRS-P, where they were taught to imagine a trustworthy other person intervening to
         disempower the perpetrator and help the victim; (3), Imagery rehearsal,where they were asked
         to recall the aversive ﬁlm scene; and (4) no intervention control. Both ImRS conditions were less
         distressing than reimagining the aversive ﬁlm scene, with the passive form (ImRS-P) less
         distressing than the active form (ImRS-A); however, only the ImRS-A condition was associated
         with increased positive aﬀect [85]. It was noteworthy that there were no diﬀerences between
         ImRS conditions in participants’ levels of self-eﬃcacy. Overall, the ﬁndings support the com-
         mon schema therapy practice of guiding clients toward imagining third-party helpers as their
         ﬁrst ImRS step because it is the easier task, but also supports the additional value of transferring
         agency within ImRS exercises to the client.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          32            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          Chairwork Exercises
          Part of the rationale for using chairwork rather than traditional counselling dialogues is to
          intensify activation of schemas – thoughts and emotions – which in turn is thought to lead
          to greater schema change in both explicit and implicit memory systems [86]. Some support
          for these ideas came from early small, randomised trials with students [87] and clinical
          clients [88, 89] in which exploration of inner conﬂict via two-chair dialogues led to greater
          depth of feeling and perspective shifts than in empathic counselling. Emotional intensity
          was also a key theme of participants’ experience of chairwork in a recent qualitative study of
          compassion-focused therapy [90]. When a single session of either a two-chair decision-
          making dialogue or another CBT strategy have been compared, there have been equivalent
          improvements on primary outcome measures (e.g., Conoley, Conoley, McConnell, and
          Kimzey [91]), with inconsistent additional beneﬁts to chairwork. For example, Greenberg
          and Clarke [87] found the two-chair dialogue produced greater reductions in ambivalence
          than problem-solving therapy. Trachsel, Ferrari, and Holtforth [92] found no diﬀerences in
          indecisiveness but found chairwork produced higher self-reported and observer-rated
          emotional activation than a decision cube task. Compared with ImRS, there are relatively
          fewer evaluations of chairwork as a stand-alone procedure and no meta-analyses that we are
          aware of.
              A further source of evidence for the eﬃcacy of chairwork comes from studies evaluating
          emotion-focused therapy (EFT). One of the key two-chair dialogues used in EFT is between
          the ‘Critic’ and the ‘Criticised Self’. Early studies identiﬁed characteristics of participants
          who resolved inner conﬂicts through chairwork as those who demonstrated a ‘softening’ of
          the Critic part, which changed from lecturing at the Criticised part, to describing its own
          feelings and sharing a similar depth of experience to the Criticised part, and then toward
          empathy, self-compassion, and discussion of mutual understanding [93]. Those who
          experienced resolution improved their indecisiveness and made more progress with their
          target complaints than those who did not [94]. In a multiple-baseline study, a ﬁve-session
          phase of the two-chair Critic–Criticised dialogue was associated with more change in
          anxiety and depression symptoms than the baseline phase [95]. In a study of people with
          major depressive disorder, people were randomised to receive either 16 weeks of Process-
          Experiential Therapy (PET, a precursor to EFT that contained signiﬁcant amounts of
          chairwork) or CBT [96]. Both groups experienced equivalent improvements in all out-
          comes, except that the PET group achieved a signiﬁcantly greater reduction in interpersonal
          problems.
              For clients with trauma symptoms from childhood sexual abuse, EFT often employs
          a two-chair dialogue between the client and the perpetrator (in the empty chair). Clients are
          encouraged to voice their thoughts and feelings about the traumatic events and their
          consequences directly to the perpetrator. Greenberg and Malcom [97] studied those who
          had completed a course of EFT for childhood maltreatment and/or interpersonal problems
          and found that clients who had been able to express unmet needs through chair dialogues
          achieved larger reductions in general psychopathology and interpersonal problems than
          those who had not. Paivio, Harry, Chagigiorgis, Hall, and Ralston [98] compared two forms
          of EFT (M = 17 sessions); one involved the perpetrator-confrontation chair dialogue and the
          other involved addressing the consequences of traumatic events by simply exploring the
          client’s feelings and meanings via empathic counselling. There were no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
          ences between the groups in trauma symptom change, but there was higher attrition in the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy              33



         group that involved perpetrator-confrontation chairwork (20%) than empathic counselling
         alone (7%).
             The implications of this research for schema therapy are arguably modest given that the
         use of chair dialogues in EFT diverges in important ways from their use in schema therapy.
         Nevertheless, schema therapists can be assured that the use of chairwork as a means to eﬀect
         change has received at least some empirical scrutiny. There is evidence that chairwork
         achieves greater emotional activation, which is its intended purpose in schema therapy: to
         bypass avoidant coping modes. As a means of cognitive change, chairwork appears to work
         at least as well as more ‘rational’ cognitive restructuring methods. This initial research also
         suggests that the beneﬁts of this component are not so profound that a schema therapist
         ought to feel compelled to use them, although the study by Paivio and colleagues [98]
         provides some caution that there are risks in pursuing emotional stimulation too aggres-
         sively. It should be noted that none of these chairwork studies has assessed for DSM
         personality disorder diagnoses. To date, the evidence for the safety and eﬀectiveness of
         chairwork with cases of severe psychiatric disability (e.g., BPD) comes from evaluations of
         complete integrated courses of schema therapy, rather than stand-alone or dismantled
         designs.

         Concluding Remarks
         In this chapter, we aimed to provide an overview of the research studies to date that support
         schema therapy theory and treatment. The strongest evidence for the eﬃcacy of schema
         therapy is for the treatment of personality disorders, especially BPD, but there is prelimin-
         ary support for its use in a range of other conditions, especially if they have not responded to
         CBT (e.g., Eating Disorders, ImRS for PTSD). We hope that the evidence reviewed here,
         gives schema therapists conﬁdence in the basic theory and treatment model, and knowledge
         about those presentations for which schema therapy has proven most helpful to date, while
         also providing some realistic boundaries and expectations for those cases that are not yet
         represented well by the evidence base.

         References
         1. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                         5. Marais I, Moir VK, Lee, CW. The eﬀects of
            therapy: A practitioners guide. New York:                        item placement in the Young Schema
            Guilford; 2003.                                                  Questionnaire. Journal of Applied
         2. Bach B, Lockwood G, Young J. A new look at                       Measurement, 2017;18(4):370–82.
            the schema therapy model: Organization                        6. Lockwood G, Perris P. A new look at core
            and role of early maladaptive schemas.                           emotional needs. In van Vreekswijk M,
            Cognitive Behaviour Therapy. 2017;47                             Broersen J, Nadort M, eds. The Wiley-
            (4):328–49.                                                      Blackwell handbook of schema therapy.
         3. Arntz A, Rijkeboer M, Chan E et al. Towards                      Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 41–66.
            a Reformulated Theory Underlying Schema                       7. Louis J, Davidson A, Lockwood G, Wood A.
            Therapy: Position Paper of an International                      Positive perceptions of parenting and their
            Workgroup. Cognitive Therapy and                                 links to theorized core emotional needs.
            Research. 2021.                                                  Journal of Child and Family Studies. 2020;29
         4. Yalcin O, Lee C, Correia H. Factor structure                     (12):3342–56.
            of the Young Schema Questionnaire (Long                       8. Dweck C. From needs to goals and
            Form-3). Australian Psychologist. 2020;55                        representations: Foundations for a uniﬁed
            (5):546–58.                                                      theory of motivation, personality, and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          34            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



                development. Psychological Review.                               adjustment among adolescents from
                2017;124(6):689–719.                                             authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent, and
            9. Deci E, Ryan R. The ‘what’ and ‘why’ of                           neglectful families. Child Development.
               goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-                          1991;62(5):1049.
               determination of behavior. Psychological                    22. Hinnant J, Erath S, Tu K, El-Sheikh M.
               Inquiry. 2000;11(4):227–68.                                     Permissive parenting, deviant peer
          10. Baumeister R, Leary M. The need to                               aﬃliations, and delinquent behavior in
              belong: Desire for interpersonal                                 adolescence: The moderating role of
              attachments as a fundamental human                               sympathetic nervous system reactivity.
              motivation. Psychological Bulletin.                              Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology.
              1995;117(3):497–529.                                             2015;44(6):1071–81.

          11. Ainsworth M. Attachment as related to                        23. Barton A, Hirsch J. Permissive parenting
              mother-infant interaction. In Rosenblatt J,                      and mental health in college students:
              ed. Advances in the Study of Behaviour.                          Mediating eﬀects of academic entitlement.
              Academic Press; 1979. pp. 1–51.                                  Journal of American College Health.
                                                                               2015;64(1):1–8.
          12. Bowlby J. Attachment and Loss: Attachment
              (Vol 1). Basic Books; 1969.                                  24. Shumow L, Vandell D, Posner J. Harsh,
                                                                               ﬁrm, and permissive parenting in
          13. Harlow H. The nature of love. American                           low-income families. Journal of Family
              Psychologist. 1958;13(12):673–85.                                Issues. 1998;19(5):483–507.
          14. Murray, H. A. Explorations in personality:                   25. Gray M, Steinberg L. Unpacking
              A clinical and experimental study of ﬁfty                        authoritative parenting: Reassessing
              men of college age. Oxford University Press;                     a multidimensional construct. Journal of
              1938                                                             Marriage and the Family. 1999;61(3):574.
          15. McClelland DC. Human motivation.                             26. Farkas M, Grolnick W. Examining the
              Cambridge; 1987                                                  components and concomitants of parental
          16. Maslow A. A theory of human motivation.                          structure in the academic domain.
              Psychological Review. 1943;50(4):370–96.                         Motivation and Emotion. 2010;34
                                                                               (3):266–79.
          17. O’Neill M, Pillai Riddell R, Bureau J et al.
              Longitudinal and concurrent relationships                    27. Grolnick W, Raftery-Helmer J, Marbell K
              between caregiver–child behaviours in the                        et al. Parental provision of structure:
              vaccination context and preschool                                Implementation and correlates in three
              attachment. Pain. 2020;162(3):823–34.                            domains. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly.
                                                                               2014;60(3):355.
          18. Calders F, Bijttebier P, Bosmans G et al.
              Investigating the interplay between                          28. Soenens B, Vansteenkiste M, Niemic C.
              parenting dimensions and styles, and the                         Should parental prohibition of adolescents’
              association with adolescent outcomes.                            peer relationships be prohibited? Personal
              European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry.                          Relationships. 2009;16(4):507–30.
              2019;29(3):327–42.                                           29. Feeney B, Collins N. The importance of
          19. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. Self-                                 relational support for attachment and
              determination theory: Basic psychological                        exploration needs. Current Opinion in
              needs in motivation, development, and                            Psychology. 2019;25:182–6.
              wellness. The Guilford Press; 2017.                          30. Silvia P, Kwapil T. Aberrant asociality:
          20. Baumrind D. Rearing competent children.                          How individual diﬀerences in social
              In Damon W, ed. Child development today                          anhedonia illuminate the need to belong.
              and tomorrow. Jossey-Bass/Wiley; 1988.                           Journal of Personality. 2011;79
              pp. 349–78.                                                      (6):1315–32.
          21. Lamborn S, Mounts N, Steinberg L,                            31. Stanley P, Schutte N, Phillips W. A
              Dornbusch S. Patterns of competence and                          meta-analytic investigation of the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy                 35



                relationship between basic psychological                        Psychiatry and Psychotherapy. 2016;18
                need satisfaction and aﬀect. Journal of                         (2):22–8.
                Positive School Psychology. 2021;5                        41. Bamelis L, Renner F, Heidkamp D,
                (1):1–16.                                                     Arntz A. Extended schema mode
         32. Pilkington P, Bishop A, Younan R. Adverse                        conceptualizations for speciﬁc personality
             childhood experiences and early                                  disorders: An empirical study. Journal of
             maladaptive schemas in adulthood:                                Personality Disorders. 2011;25(1):41–58.
             A systematic review and meta-analysis.                       42. Jacobs I, Lenz L, Wollny A, Horsch A. The
             Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy.                             higher-order structure of schema modes.
             2020;28(3):569–84.                                               Journal of Personality Disorders. 2020;34
         33. Young JE, Klosko JS. Reinventing your life:                      (3):348–76.
             The breakthrough program to end negative                     43. Kotov R, Krueger R, Watson D et al. The
             behavior and feel great again. Plume; 1994.                      hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology
         34. Mertens Y, Yılmaz M, Lobbestael J. Schema                        (HiTOP): A dimensional alternative to
             modes mediate the eﬀect of emotional                             traditional nosologies. Journal of
             abuse in childhood on the diﬀerential                            Abnormal Psychology. 2017;126
             expression of personality disorders. Child                       (4):454–77.
             Abuse & Neglect. 2020;104:104445.                            44. Keulen-de Vos M, Bernstein D, Clark L,
         35. Specht M, Chapman A, Cellucci T.                                 et al. Validation of the schema mode
             Schemas and borderline personality                               concept in personality disordered
             disorder symptoms in incarcerated                                oﬀenders. Legal and Criminological
             women. Journal of Behavior Therapy and                           Psychology. 2017;22(2):420–41.
             Experimental Psychiatry. 2009;40                             45. Sempértegui G, Karreman A, Arntz A,
             (2):256–64.                                                      Bekker M. Schema therapy for borderline
         36. Saldias A, Power K, Gillanders D,                                personality disorder: A comprehensive
             Campbell C, Blake R. The mediatory role of                       review of its empirical foundations,
             maladaptive schema modes between                                 eﬀectiveness and implementation
             parental care and non-suicidal self-injury.                      possibilities. Clinical Psychology Review.
             Cognitive Behaviour Therapy. 2013;42                             2013;33(3):426–47.
             (3):244–57.                                                  46. Giesen-Bloo J, van Dyck R, Spinhoven P
         37. Lumley M, Harkness K. Speciﬁcity in the                          et al. Outpatient psychotherapy for
             relations among childhood adversity,                             borderline personality disorder:
             early maladaptive schemas, and symptom                           Randomizedtrial of schema-focused
             proﬁles in adolescent depression.                                therapy vs transference-focused
             Cognitive Therapy and Research. 2007;31                          psychotherapy. Archives of General
             (5):639–57.                                                      Psychiatry. 2006;63(6):649.
         38. Bach B, Farrell J. Schemas and modes in                      47. Arntz A, van Genderen H. Schema therapy
             borderline personality disorder: The                             for borderline personality disorder. Wiley.
             mistrustful, shameful, angry, impulsive,                         2009.
             and unhappy child. Psychiatry Research.                      48. Sieswerda S, Arntz A, Kindt M. Successful
             2018;259:323–9.                                                  psychotherapy reduces hypervigilance in
         39. Bach B, Lobbestael J. Elucidating DSM-5                          borderline personality disorder.
             and ICD-11 diagnostic features of                                Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy.
             borderline personality disorder using                            2007;35(4):387–402.
             schemas and modes. Psychopathology.                          49. van Asselt A, Dirksen C, Arntz A,
             2018;51(6):400–7.                                                Severens J. The cost of borderline
         40. Dadashzadeh H, Hekmati I, Gholizade H,                           personality disorder: Societal cost of illness
             Abdi R. Schema modes in cluster                                  in BPD-clients. European Psychiatry.
             B personality disorders. Archives of                             2007;22(6):354–61.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          36            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          50. Nadort M, Arntz A, Smit J et al.                             58. van Vreeswijk M, Spinhoven P, Eurelings-
              Implementation of outpatient schema                              Bontekoe E, Broersen J. Changes in
              therapy for borderline personality disorder                      symptom severity, schemas and modes in
              with versus without crisis support by the                        heterogeneous psychiatric patient groups
              therapist outside oﬃce hours:                                    following short-term schema
              A randomized trial. Behaviour Research                           cognitive-behavioural group therapy:
              and Therapy. 2009;47(11):961–73.                                 A naturalistic pre-treatment and
          51. Farrell JM, Shaw JM. Group schema therapy                        post-treatment design in an outpatient
              for borderline personality disorder a step-by-                   clinic. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy.
              step treatment manual with patient                               2012;21(1):29–38.
              workbook. Wiley-Blackwell. 2012                              59. Skewes S, Samson R, Simpson S, van
          52. Dickhaut V, Arntz A. Combined group and                          Vreeswijk M. Short-term group schema
              individual schema therapy for borderline                         therapy for mixed personality disorders:
              personality disorder: A pilot study. Journal                     A pilot study. Frontiers in Psychology.
              of Behavior Therapy and Experimental                             2015;5(1592):1–9.
              Psychiatry. 2014;45(2):242–51.                               60. Schaap G, Chakhssi F, Westerhof G.
          53. Arntz A, Jacob GA, Lee CW et al.                                 Inpatient schema therapy for
              Eﬀectiveness of predominantly group                              nonresponsive clients with personality
              schema therapy and combined individual                           pathology: Changes in symptomatic
              and group schema therapy for borderline                          distress, schemas, schema modes, coping
              personality disorder: A randomized                               styles, experienced parenting styles, and
              clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2022;79                         mental well-being. Psychotherapy. 2016;53
              (4):287–99.                                                      (4):402–12.

          54. Hilden H, Rosenström T, Karila I et al.                      61. van Vreeswijk M, Spinhoven P, Zedlitz A,
              Eﬀectiveness of brief schema group therapy                       Eurelings-Bontekoe E. Mixed results of
              for borderline personality disorder                              a pilot RCT of time-limited schema
              symptoms: a randomized pilot study.                              mindfulness-based cognitive therapy and
              Nordic Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;75                            competitive memory therapy plus
              (3):176–85.                                                      treatment as usual for personality
                                                                               disorders. Personality Disorders: Theory,
          55. Bohus M, Kleindienst N, Limberger M et al.                       Research, and Treatment. 2020;11
              The short version of the borderline                              (3):170–80.
              symptom list (BSL-23): Development and
              initial data on psychometric properties.                     62. Bamelis L, Evers S, Spinhoven P, Arntz A.
              Psychopathology. 2008;42(1):32–9.                                Results of a multicenter randomized
                                                                               controlled trial of the clinical eﬀectiveness
          56. Hamid N, Molajegh R, Bashlideh K,                                of schema therapy for personality
              Shehniyailagh M. The comparison of                               disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry.
              eﬀectiveness of dialectical behavioral                           2014;171(3):305–22.
              therapy (DBT) and schema therapy (ST) in
              reducing the severity of clinical symptoms                   63. Arntz A, Jacob G. Schema therapy in
              (disruptive communication, emotional                             practice: An introductory guide to the
              deregulation and behavioral deregulation)                        schema mode approach. Wiley-Blackwell;
              of borderline personality disorder in Iran.                      2013
              Pakistan Journal of Medical and Health                       64. Hopwood C, Thomas K. Schema therapy is
              Sciences. 2020;14:1354–62.                                       an eﬀective treatment for avoidant,
          57. Fassbinder E, Assmann N, Schaich A et al.                        dependent and obsessive-compulsive
              PRO*BPD: Eﬀectiveness of outpatient                              personality disorders. Evidence Based
              treatment programs for borderline                                Mental Health. 2014;17(3):90–1.
              personality disorder: A comparison of                        65. Bernstein D, Keulen-de Vos M, Clercx M
              Schema therapy and dialectical behavior                          et al. Schema therapy for violent PD
              therapy: Study protocol for a randomized                         oﬀenders: A randomized clinical trial.
              trial. BMC Psychiatry. 2018;18(1).                               Psychological Medicine. 2021:1–15.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Research Support for Schema Therapy                 37



         66. Videler A, van Alphen S, van Royen R et al.                        eating: A randomized controlled trial of
             Schema therapy for personality disorders                           cognitive-behavioural therapy,
             in older adults: A multiple-baseline study.                        appetite-focused cognitive-behavioural
             Aging & Mental Health. 2017;22                                     therapy, and schema therapy. Psychiatry
             (6):738–47.                                                        Research. 2016;240:412–20.
         67. Videler A, Rossi G, Schoevaars M, van der                    76. Mohtadijafari S, Ashayeri H, Banisi P. The
             Feltz-Cornelis C, van Alphen S. Eﬀects of                        eﬀectiveness of schema therapy
             schema group therapy in older outpatients:                       techniques in mental health and quality of
             a proof of concept study. International                          life of women with premenstrual
             Psychogeriatrics. 2014;26(10):1709–17.                           dysphoric isorder. Iranian Journal of
         68. van Dijk S, Veenstra M, Bouman R et al.                          Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology.
             Group schema-focused therapy enriched                            2019;25(3):278–91.
             with psychomotor therapy versus                              77. Nameni E, Saadat S H, Keshavarz-Afshar
             treatment as usual for older adults with                         H, Askarabady F. Eﬀectiveness of group
             cluster B and/or C personality disorders:                        counseling based on schema therapy on
             a randomized trial. BMC Psychiatry.                              quality of marital relationships,
             2019;19(1):26.                                                   diﬀerentiation and hardiness in women
         69. Gude T, Hoﬀart A. Change in                                      seeking divorce in families of war veterans.
             interpersonal problems after cognitive                           Journal of Military Medicine. 2019; 21
             agoraphobia and schema-focused therapy                           (1):91–9.
             versus psychodynamic treatment as usual                      78. Farrell J, Shaw I, Webber M. A
             of inpatients with agoraphobia and Cluster                       schema-focused approach to group
             C personality disorders. Scandinavian                            psychotherapy for outpatients with
             Journal of Psychology. 2008;49(2):195–9.                         borderline personality disorder:
         70. Cockram D, Drummond P, Lee C. Role and                           A randomized controlled trial. Journal of
             treatment of early maladaptive schemas in                        Behavior Therapy and Experimental
             vietnam veterans with PTSD. Clinical                             Psychiatry. 2009;40(2):317–28.
             Psychology & Psychotherapy. 2010;17                          79. Yakın D, Grasman R, Arntz A. Schema modes
             (3):165–82.                                                      as a common mechanism of change in
         71. Thiel N, Jacob G, Tuschen-Caﬃer B et al.                         personality pathology and functioning: Results
             Schema therapy augmented exposure and                            from a randomized controlled trial. Behaviour
             response prevention in clients with                              Research and Therapy. 2020;126:103553.
             obsessive-compulsive disorder: Feasibility                   80. Hyett M, Bank S, Lipp O et al. Attenuated
             and eﬃcacy of a pilot study. Journal of                          psychophysiological reactivity following
             Behavior Therapy and Experimental                                single-session group imagery rescripting
             Psychiatry. 2016;52:59–67.                                       versus verbal restructuring in social
         72. Simpson S, Morrow E, van Vreeswijk M,                            anxiety disorder: Results from
             Reid C. Group schema therapy for eating                          a randomized controlled trial.
             disorders: A pilot study. Frontiers in                           Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics.
             Psychology. 2010;1(182):1–10.                                    2018;87(6):340–9.

         73. Calvert F, Smith E, Brockman R,                              81. Kunze A, Lancee J, Morina N, Kindt M,
             Simpson S. Group schema therapy for                              Arntz A. Mediators of change in imagery
             eating disorders: study protocol. Journal of                     rescripting and imaginal exposure for
             Eating Disorders. 2018;6(1):1–7.                                 nightmares: Evidence from a randomized
                                                                              wait-list controlled trial. Behavior Therapy.
         74. Simpson S, Slowey L. Video therapy for                           2019;50(5):978–93.
             atypical eating disorder and obesity: A case
             study. Clinical Practice & Epidemiology in                   82. Romano M, Moscovitch D, Huppert J,
             Mental Health. 2011;7(1):38–43.                                  Reimer S, Moscovitch M. The eﬀects of
                                                                              imagery rescripting on memory outcomes
         75. McIntosh V, Jordan J, Carter J et al.                            in social anxiety disorder. Journal of
             Psychotherapy for transdiagnostic binge                          Anxiety Disorders. 2020;69:102169.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          38            Overview of the Schema Therapy Model



          83. Boterhoven de Haan K, Lee C et al. Imagery                         rational emotive therapy and the
              rescripting and eye movement                                       empty-chair technique of gestalt therapy
              desensitisation and reprocessing as                                on anger reduction. Psychotherapy: Theory,
              treatment for adults with post-traumatic                           Research & Practice. 1983;20(1):112–17.
              stress disorder from childhood trauma:                       92. Trachsel M, Ferrari L, Holtforth MG.
              randomised clinical trial. The British                           Resolving partnership ambivalence:
              Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;217(5):609–15.                       A randomized controlled trial of very brief
          84. Paulik G, Steel C, Arntz A. Imagery                              cognitive and experiential interventions
              rescripting for the treatment of trauma in                       with follow-up. Canadian Journal of
              voice hearers: A case series. Behavioural                        Counselling and Psychotherapy. 2012; 46
              and Cognitive Psychotherapy. 2019;47                             (3):239–58.
              (6):709–25.                                                  93. Greenberg L. The intensive analysis of
          85. Siegesleitner M, Strohm M, Wittekind C,                          recurring events from the practice of
              Ehring T, Kunze A. Improving imagery                             Gestalt therapy. Psychotherapy: Theory,
              rescripting treatments: Comparing an                             Research & Practice. 1980;17(2):143–52.
              active versus passive approach. Journal of                   94. Greenberg L, Webster M. Resolving
              Behavior Therapy and Experimental                                decisional conﬂict by Gestalt two-chair
              Psychiatry. 2020;69:101578.                                      dialogue: Relating process to outcome.
          86. Rafaeli E, Young J, Bernstein D. Schema                          Journal of Counseling Psychology. 1982;29
              therapy: Distinctive features. Routledge.                        (5):468–77.
              2011                                                         95. Stiegler J, Molde H, Schanche E. Does
          87. Greenberg L, Clarke K. Diﬀerential eﬀects                        an emotion-focused two-chair dialogue
              of the two-chair experiment and empathic                         add to the therapeutic eﬀect of the
              reﬂections at a conﬂict marker. Journal of                       empathic attunement to aﬀect? Clinical
              Counselling Psychology. 1979;26(1):1–8.                          Psychology & Psychotherapy. 2017;25(1):
          88. Greenberg L, Dompierre L. Speciﬁc eﬀects                         e86–e95.
              of Gestalt two-chair dialogue on                             96. Watson J, Gordon L, Stermac L,
              intrapsychic conﬂict in counselling.                             Kalogerakos F, Steckley P. Comparing the
              Journal of Counselling Psychology. 1981;28                       eﬀectiveness of process-experiential with
              (4):288–94.                                                      cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy in the
          89. Greenberg L, Higgins H. Eﬀects of                                treatment of depression. Journal of
              two-chair dialogue and focusing on conﬂict                       Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2003;71
              resolution. Journal of Counseling                                (4):773–81.
              Psychology. 1980;27(3):221–24.                               97. Greenberg L, Malcolm W. Resolving
          90. Bell T, Montague J, Elander J, Gilbert P.                        unﬁnished business: Relating process to
              ‘A deﬁnite feel-it moment’: Embodiment,                          outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
              externalisation and emotion during chair-                        Psychology. 2002;70(2):406–16.
              work in compassion-focused therapy.                          98. Paivio S, Jarry J, Chagigiorgis H, Hall I,
              Counselling and Psychotherapy Research.                          Ralston M. Eﬃcacy of two versions of
              2019;20(1):143–53.                                               emotion-focused therapy for resolving
          91. Conoley C, Conoley J, McConnell J,                               child abuse trauma. Psychotherapy
              Kimzey C. The eﬀect of the ABCs of                               Research. 2010;20(3):353–66.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                 Part II             The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice
               Chapter
                                     Schema Therapy Assessment

                       3
         Introduction
         In this chapter we provide a detailed description of how to conduct assessments to produce
         good-quality schema therapy case conceptualisations (see Chapter 4) which, in turn, direct
         eﬀective treatment provision. A clear understanding of the client’s experiences throughout
         their life allows the therapist to ﬁne-tune their limited reparenting (see Chapter 6) to
         speciﬁcally address needs which were not met in childhood and deeply attune to the client.
         This profound level of understanding enables the therapist to work collaboratively with
         clients to set highly personalised therapy goals that help them learn how to meet their
         emotional needs in healthy ways.
             Traditionally, for complex cases, 5–8 sessions are dedicated to the schema therapy
         assessment phase, not only because more information is gathered than in typical psycho-
         therapy assessments but also because doing so facilitates a safe and constructive therapeutic
         bond. Assessment is also a process of hypothesis testing; as information is gathered, the
         schema therapist will start to form hypotheses about the central modes, schemas, and unmet
         needs contributing to the client’s problems, which will eventually produce a collaborative
         case conceptualisation. Psychoeducation is interwoven throughout the assessment phase via
         a collaborative and curious stance that helps the client ‘make sense’ of their problems and
         builds the therapeutic alliance. Rather than depending heavily on any one method, the
         schema therapist relies on a triangulation of multiple methods, which are listed here and are
         outlined throughout the rest of this chapter.
         1. Clinical interview
         2. Identiﬁcation of key problem areas and related therapy goals
         3. Functional assessment of key problem areas
         4. Self-monitoring forms
         5. Downward arrowing techniques
         6. Mode assessment
         7. Questionnaire/psychometric data
         8. Diagnostic imagery
         9. Process assessment/transference data

         Part I: Schema Therapy Assessment: Focus and Considerations
         A central goal of any schema therapy assessment is to gain a clear understanding of the
         client’s presenting problems, and to begin to conceptualise how underlying EMS and modes
         cause and perpetuate such problems. In schema therapy, many of the presenting problems
                                                                                                    39


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Part II             The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice
               Chapter
                                    Schema Therapy Assessment

                       3
         Introduction
         In this chapter we provide a detailed description of how to conduct assessments to produce
         good-quality schema therapy case conceptualisations (see Chapter 4) which, in turn, direct
         eﬀective treatment provision. A clear understanding of the client’s experiences throughout
         their life allows the therapist to ﬁne-tune their limited reparenting (see Chapter 6) to
         speciﬁcally address needs which were not met in childhood and deeply attune to the client.
         This profound level of understanding enables the therapist to work collaboratively with
         clients to set highly personalised therapy goals that help them learn how to meet their
         emotional needs in healthy ways.
             Traditionally, for complex cases, 5–8 sessions are dedicated to the schema therapy
         assessment phase, not only because more information is gathered than in typical psycho-
         therapy assessments but also because doing so facilitates a safe and constructive therapeutic
         bond. Assessment is also a process of hypothesis testing; as information is gathered, the
         schema therapist will start to form hypotheses about the central modes, schemas, and unmet
         needs contributing to the client’s problems, which will eventually produce a collaborative
         case conceptualisation. Psychoeducation is interwoven throughout the assessment phase via
         a collaborative and curious stance that helps the client ‘make sense’ of their problems and
         builds the therapeutic alliance. Rather than depending heavily on any one method, the
         schema therapist relies on a triangulation of multiple methods, which are listed here and are
         outlined throughout the rest of this chapter.
         1. Clinical interview
         2. Identiﬁcation of key problem areas and related therapy goals
         3. Functional assessment of key problem areas
         4. Self-monitoring forms
         5. Downward arrowing techniques
         6. Mode assessment
         7. Questionnaire/psychometric data
         8. Diagnostic imagery
         9. Process assessment/transference data

         Part I: Schema Therapy Assessment: Focus and Considerations
         A central goal of any schema therapy assessment is to gain a clear understanding of the
         client’s presenting problems, and to begin to conceptualise how underlying EMS and modes
         cause and perpetuate such problems. In schema therapy, many of the presenting problems
                                                                                                    39


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          40            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



          or ‘key problem areas’ may be conceptualised as behavioural and/or cognitive manifest-
          ations of coping modes, designed to escape the emotional pain associated with unmet needs
          in childhood. Common problems associated with coping modes might include substance
          use disorders (e.g., Self-Soother mode), eating disorders (e.g., Overcontroller mode), or
          a range of interpersonal problems related to being excessively compliant or reliant on others
          (e.g., Compliant Surrenderer mode), being too aloof from or avoidant of others (e.g.,
          Detached Protector mode), or being highly antagonistic (e.g., Bully and Attack mode).
          A detailed assessment will reveal that these coping mechanisms usually make sense in the
          context in which they developed. In the short term, they tend to provide relief, and thereby
          function primarily as ‘solutions’ to underlying emotional pain. This conﬂict between the
          relief provided by coping mechanisms and the secondary distress that they cause often
          results in ambivalence about change: on the one hand the person wants to get rid of the self-
          harm, binge eating, or drug use, but on the other hand they ﬁnd it diﬃcult to relinquish the
          beneﬁts and sense of safety they provide. In contrast to presenting issues related to coping
          modes, when clients describe their diﬃculties in terms of overwhelming emotions and
          diﬃculties with regulating distress, these might be conceptualised as manifestations of child
          modes. Many clients come to therapy with the perception that their Vulnerable Child mode
          is the ‘problem’, and that this part of themselves needs to be eliminated, ‘ﬁxed’, or
          controlled. Such clients may present with issues such as chronic anxiety, overwhelm, or
          anger dysregulation. Other problems – like ‘low self-esteem’, self-injury, and other forms of
          self-defeating behaviour – might reﬂect the dominance of maladaptive parent or critic
          modes. It is equally important to pay attention to the strength of the client’s Healthy
          Adult mode. Generally, the strength of maladaptive modes is likely to indicate relative
          weaknesses or ‘blind spots’ in a client’s Healthy Adult mode. For example, a client with
          a strong Punitive Critic mode is likely to have poor Healthy Adult mode functioning in the
          domain of self-compassion (a positive schema which is the antithesis of the
          Punitiveness EMS).

          Mode Assessment: Identiﬁcation of Modes for the Case
          Conceptualisation
          Identifying which modes account for most of the client’s problematic experiences is argu-
          ably the most important objective of schema therapy assessment. The therapist looks to
          answer two key questions: (1) Which mode/s dominate/s the client’s presentation in
          session? (2) Which modes are implicated in the client’s problems? Modes can be identiﬁed
          ‘in the moment’ through three main sources of information: the content of speech (what the
          person says), non-verbal communication (e.g., the tone of their voice, facial expressions,
          postures, and gestures), and countertransference (feelings and behavioural urges that the
          client’s responses elicit within the therapist). Examples of ways in which the modes can
          manifest are presented in Table 3.1.

          Identifying Key Problem Areas
          Identifying speciﬁc and clear ‘Key Problem Areas’ is critical for at least three reasons. First,
          they provide initial clues as to which EMS and/or modes are likely problematic for the client.
          Second, a clear problem list focuses the treatment, avoiding a common technical ﬂaw of
          repeatedly ‘putting out spot ﬁres’ without reducing the frequency of crises over the long




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Table 3.1 Assessment questions linked to each schema

                                                                                           Early             Unmet Needs            Interpersonal Problems             Typical Relevant Modes            Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                              (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                  Relationships)
                                                                                           Emotional         Insuﬃcient:            Resignation (Surrender):           Resignation Coping Modes:         How close were you to your parents as you were
                                                                                           Deprivation       Warmth,                Detachment, lack of overt          Vulnerable (Lonely, Unlovable)    growing up? Were your parents present emotionally?
                                                                                                             nurturance,            expression of needs, attraction    Child;                            How did they show their love (e.g., warmth, aﬀection,
                                                                                                             aﬀectionate touch,     to partners who cannot             (Overt or Suppressed) Angry       connecting, vs. through gifts, working hard to pay for a
                                                                                                             guidance, empathy,     commit; Feels bored/               Child;                            good school, food/cooking)?
                                                                                                             validation,            smothered when with loving         Impulsive Child;                  How much time was spent being with your parents
                                                                                                             attunement, being      partners.                                                            (e.g., playing, conversing, having fun), without the
                                                                                                                                                                       Inner Critic (‘You’re
                                                                                                             cherished.             Avoidance:                                                           pressure to perform or achieve?
                                                                                                                                                                       undeserving’)
                                                                                                                                    Keeps others at an arm’s length,   Avoidant Coping Modes:            To what extent can you talk to your parents about the
                                                                                                                                    avoids intimacy/commitment,        Detached Protector; Detached      things that really upset or bother you?
                                                                                                                                    uses compulsive coping (e.g.,      Self-Soother; *Funny Protector,   If you were upset about something that happened to
                                                                                                                                    bingeing, alcohol, substances,     Compliant Surrenderer;            you as a child, who would you have gone to? Why/
                                                                                                                                    promiscuous sex, gaming) to        *Helpless Surrenderer             why not? If you had gone to mum/dad/grandma, how
                                                                                                                                    block emptiness and self-          (function = ‘See me’)             do you think they would have responded?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                    soothe when alone.                                                   What did you fear would happen (to you or to them) if
                                                                                                                                                                       Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                    Inversion (Overcompensation):                                        you had shared your feelings and needs more?
                                                                                                                                                                       Perfectionistic Overcontroller;
                                                                                                                                    Co-dependency, emotionally         *Clown; Attention/Approval        Who provided guidance about managing diﬃcult
                                                                                                                                    (&/or practically) demanding       Seeker                            emotions, making decisions in your family?
                                                                                                                                    toward friends and partners.                                         Who (if anyone) would you have spoken with if you
                                                                                                                                                                                                         were upset about an incident at school?
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do you feel as though others in your family really ‘get’
                                                                                                                                                                                                         who you are and understand you?
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Did you feel loved and cherished? If yes, how did you
                                                                                                                                                                                                         know? What indicated to you that you were
                                                                                                                                                                                                         cherished?
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Were your parents able to overtly show warmth, such
                                                                                                                                                                                                         as through aﬀectionate touch, hugs, telling you they
                                                                                                                                                                                                         loved you?
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs           Interpersonal Problems                Typical Relevant Modes           Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                               (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                   Relationships)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Did anyone play with you as a child, and spend time
                                                                                                                                                                                                            laughing and having fun or being silly together?
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Did you feel really understood as your own person
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (rather than what you were expected to be)?
                                                                                                                                                                                                            When you talk about emotions, to what extent are
                                                                                                                                                                                                            others able to listen to you and really understand your
                                                                                                                                                                                                            struggles?
                                                                                                                                                                                                            To what extent were your parents able to meet your
                                                                                                                                                                                                            needs? Did you have any role in taking care of your
                                                                                                                                                                                                            parents’ needs?
                                                                                           Defectiveness/      Insuﬃcient:           Resignation:                          Resignation Coping Modes:        Did you feel criticised or judged by anyone in your
                                                                                           Shame               Unconditional love,   Tolerates friends who are             Vulnerable (Inferior/Ashamed)    family as a child?
                                                                                                               acceptance,           critical, rejecting. Puts others on   Child;                           Did you feel accepted for who you are, or was there an
                                                                                                               inadequate            a pedestal whilst blaming &           Angry Child;                     expectation that you should be a certain way in order
                                                                                                               protection from       demeaning self.                       Impulsive Child;                 to be lovable?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                               criticism, put-       Avoidance:                                                             Did you ever feel rejected by your parents?
                                                                                                                                                                           Inner Critic (Punitive;
                                                                                                               downs, abuse.         Keeps others at an emotional                                           Did anyone make you feel ashamed for your needs or
                                                                                                                                                                           Demanding): ‘You’re bad,
                                                                                                                                     distance; Doesn’t allow others        worthless, unlovable’            feelings?
                                                                                                                                     to see vulnerability or to get        Avoidant Coping Modes:           Did you experience punishment (emotional/physical)
                                                                                                                                     close.                                Detached Protector; *Avoidant    that made you feel ashamed or defective?
                                                                                                                                     Inversion:                            Protector; Detached Self-        Did anyone hurt you or touch you in an unwanted or
                                                                                                                                     Puts others on a pedestal to          Soother; *Helpless Surrenderer   sexual way as a child?
                                                                                                                                     elevate own status; Critical and      Inversion Coping Modes:          As an adult, do you ever think of yourself as unlovable,
                                                                                                                                     demeaning toward others to            Self-Aggrandiser;                or defective in any way?
                                                                                                                                     elevate own status; Acts hyper-       Overcontroller (*Flagellating/   Do you compare yourself negatively with others, and
                                                                                                                                     ‘nice’ and caring to prevent                                           think of yourself as less worthy or lovable?
                                                                                                                                                                           Scolding/Perfectionistic);
                                                                                                                                     potential rejection.                  Attention/Approval Seeker;       Are you hypersensitive to criticism (or have others
                                                                                                                                                                           *Clown                           noticed this about you)?
                                                                                           Abandonment/     Insuﬃcient:                 Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:          Were your parents consistently available to provide
                                                                                           Instability      Consistent                  Chooses & tolerates partners       Vulnerable (Abandoned) Child;      support and care? Did grandparents or previous
                                                                                                            emotional                   who are unable to commit.          Angry Child;                       generations experience any abandonment that
                                                                                                            availability of             Avoidance:                         Impulsive Child                    aﬀected your parents?
                                                                                                            caregivers; support         Avoids close relationships and     Avoidant Coping Modes:             Were either of your parents emotionally unavailable
                                                                                                            & guidance to help          commitment. Uses compulsive                                           for any reason (e.g., working away, mood swings,
                                                                                                                                                                           Detached Protector; *Funny
                                                                                                            deal with loss;             coping (e.g., bingeing, alcohol,                                      alcohol or drug use)?
                                                                                                                                                                           Protector; *Reassurance Seeker;
                                                                                                            emotional stability.        substances) to self-soothe                                            Were there any periods of time that you were
                                                                                                                                                                           *Slacker/Oblomov; Detached
                                                                                                            Too much:                   when alone.                        Self-Soother; Compliant            separated from your parents/caregivers as a child?
                                                                                                            Emotional                   Inversion:                         Surrenderer; *Helpless             Did anyone important to you leave or die during your
                                                                                                            unavailability/             Clings to partners, friends.       Surrenderer                        childhood?
                                                                                                            inconsistency; loss.        Becomes angry and attacking        Inversion Coping Modes:            If so, how much emotional support did you have from
                                                                                                                                        of partner for any separations.    Bully & Attack; *Clown;            your parents (or others) following this event?
                                                                                                                                                                           *Conning & Manipulation;           As an adult, do you struggle with feeling abandoned,
                                                                                                                                                                           *Hyperautonomous                   desperate, or alone when you are apart from others
                                                                                                                                                                           Overcontroller                     who are close to you? Or do you close yourself oﬀ by
                                                                                                                                                                                                              leaving others before they leave you?
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Do you expect others to leave you?
                                                                                           Mistrust/Abuse   Insuﬃcient:                 Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:          Did anyone hurt, abuse, cheat on you, or lie to you as a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                            Protection, safety,         Attracted to partners/friends      Vulnerable (Abused) Child;         child?
                                                                                                            stability, reliability of   who turn out to be abusive;        Angry Child;                       Did anyone hurt you or touch you inappropriately as a
                                                                                                            caregivers                  Tolerates abuse; Copes in ways     Impulsive Child;                   child?
                                                                                                            Too much:                   which provoke rage/outbursts       Inner Critic (Punitive): ‘You’re   Did either of your parents lie to you, use you for their
                                                                                                            Abuse, deception,           from others.                       dirty, damaged, bad’               own beneﬁt, or try to manipulate you?
                                                                                                            lies, duplicity.            Avoidance:                         Avoidant Coping Modes:             Were you humiliated by parents or other family
                                                                                                                                        Keeps others at a distance;        Detached Protector                 members?
                                                                                                                                        Avoids trusting others with        (Dissociation); *Avoidant          Did anyone in your family act to protect you when/if
                                                                                                                                        secrets and vulnerabilities.       Protector; Detached Self-          you were mistreated?
                                                                                                                                        Inversion:                         Soother; *Slacker/Oblomov          Was anyone in the family duplicitous, or underhand in
                                                                                                                                        Mistreats, abuses, manipulates     Inversion Coping Modes:            the way they managed situations?
                                                                                                                                        others. Writes others oﬀ as soon   Overcontroller (*Flagellating,     As an adult, do you ﬁnd yourself trusting the wrong
                                                                                                                                        as they are not of use.            Paranoid); Bully and Attack;       people? Do you notice higher chemistry with people
                                                                                                                                                                                                              who end up being untrustworthy?
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs             Interpersonal Problems              Typical Relevant Modes             Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                                 (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                     Relationships)
                                                                                                                                                                           *Idealiser; *Clown; Conning &      Does it feel like you can trust people 100% or not at all?
                                                                                                                                                                           Manipulation                       Do you end your relationships abruptly due to feeling
                                                                                                                                                                                                              let down or hurt by others?
                                                                                           Social Isolation    Insuﬃcient:             Resignation:                        Resignation Coping Modes:          Did you feel that you belonged in your family? In what
                                                                                                               Opportunities to        Stays on the periphery of           Vulnerable (Alienated/             ways was your family the same as other families? Did
                                                                                                               gain a sense of         groups, doesn’t join in with        Misunderstood) Child;              you ever feel that your family was diﬀerent from other
                                                                                                               belonging and           group activities, joins ‘outcast’   Angry Child;                       families in any way?
                                                                                                               community with          groups, exaggerates                 Impulsive Child;                   Were you ever part of a peer group or community
                                                                                                               both family and         diﬀerences (e.g., through dress,                                       where you felt you belonged? Did you ever feel
                                                                                                                                                                           Inner Critic: ‘You don’t belong,
                                                                                                               peers.                  attire, hair, makeup).                                                 excluded from your peers?
                                                                                                                                                                           you don’t ﬁt in’
                                                                                                                                       Avoidance:                          Avoidant Coping Modes:             Did you feel part of a peer group when you were at
                                                                                                                                       Stays away from social                                                 school?
                                                                                                                                                                           Detached Protector; *Avoidant
                                                                                                                                       gatherings, groups.                 Protector; Detached Self-          Did you ever feel diﬀerent to others, like you didn’t
                                                                                                                                       Inversion:                          Soother; *Funny Protector;         ﬁt in?
                                                                                                                                       Works hard to ﬁt in, through        Compliant Surrenderer              As a child/adolescent (and now as an adult) have you




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                       ‘acting the part’.                  Inversion Coping Modes:            ever been part of a community (e.g., church, sports
                                                                                                                                                                           Attention-Seeker; Self-            club, interest group)?
                                                                                                                                                                           Aggrandiser; *Superior Loner;      As an adult, when you are with a group, do you join in,
                                                                                                                                                                           *Clown                             or stay on the periphery watching others?

                                                                                           Dependence/         Insuﬃcient: Practical   Resignation:                        Resignation Coping Modes:          Were you over-protected by either of your parents?
                                                                                           Incompetence        support, help,          Seeks partners & friends who        Vulnerable (Dependent) Child;      Did they prefer to do things for you rather than letting
                                                                                                               guidance (under- or     appear dominant/conﬁdent.           Angry Child;                       you have a go and learn by your own mistakes?
                                                                                                               overprotectiveness).    Relies on others to take on day-    Impulsive Child;                   Did you feel like you had to grow up and take
                                                                                                                                       to-day responsibilities;            Inner Critic: ‘You’re too          responsibility too quickly?
                                                                                                                                       Constantly seeks advice and         incompetent, you can’t cope’       Did you feel like you had to take care of yourself and
                                                                                                                                       reassurance                                                            had no one to depend on for periods of your life?
                                                                                                                                                                           Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                       Avoidance:                          Detached Protector; Detached       As an adult, do you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to take care of
                                                                                                                                       Avoids making decisions, taking     Self-Soother; *Funny Protector;    yourself in practical ways? Do you lean on others to
                                                                                                                                       responsibility for own life
                                                                                                                                    choices. Sticks to comfort zone     Compliant Surrenderer              take responsibility for day-to-day issues (e.g., ﬁnancial
                                                                                                                                    whilst avoiding new challenges.     *Helpless Surrenderer              matters, ﬁxing things)?
                                                                                                                                    Inversion:                          Inversion Coping Modes:            Do you ﬁnd yourself looking for answers or direction
                                                                                                                                    Hyper-self-reliant and              Overcontroller (Perfectionistic/   from others? Do you notice that you are easily drawn
                                                                                                                                    autonomous; doesn’t ask for         *Invincible/                       into the next gimmick?
                                                                                                                                    help; takes on ‘helper’ role for    *Hyperautonomous); *Clown
                                                                                                                                    others.
                                                                                           Vulnerability to   Insuﬃcient: Safety    Resignation:                        Resignation Coping Modes:          As a child, did you or anyone in your family experience
                                                                                           Harm or Illness    and protection from   Seeks reassurance & speaks          Vulnerable (Anxious) Child;        any harm or illness that felt frightening? Did
                                                                                                              harm/illness.         obsessively about fears around      Angry Child;                       grandparents or previous generations experience any
                                                                                                              Reassurance and       illness, deaths and other           Impulsive Child                    serious illness or harm that aﬀected your parents?
                                                                                                              support to build      catastrophes; Obsessionally                                            Did any family members worry or talk a lot about
                                                                                                                                                                        Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                              trust in body,        checks own and family                                                  illness or death? Do you recall worrying excessively
                                                                                                                                                                        Detached Protector; Detached
                                                                                                              thoughts, emotions    members for signs and                                                  about illness and death as a child?
                                                                                                                                                                        Self-Soother; *Funny Protector;
                                                                                                              and own resources.    symptoms of illness.                                                   As an adult, do you ﬁnd yourself seeking reassurance
                                                                                                                                                                        *Reassurance Seeker/*Helpless
                                                                                                                                    Reassurance-seeking; Cossets                                           from others? Do you notice yourself avoiding going to
                                                                                                                                                                        Surrenderer
                                                                                                                                    family members due to fears of                                         certain places, or venturing far due to a fear of illness or
                                                                                                                                                                        Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                    harm.                                                                  death?
                                                                                                                                                                        *Invincible Overcontroller;
                                                                                                                                    Avoidance:                                                             Do you worry about the impact or meaning of your
                                                                                                                                                                        *Clown
                                                                                                                                    Sticks to same routine and                                             thoughts? Do you try to control or suppress thoughts




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                    doesn’t venture anywhere new                                           that frighten you? Do you ever worry that you are
                                                                                                                                    (including family holidays) due                                        losing control or going mad?
                                                                                                                                    to fear of harm/illness.
                                                                                                                                    Inversion:
                                                                                                                                    Takes risks and ignores safety
                                                                                                                                    regulations. Behaves as though
                                                                                                                                    invincible.
                                                                                           Enmeshment         Insuﬃcient:           Resignation:                        Resignation Coping modes:          As a child, did you feel that stating your own views, or
                                                                                           (undeveloped       Encouragement         Excessively close contact with      Vulnerable (Invisible; non-        wanting/believing something diﬀerent from one or
                                                                                           self)              and praise to         parents/partner; Lack of privacy,   individualised) Child;             both parents would lead to them acting hurt or
                                                                                                              support               tells them everything; Lives        Angry Child/Sulking/Rebellious     disappointed?
                                                                                                              development of                                            Child
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs         Interpersonal Problems             Typical Relevant Modes            Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                             (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                 Relationships)
                                                                                                               autonomy.           through children and/or            Inner Critic (Guilt-Inducing):    Were there any barriers in your family to you becoming
                                                                                                               Attunement and      partner.                           ‘You’re hurting me by             separate or independent?
                                                                                                               recognition of      Avoidance:                         separating from me and            As an adult, do you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to state your
                                                                                                               individual          Avoids closeness, intimacy.        making life choices that don’t    opinions without fearing that you will hurt one or both
                                                                                                               preferences,        Avoids stating own opinions,       involve me’                       of your parents?
                                                                                                               character traits.   preferences.                       Avoidant Coping Modes:            Has it been diﬃcult to make your own life choices
                                                                                                               Encouragement to    Inversion:                         Detached Protector; *Funny        without feeling that you are letting one or both of
                                                                                                               develop express     Rebels against expectations        Protector; Detached               them down?
                                                                                                               own views and       and asserts individuality          Self-Soother; Compliant           Do you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to know what you feel or want
                                                                                                               values.             through behaving in opposite       Surrenderer                       from your life?
                                                                                                                                   way to parents.                    Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                                                      *Clown; *Hyperautonomous
                                                                                                                                                                      Overcontroller
                                                                                           Failure (to         Insuﬃcient:         Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:         Were either of your parents critical of your abilities or
                                                                                           achieve)            Encouragement,      Makes minimal eﬀort; Looks up      Vulnerable (Anxious; Failed)      achievements? Did you experience excessive criticism
                                                                                                               praise, support,    to others on the assumption        Child;                            from teachers or signiﬁcant others?
                                                                                                               guidance,           that they are more intelligent,                                      As a child/adolescent, did you ever receive praise or




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                      Angry Child;
                                                                                                               opportunities for   capable.                           Impulsive Child;                  encouragement for your work/study?
                                                                                                               mastery.            Avoidance:                                                           Did you struggle with learning at school for any
                                                                                                                                                                      Undisciplined Child;
                                                                                                                                   Procrastinates, avoids work        Inner Critic (Punitive,           reason? How was it dealt with by parents/teachers?
                                                                                                                                   tasks.                             Demanding): ‘You’re a failure,    Was there any area of your life where you felt a sense of
                                                                                                                                   Inversion:                         stupid, inept’                    mastery and competence?
                                                                                                                                   Relentless striving, prioritises   Avoidant Coping Modes:            As an adult, do you ever feel that you are not reaching
                                                                                                                                   work over health, and              Detached Protector, Detached      your true potential (at work/study)? Do you compare
                                                                                                                                   relationships with partner,        Self-Soother; *Reassurance        yourself negatively with others, and think of yourself as
                                                                                                                                   family, friends.                   Seeker; *Funny Protector          less capable?
                                                                                                                                                                      Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                                                      Perfectionistic Overcontroller;
                                                                                                                                                                      *Clown; Self-Aggrandiser (The
                                                                                                                                                                      Winner)
                                                                                           Entitlement-        Insuﬃcient: Healthy       Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:        Did your parents ever give you the impression that the
                                                                                           grandiosity         consistent limits;        Boasts about achievements;         *Grandiose Child; *Spoiled       rules and conventions that others have to follow don’t
                                                                                                               support with              competes with others, one-up-      Child;                           apply to you? Did they give you the impression that
                                                                                                               developing                manship; Bullying, demanding,      Angry/Enraged Child;             you were special in some way?
                                                                                                               compassion/               controlling toward others.         Impulsive Child;                 How did your parents show love? Was there an
                                                                                                               empathy for others;       Takes advantage of others in                                        emphasis on material gifts?
                                                                                                                                                                            Inner Critic (usually
                                                                                                               opportunity to learn      relationships.                                                      How important is/was success, wealth, and status to
                                                                                                                                                                            Demanding): ‘You should strive
                                                                                                               how to function in        Avoidance:                                                          your parents? Did you experience any pressure from
                                                                                                                                                                            to be better than others;
                                                                                                               relationships on an       Avoids being with others who                                        your parents to get into a particular school/university,
                                                                                                                                                                            anything less than perfect is
                                                                                                               equal footing with                                                                            or to aim for particular job or position?
                                                                                                                                         are of higher status – except to   unacceptable’
                                                                                                               others.                   gain status via association.                                        Did your parents have trouble setting limits or
                                                                                                                                                                            Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                               Too much:                 Inversion:                                                          consistent boundaries? Did they make you follow the
                                                                                                                                                                            Detached Self-Soother;
                                                                                                               Spoiled, over-            Focuses excessively on others’                                      rules, even if you resisted?
                                                                                                                                                                            Detached Protector; *Avoidant
                                                                                                               indulged. Focus on        needs.                                                              As an adult, do you have trouble following the rules
                                                                                                                                                                            Protector
                                                                                                               material expression                                                                           that others follow? Do you feel like you deserve better
                                                                                                                                                                            Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                               of love, at expense                                                                           than others, or should be treated diﬀerently? Do you
                                                                                                                                                                            *Over-humble mode
                                                                                                               of emotional                                                                                  ever justify doing what you want by reassuring
                                                                                                               presence/                                                                                     yourself, e.g. ‘Others won’t mind if I ….’?
                                                                                                               attunement.
                                                                                           Insuﬃcient self-    Insuﬃcient: Lack of       Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:        As a child, did anyone ensure that you completed




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           control (or self-   consistent                Doesn’t stick with tasks until     Undisciplined Child              homework and took on other appropriate
                                                                                           discipline)         boundaries and            completed, gives up easily.        Angry/Enraged/*Sulking Child     responsibilities within your family?
                                                                                                               parental presence.        Avoidance:                         Avoidant Coping Modes:           Were consequences set in a healthy consistent way to
                                                                                                               Child was not made        Avoids responsibility and allows                                    ensure that you followed the family rules/boundaries?
                                                                                                                                                                            *Avoidant Protector; Detached
                                                                                                               to complete boring        others to do the boring or                                          Were steps taken to ensure that you and your siblings
                                                                                                                                                                            Protector; Detached Self-
                                                                                                               or routine tasks and      routine tasks. Avoids                                               were not disrespectful or hurtful toward others?
                                                                                                                                                                            Soother
                                                                                                               to take on normal         employment or turns up late                                         As an adult, do you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to complete routine
                                                                                                                                                                            Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                               responsibilities (e.g.,   and does not complete                                               or boring tasks? Do others notice that you tend to pass
                                                                                                               homework and                                                 Perfectionistic Overcontroller
                                                                                                                                         required tasks. Expects others                                      responsibility on to them?
                                                                                                               household chores).        to do boring/routine tasks and                                      Do you often feel like you can say or do whatever you
                                                                                                                                         doesn’t do their share.                                             want, without thinking about the consequences or
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs            Interpersonal Problems             Typical Relevant Modes            Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                                (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                    Relationships)
                                                                                                                                      Inversion:                                                           eﬀects on others? Do you often lose control of your
                                                                                                                                      Tightly controlled or self-                                          emotions?
                                                                                                                                      disciplined; Overly responsible;
                                                                                                                                      Demands high standards from
                                                                                                                                      self and others.
                                                                                           Subjugation         Insuﬃcient:            Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:         As a child, were either of your parents overcontrolling
                                                                                                               Freedom to make        Goes along with others’ views      Vulnerable (Intimidated) Child;   and/or overprotective?
                                                                                                               decisions based on     and decisions, doesn’t stand up    Angry Child;                      Were you made to feel guilty if you said what you felt
                                                                                                               own feelings and       for own opinions or needs.         Rebellious Child;                 or needed?
                                                                                                               needs, and to follow   Allows others to be in control                                       Did either of your parents become angry or act as if
                                                                                                                                                                         Inner Critic (Guilt-Inducing):
                                                                                                               own intuition.         without asserting own needs.                                         you had hurt them if your needs or feelings clashed
                                                                                                                                                                         ‘you’re selﬁsh, you cause
                                                                                                               Too much: Control,     Avoidance:                         trouble’                          with theirs?
                                                                                                               anger, coercion in     Avoids situations that may                                           Did you feel smothered and/or unable to express your
                                                                                                                                                                         Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                               response to non-       result in conﬂict. Hides                                             own views in your relationship with either/both
                                                                                                                                                                         Compliant Surrenderer;
                                                                                                               compliance and         information from others to                                           parents, for fear of repercussions?
                                                                                                                                                                         Detached Protector; Detached




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                               expression of          avoid conﬂict, anger.                                                As an adult, do you struggle to say ‘no’ and set limits on
                                                                                                                                                                         Self-Soother; *Funny Protector
                                                                                                               needs/feelings.        Inversion:                                                           others, due to fears that others will get angry at you?
                                                                                                                                                                         Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                      Controlling and domineering        Bully & Attack; Overcontroller    Do you often feel controlled/coerced into doing
                                                                                                                                      toward others.                                                       things that you would not choose to do of your own
                                                                                                                                                                         (*hyperautonomous;
                                                                                                                                                                         *scolding); Self-Aggrandiser;     volition? Are you fearful of standing up for yourself due
                                                                                                                                                                         *Clown                            to expectations that others will get angry at you?
                                                                                                                                                                                                           As an adult, do you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to know what you
                                                                                                                                                                                                           want or need?
                                                                                           Self-Sacriﬁce       Insuﬃcient:            Resignation:                       Resignation Coping Modes:         As a child (and adult), did (do) you have a high
                                                                                                               Encouragement          Tuned in to others’ needs and      Vulnerable (Parentiﬁed) Child;    sensitivity to the feelings, and emotional suﬀering of
                                                                                                               and support to         feelings; Takes care of others;    *Aggrieved Child;                 others?
                                                                                                               prioritise own needs   Shuts oﬀ from own feelings and     Angry Child;
                                                                                                          and self-care; Lack    needs. May be disdainful             Inner Critic (Guilt-Inducing/   Did you tend to feel responsible for managing one or
                                                                                                          of role model or       toward own needs.                    Absent/Over-Anxious): ‘you’re   both of your parents’ emotions and needs?
                                                                                                          guidance in            Avoidance:                           selﬁsh, your needs are not      As a child, did you ever worry that your feelings and
                                                                                                          balancing own          Avoids situations and                important’                      needs were a burden on others? Did you ever feel that
                                                                                                          needs with others’.    relationships which involve          Avoidant Coping Modes:          by stating your feelings and needs you would
                                                                                                          Too much: Exposure     being the recipient of care and      Detached Protector; *Funny      overwhelm your parents?
                                                                                                          to others’ troubles,   nurturance; May avoid                Protector; Detached Self-       Do you feel guilty if you do something for yourself, or
                                                                                                          pain and suﬀering.     situations that involve giving, to   Soother                         ﬁnd yourself feeling happy, whilst others are suﬀering?
                                                                                                                                 avoid impending burnout.             Inversion Coping Modes:         As an adult, do others typically seek you out for
                                                                                                                                 Inversion:                           Overcontroller                  support and guidance?
                                                                                                                                 Withholding and resentful            (*hyperautonomous); Self-       Do you struggle to say ‘no’ and set limits on others,
                                                                                                                                 when others express their            Aggrandiser; *Clown             due to feelings of responsibility and guilt?
                                                                                                                                 needs.
                                                                                           Approval/      Insuﬃcient:            Resignation:                         Resignation Coping Modes:       As a child, did you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to get the approval
                                                                                           Recognition-   Unconditional love,    Seeks recognition or approval        Vulnerable (Invisible) Child;   and attention you needed?
                                                                                           seeking        approval,              from others through trying to        Attention-seeking Child;        Were there any circumstances in your family that
                                                                                                          recognition,           impress (through knowledge,          Angry/Sulking Child;            made it diﬃcult to get the recognition you needed
                                                                                                          attention, praise.     skills, status, success,                                             from your parents (e.g., a sibling with emotional
                                                                                                                                                                      Impulsive Child
                                                                                                          Too much: Approval     appearances).                                                        problems or learning diﬃculties; a parent with mental
                                                                                                                                                                      Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                          conditional on         Avoidance:                                                           health problems)?
                                                                                                                                                                      Detached Protector; Detached
                                                                                                          success, status.       Avoids interacting with those                                        Did you feel that in order to get the love and attention




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                      Self-Soother
                                                                                                                                 from whom approval is desired.                                       you needed, you had to perform well or be ‘good’?
                                                                                                                                                                      Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                 Inversion:                                                           What type of behaviours did your parents reward or
                                                                                                                                                                      Self-Aggrandiser;
                                                                                                                                 Reacts by being ‘invisible’, not                                     value when you were a child? Do you feel like you
                                                                                                                                                                      Overcontroller
                                                                                                                                 standing out; Rebels against                                         turned out to be the person they wanted you to be?
                                                                                                                                                                      (*hyperautonomous)
                                                                                                                                 perceived expectations of                                            Can you explain more about that?
                                                                                                                                 others to elicit disapproval.                                        What were the qualities that they were impressed by?
                                                                                                                                                                                                      How did you know? How did they let you know about
                                                                                                                                                                                                      that? Did you ever feel that you had to eliminate
                                                                                                                                                                                                      aspects of yourself to be acceptable to others?
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Did you learn to use achievement, status, or success as
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a way of seeking approval and recognition from
                                                                                                                                                                                                      others?
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs             Interpersonal Problems              Typical Relevant Modes       Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                                 (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                     Relationships)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        As an adult, do you ever feel that by seeking approval
                                                                                                                                                                                                        and recognition from others, you can end up
                                                                                                                                                                                                        neglecting yourself and giving yourself time to just ‘be’
                                                                                                                                                                                                        and have fun?
                                                                                           Negativity/         Insuﬃcient: Balance     Resignation Coping Modes:           Resignation Coping Modes:    As a child, was there an excessive focus on negativity,
                                                                                           Pessimism           of positive and         Worries & ruminates about           Vulnerable (Disappointed;    pessimism, and things going wrong in your family?
                                                                                                               negative life events;   potential negative outcomes         downhearted) Child;          Was there less focus on talking about the positive side
                                                                                                               Support with            whilst dismissing positives;        Angry Child                  of life?
                                                                                                               managing diﬃcult        Discussions with others are         Avoidant Coping Modes:       How much play, joy, and spontaneity did your family
                                                                                                               events and              focused on complaining about                                     engage in when you were a child?
                                                                                                                                                                           Detached Protector; *Funny
                                                                                                               regulating emotions     problems, worrying about                                         Were either of your parents depressed/highly anxious/
                                                                                                                                                                           Protector; Detached Self-
                                                                                                               in healthy ways.        circumstances going wrong;                                       a worrier? Did either of your parents talk about their
                                                                                                                                                                           Soother
                                                                                                               Too much:               Obsessionally prepares for                                       worries and anxieties, predicting all of the possible
                                                                                                                                                                           Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                               Discussions focused     every possible scenario in                                       problems that could emerge?
                                                                                                                                                                           *Pollyanna; *Clown
                                                                                                               on negative             attempt to avoid negative                                        As an adult, do you focus a lot on things that could go
                                                                                                               outcomes,               outcomes.                                                        wrong? Do you spend a lot of energy planning and
                                                                                                               disappointments,        Avoidance:                                                       avoiding situations that might not be guaranteed of a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                               and not getting         Avoids situations perceived to                                   100% positive outcome?
                                                                                                               hopes up.               be ‘risky’; Stays within narrow
                                                                                                                                       comfort zone; Uses avoidant
                                                                                                                                       self-soothing (e.g., alcohol,
                                                                                                                                       drugs, bingeing, promiscuous
                                                                                                                                       sex, gambling) to block
                                                                                                                                       depression.
                                                                                                                                       Inversion:
                                                                                                                                       Sees the positive in every
                                                                                                                                       situation; denies negative
                                                                                                                                       feelings or fears; Overly buoyant
                                                                                                                                       and positive whilst ignoring
                                                                                                                                       negative emotions and
                                                                                                                                   minimising diﬃcult life
                                                                                                                                   circumstances; Takes on ‘expert’
                                                                                                                                   role to compensate for
                                                                                                                                   underlying insecurities.
                                                                                           Emotional        Insuﬃcient:            Resignation:                          Resignation Coping Modes:        As a child, did your parents express and talk openly
                                                                                           Inhibition       Expression of          Stays detached, calm,                 Vulnerable (Inhibited) Child;    about their feelings?
                                                                                                            vulnerability,         emotionally unexpressive in           Vulnerable (Frightened) Child;   Did your parents/caregivers encourage you to express
                                                                                                            emotions, and          relationships. Controls and           Angry Child;                     your feelings?
                                                                                                            needs.                 suppresses expression of                                               How was anger expressed by members of your family?
                                                                                                                                                                         Inner Critic (Demanding)
                                                                                                            Too much:              emotions, including joy,                                               How do members of your family express
                                                                                                                                                                         Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                            Disapproval/           spontaneity.                                                           happiness, joy?
                                                                                                                                                                         Detached Protector; Detached
                                                                                                            judgement for          Avoidance:                                                             As an adult, do others see you as emotionally uptight?
                                                                                                                                                                         Self-Soother; *Avoidant
                                                                                                            expressing             Steers clear of relationships and                                      Do you feel self-conscious expressing aﬀection? Is it
                                                                                                                                                                         Protector; *Funny Protector
                                                                                                            emotions, especially   situations that may result in                                          diﬃcult for you to show emotions to others?
                                                                                                            anger.                                                       Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                   overt expression of emotions.
                                                                                                                                                                         *Clown; Attention-Approval
                                                                                                                                   Inversion:
                                                                                                                                                                         Seeker; *Overcontroller
                                                                                                                                   Tries to ﬁt in, and act in a          (Invincible)
                                                                                                                                   vivacious or outgoing way, but
                                                                                                                                   feels stiﬀ and fabricated.
                                                                                           Unrelenting      Insuﬃcient:            Resignation:                          Resignation Coping Modes:        As a child, what messages did you receive from your
                                                                                           Standards        Unconditional          Strives for perfection; prioritises   Vulnerable (Disappointing/       parents about work–life balance?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           (hypercritical   acceptance; balance    work over health & happiness;         Short-Falling) Child;            How much balance did your parents demonstrate in
                                                                                           ness)            of fun, spontaneity,   prepares in excessive, over-          *Over-Diligent Child;            their own lives? Were they able to take time for fun,
                                                                                                            play alongside         inclusive manner in attempt to        Angry/*Sulking/*Rebellious       enjoyment, spontaneity, and play?
                                                                                                            work/study.            reach excessive standards.            Child;                           What was your attitude toward people who didn’t
                                                                                                            Too much: Family       Avoidance:                            Impulsive Child;                 uphold these high standards (in terms of study/
                                                                                                            culture of pressure    Procrastination/avoidance to          Inner Critic (Demanding)         success (e.g. academic, sports, appearance, etc.))?
                                                                                                            to achieve;            prevent being scrutinised by                                           How much pressure did you feel under to perform well
                                                                                                                                                                         Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                            emphasis on work;      peers; avoids mistakes.                                                and get good grades at school?
                                                                                                                                                                         Detached Protector; Detached
                                                                                                            role modelling of      Inversion:                                                             Were you expected to strive in order to be accepted
                                                                                                                                                                         Self-Soother
                                                                                                            prioritisation of      Relinquishes standards;                                                into a particular school/university as you grew up?
                                                                                                            work/striving over                                           Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                   haphazard, slap-dash, careless        *Slacker/Oblomov, *Helpless      As an adult, do you strive to be the best? Do you ﬁnd it
                                                                                                            health & happiness.    approach.                                                              hard to forgive yourself for making mistakes?
                                                                                                                                                                         Surrenderer
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs             Interpersonal Problems             Typical Relevant Modes          Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                                 (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                     Relationships)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Do you ever notice an urge to avoid work
                                                                                                                                                                                                          presentations due to fears about being scrutinised by
                                                                                                                                                                                                          your peers?
                                                                                           Punitiveness        Insuﬃcient:             Resignation Coping Modes:          Resignation Coping Modes:       As a child, were you punished harshly (e.g., shouted at,
                                                                                                               Love, warmth,           Critical, punitive, harsh toward   Vulnerable (Bad) Child;         hit) for making mistakes? Were you humiliated or
                                                                                                               aﬀection,               self & others.                     Angry or *Sulking Child;        made to feel bad about yourself when you got
                                                                                                               nurturance.             Avoidance:                         Impulsive Child;                something wrong?
                                                                                                               Too much:               Keeps others at a distance due     Inner Critic (Punitive)         As an adult, if you make a mistake, do you believe that
                                                                                                               Punishment,             to fear of being punished.         Avoidant Coping Modes:          you deserve to be punished?
                                                                                                               harshness, criticism,   Inversion:                                                         Do you feel compelled to punish others when they get
                                                                                                                                                                          Detached Protector; Detached
                                                                                                               judgement.              Lacks assertiveness, forgives      Self-Soother                    things wrong?
                                                                                                                                       everything.                                                        Do you worry that others will punish you?
                                                                                                                                                                          Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                                                          *Overforgiving merciful mode
                                                                                           *Lack of            Insuﬃcient:             Resignation Coping Modes:          Resignation Coping Modes:       As a child, what were your favourite places where you
                                                                                           Connectedness       Opportunity to          Operates in disconnected and       Vulnerable (Empty) Child        felt most alive and free?
                                                                                           to Nature           connect to nature in    disembodied way, materialism;                                      How much time did you spend in nature in childhood?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                          Avoidant Coping Modes
                                                                                                               a meaningful way,       has no active relationship with    Detached Protector, *Avoidant   What aspects of the natural environment do you recall
                                                                                                               insuﬃcient              Nature.                            Protector; Detached Self-       most clearly? As you focus on those places in your
                                                                                                               opportunity to          Avoidance:                         Soother                         mind’s eye, are there any images or sensations that
                                                                                                               develop                 Actively avoids spending time      Inversion Coping Modes:         you notice? What does it feel like in your body to recall
                                                                                                               connectedness with      in nature; or spends time in                                       those memories?
                                                                                                                                                                          Self-Aggrandiser; Predator
                                                                                                               place (natural          nature in disengaged manner.                                       Did you and/or anyone in your family have a special
                                                                                                               environment).           Inversion:                                                         connection with animals or other aspects of nature?
                                                                                                                                       Consumerism; domination and                                        What kinds of things did your family members do that
                                                                                                                                       exploitation of nature; use of                                     might indicate they cared about nature and the
                                                                                                                                       nature purely as resource to be                                    environment?
                                                                                                                                       manipulated, and proﬁted                                           Do you ever ﬁnd yourself aﬀected or anxious about
                                                                                                                                       from.                                                              current environmental crises?
                                                                                           *Unfairness   Insuﬃcient: Culture      Resignation:                        Resignation Coping Modes:         As a child, were you treated diﬀerently from other
                                                                                                         of fairness, equality,   Interprets others’ behaviours as    Vulnerable (Victimised) Child;    children – by your parents, school, peers?
                                                                                                         opportunity to           signs of victimisation and unfair   Angry Child;                      Were you treated diﬀerently from your siblings in any
                                                                                                         explain point of         treatment; Interprets negative      Impulsive Child                   way? E.g., were you made to feel less important, or to
                                                                                                         view.                    events as evidence that they                                          do an unfair share of the chores around the house?
                                                                                                                                                                      Avoidant Coping Modes:
                                                                                                         Too much: Treated        are being unfairly victimised;                                        As an adult, do you ever feel like you are a victim and
                                                                                                                                                                      Detached Protector
                                                                                                         unfairly, blamed         Expects others to take care of                                        that the world is unfair?
                                                                                                                                                                      Detached Self-Soother;
                                                                                                         when things go           them or makes things right.                                           Do you feel like you have to prepare yourself for the
                                                                                                                                                                      *Helpless Surrenderer; *Victim/
                                                                                                         wrong; Treated           Avoidance:                                                            worst? Do you feel that there is no point in getting
                                                                                                                                                                      Self-Pity
                                                                                                         diﬀerently from          Avoids relationships, closeness                                       your hopes up?
                                                                                                         siblings; victimised,                                        Inversion Coping Modes:
                                                                                                                                  based on equality and trust.                                          Alternatively, do you always assume the best of
                                                                                                         bullied.                                                     Bully & Attack, Predator;
                                                                                                                                  Inversion:                                                            everyone and not take precautions even when others
                                                                                                                                                                      *Invincible/Idealising
                                                                                                                                  Dominating, controlling,            Overcontroller; *Conning          would do so?
                                                                                                                                  manipulating, attacking others      Manipulator
                                                                                                                                  to give feeling of power and
                                                                                                                                  dominance to prevent being
                                                                                                                                  used/treated badly by others.
                                                                                                                                  Alternatively, naively idealises
                                                                                                                                  others as fair and equal, and
                                                                                                                                  does not take adequate steps
                                                                                                                                  to protect oneself.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           *Lack of a    Intersection of          Resignation:                        Resignation Coping Modes:         As a child, did you feel like it was diﬃcult to rely on
                                                                                           Coherent      needs across all         Feels unable to express own         Vulnerable (Confused) Child;      others to be there for you? Did it feel as though you
                                                                                           Identity      schemas.                 views, opinions, lacks a sense of   Angry Child                       couldn’t be certain that your caregivers would be
                                                                                                         Insuﬃcient:              coherent self. Intimacy is          Avoidant Coping Modes:            there for you?
                                                                                                         Identity grounded        superﬁcial and lacks emotional      Detached Protector                Did you feel cherished by your family? Did your family
                                                                                                         in interpersonal         depth.                              (dissociative); Detached Self-    celebrate special events in your life – such as your
                                                                                                         connectedness, self-     Avoidance:                          Soother                           birthdays, graduation, etc.?
                                                                                                         relevant roles;          Derealisation, dissociation,        Inversion Coping Modes:           Did you feel really ‘known’ or understood at a deep
                                                                                                         opportunities to feel    depersonalisation,                  Overcontroller; *Invincible-      level by family and friends?
                                                                                                         psychologically          pseudoseizures, facilitates         Pretender                         Was there a lot of disruption or change in your
                                                                                                         rooted and intact.       avoidance of sense of ‘falling                                        childhood as you grew up?
                                                                                                                                  apart’ or fragmentation of self.                                      Did you feel part of a wider community that meant
                                                                                                                                                                                                        something to you as you grew up?
                                                                                           Table 3.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Early               Unmet Needs           Interpersonal Problems                Typical Relevant Modes           Assessment Queries
                                                                                           Maladaptive                               (e.g., Signs in
                                                                                           Schemas                                   Relationships)
                                                                                                                                     Use of drugs, alcohol, gaming,                                         Was it hard for you to make sense of what was
                                                                                                                                     promiscuous sex.                                                       happening in your relationships and the ways that
                                                                                                                                     Inversion:                                                             other people behaved?
                                                                                                                                     Clings to false certainty and                                          Did you worry or feel anxious about your capacity to
                                                                                                                                     predictability such as through                                         cope with all of the changes happening in your life?
                                                                                                                                     co-dependency, and/or                                                  Did you ever worry that things were out of your
                                                                                                                                     overcontrolling behaviours                                             control (e.g., life circumstances, relationships, your
                                                                                                                                     (e.g., obsessional rituals, eating-                                    feelings, your body)?
                                                                                                                                     disordered rituals); Objectiﬁes                                        As an adult, do you cling to certain relationships or
                                                                                                                                     self and others in attempt to                                          coping habits as a way of trying to feel safe and in
                                                                                                                                     ﬁnd tangible identity; Pretends                                        control?
                                                                                                                                     to have a strong sense of                                              Do you worry that things will go wrong if you don’t
                                                                                                                                     identity and sure-footedness.                                          keep tight control over everything?
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do you worry about whether you are capable of
                                                                                                                                                                                                            coping when unexpected or unpredicted events crop
                                                                                                                                                                                                            up in your life?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do you ever feel like you don’t know who you are, as if
                                                                                                                                                                                                            your identity is missing, or as though you only exist as
                                                                                                                                                                                                            separate bits (or body parts)?
                                                                                           *Lack of a          Intersection of       Resignation:                          Resignation Coping Modes:        As a child, what were the values that were important
                                                                                           meaningful          needs across all      Experiences life as empty,            Vulnerable (Disconnected)        to your family?
                                                                                           world               schemas.              meaningless. Sense of                 Child;                           Which was more important in your family: success and
                                                                                                               Insuﬃcient:           disconnection from others and         Angry Child                      status, or other things? What meant most to your
                                                                                                               Opportunities to      the world.                            Avoidant Coping Modes:           parents as you were growing up?
                                                                                                               develop meaningful    Avoidance:                            Detached Protector               How much interest did your family show in the
                                                                                                               social connections,   Derealisation, dissociation,          (dissociative); Detached Self-   experiences and suﬀering of fellow others in the world
                                                                                                               meaningful goals      depersonalisation,                    Soother; *Helpless Surrenderer   who are suﬀering (e.g., other people, animals, nature)?
                                                                                                               and pursuits.         pseudoseizures, facilitates
                                                                                                                                           avoidance of sense of                 Inversion Coping Modes:          Was your family part of a church or any other spiritual
                                                                                                                                           emptiness, meaninglessness of         *Pollyanna/*Pretender            group? Did this resonate for you? Were you able to feel
                                                                                                                                           life; Use of drugs, alcohol.                                           a sense of belonging of fulﬁlment in this community?
                                                                                                                                           Inversion:                                                             How much time/energy was spent on supporting
                                                                                                                                           Clings to pseudo-control and                                           charities or other people outside of the family?
                                                                                                                                           meaning, such as by focusing                                           How much opportunity did you have to connect with
                                                                                                                                           on tangible materialistic life                                         nature? How much time did you spend with your
                                                                                                                                           goals (e.g., accumulation of                                           parents in the outdoors in natural or wild
                                                                                                                                           possessions, wealth,                                                   environments?
                                                                                                                                           appearance, weight) and
                                                                                                                                           overcontrolling behaviours
                                                                                                                                           (e.g., obsessional rituals, eating-
                                                                                                                                           disordered rituals); Objectiﬁes
                                                                                                                                           self and others in attempt to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                           ﬁnd tangible meaning and
                                                                                                                                           purpose; Pretends to have a
                                                                                                                                           strong sense of control and
                                                                                                                                           meaning.

                                                                                           * Proposed additional schemas/modes and associated unmet needs are based on recent theoretical developments by Arntz et al. [13] Aalbers et al. [33], Simpson and Smith [34],
                                                                                           and Edwards [35, 36].
          56            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



              Table 3.2 Common key problems in schema treatment as related to typical mode patterns

              Reported Problem Area                                        Potential Mode

              Chronic or acute anxiety or panic                            Vulnerable Child mode
              Chronic or acute depression                                  Vulnerable Child mode, Punitive (Parent) Critic
                                                                           mode, Detached Protector mode
              Low self-esteem                                              Punitive (Parent) Critic mode
              Anger dysregulation                                          Angry Child mode
              Aggression                                                   Angry Child mode, Bully and Attack mode
              Relationship problem – assertiveness                         Compliant Surrenderer mode
             Relationship problem – control                                Overcontroller mode, Self-Aggrandiser mode
             Relationship problem – lack of intimacy                       Detached Protector mode, Avoidant Protector
                                                                           mode
             Worry and rumination                                          Overcontroller mode (Over-analyser type)
             Perfectionism                                                 Perfectionistic Overcontroller mode
             Hopelessness                                                  Helpless Surrender mode; Avoidant Protector
                                                                           mode
             Stress/pressure/burnout                                       Perfectionistic Overcontroller mode,
                                                                           Demanding (Parent) Critic mode
             Withdrawal, avoidance of relationships and                    Avoidant Protector mode
             activities
             Shut down, loss of motivation and interest,                   Detached Protector mode
             lack of connection to positive aﬀect
             Binge drinking (or other compulsive or                        Detached Self-Soother, Impulsive Child mode
             addictive behaviour)




          term. Third, a clear problem list informs the goals of treatment, by which the eﬀectiveness of
          therapy will be judged. Whether therapy has been eﬀective can only be determined by
          referring to its goals and objectives. Table 3.2 outlines key problem areas that commonly
          present in chronic and complex clients seeking schema therapy, and the schemas and mode
          categories they might commonly reﬂect. Most clients will manifest a combination of modes,
          depending on their individual case conceptualisation.

          Diagnosis in Schema Therapy Treatment
          The challenges of assessment vary across client groups. For some presenting problems, the
          client will be insuﬃciently forthcoming with information to understand what maintains the
          problem. In these cases, making a formal psychiatric diagnosis (e.g., DSM-5 or ICD-10) can
          help the clinician access information about areas that are likely to be over- or under-
          reported by clients with that diagnosis. For example, clients with borderline personality
          disorder will often provide a detailed description of their emotional struggles but need more
          guidance with identifying coping behaviours that perpetuate their unmet needs. In contrast,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment               57



         clients with narcissistic personality disorder will require a concerted eﬀort from the
         therapist to delineate what the presenting issues are, and what the client’s worst fears are,
         should their diﬃculties remain unchanged. In addictions and eating disorders the focus
         should be on identifying the underlying suﬀering and unmet emotional needs that drive the
         urge for compulsive avoidance. Furthermore, because eﬃcacy studies usually select clients
         who ﬁt speciﬁc diagnostic categories, identifying a client who also ﬁts these categories gives
         the therapist more conﬁdence that a speciﬁc therapeutic approach or treatment format is
         likely to be successful. On the other hand, many clients have experienced signiﬁcant stigma
         related to either receiving particular diagnoses or the process of being ‘diagnosed’. We attest
         that while forming a diagnostic impression can inform the schema therapist, its ultimate
         usefulness will depend on the client and their experiences of diagnosis. Schema therapy can
         be described as a transdiagnostic model that works with common processes (e.g., self-
         criticism, emotional detachment, avoidance) rather than diagnostic categories per se; there-
         fore, schema therapy can be applied with clients who are not seeking a mental health
         diagnosis but who can identify signiﬁcant problem areas as a focus for treatment. Box 3.1
         provides an overview of the initial schema-focused assessment session.

             Box 3.1 Summary of Initial Assessment Session(s)

             Aims
             •    Establish a therapeutic connection or bond
             •    Explore unmet needs linked to childhood or adolescent experiences
             •    Assess strength of schemas and modes through observation of non-verbals, language (content),
                  countertransference, and questionnaires
             •    Explore the client’s capacity to describe their internal world, including emotions, thoughts, and
                  interoceptive experience
             •    Look for patterns within the manifestation of symptoms over time
             •    Develop hypotheses regarding the client’s dominant modes and dynamics between modes
             •    Assess strength of the client’s Healthy Adult self. How much compassion do they show themselves?
                  To what degree are they able to take responsibility for their decisions and day-to-day lives, to
                  regulate their emotions?
             •    Assess suitability for treatment

             Therapeutic Stance
             •    Warmth, presence, and attunement
             •    Compassionate stance based on tuning in to the client, how much compassion do they show
                  themselves? To what degree are they able to take responsibility for their problems? How is the level
                  of eye contact?

             Essential Topics to Cover
             •    Presenting issues (history and current manifestation)
             •    Begin exploration of developmental, family, and educational history throughout childhood and
                  adolescence as it relates to current diﬃculties, paying particular attention to attachment
                  disruptions. Explore relationships with caregivers within and since childhood
             •    Why they want treatment now: reasons (and fears) that led them to seek help at this time
             •    Previous therapy/treatment experiences
             •    Risk assessment (acute comorbid disorder or risk which requires immediate hospitalisation?)
             •    Enquire about personal goals for therapy: What does the client want to work on? How will you know
                  when this has been achieved? Try to link goals to speciﬁc behavioural changes



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          58            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice




               •   Ask for feedback: check in at the end of the session regarding the client’s emotional reactions to you
                   (therapist) and the session
               •   Clarify your (therapist’s) understanding of the client’s diﬃculties so far and ask for feedback in terms
                   of whether this resonates with the client’s experience
               •   Clarify what the client can expect over the assessment period, and how long this is likely to take (i.e.,
                   how many sessions)
               •   Identify factors which may limit eﬃcacy or require some degree of adjustment to the treatment,
                   such as IQ, acute psychosis, or neurodiversity (including ADHD, ASD)
               •   Allow venting about previous therapy experiences
               •   Hand out questionnaires and assign relevant reading as take-home tasks
               •   Begin the process of conceptualisation, the most relevant treatment format: short-term; longer-
                   term; group/individual?

               Conceptualising Modes Based on Process Information and Countertransference
               •   Identify client modes via patterns of speech, content, tone, and countertransference reactions
               •   Hypothesise about which modes are manifested by the way in which the client tells their story

               •   Assessing Suitability for Treatment
               •   Assess client ability for treatment: regular sessions, and management of risk through self-harm and
                   suicide risk




          Structuring the Initial Assessment Session
          First Assessment Session Aims. The ﬁrst session may take up to 90 minutes, with the goal
          of beginning to develop a therapeutic bond and simultaneously gaining a preliminary
          understanding of the client’s diﬃculties. We invite the client to describe in their own
          words, and from their perspective, the main problems and their reasons for seeking help.
          As the client tells their story, the therapist’s goal is to deepen their understanding of the
          issues and to identify ‘what happened’ (or didn’t happen) during the client’s early years that
          contributed to the development of their current diﬃculties. The therapist explores which
          needs may not have been met during the client’s life. Throughout, the therapist assesses the
          extent to which the client can describe their inner experience, including emotions, thoughts,
          and interoceptive sensations. At this early stage, the therapist does not give corrective advice
          or suggestions, as the client may experience this as invalidating. This is especially true for
          clients whose childhood was characterised by invalidation or well-meaning but ‘empty’
          validation consisting of platitudes, general reassurance, and advice. Instead, the therapist
          focuses on attuning to the client’s experience and being as emotionally present and attentive
          as possible. The presence and strength of schemas and modes is assessed through the
          triangulation of multiple sources of information, including self-monitoring tools, observa-
          tion of non-verbal behaviour, language (content), countertransference, questionnaire data,
          and imagery exercises. This information will eventually be collated into a schema therapy
          case conceptualisation or mode map depicting hypotheses about the client’s dominant
          modes and the dynamics between modes.
          First Session Therapeutic Stance: Emotional Presence and Co-Regulation. As the client
          tells their story, the schema therapist tries to be as emotionally present and validating as



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   59



         possible. Emotional presence requires the therapist to be in a centred state, aware of their
         own experience, so that they can ‘be with’ the client without becoming ﬂooded by their
         own – or the client’s – emotional reactions. Dan Siegel uses the acronym COAL to describe
         the ingredients of emotional presence: Curiosity, Openness, Acceptance, and Love [1]. The
         therapist remains a safe recipient of whatever the client needs to express. The therapist
         remains ‘with’ the client as they experience whatever they experience, including what will
         often feel like overwhelming emotions. Instead of providing advice at this early stage,
         schema therapists want the client to have an experience of being attuned to and getting
         their needs met from the very ﬁrst session. To attune to the client, the therapist needs to be
         willing to experience feeling vulnerable so that their emotions resonate with the client’s
         experience. In schema therapy, attunement is not simply listening and summarising/
         paraphrasing to show we understand – it is listening deeply and showing that we really
         care about the client’s internal reactions and experience; we aim for the client to have the
         experience of feeling felt and seen. As much as possible, the therapist needs to slow the
         interview down: for example, ‘I really want to understand this . . . can we slow this down
         a bit, can you tell me what that experience was like for you?’ The therapist conveys warmth,
         empathy, and care through eye gaze and tone of voice. The therapist aims to partially
         recreate the relationship of mother–infant bonding: a contained, ‘stable base’ providing
         emotional co-regulation for the client as they become aware of and describe diﬃcult
         psychological experiences (see Chapter 6: Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 1:
         Limited Reparenting). The therapeutic relationship provides enough emotional security to
         enable the client to go out into the world and continue their emotional development whilst
         learning to express themselves and connect authentically with others. Emotional regulation
         and stability are provided and internalised through the process of the client exploring and
         expressing their emotions in the presence of a therapist who remains attentive, calm, and
         caring, rather than through the therapist teaching regulation skills. Just as a child learns to
         regulate their own emotions through the soothing, attuned presence of a parent, our clients
         can learn to regulate themselves via this same process (limited reparenting).
         Linking Past and Present. The therapist tentatively suggests links between current diﬃcul-
         ties and early experiences, checking whether their hypotheses resonate with the client.
         Box 3.2 illustrates this process.
         Exploring the Client’s Coping Repertoire. When enquiring about presenting symptoms,
         behavioural urges, and coping strategies, our goal is to identify how these have evolved since
         childhood, and how they are linked to underlying schemas and schema modes. Schema- and
         mode-driven behavioural patterns and symptoms often manifest in diﬀerent ways over the
         lifespan, so the therapist should not assume that current coping strategies exhaust the
         client’s repertoire and enquire about ways of coping at other times in the client’s life.
         Box 3.3 illustrates a query to assess coping strategies.
             We might also enquire about how other family members and friends perceive the client’s
         problems and what advice they have received from them. Further, we would investigate
         what (if any) professional treatment they have received in the past, and to what degree this
         was helpful.
         Recognising and Making Sense of Body Experience. As the therapist explores the client’s
         experience, it is also important to understand their experience of physical sensations in the
         body – their interoceptive felt sense linked to schemas and modes. Clinically signiﬁcant



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          60            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



               Box 3.2 Clinical Example of Linking Past and Present During Assessment

               Miriam described feeling anxious every time her partner was late or was unable to take her
               calls at work. As a young child, her mother frequently raised the subject of leaving, telling
               Miriam that she didn’t want to be a parent, that she had never wanted Miriam, and that she
               was a burden to her. When Miriam was telling her therapist about the panic that had led to an
               argument with her partner the previous week, the therapist hypothesised:
               Therapist: As you are speaking about your history of romantic relationships, a part of me
               wonders if this might be linked to your experience as a child, when your mum would come
               and go, leaving you feeling alone and scared? And so, when your partner is late home from
               work, in your mind’s eye you teleport back to being that little girl, whose mother has
               threatened to leave you again. I might be making too much of a leap, but as you were
               describing the intensity of that sense of panic that you were experiencing, that possible
               association jumped out at me . . . would that make sense to you?




               Box 3.3 Clinical Example of Enquiring About Coping Strategies Across the Lifespan

               Therapist: So, it seems that gambling is one way you have learned to cope . . . when and how
               did this pattern emerge in your life? How old were you when this started? What about earlier
               in your life, were there any patterns of using distraction as a way of avoiding diﬃcult emotions
               as a young child?




               Box 3.4 Clinical Example of Identifying and Labelling Emotions During Assessment

               Client: ‘Well . . . I notice my heart is racing, and my chest is tense, like I can’t catch my breath.
               My throat is tight. My vision is blurry.’
                  Therapist: Could you try closing your eyes, focusing on those sensations, and just notice the
               ﬁrst image or word that comes up? I wonder if that feeling might be anxiety . . . does that
               resonate for you? Or could it be scared, or worried? Or is there another word that might ﬁt
               even better? Or alternatively, some people ﬁnd it easier to use colours . . . if those sensations
               had a colour, what would it be?



          sensations might include smells, tastes, muscle tension, ‘heaviness’, fatigue, temperature
          changes, nausea, or agitation. We might ask ‘When you are describing this event to me now,
          what are you noticing in your body?’ Answers may reveal body-experiences linked to
          schema modes. For clients who have little or no experience of labelling their emotions,
          this begins to develop their emotional literacy; the therapist helps the client make sense of
          their sensations by suggesting emotion labels that are likely to ﬁt with their experience. In
          the words of Dan Siegel [2], ‘name it to tame it’ refers to the notion that putting the felt sense
          of emotions into words increases one’s understanding of emotions and reduces their
          overwhelming impact. Box 3.4 illustrates how the clinician might assist clients to label
          their emotions.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   61



         Assess Strength of the Client’s Healthy Adult Self. From the ﬁrst session we begin to assess
         the strength of the client’s Healthy Adult self. Healthy Adult abilities include the capacity to
         show compassion for their own vulnerability and suﬀering, and to exercise self-care. Many
         clients will have high-functioning coping modes that mask the fact that their Healthy Adult
         mode is actually very underdeveloped – what Dialectical Behaviour Therapists call ‘appar-
         arent competence’ [3]. Detached Protector, Overcontroller, Self-Aggrandiser, and
         Compliant Surrenderer can all appear to fulﬁl the functions of Healthy Adult, but under-
         neath there is very little self-compassion. A litmus test for the compassionate strength of the
         Healthy Adult is the ‘Child in the Street’ exercise [4], wherein the client is asked to imagine
         themselves approaching a child who they ﬁnd crying in the street. As they approach the
         child, they notice their responses, emotions, and urges. Then they are guided to notice that
         the child is their own inner Vulnerable Child. Clients are asked to notice whether their
         responses stay the same or change once they realise the child is them.
         Discuss Previous Therapy Relationships. Giving the client an opportunity to talk and/or
         complain about previous therapists is also an important option in the assessment phase that
         can provide some insight into the client’s EMS triggers (e.g., hypersensitivity to feeling
         misunderstood, invalidated). This can help the therapist to anticipate potential therapeutic
         ruptures associated with client schema activation. For example, clients with BPD may have
         developed a pattern of elevating therapists to ‘rescuer’ status early in the relationship, and
         then felt abandoned when they have not been available due to therapist illness or extended
         leave. Miriam described several previous therapists who had terminated the therapy before
         she was ‘ready’. She had pleaded with them to continue to work with her and was angry when
         therapy ended. She also described feeling anxious when therapists were away on holidays and
         had tried to recruit several therapists to support her all at once. This was a clear indication that
         her Abandonment EMS was being activated within the therapeutic setting and signalled to the
         schema therapist to focus on the impact of this schema on treatment from the outset.
         Questionnaires. Questionnaires may be given out at the end of the ﬁrst session. However,
         for those with a strong overcompensatory coping style, it can be worthwhile to either wait
         before administering the questionnaires or give the questionnaires again after 8–10 weeks of
         therapy, once the client is displaying some of the vulnerability and suﬀering that lies
         underneath the coping modes. A list of suggested questionnaires is included in the section
         on Schema Therapy Questionnaires.
         Logistical Issues. In the ﬁrst session, important aspects of the therapeutic relationship are
         clariﬁed, including therapy times (length of sessions), conditions of payment (where
         required), and cancellation policy, and a contract for informed consent is signed. The client
         is invited to ask any questions they might have about the therapeutic contract. Clariﬁcation
         of the proposed length, phases, and format of therapy are gradually introduced towards the
         end of the assessment period, once the therapist has developed a clear case conceptualisation
         and treatment plan.
         Conceptualising Modes Based on Process Information and Countertransference.
         Depending on which of the client’s modes are active or ‘front stage’ in the assessment sessions,
         the therapist will need to adjust the content of the interview accordingly. For example, a client
         with an avoidant (e.g., Detached Protector mode) or overcompensatory (Self-Aggrandiser,
         Overcontroller) style of relating to others might discuss a history of abuse or neglect in



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          62            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



          a detached manner, whereby their emotional reaction has become disconnected from their
          narrative. They may dismiss the importance of early attachments or losses or describe their
          childhood as ‘ﬁne’ or ‘great’. The person may even idealise their childhood or minimise the
          impact of early unmet needs without being able to convey a balance of positive and negative
          experiences. The therapist might also notice their own ‘countertransference’ reaction of
          detachment or disinterest towards the client, in contrast to their usual attitude of interest
          and empathy. A client in Overcontroller mode might describe their experiences in an overly
          detailed way, focusing on the facts of the events but neglecting their emotional impact. The
          countertransference response in the therapist might be boredom, frustration, or a sense of
          powerlessness. A client in Compliant Surrenderer mode may also minimise the impact of
          childhood events whilst focusing more on others’ needs and the negative impact that they
          have had on others by not fulﬁlling their expectations or aspirations. In Compliant
          Surrenderer mode, the client may be more tuned in to the therapist’s needs, telling the
          therapist what they think that they want to hear. The countertransference response might
          initially include a positive feeling linked to a sense that ‘we are on the same page’, followed by
          feeling stuck when the therapist notices the client ‘paying lip service’ to the process but not
          authentically connecting to their Vulnerable Child self. The therapist needs to remain tuned
          in to the within-session presentation and behaviour of the client and to be guided by
          constantly questioning ‘what mode could this be?’ In all of these examples, the coping
          modes are ‘front stage’, dominating the client’s conscious perspective on the world, whereas
          their child modes are likely to be ‘back stage’, meaning information relating to their emotional
          experience is less available. This informs the therapist the extent to which strategies for
          bypassing coping modes are needed to reach the hidden child modes.
          Assessing the Client’s Suitability for Schema Therapy. An important component of
          schema therapy assessment is evaluating the client’s suitability to begin therapeutic work.
          Many clients experience regular crises as a central part of their mental health diﬃculties.
          This does not preclude them from accessing therapy; in fact, a signiﬁcant period of
          therapeutic work will be dedicated to emotional bonding and stabilisation. However, if
          instability is so signiﬁcant that the client is unable to attend sessions regularly, they may
          require preparatory practical support or stabilisation prior to starting schema therapy.
          Clients with acute comorbid disorders – such as severe depression, substance misuse,
          acute psychosis, and eating disorders – may require a hospital admission to bring about
          suﬃcient stability to enable them to begin a course of outpatient schema therapy. Risk posed
          by acute suicidality should also be assessed, with particular attention to coping resources. In
          schema therapy, analysing situations which provoke thoughts of suicide or self-harm is
          especially valuable in elucidating unmet emotional needs and associated schema modes. For
          example, many clients with longstanding diﬃculties report chronic suicidal ideation, which
          may represent a compulsive re-enactment of internalised messages of defectiveness and
          punitiveness. Alternatively, suicide or self-harm may serve one or more coping function
          (e.g., escape from distress). The schema therapist should explore and formulate links
          between schemas, modes, and suicidality, and associated risk. Which modes might be
          driving the risk? Which modes want the client to self-harm? This is valuable information
          for the risk assessment and will determine the degree to which additional mental health
          support services may need to be involved, and whether hospital admission and stabilisation
          are required before onset of therapy (e.g., in the case of severe depression and/or suicidal-
          ity). Other therapeutic approaches (e.g., dialectical behaviour therapy, acceptance and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   63



         commitment therapy) may also be integrated during the initial phase of therapy to enhance
         coping and reduce risk [5] in preparation for implementing schema therapy.
         Wrapping up the First Session. At the end of the ﬁrst session, it can be useful to ask about
         the client’s experience of the session and whether there were any aspects that made them feel
         uncomfortable. For example, a client with a history of rejection or abandonment may be
         highly rejection-sensitive and require more than usual reassurance about the therapist’s
         availability to provide consistent care. Another client with a strong Mistrust/Abuse schema
         may be more likely to view warmth and empathy with suspicion and may react with disdain
         or cynicism. This ‘checking in’ allows the therapist to respond to any queries or anxieties
         that the client may have at the end of the session, to demonstrate curiosity about the client’s
         internal experience in the here and now, and to further strengthen the therapeutic rapport
         through validation and attunement.

         Comprehensive Schema Therapy Assessment (Sessions 2–8)
         As the assessment proceeds beyond the initial 1–3 sessions, both therapist and client will be
         better able to gauge whether and how they will work together in the longer term. Should
         they continue to work together, assessment continues until suﬃcient information has been
         garnered from interviews, questionnaires, and the therapy relationship (process informa-
         tion and therapist countertransference reactions), to develop a preliminary case conceptu-
         alisation and mode map. This section describes all the areas the clinician should include
         over the course of the assessment phase to enable them to put together, and eventually
         present, a case conceptualisation to the client (see Chapter 4: Case Conceptualisation and
         Mode Mapping in Schema Therapy).
         Assessment of Temperament. The therapist should enquire about the client’s temperament
         (both as an infant and now) to help understand the mismatch between innate predisposition
         and parenting style that resulted in unmet needs during childhood and, in turn, to the
         formation of EMS. Temperament appears to inﬂuence both choice of coping style [6, 7], and
         emotional sensitivity and intensity [8]. Recent evidence suggests that at least 25% of the
         population may have a highly sensitive temperament, which, in turn, increases reactivity to
         the type of parenting received [8, 9]. These clients appear to thrive with highly nurturing
         parenting but are more susceptible to developing diﬃculties when faced with inadequate or
         adverse childhood circumstances.
             The reader is directed to the extensive research on the role of temperament in personal-
         ity development, including the work of Rothbart and colleagues [10] and Cloninger and
         colleagues [11]. The following dimensions were provided by Young, Klosko, and Weishaar
         [7] as a guide for assessing client temperament:
         • Extraversion–Introversion
         • Labile–Non-Reactive
         • Dysthymic–Optimistic
         • Anxious–Calm
         • Obsessive/Perfectionistic–Distractable
         • Passive–Aggressive
         • Irritable–Cheerful
         • Shy–Sociable



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          64            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



          Assessment of Life History. A comprehensive life history assessment explores the inter-
          action between the client’s temperament and unmet childhood emotional needs that have
          contributed to the development of EMS and schema modes. We suggest that eight main
          areas of unmet needs should be explored:
          • Secure Attachment and Connection to Others – Children need the protection of a safe and
              reliable adult upon whom they can depend. Children need opportunities to connect and
              share their emotions, experiences, and thoughts with others. Children require attuned
              co-regulation during their early development to be able to modulate their emotions [12].
          • Freedom of Self-Expression – Children need the freedom to express their emotions and
              views without the threat of being punished or restrained.
          • Play and Spontaneity – Children need opportunities to play, have fun, and be
              spontaneous to enable them to develop a sense of connection and capacity for joy.
          • Autonomy – Children need a secure, safe environment from which they can venture out
              to experience the world, discover their capacity to cope, and develop self-reliance and
              self-eﬃcacy.
          • Realistic Limits – Children need support to develop an understanding of societal rules to
              enable them to live in harmony alongside others, and guidance to learn how to deal with
              frustration.
          • Self-Coherence and Meaningful World [13] – The healthy person knows who they are;
              they have an inner sense that a part of them is consistent and stable across moods and
              situations, and that feels secure and ‘together’. The healthy person knows what they
              value and lives a meaningful life consistent with their values. They recognise their
              existence both as a separate and ‘whole’ individual as well as a being who is inextricably
              interconnected with all living beings. They have a sense of purpose that includes but
              extends beyond the individual. They experience a sense of self-determination and
              capacity to live a life that brings them joy, harmony, and purpose. Children need support
              to develop a sense of self and identity whereby they can feel positive about themselves
              and develop self-appreciation.
          • Physical Safety and Security – Children need protection from physical harm, uncertainty,
              and pain. Children need to feel secure that they – and their signiﬁcant others – are safe
              from physical harm or injury, illness, abuse, and ﬁnancial collapse.
          • Connection to Nature – People thrive when they feel connected with nature and all living
              creatures [14]. The ability to experience interconnectedness with all aspects of the
              universe, Earth, and nature is an essential source of well-being and nourishment [15, 16].
              The extent to which the aforementioned needs have been met in the client’s life will
          determine which EMS and modes are likely to have developed. Childhood physical, sexual,
          and emotional abuse are important areas of enquiry in a schema therapy assessment [17]. In
          the case of assessing emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, the therapist is looking at
          experiences that happened but shouldn’t have within the person’s childhood. However, many
          more clients have been aﬀected by emotional neglect. In this case, the therapist is looking for
          ingredients that the client should have had as part of a healthy upbringing but missed out on:
          the absence of childhood need satisfaction. A signiﬁcant proportion of the population are
          growing up ‘under the radar’, without adequate experiences of parental or family capacity for
          emotional availability, attunement, warmth, overt aﬀection, nurturance, empathy, guidance,
          and feeling cherished. In these cases, the history-taking must be more nuanced, with greater
          use of hypothetical questions. Intergenerational sociograms or genograms [18] can be used to



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   65



         draw out interpersonal patterns and EMS that have been transmitted through successive
         generations. This may also include societal problems and traumas associated with discrimin-
         ation and historical atrocities based on race and sexuality. Cultural factors and intergenera-
         tional patterns should be explored alongside intra-familial patterns, including family attitudes
         towards physical touch, emotional expression, gender roles, body objectiﬁcation, and so on.
         Asking about unmet needs within the parents’ and grandparents’ childhoods can also be
         a helpful starting point, before moving on to explore ways in which the client’s parents’
         parenting style was the same or diﬀerent from their grandparents’ parenting style. For
         example: ‘What do you know about your mum’s childhood? What were the good bits and
         the diﬃcult bits that you know about? Is that something you could ask her more about?
         I wonder if she parented you in a similar way to the parenting she received, or whether she
         tried to do things diﬀerently? If there were improvements, what were they? What were the
         parts of parenting that might have been a struggle for her because of her own childhood?’ For
         further assessment questions linked to speciﬁc schemas, see Table 3.1.
             Generally, when clients can describe their childhood in a coherent, balanced way which
         includes both positive and negative aspects of their experience, and they are able to describe
         repeated instances in which a particular need was met – without the need to idealise or minimise
         the impact of their experiences – the therapist can assume that this need was adequately met.
             In the Appendix to this chapter, you will ﬁnd more detailed suggestions for questions
         that we have found useful to help the therapist explore the relevance of each of these needs.
         They are not exhaustive and should not be used as a ‘checklist’ per se, but oﬀer a guide as to
         lines of questioning that are often useful to explore the client’s childhood background
         through an attachment and ‘needs’ lens.
             Schema Questionnaires. Schema therapists vary greatly in how they administer and
         utilise questionnaires. On most occasions, these will be handed to clients to ﬁll out as
         homework between sessions. However, when working with clients with high levels of
         trauma or dissociation, or who are very easily overwhelmed, it can be helpful to cover the
         questionnaires more slowly during a session to try to keep within the ‘window of tolerance’
         (the zone of arousal which is optimal for receiving, processing, and integrating information)
         [19] while completing them.
         • Young Schema Questionnaire (YSQ-L3 (Young & Brown, 2003) [20]; YSQ-S3
             (Young, 2005) [21], YSQ-R [22] measures 18 EMS, with a 6-point Likert scale that
             ranges from a score of 1 (Completely untrue of me) to a score of 6 (Describes me perfectly).
             To guide clinical use, Young has recommended looking at items with high rating (i.e., 5
             or 6) and interpreting as clinically meaningful any EMS for which 3 high-rating items
             have been endorsed on the long version (YSQ-L3) or 2 items have been endorsed on the
             short version (YSQ-S3). The YSQ-S3 was validated using community as well as clinical
             samples [23]. Internal consistency and Cronbach’s alpha reliability was >0.70 for 17 of
             the EMS, except for Entitlement. A validation study by Bach, Simonsen, Christoﬀersen,
             and Kriston [24] found all 18 EMS had a Cronbach’s alpha value of >0.70. The subscales
             of the YSQ-S3 were also found to be meaningfully linked with personality disorders.
             Clients with strong overcompensatory modes may generate artiﬁcially low scores on
             core EMS in the Disconnection and Rejection domain. In this case, consider using
             other measures, such as the Young Parenting Inventory [25] or Young Parenting
             Inventory-Revised [26]. Recently, Yalcin, Marais, Lee, and Correia used item
             response theory analyses to create a new short version, the YSQ-R, containing only items




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          66            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



              with the best psychometric characteristics. This analysis also led to a reconceptualisation
              of the Emotional Inhibition schema as better representing two separate factors of
              Emotional Constriction and Fear of Losing Control (of emotions) and the Punitiveness
              schema as having separate factors: Punitiveness (Self-Directed) and Punitiveness (Other-
              Directed). The YSQ-R and scorer are available from the journal article’s website [22].
          • Young Parenting Inventory-revised (YPI-R2; Louis, Wood & Lockwood, 2018) [25]
              assesses perceived negative parenting. The YPI-R2 is a 36-item questionnaire measuring
              parenting styles, namely: Competitiveness and Status seeking; Degradation and
              Rejection; Emotional Inhibition and Deprivation; Overprotection and Overindulgence;
              Punitiveness; Controlling. Subscale scores are calculated as mean scores, with higher
              scores indicating stronger perceived negative parenting. The YPI-R has been shown to
              be a reliable and valid measure of perceived parenting [26].
          • The Schema Mode Inventory (SMI V1.1; Young et al., 2007) [27] is a self-report
              measure consisting of 124 items designed to assess 14 schema modes, which includes 5
              dysfunctional coping modes, namely Compliant Surrenderer, Detached Self-Soother,
              Detached Protector, Bully and Attack, and Self-Aggrandiser. A 6-point Likert scale
              ranging from 1 (never or almost never) to 6 (all of the time) is used to rate each item. The
              overall score for the individual schema mode is calculated by the sum score of each scale,
              which is then divided by the number of items on that scale. The higher the calculated
              schema mode score, the more pervasive the mode.
          • Positive Schema Questionnaire (PSQ; Louis, Wood, & Lockwood, 2018) [28] is a self-
              report measure consisting of 56 items rated on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (never
              or almost never) to 6 (all of the time). This questionnaire was designed to assess early
              adaptive schemas linked to 14 themes – Emotional Fulﬁlment; Success; Empathic
              Consideration; Basic Health and Safety/Optimism; Emotional Openness and Spontaneity;
              Self-Compassion; Healthy Boundaries/Developed Self; Social Belonging; Healthy Self-
              Control/Self-Discipline; Realistic Expectations; Self-Directedness; Healthy Self-Interest
              /Self-Care; Stable Attachment; Healthy Self-Reliance/Competence. This scale has been
              found to have good factorial validity, cross-cultural stability, and excellent reliability [27].
          • Life Events Checklist (LEC-5; Weathers et al., 2013) [29] – When it comes to clients
              divulging trauma in the assessment phase, we have found that for some clients it can be
              a case of ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’. For these clients, if you do not ask directly about trauma, it
              may be many sessions down the line until the client divulges this. We have found the Life
              Events Checklist for DSM-5 (LEC-5) to be a useful self-report screen for potential
              traumatic events across a respondent’s lifetime. The LEC-5 assesses exposure to 16
              events known to commonly predict subsequent PTSD or distress and includes an
              additional open question designed to pick up events not covered explicitly by the
              checklist. There is no formal scoring protocol or interpretation per se. In a schema
              therapy assessment, the checklist will pick up potentially traumatic incidents to be
              followed up. It is particularly important to ascertain the impact of any of these events
              both on the client’s current functioning, and on their childhood development, if any of
              these events occurred during childhood.
              Questionnaire scores can be explored collaboratively in the form of bar graphs, which
          will enable the therapist to focus on which EMS or modes are relatively high and which are
          unexpectedly low. Alternatively, questionnaires can be used more qualitatively, by exploring
          each of the client’s main schemas in turn, in terms of relevant childhood and adolescent
          experiences (and unmet needs) as well as current patterns that have evolved from these. The


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   67



         YSQ can be used to explore schema themes and unmet needs that are linked to these. As the
         therapist provides feedback regarding the questionnaire scores, the client can be asked for
         examples from diﬀerent aspects of their lives. The therapist may choose to focus on the
         schemas with the highest questionnaire scores, or it may be more fruitful to focus on the
         schemas for which scores are relatively high in the case of an individual whose scores are
         suppressed across all EMS. For clients who only report secondary/compensatory schemas,
         the therapist may choose to explore the aspects of life that the client avoids, to shed more
         light on the underlying core schemas. For example, a client may endorse a high Unrelenting
         Standards and Self-Sacriﬁce schema on the YSQ, but core schemas appear unsubstantial.
         However, the therapist notes that the client has attended therapy due to marital dissatisfac-
         tion, alongside a longstanding pattern of consistently forming relationships with emotion-
         ally unavailable partners, so explores the possibility of an underlying Emotional Deprivation
         schema that is hidden by powerful coping modes. If the client’s responses have been
         obscured by a highly avoidant or overcompensatory coping mode, then it can be useful to
         revisit these later in therapy, once coping modes have been bypassed and the client is able to
         complete questionnaires from a more authentic perspective. Coping modes may also arise as
         the therapist provides feedback on questionnaire results, in terms of how the person
         describes events and associated unmet needs. For example, someone with a strong
         Detached Protector mode may say something like, ‘that’s all in the past, I’m over that
         now, I’ve dealt with it and don’t see the point of dwelling on that stuﬀ’. All responses provide
         data that can help the therapist make sense of the client’s presentation and feed into the
         mode conceptualisation. The therapist can also enquire about how the client found the
         process of ﬁlling out the questionnaires as a means of exploring the role of schemas and
         modes. An exploration of both schemas and modes can enrich the case conceptualisation by
         ﬁne tuning the understanding of how schemas and modes operate under diﬀerent circum-
         stances, and the ‘ﬂavours’ of the modes, based on underlying schemas, unmet needs, typical
         triggers, and emotional felt sense. Examples of diﬀerent ‘core emotional ﬂavours’ of the
         Vulnerable Child mode are described in Table 3.3.
         Imagery in Assessment. Diagnostic imagery is a powerful technique for identifying links
         between presenting issues, coping behaviours, early experiences of unmet childhood needs, and
         the origins of EMS. Many chronic and complex clients are unable to report the details of
         schema-related experiences (e.g., speciﬁc triggers, feelings, bodily sensations, meaning aspects)
         during traditional interviewing. In these cases, imagery – which has a strong connection to
         emotional memory [30] – can be used to activate the schema within the session to make its
         contents more accessible. Imaginal assessment helps the therapist and client develop a deeper,
         experiential understanding of the schema. There are two main types of imagery for assessment:
         1) Imagery of a recent event – The therapist asks the client to recall a recent episode of the
            problem being triggered but, rather than simply discussing it, asks the client to close their
            eyes and relive the recent episode, relaying the experience as though they were there.
            Although the primary purpose of the exercise is to help identify problem-schema-coping
            relationships, this kind of imagery task is also a good indicator of the client’s capacity to
            manage aﬀect. If the client has some diﬃculty regulating aﬀect during this kind of recent
            imagery, it is unlikely they would be ready to process imagery focused on the past,
            especially childhood images which tend to be more overwhelming.
         2) Imagery of a historical event via ‘Aﬀect Bridge’ – If clients can handle recent images, an
            imagery aﬀect bridge can be used to establish an experiential link between recent schema



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Table 3.3 Assessment and identiﬁcation of schema modes

                                                                                           Modes                 Verbal Content          Non-verbal                Typical Body               Countertransference               Mode ‘Agenda’        Therapist Pitfalls
                                                                                                                                         Gestures,                 Experience and             Reactions
                                                                                                                                         Behaviours and            Urges
                                                                                                                                         Tone
                                                                                           Child Modes
                                                                                           Vulnerable Child      Describes &             Tone of voice and         Increased activity in      Compassion, empathy,              To communicate       Therapist stays too
                                                                                                                 expresses emotions      posture indicates         the upper chest area,      connection. Therapist can         needs, emotions.     cognitive and does not
                                                                                                                 in authentic            vulnerability,            changes in breathing       ‘feel’ the client’s feelings in                        stay emotionally
                                                                                                                 manner.                 sadness, anxiety,         and heart rate.            the room. (May trigger                                 present. Limited
                                                                                                                                         loneliness,               Decreased limb activity.   therapist’s emotional                                  reparenting is too
                                                                                                                                         overwhelm. May be                                    inhibition schema, leading                             general and not
                                                                                                                                         child-like, terriﬁed of                              to detachment.)                                        attuned to client’s
                                                                                                                                         abandonment,                                                                                                unmet needs.
                                                                                                                                         tearful.
                                                                                           Angry Child           Acting out anger in     Facial expression         Sensations of approach/    Anxiety, defensiveness (may       To show others the   Therapist becomes
                                                                                                                 child-like way to       either overtly or         aggression in head,        trigger therapist’s               hurt they have       defensive and makes




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                 show others how         passively angry.          upper limbs, and torso.    Subjugation, Emotional            caused, by acting    excuses. Therapist
                                                                                                                 much hurt they          Overt: Slams doors,                                  Inhibition &/or Mistrust/         out or punishing     becomes angry at client
                                                                                                                 have caused.            shouts, throws                                       Abuse, and Punitiveness           them.                and ﬁghts back.
                                                                                                                 Blames therapist or
                                                                                                                                         things. Covert:                                      schemas).                                              Therapist detaches and
                                                                                                                 others.
                                                                                                                                         Silently punishes                                                                                           loses connection with
                                                                                                                 ‘I hate you! It’s not
                                                                                                                 fair!’                  others (e.g., through                                                                                       client. Therapist allows
                                                                                                                                         missing                                                                                                     client to vent endlessly
                                                                                                                                         appointments,                                                                                               without setting limits.
                                                                                                                                         acting in sullen
                                                                                                                                         manner).
                                                                                           Undisciplined Child   ‘I can’t do it, it’s too   Cancels or does not       Mild discomfort in the     Frustration, anger,         To escape              Therapist colludes with
                                                                                                                 hard, too                  attend sessions at        legs and stomach.          punitiveness, urge to       discomfort, to avoid   client’s avoidance of
                                                                                                                 uncomfortable!’            short notice. Pays ‘lip                              control (may trigger        sense of failure.      discomfort, steering
                                                                                                                                            service’ to                                          therapist’s Failure or                             away from diﬃcult
                                                                                                                                            homework – then                                      Unrelenting Standards, or                          topics. Therapist takes
                                                                                                                                            avoids tasks which                                   Punitiveness Schema).                              all-or-nothing (rather
                                                                                                                                            may cause distress or                                                                                   than a graduated
                                                                                                                                            discomfort. Does not                                                                                    approach) to setting
                                                                                                                                            complete                                                                                                therapy session and
                                                                                                                                            homework, does not                                                                                      homework tasks.
                                                                                                                                            pay for sessions on
                                                                                                                                            time.
                                                                                           Impulsive Child       ‘I want it now!’           Seeks immediate           Excitement, urge to        Anxiety (regarding risk-    To bypass obstacles    Therapist avoids raising
                                                                                                                                            gratiﬁcation,             respond to take risks/     issues).                    to freedom. To take    issue of boundary
                                                                                                                                            impatient, easily         what they want.                                        what I want/need       transgressions. Therapist
                                                                                                                                            frustrated or             Anger in chest and                                     before my freedom      does not recognise
                                                                                                                                            irritated.                extremities if thwarted.                               is taken from me.      unmet needs associated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    with impulsive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    acting out.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Inner Critic
                                                                                           (Internalised)
                                                                                           Modes
                                                                                           Punitive mode         ‘I’m a bad person;         Self-punishment,          Increased sensations in    Intimidated.                To punish self and     Therapist is not
                                                                                                                 There is something         self-harm.                the head, chest (shame),                               sabotage recovery      suﬃciently assertive in
                                                                                                                 wrong with me; I am                                  digestive system, and                                  (due to belief that    setting limits on this
                                                                                                                 defective, ﬂawed,                                    around the throat region                               they don’t deserve     mode.
                                                                                                                 unlovable’.                                          (disgust).                                             happiness).
                                                                                                                                                                      Urge to hide, freeze,
                                                                                                                                                                      avoid.
                                                                                           Table 3.3 (cont.)

                                                                                           Modes               Verbal Content          Non-verbal              Typical Body              Countertransference            Mode ‘Agenda’           Therapist Pitfalls
                                                                                                                                       Gestures,               Experience and            Reactions
                                                                                                                                       Behaviours and          Urges
                                                                                                                                       Tone
                                                                                           Demanding mode      ‘I should try harder;   Produces ‘perfect’                                Pressure to meet client’s      To push client to       Therapist colludes with
                                                                                                               Where is the            homework, tries to                                high expectations.             reach high              this mode by setting
                                                                                                               extra 10%?’             get everything                                                                   standards instead of    unrealistically high
                                                                                                                                       ‘right’, striving for                                                            taking care of self.    standards for self and
                                                                                                                                       ﬂawless recovery.                                                                                        client.
                                                                                           Guilt-Inducing      ‘I’m undeserving,       Dismisses/                                        Anger (on behalf of client).   To make client feel     Therapist is not
                                                                                           mode                a burden.’              minimises own                                                                    guilty for placing      suﬃciently assertive in
                                                                                                                                       needs, and pushes                                                                emphasis on own         setting limits on this
                                                                                                                                       for recovery only to                                                             recovery and future     mode.
                                                                                                                                       reduce impact of                                                                 happiness.
                                                                                                                                       client’s problems on
                                                                                                                                       others.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Coping Modes
                                                                                           Detached            Describes problems      Zoned out, numb,        Deactivation of           Fatigue, sleepiness, zoning    To detach, avoid        Detached Protector is
                                                                                           Protector/Self-     in detached way.        yawning,                sensations,               out, boredom ‘walking          vulnerability           mistaken for Healthy
                                                                                           Soother             When asked about        ‘downloading’           depersonalisation, body   through mud’, frustration.     associated with         Adult mode. Therapist is
                                                                                                               how they feel, they     information in          rigidity creating         (May trigger therapist’s       schema activation       insuﬃciently ‘relentless’
                                                                                                               commonly answer         detached or cynical,    separation from others.   Failure schema due to lack     (e.g., to avoid being   in bypassing this mode.
                                                                                                               ‘I don’t know’.         or Pollyanna                                      of progress.)                  hurt, rejected,
                                                                                                                                       (excessively upbeat                                                              overwhelmed,
                                                                                                                                       or positive) manner.                                                             humiliated, losing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        control).
                                                                                           Angry Protector   Becomes annoyed if        Hostile, annoyed,        Tension or ‘hardening’     Intimidated, with urge to       To avoid               Therapist backs oﬀ and
                                                                                                             therapist suggests        irritated. Implicit      of the upper and lower     comply by avoiding              interactions which     enables avoidance of
                                                                                                             experiential work:        message ‘I don’t         diaphragm area, neck,      experiential work (may          will lead to           vulnerability by sticking
                                                                                                             ‘Why do we have to        need you!’               jaw. Holding breath.       trigger therapist’s             vulnerability due to   to ‘safe’ topics.
                                                                                                             do this stupid                                     Urge to shut others out,   Subjugation schema).            fear of humiliation,
                                                                                                             imagery work                                       withdraw.                                                  rejection,
                                                                                                             anyway?’                                                                                                      abandonment etc.)
                                                                                           Complaining       Gives details of          Complains in             Pulling shoulders up,      Feeling trapped, stuck,         As above.              Complaining Protector
                                                                                           Protector         perceived problem-        a relentless,            arms and legs crossed      frustrated, impotent.                                  is mistaken for
                                                                                                             issues or problem-        detached manner.         or tucked close to the     (May trigger therapist’s                               Vulnerable Child, so
                                                                                                             people in                                          body, hunched posture.     Subjugation & Self-Sacriﬁce                            therapist responds with
                                                                                                             a repetitive, detailed                             Chin pulled down. Eye      schemas.) May trigger                                  reparenting, whilst
                                                                                                                                                                                           therapist’s Unrelenting
                                                                                                             manner. Seeks                                      gaze and expression                                                               avoiding empathic
                                                                                                                                                                                           Standards schema, leading
                                                                                                             ‘solutions’ but then                               may convey passive                                                                confrontation.
                                                                                                                                                                                           to an urge to give advice, &
                                                                                                             rejects these: ‘yes,                               hostility.
                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘ﬁx’ the problems.
                                                                                                             but . . .’ and/or ‘that




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                             doesn’t work’.
                                                                                           Compliant         Agrees with               Smiley, pleasant,        Posture is overly          Feeling stuck, frustration at   To avoid conﬂict &     Therapist reacts by
                                                                                           Surrenderer       everything that           agreeable façade.        accommodating, leans       inability to access client’s    rejection.             making all decisions
                                                                                                             therapist suggests,       May compliment           forward, allows others     true needs and feelings.                               rather than accessing
                                                                                                             goes along with           therapist. Attempts      to invade personal                                                                client needs and
                                                                                                             suggestions, carries      to take care of          space. Apologetic for                                                             emotions.
                                                                                                             out homework              therapist’s needs by     taking up space.
                                                                                                             diligently.               bringing gifts, and is
                                                                                                                                       overly
                                                                                                                                       accommodating.
                                                                                           Table 3.3 (cont.)

                                                                                           Modes               Verbal Content          Non-verbal             Typical Body             Countertransference            Mode ‘Agenda’           Therapist Pitfalls
                                                                                                                                       Gestures,              Experience and           Reactions
                                                                                                                                       Behaviours and         Urges
                                                                                                                                       Tone
                                                                                           Self-Aggrandiser    Describes self in       Values therapist       Arms outstretched or     Feels devalued, used,          To distance self        Therapist waits too long
                                                                                                               grandiose or            only insofar as they   elbows outward with      powerless.                     from underlying         to use empathic
                                                                                                               entitled way, and       provide gratiﬁcation   hands behind head.                                      sense of                confrontation and limit
                                                                                                               considers others as     (recognition,          Limbs open, taking up                                   worthlessness,          setting. Therapist
                                                                                                               ‘the problem’.          approval).             available space. Chin                                   shame, loneliness.      colludes with
                                                                                                                                                              up, eye gaze may ‘look                                  To be ‘on top’ of all   recognition-seeking,
                                                                                                                                                              down on’ others.                                        interactions.           and client does not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              learn how to tolerate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nurturance as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vulnerable Child.
                                                                                           Overcontroller      Intellectualising,      Denies                 Closed posture, rigid,   Compulsion to be drawn         To distance self        Therapist mistakes
                                                                                                               pontiﬁcating,           vulnerability &        tense. Furrowed brow.    into power struggles and       from vulnerability      Overcontroller for
                                                                                                               overanalysing.          compensates            Narrowed gaze. Tense     micro-level debates.           through                 Healthy Adult. Therapist
                                                                                                                                                                                       Therapist feels scrutinised,                           engages in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                               Describing rules,       through engaging       expression.                                             perfectionism,
                                                                                                               and situations in       in intellectual                                 powerless, controlled,         knowledge,              intellectualisation,
                                                                                                                                                                                       under pressure to get                                  debates, power
                                                                                                               excessive detail.       debates or power                                                               productivity,
                                                                                                                                                                                       things right, to avoid                                 struggles.
                                                                                                               Presents self as all-   struggles with                                                                 invincibility. May
                                                                                                                                                                                       mistakes, to be eﬀective                               Therapist allows
                                                                                                               knowing,                others. Takes                                                                  also use self-
                                                                                                                                                                                       and productive.                                        Overcontroller to take
                                                                                                               knowledgeable,          control of therapy,                                                            ﬂagellation &/or        control of sessions, and
                                                                                                                                                                                       Relationship is viewed as
                                                                                                               well-read.              sets the agenda,                                a transaction.                 deprivation used as     avoids empathic
                                                                                                                                       prefers to focus on                                                            mechanism to gain       confrontation. Therapist
                                                                                                                                       cognitive work &                                                               sense of control,       fails to recognise self-
                                                                                                                                       ﬁnding logical                                                                 safety, atonement,      ﬂagellation as coping
                                                                                                                                       solutions.                                                                     propitiation.           mechanism and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              assumes it is Punitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mode.
                                                                                           Helpless             Describes                Presents self as        Looks down, averts eye    Initially: urge to rescue, and   To legitimise needs      Therapist mistakes
                                                                                           Surrenderer/Victim   diﬃculties in            fragile and helpless    gaze. Hunched/            take on role of ‘saviour’        through                  Helpless Surrenderer as
                                                                                           mode.                intense, helpless,       (can include illness    collapsed posture. Hugs   (may trigger therapist’s Self-   helplessness, illness,   Vulnerable Child mode
                                                                                                                passive manner.          behaviour).             legs to chest/torso.      Sacriﬁce schema with             fragility. To provide    and does not use
                                                                                                                Pays lip service to      Expresses                                         excessive responsibility;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            underlying               empathic
                                                                                                                therapeutic goals,       vulnerability in                                  May trigger sense of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Abandoned Child          confrontation. Therapist
                                                                                                                with underlying          slightly inauthentic                              grandiosity in therapist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            with a substitute        gratiﬁes the mode
                                                                                                                agenda of seeking        manner, as a means                                within ‘rescuer’ role).
                                                                                                                a ‘perfect’ parent       of seeking ‘rescue’ &                             Later: irritation, trapped,      parent to avoid          through reparenting,
                                                                                                                who will take care       protection.                                       powerless, manipulated,          underlying pain of       rather than trying to
                                                                                                                of & never abandon       Presents as                                       urge to refer on (may            unmet needs              access underlying
                                                                                                                them.                    helpless &                                        trigger therapist’s Self-        associated with          Abandoned Child.
                                                                                                                                         dependent, but if                                 Sacriﬁce schema – therapist      abandonment              Therapist enables
                                                                                                                                         confronted, may                                   feels guilty about diﬃculties    dependency,              avoidance of
                                                                                                                                         move into Victim                                  accessing empathy).              emotional                responsibility and does
                                                                                                                                         stance: ‘You don’t                                                                 deprivation.             not bring client’s
                                                                                                                                         care about me’.                                                                                             Healthy Adult into chair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     work and imagery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rescripting early
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     enough. Therapist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     allows boundaries to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     become blurred (oﬀers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     longer sessions, high
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     contact between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sessions, avoids setting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     termination date).
                                                                                           Healthy Modes
                                                                                           Healthy Adult        Client takes             Uses healthy            Upright posture, open     Feeling connected with           To heal the child        Therapist takes on role
                                                                                           (‘Higher Self’)      responsibility for       emotional               expression, openness of   client on an ‘equal’ adult       modes through            of Healthy Adult too
                                                                                                                change; sets realistic   regulation              chest/torso area.         basis. Can trust client to       developing self-         much (or for too long)
                                                                                                                goals; takes healthy     strategies              Relaxed expression,       take care of themselves, to      compassion and           instead of coaching
                                                                                           Table 3.3 (cont.)

                                                                                           Modes               Verbal Content          Non-verbal               Typical Body              Countertransference           Mode ‘Agenda’          Therapist Pitfalls
                                                                                                                                       Gestures,                Experience and            Reactions
                                                                                                                                       Behaviours and           Urges
                                                                                                                                       Tone
                                                                                                               steps to access         (especially              maintains healthy level   prioritise their own needs;   learning to get        client to embody this
                                                                                                               support; seeks          connection) to           of eye contact.           to carry out homework         emotional needs        role. Therapist stays too
                                                                                                               healthy connections     enable them to                                     tasks between sessions.       met; to regulate       cognitive/rational, but
                                                                                                               with others; takes      tolerate distress                                                                emotions through       lacks warmth, and
                                                                                                               steps to get            associated with                                                                  top-down (mindful      attunement.
                                                                                                               emotional needs         trauma processing;                                                               problem-solving)
                                                                                                               met in healthy          takes care of self and                                                           and bottom-up
                                                                                                               relationships;          body.                                                                            (embodiment)
                                                                                                               focuses energy on                                                                                        processes; to
                                                                                                               areas of mastery/                                                                                        embrace and
                                                                                                               achievement to                                                                                           transform coping
                                                                                                               strengthen sense of                                                                                      modes, to set limits
                                                                                                               self-expression;                                                                                         on Parent (Inner
                                                                                                               assertively and                                                                                          Critic) modes and
                                                                                                               compassionately                                                                                          Angry/Impulsive/
                                                                                                               protects own                                                                                             Undisciplined child




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                               boundaries (from                                                                                         modes. Developing
                                                                                                               others’ demands,                                                                                         a sense of meaning
                                                                                                               work, etc.); sense of                                                                                    and connection
                                                                                                               self is ‘embodied’ –                                                                                     based on ‘inter-
                                                                                                               based on being in                                                                                        being’ –
                                                                                                               the body and in                                                                                          understanding the
                                                                                                               tune with body                                                                                           connection
                                                                                                               signals; seeks sense                                                                                     between self and all
                                                                                                               of self and meaning                                                                                      living beings.
                                                                                                               that is
                                                                                                               interconnected with
                                                                                                               all living beings.
                                                                                           Contented Child   Client can have fun,    Uninhibited self-     Sensations in head,       Feels a sense of connection   To experience            Therapist is striving due
                                                                                                             be spontaneous,         expression, laughs,   upper limbs, and torso,   with playful spontaneous      greater levels of joy,   to their own
                                                                                                             laugh and enjoy life;   cries, reacts in      enhanced sensations all   part of client.               fun, spontaneity         Demanding Critic and
                                                                                                             engages in activities   spontaneous           over the body.                                          and contentment.         places disproportionate
                                                                                                             for enjoyment and       manner.                                                                                                energy into focusing on
                                                                                                             pleasure, rather                                                                                                               trauma processing
                                                                                                             than solely for                                                                                                                without nurturing the
                                                                                                             achievement;                                                                                                                   Contented Child.
                                                                                                             expresses self in                                                                                                              Therapist is too stuck in
                                                                                                             creative ways (e.g.,                                                                                                           their own
                                                                                                             through dance,                                                                                                                 Overcontroller mode,
                                                                                                             music, art).                                                                                                                   trying to get the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            therapy ‘right’, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            follow the rules, but




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            misses opportunities for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            emotional connection,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and introducing fun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and ‘light’ activities into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            therapy.
          76            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



               activation and its developmental antecedents. A useful starting point for this exercise is
               to ask the client to visualise a current trigger situation (e.g., an argument with a family
               member, a situation at work), noticing subsequent thoughts, feelings, and visceral felt
               sense. The client then focuses on the emotion (aﬀect) to evoke childhood experiences
               (bridge) that generated similar feelings. This process is outlined in Box 3.5.


               Box 3.5 Example Script: Imagery Aﬀect Bridge for Assessment

               Start: Choose a recent schema-triggering episode that the client would like to examine (e.g.,
               triggered by a colleague at work).

               Step 1. Close Eyes and Activate a Memory
               Therapist: Close your eyes and take me back to this recent episode. What is happening in the
               image? Take some time to thicken out the image . . . What do you see (hear, smell)? Are there
               any characters involved in the image?

               Step 2. ‘Tune in’ to the Client’s Feelings, Speciﬁc Triggers, and Meaning Derived
               From the Image
               Tune in to the speciﬁc feelings and felt reaction in the body.
               How do you feel in this image . . . and where do you feel that in your body?
               Tune in to what seems to be the main trigger in the image. What’s happening for the client
               to feel this way? Make sure the client is immersed in the image as indicated by them
               speaking in the ﬁrst person, using the present tense. For example: ‘I’m in the lunchroom, he’s
               over by the door laughing’. It is often quite powerful to identify the hotspot in the image:
               Therapist: What is the moment here in the image that is most painful for you? . . . OK, it is the
               fact that he is laughing at you . . .’
               Tune in to the meaning/takeaway that the client derived from the experience.
               What does it mean to you that this is happening?

               Step 3. Aﬀect Bridge: Float Back From the Recent Experience and Connect
               to a Relevant Childhood Image
               OK . . . now that you are connected to that feeling . . . and that feeling in your body . . . we
               can let that image wash away a little bit . . . but stay with that feeling . . . the feeling of xxxxx
               [insert feeling label/bodily sensation/schema theme/meaning].
               . . . You know . . . I’m willing to bet it’s not the ﬁrst time you’ve felt this way . . . this feeling of (e.g.,
               being not good enough, and that feeling in your throat) . . . now let’s gently take that feeling . . .
               and take it all the way back to being a little boy/girl . . . (pause) . . . what is the ﬁrst image that
               comes up for you connected to this feeling . . . (pause) . . . (pause) what do you see . . .?

               Step 4. Elaborate the Relevant Childhood Image
               What is happening in the image . . . what’s happening for little x? Take some time to thicken
               out the image . . . What do you see (hear, smell), are there any characters involved in the
               image? What does little x need in the image? How do any caregivers respond to those
               needs? How does that feel?

               Step 5. Bring the Client Back into the Present Moment
               OK . . . now let’s slowly and gently . . . pan out of the image and ﬂoating back towards the
               present moment . . . and drifting towards the recent episode . . . just notice this recent
               episode as you ﬂoat towards it . . . notice if there is any connection between this image and


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment      77




             that of the child . . . How might this image be similar to the childhood image? . . . How might
             it be diﬀerent? (optional: safe place imagery . . .) and now when you are ready . . . can I get
             you to slowly and gently open your eyes and reorient yourself to the room . . .

             Step 6. Debrieﬁng the Exercise
             Generally, the therapist will derive a lot of rich information from such an exercise directly by
             getting feedback from the client about their experience during the task. Some interesting
             reﬂective questions to debrief this task might include:
             1.   What was that like for you?
             2.   What did little x (the child) need in the childhood image?
             3.   Were your parents (or caregiver) available to meet those needs?
             4.   What did you need in the adult scenario?
             5.   Is there any connection between the two?
             6.   What might this say about your needs going forward?
             Generally, what might ensue is an open discussion of how characteristic this kind of scenario
             was of their childhood experience, and how these needs and schema themes might relate to
             the kind of problems they experience these days. This information will go straight into any
             formulation.



         Part II – Process Issues in Assessment
         During the assessment phase, the main goal is to enable the client to describe their
         presenting issues and life history in their own way whilst observing how they communicate.
         As clients describe their diﬃculties, the schema therapist notices both the way in which they
         tell their story and the meanings they have derived from their experiences. The process of
         telling the story will also help to reveal the client’s level of ‘mindsight’ – the capacity to
         reﬂect on one’s own mind and that of others – or awareness, which is an indicator of the
         strength of a client’s Healthy Adult mode. In later assessment sessions, the way in which the
         client has told their story can form points for discussion and shared observation, to
         stimulate the development of Healthy Adult mindsight, whilst providing preliminary
         education about schemas and modes (see Box 3.6 for examples of how to use observations
         of clients’ in-session behaviour to identify schema therapy concepts).
              Recent research indicates that coherence in retelling the details of childhood is a sign of
         secure attachment [31]. As the client tells their story, consider its coherence and complete-
         ness. These qualities may indicate the presence of EMS or problematic coping modes. What
         does the client include, and what is omitted? How much detail is given, and to what degree
         does the narrative sync with any expression of emotions? As schema therapists observe the
         client telling their narrative, they might hold in mind the following questions to guide the
         assessment and hypothesis testing process:
         • Does the client describe their childhood in a chaotic manner (describing events
              disparately or haphazardly, with little use of sequence or themes of connection) or a rigid
              manner (describing events in an overly detailed way that is disconnected from emotion/
              sensory experience)? For those with a pattern of disorganised attachment characterised
              by emotional/physical/sexual abuse and/or neglect, memory gaps may be linked to the
              child using dissociative coping as a survival mechanism. These patterns may be




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          78            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



               Box 3.6 Clinical Examples of Incorporating Observations of Client Behaviour
               Into Schema Therapy Assessment

               Therapist: I’m curious about something I noticed just now . . . I’m guessing that it must have
               felt traumatic for you to have been bullied at school, and yet when you describe this to me,
               your facial expression and tone of voice conveys a diﬀerent message, almost as if it didn’t
               aﬀect you. I wonder what happened [or didn’t happen] in your past for you to have learned to
               dismiss or shut oﬀ from those emotions . . . It’s almost as if there is a part of you that operates
               as a protector, to keep your emotions at a distance . . . Does that resonate in any way for you?
                  s
                  I notice that, on the one hand, you describe your relationship with your parents as close, but
               on the other hand it sounds like your feelings and needs weren’t really a topic of conversation
               in your family. I wonder if you can help me understand what ‘closeness’ means to you . . . how
               would I know you were close if I were a ﬂy on the wall in your home?
                  or
                  I notice that as you are telling me your story, it feels a little bit like the memories and pieces
               of your life are a bit disjointed or chaotic. Does it ever feel like that to you as you are living day-
               to-day . . . as if life is a puzzle and it’s hard to piece it together in a way that makes sense?



               associated with a range of schemas, especially those from the Disconnection and
               Rejection domain, including Defectiveness, Mistrust/Abuse, Abandonment, and
               Emotional Deprivation.
          •    Does the client describe childhood from an overly positive stance in an attempt to gloss
               over any events that may cast parents or other family members in a negative light? (This
               may indicate that loyalty to others interferes with acknowledging negative emotions
               toward them.) This is commonly associated with modes such as Detached Protector (‘I’m
               ﬁne, my childhood was ﬁne’); Compliant Surrenderer (‘I must be what others want or
               expect me to be, and go along with their wishes’); Guilt-Inducing Critic (‘If I get angry/
               upset with others, I’m a bad person’); and Punitive Critic/Flagellating Overcontroller (‘It’s
               better to be a bad kid in a good family than a good kid in a bad family’). Or are they able to
               describe both negative and positive experiences in a Healthy Adult balanced way (i.e., give
               examples both of needs that were met and needs that were not met)?
          •    To what degree does the individual focus on relationships amongst family
               members when they are describing events from childhood (as opposed to simply
               focusing on external life events)? This will provide information about the value
               that the client has learned to place on relationships. A person who grew up in an
               emotionally detached environment, in which their parents were emotionally
               inhibited and had limited capacity for connection, will learn to abandon their
               internal world and focus on the external world (events, achievements,
               appearances). They learn to connect with others through communicating concrete
               concepts and intellectualising, but lack capacity to communicate about their
               emotional experiences. Although they continue to experience emotions and
               sensations, these remain in the background, detached and minimised.
               Alternatively, individuals who have experienced a chaotic childhood environment
               where there are high levels of expressed emotion and/or instability can become
               highly preoccupied with interpersonal relationships as an adult, due to expectations
               that the past chaotic patterns (e.g., abandonment, loss, rejection, humiliation) will



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   79



              recur in present relationships (schema perpetuation). Thus, the degree to which
              discussion of others features in stories of early childhood may inform the
              development of hypotheses about the client’s schemas and unmet needs.
         •    How connected is the client to their emotions as they talk about their diﬃculties and
              their childhood? Does the client describe diﬃcult circumstances (e.g., traumas) in a way
              which is emotionally congruent, or in a detached manner? For example, a client with
              a strong Emotional Deprivation and/or Emotional Inhibition schema (linked to
              insuﬃcient emotional attunement in childhood) may talk about their life in very
              concrete terms, and may be dismissive of the impact of childhood and/or describe their
              childhood memories in a vague manner that lacks sensory or emotional detail. A client
              with a signiﬁcant Abandonment schema may tend to confuse past and present and be
              preoccupied by a constant fear that others will leave them in the here and now.
         •    It is easier to detect schemas in clients with a surrendering coping style; these clients are
              more in touch with the felt sense of their schemas. However, for clients with strong
              overcompensatory or avoidant coping styles, conscious awareness of schema-driven
              patterns will be limited, depending on how well their coping strategies work. For example,
              a client with a substance addiction may manage to keep their feelings of abandonment and
              defectiveness at bay through consistently ensuring they have access to their substance of
              choice. A client with bulimia nervosa may block activation of schemas through regular
              bingeing and purging. A client with relationship diﬃculties, who is a highly successful
              CEO with his own business, may keep the loneliness and shame associated with their
              Emotional Deprivation and Defectiveness/Shame schemas out of awareness through
              workaholism and an excessive focus on achievement. In these cases, the therapist will have
              to work harder to identify schemas by integrating both what the client says/doesn’t say,
              their non-verbal communication, and the evolving countertransference.
         •    From a schema mode perspective, you might pay attention to whether the story is told
              from the viewpoint of a coping mode, a parent mode, or a child mode. From the
              Detached Protector mode, the client will tell their story in a numb, detached manner that
              may be out of sync with the content of their life story. Alternatively, they may just answer
              ‘I don’t know’ to questions, with a blank expression. In relation to questions about
              childhood, they might say, ‘Oh, I have already dealt with that stuﬀ in the past. I just want
              to focus on the present now and don’t want to go back there and talk about my parents.’
              A client with a strong Paranoid Overcontroller mode might withhold important
              information for fear of losing control (e.g., ‘Why do you need to know that?’) and might
              give suspicious or vague answers to questioning. A client in Angry Protector mode
              might become hostile when the therapist asks about childhood and deny any connection:
              for example, ‘I really don’t see what you’re getting at. You therapists are so predictable,
              I don’t see the point in this!’ A person in Self-Aggrandiser mode might turn their focus
              back to the therapist, either in a charming way (e.g., ‘I heard you were the best therapist
              in the area, and I thought that with your expertise you would really understand me’), or
              asking about the therapist’s qualiﬁcations, and questioning the therapy model and/or
              the therapist’s way of working. From the viewpoint of the Pollyanna mode, a client is
              likely to gloss over any negative details whilst producing an overly glossy or optimistic
              perspective of their childhood that is incongruent with their circumstances: for example,
              ‘My parents are wonderful . . . just the best. I’ve had an ideal childhood, perfect in every
              way. All of my needs were met. I’m so fortunate.’
              See Table 3.3 for further information about how schema modes may present in session.


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          80            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



          Part III – Deﬁning Treatment Goals and Gauging Client Motivation
          It is important that the client’s key problem areas can be translated into some clear
          treatment goals. Therapists should note the degree to which the client can articulate their
          treatment goals. Is the client able to describe in speciﬁc terms what they would like to be
          diﬀerent in their life, and what they would like to work on from a personal perspective?
          Similarly, how motivated is the client to pursue these goals? The therapist should enquire
          about the client’s fears and feelings (short-term and long-term) if they do versus do not
          work on these issues. What are the motivating factors? Did they decide to attend of their
          own volition, or has someone else in their life encouraged them or made an ultimatum to
          motivate them to attend therapy? Do any of their goals clash with those of other family
          members? Are the client’s goals linked to their presenting issues? To what degree is the
          client exercising a sense of autonomy by engaging in therapy or considering change? Below
          are some key questions and considerations that might guide the schema therapist in
          understanding the client’s treatment goals and motivation for change.

          What Stage of Change Might the Client Be In?
          In Figure 3.1 we have mapped schema therapy objectives and interventions onto the stages
          of change model [32]. How ready/able is the client to set long-term vs. short-term goals? Are
          their goals focused on short-term relief or on long-term contentment and fulﬁlment? Is the
          client seeking a ‘quick ﬁx’, or do they require psychoeducation to help them recognise the


           Stages of Change in Schema Therapy
           (based on Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983)
                                                                        Pre-contemplation
                                                             Mode mapping, pros/cons of coping
                                                               modes; ‘contaminate’ VC chair;
                                                             chairwork (Th plays VC); draw the
                                                             modes; psychoeducation regarding
                                                              modes/schemas/emotional needs



                                                                                                     Contemplation/Preparation
                                      Relapse
                                                                                                  *Safe/calm place imagery/*Chairwork
                          *Chairwork to identify stuck points in
                                                                                                      with coping modes; *Imagery
                           recovery; *Imagery for behavioural
                                                                                                  Rescripting to identify origins of EMS
                       rehearsal; *push for behavioural changes
                                                                                                    and coping modes; Limited Re-
                        to strengthen capacity to get needs met
                                                                                                      parenting; *gentle Empathic
                        from HA and interpersonal relationships
                                                                                                              Confrontation




                                                                                                          Action
                                        Maintenance                                            *Chairwork to empathically confront
                                                                                             coping modes; Imagery & chairwork to
                               * Push for behavioural change and                           bypass coping modes and strengthen HA;
                                   internalization of HA mode;                                *Empathic contfrontation/limit setting;
                                    *Future focused imagery;                                * Imagery rescripting to address EMS &
                                  *Chairwork with ‘stuck’ modes                                  unmet needs; historical role-play;
                                                                                            Emotional Deprivation schema diaries &
                                                                                              flashcards; behavioural change work

          Figure 3.1 Stages of change model and schema therapy interventions [32]




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment   81



         intense work and commitment that comes with long-term therapeutic change? How willing
         are they to tolerate short-term stress or diﬃcult emotions to achieve their longer-term
         goals? How might they envisage their life evolving in ﬁve and ten years’ time if their goals
         were achieved? What barriers do they anticipate that might block their progress at this early
         stage? Is there anything that can be learned from previous therapy relationships about what
         might trigger blocks to treatment engagement, adherence, and progress (e.g., a tendency to
         be suspicious as soon as the therapist forgets to do something they had promised, whilst
         assuming that all therapists are just like everybody else and don’t really care about them)?

         Explore Client Treatment Goals That Relate to Presenting Issues
         Over the course of treatment, the client’s capacity to self-reﬂect and consider more
         possibilities may allow their goals to evolve. It can be useful to revisit and ﬁne-tune
         goals to ensure that they cover a broad range of life domains. This might include
         relationships and connections (to self, others, nature), work, spirituality, bodily and
         mental well-being, or any domain that is signiﬁcant to the client. Clients who are aware
         of their distress, such as those with BPD, are more likely to be able to describe their
         current diﬃculties in detail and to formulate goals linked to these. For those with
         Cluster C and NPD, the presence of strong coping modes can interfere with the
         person’s capacity to recognise or describe their underlying suﬀering. These clients can
         easily lose sight of their reasons for attending therapy, increasing the risk that sessions
         will be dominated by ‘downloading’ details, general chatting, or a space for intellectual-
         ising or self-aggrandising (depending on dominant modes). With the ultimate goal of
         bypassing coping modes, it is therefore crucial to link treatment goals with the client’s
         underlying (and sometimes hidden) experience of vulnerability. Treatment goals should
         to some extent be linked to these areas of vulnerability (e.g., to reduce feelings of
         suicidality or loneliness, and to learn healthy ways of getting needs met). For clients
         with narcissistic and highly avoidant presentations, the clear identiﬁcation of diﬃculties
         and goals will later be a source of leverage to motivate the client to engage in
         experiential work that will mitigate their emotional suﬀering. For clients with more
         chaotic symptom presentations, the goals will serve as a compass to which both
         therapist and client can return, to ensure that working with crises and schema activation
         on a week-to-week basis remains consistent with the overarching goals. For those with
         more rigid and compulsive presenting issues, regularly revisiting the goals will serve as
         a beacon that brings hope and motivation to work on bypassing stuck – and seemingly
         impenetrable – coping modes, to facilitate healing work with the child modes.

         What Length of Treatment Might Be Appropriate or Realistic?
         Schema therapists must ensure that they are available to provide longer-term therapy,
         especially when working with clients who require extensive trauma-processing work.
         However, this may be ﬂexible to some degree by incorporating phase-based schema therapy
         [33] and/or a combination of group and individual therapy. Short-term (~20 sessions)
         schema therapy has also been found to be eﬀective for many client groups (see Chapter 1:
         From Core Emotional Needs, to Schemas, Coping Styles, and Schema Modes for details).
         Goal setting can then be planned around phases and/or length of treatment to ensure that it
         is realistic and achievable within this time frame.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          82            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



               Box 3.7 Clinical Examples of Feeding Back Hypotheses Formed During Assessment
                (a)
               Therapist: Could it be that this pattern of expecting that others will become ill or die might
               be linked to the early experience of suddenly losing your grandmother, the only person who
               really understood you and was there for you?
               (b)
               You mentioned that procrastination and turning up late is causing you stress at the
               moment . . . I wonder if when your boss sets a deadline that triggers old memories of your
               dad telling you what to do? And there is this part of you that pushes back against that feeling
               of being controlled?
               (c)
               I can see that it’s so hard for you to conﬁde in others about what you need and feel. I’m
               curious as to whether you might have learned to protect yourself by detaching from your
               feelings as a little girl, as neither of your parents really ‘got’ you, and your brother teased you
               incessantly . . . What do you think about this idea?
               (d)
               I wonder if your inability to switch oﬀ from your studies and relax might be related to your
               mum’s high expectations in childhood . . . the way she would always act disappointed if you
               didn’t get the top grade in your class?




          Provision of Feedback in Assessment
          The schema therapist tentatively links current problems with early patterns and unmet
          needs over the course of the entire assessment phase. Even at the end of session one or two,
          the experienced schema therapist can provide a basic mode map, which can be presented on
          paper, a white board, or via chair work, to introduce the client’s main modes and link these
          to early experiences. This is collaboratively presented, as a summary of the most
          conceptualisation-relevant information obtained via the assessment to date. This can be
          a validating experience, by helping the client to consider possible origins of their diﬃculties
          and providing a developmental framework for understanding their presenting issues.
              At this stage the therapist aims mainly to ‘plant seeds’ by introducing the notion that the
          client’s presenting problems make good sense when they are considered in the context of the
          early environment in which they emerged. This can be highly liberating as the client starts to
          realise that their problems might not be due to an inherent ﬂaw but be at least partly a side
          eﬀect of their survival as a human being. Although therapists’ suggested links are only
          tentative hypotheses at this early stage, they set the scene for the development of the more
          stable conceptualisation and therapeutic work that follows (see Box 3.7 for examples of how
          a therapist feeds back their assessment).
              After approximately 4–8 sessions, once historical information has been gathered, ques-
          tionnaires have been ﬁlled out and discussed, and early exploration and linking (of early
          experiences with current diﬃculties) has begun, the therapist can move into a more formal
          process of collaboratively constructing a case conceptualisation to guide therapy.

          Concluding Remarks About the Assessment Phase
          The assessment process in schema therapy requires a blend of determination and ﬂexibility
          on the part of the therapist, to carry out the detective work that will enable them to piece



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment            83



         together the puzzle of linking multiple presenting issues, childhood and adolescent experi-
         ences, and unmet needs and/or traumas. As much as possible, the schema therapist should
         be genuinely curious, open-minded, and attuned to the individual, whilst drawing on
         previous research and guidance, and should resist the urge to make assumptions based on
         diagnostic labels. At some level, the assessment process continues throughout the entire
         course of therapy, as more information is revealed and understood, allowing for re-
         conceptualisation and ﬁne tuning. Throughout the assessment process, the schema therap-
         ist suggests possible links between current presenting issues and interpersonal patterns,
         early attachment processes and schema development. This process is aimed at building
         rapport through deep attunement and transparency whilst providing education about
         schema development, thereby gradually strengthening the client’s capacity to self-reﬂect.
         Schemas and modes are gradually introduced into the conversation, integrating informa-
         tion gained from discussions about current presenting issues and early experiences. As the
         assessment proceeds, the focus gradually moves from addressing ‘What’s wrong with you?’
         to ‘What happened in your life for you to have learned to think this way about yourself and
         to cope in this way?’ Once there is enough preliminary information to piece together (at
         least provisionally) the factors that link early experiences with the onset and maintenance of
         schemas, modes, and presenting issues, the therapist can begin to tentatively verbalise these
         case conceptualisations, checking out how well these ideas resonate with or make sense to
         our clients. In some cases, the therapist will be wrong and need to return to the drawing
         board; in other cases, clients will immediately feel relieved that at last someone understands
         their world. On yet other occasions, clients might not be ready to focus on the truths that
         underlie their diﬃculties, and the therapist may need to revisit these in a gentle yet
         persistent way as they move forward with the early phase of treatment.
             Even a tentative shared case conceptualisation provides the basis for schema therapy.
         It is therefore essential to spend suﬃcient time exploring childhood and adolescent
         issues to understand how these may be linked with presenting issues. However, the
         therapist must acknowledge that exploring unmet needs in childhood is often a painful
         process and ﬁnd a way to work collaboratively with clients to help them understand
         their own truths and experiences. The therapist must resist any urge to prioritise the
         therapist’s preconceptions, agendas, and internal timetables. At the end of the main
         phase of assessment, it can be helpful to feed back the therapist’s assessment and case
         conceptualisation in a way that helps the client make sense of their own story. One way
         of doing this is in the form of telling a fairy-tale, as a way of ‘bringing it all together’.
         For example: ‘Once upon a time, there was a little child who went through A,B,C
         [experiences associated with parenting, and wider family]. The child felt X a lot of the
         time, and learned to cope by doing Y and Z. This helped some of the time but ended up
         creating more problems through . . .’.
             This leads us to the next chapter, wherein we explore the schema therapy case concep-
         tualisation in greater depth.

         References
         1. Siegel DJ. Aware: The science and practice of                 2. Siegel DJ, Bryson TP. The whole-brain child:
            presence – a complete guide to the                               12 revolutionary strategies to nurture your
            groundbreaking Wheel of Awareness                                child’s developing mind. Bantam Books;
            meditation practice. Tarcherperigree; 2018.                      2012.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          84            The Model of Schema Therapy in Practice



            3. Linehan M. Skills training manual for                             international workgroup. Cognitive
               treating borderline personality disorder.                         Therapy and Research. 2021.
               Guilford Press; 1993.                                       14. Windhorst E, Williams A. Growing up,
            4. Farrell JM, Shaw IA, Reiss N. The                               naturally: The mental health legacy of early
               schema therapy clinician’s guide:                               nature aﬃliation. Ecopsychology.
               A complete resource for building and                            2015;7:115–25.
               delivering individual, group and                            15. Groeger N. Meta needs in the context of
               integrated schema mode treatment                                schema therapy: Psychometric qualities of
               programs. Wiley; 2014.                                          a new meta needs questionnaire and
            5. Roediger E, Stevens BA, Brockman R.                             relationships with depression, anxiety and
               Contextual schema therapy: An integrative                       schemas. Maastricht Student Journal of
               approach to personality disorders, emotional                    Psychology and Neuroscience.
               dysregulation, and interpersonal                                2012;1:65–79.
               functioning. New Harbinger Publications;                    16. Renye D. We are the environment:
               2018.                                                           Understanding how when we
            6. Haugh JA, Miceli M, DeLorme J.                                  interpsychically and interpersonally take
               Maladaptive parenting, temperament,                             care and heal ourselves, we aid the
               early maladaptive schemas, and                                  evolution of the environment and
               depression: a moderated mediation                               planet. Presentation at The Annual
               analysis. Journal of Psychopathology and                        Meeting of the California Sociological
               Behavioral Assessment. 2017; 39                                 Association; 2007, 17 Nov.; Berkeley,
               (1):103–16.                                                     California.
            7. Young JE, Klosko JS, Weishaar ME.                           17. Pilkington P, Younan R, Bishop A. Early
               Schema therapy. Guilford; 2003.                                 maladaptive schemas, suicidal ideation,
            8. Kennedy E. Orchids and dandelions:                              and self-harm: a meta-analytic review.
               How some children are more susceptible                          Journal of Aﬀective Disorders Reports. 2021;
               to environmental inﬂuences for better or                        3: 100051.
               worse and the implications for child                        18. van der Mark W, van Oort N. The
               development. Clinical Child                                     genogram as a tool to break free from
               Psychology & Psychiatry. 2013; 18                               Intergenerational Schema Transference in
               (3):319–21.                                                     Present Relationships. A presentation at:
            9. Belsky M, Pluess J. Diﬀerential                                 International Society of Schema Therapy
               susceptibility to rearing experience: the                       (ISST) Conference; 2014, 14 June; Istanbul,
               case of childcare. Child Psychology &                           Turkey.
               Psychiatry. 2009; 50(4):396–404.                            19. Siegel DJ. The developing mind. Guilford
          10. Rothbart MK, Dweck CS, Eisenberg N,                              Press; 1999.
              Sameroﬀ AJ, Bates JE. Becoming who we                        20. Young J, Brown G. (Eds.). Young Schema
              are: Temperament and personality in                              Questionnaire – Long form 3. Professional
              development. Guilford Press; 2011.                               Resource Exchange; 2003.
          11. Cloninger CR, Svrakic DM, Przybeck TR.                       21. Young J. Young Schema Questionnaire-3.
              A psychobiological model of temperament                          Cognitive Therapy Center; 2005.
              and character. Archives of General                           22. Yalcin O, Marais I, Lee C, Correia H.
              Psychiatry. 1993; 50: 975–90.                                    Revisions to the Young Schema
          12. Fuchs T, Koch SC. Embodied aﬀectivity: on                        Questionnaire using Rasch analysis: The
              moving and being moved. Frontiers in                             YSQ-R. Australian Psychologist.
              Psychology. 2014;5:508.                                          2022;57:8–20, DOI: 10.1080/00050067
          13. Arntz A, Rijkeboer M, Chan E et al.                              .2021.1979885.
              Towards a reformulated theory underlying                     23. Kriston L, Schäfer J, Jacob GA, Härter M,
              schema therapy: Position paper of an                             Hölzel LP. Reliability and validity of the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                 Schema Therapy Assessment               85



                German version of the Young Schema                              (LEC-5) [Internet]. National Center for
                Questionnaire–Short Form 3 (YSQ-S3).                            PTSD; 2013. Available from: www.ptsd.va.gov/
                European Journal of Psychological                               professional/assessment/te-measures/life_
                Assessment. 2013;29(3):205–12.                                  events_checklist.asp
         24. Bach B, Simonsen E, Christoﬀersen P,                         30. Holmes EA, Mathews A. Mental imagery
             Kriston L. The Young Schema Questionnaire                        in emotion and emotional disorders.
             3 Short Form (YSQ-S3): Psychometric                              Clinical Psychology Review. 2010; 30
             properties and association with personality                      (3):349–362.
             disorders in a Danish mixed sample.                          31. Siegel D, Hartzell M. Parenting from the
             European Journal of Psychological                                inside out. Penguin; 2004.
             Assessment. 2017; 33(2);134–43.
                                                                          32. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Stages and
         25. Young J. Young parenting inventory.                              processes of self-change of smoking:
             Cognitive Therapy Center; 1994.                                  Toward an integrative model of change.
         26. Louis JP, Wood, AM, Lockwood, G.                                 Journal of Consulting and Clinical
             Psychometric validation of the Young                             Psychology. 1983; 51(3),390–95.
             Parenting Inventory – Revised (YPI-R2):                      33. Reubsaet R. Schema therapy – A phase-
             Replication and Extension of a commonly                          oriented approach, targeting tasks and
             used parenting scale in Schema Therapy                           techniques in individual and group schema
             (ST) research and practice. PloS One.                            therapy. Pavilion Publishing; 2021.
             2018;13(11):e0205605.
                                                                          34. Simpson S, Smith E. Schema therapy for
         27. Young JE, Arntz A, Atkinson T,                                   eating disorders: Theory and practice for
             Lobbestael J, Weishaar ME, van                                   individual and group settings. Routledge;
             Vreeswijk MF. The Schema mode                                    2019.
             inventory. Schema Therapy Institute; 2007.
                                                                          35. Edwards D. Self pity/victim: A surrender
         28. Louis JP, Wood AM, Lockwood G, Ho MH,
                                                                              schema mode. Schema Therapy Bulletin.
             Ferguson E. Positive clinical psychology
                                                                              2015;1(1):1–6.
             and schema therapy (ST): The
             development of the Young Positive Schema                     36. Edwards DJ. An interpretative
             Questionnaire (YPSQ) to complement the                           phenomenological analysis of schema
             Young Schema Questionnaire 3 Short                               modes in a single case of anorexia
             Form (YSQ-S3). Psychological Assessment.                         nervosa: Part 2. Coping modes, healthy
             2018;30(9):1199–213.                                             adult mode, superordinate themes, and
                                                                              implications for research and practice.
         29. Weathers FW, Blake DD, Schnurr PP et al.                         Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology.
             The Life Events Checklist for DSM-5                              2017; 17(1):1–12.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Case Conceptualisation and Mode

                       4             Mapping in Schema Therapy


          Introduction
          Composing and communicating a clear and accurate case conceptualisation should occur
          before any treatment begins. The main purpose of the case conceptualisation is to aid the
          therapist and client in understanding how the client’s presenting problems have been
          caused, and are now maintained, by the operation of schemas and modes. A therapist’s
          treatment direction is always informed by this conceptualisation [1]. The case conceptual-
          isation continues to be reﬁned as the therapist learns more about the client. A second
          important function of a case conceptualisation is to help engage the client in therapy. An
          accurate conceptualisation, clearly communicated, helps the client feel heard and under-
          stood. It also helps the client to understand themselves better by increasing their mode
          awareness. By the end of the assessment phase, the schema therapist will document a full
          schema therapy case conceptualisation and then communicate a summary of its most
          important parts using a schema therapy mode map. In this chapter, we will provide an
          overview of the information schema therapists document as a part of their overall case
          conceptualisation before outlining how this information may be summarised and commu-
          nicated to clients using schema therapy mode maps.

          Documenting an Overall Case Conceptualisation
          Using the assessment methods described in Chapter 3: Schema Therapy Assessment, the
          schema therapist will collect detailed information. The International Society for Schema
          Therapy (ISST) currently recommends the Schema Therapy Case Conceptualization form,
          2nd Edition (Version 2.22) as a template for assembling the information that should be
          collected to form the case conceptualisation. This form has been developed and elaborated
          over time by an ISST workgroup led by Jeﬀrey Young [2]. An overview of the domains
          detailed in a comprehensive case conceptualisation based on this form are given in
          Table 4.1, and a case example using the template is provided in Box 4.1.

          Developing and Sharing a Schema Mode Map With the Client
          The full case conceptualisation, as described herein, is generally too dense for clients to
          beneﬁt from. Instead, the central parts of the case conceptualisation are communicated to
          the client through a visual schema therapy mode map using a template such as the one in
          Figure 4.1. The mode map is completed with the client, and is written directly onto a paper
          template or drawn up on a whiteboard or similar. This process is intended to be educational
          and collaborative. It allows the schema therapist to convey their understanding of the
          client’s presenting issues, but also provides an opportunity for the client to give feedback
          86


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping            87



             Table 4.1 Schema therapy case conceptualisation: Key content

             Client Background Information
             Includes client name/ID, age, current relationship status/sexual orientation and children (if any),
             occupation/position, highest educational level, country of birth/religious aﬃliation/ethnic group
             (if relevant).
             Key Problem Areas: Why Is the Client in Therapy?
             What are the primary problems motivating the client to seek help? Examples of this are given in
             Chapter 3 on assessment under key problem areas (e.g., anger problems, self-harm behaviour, lack
             of intimacy in relationship, problems establishing boundaries with parents).
             General Impressions of the Client
             How does the client present in a global sense in therapy sessions? (e.g., reserved, hostile, eager to
             please, needy, articulate, unemotional).
             Current Diagnostic Impression
             A. Identify any relevant ICD-10-CM/DSM5 disorder(s).
             B. Current level of functioning across ﬁve major life areas (includes occupational/school
                performance, intimate/romantic relationships, family relationships, friends and other social
                relationships, solitary functioning, and time alone. The Client’s current function is rated on
                a 6-point scale (1=Not Functional/Very Low, 6=Very Good or Excellent Functioning) and
                elaborated via a more qualitative explanation.
             Major Life Problems and/or Symptoms
             Here we elaborate on central problems identiﬁed as key problem areas, describing the nature of
             the problem(s), and how they create diﬃculties in the client’s daily life. A list of 1–5 is ideal.
             Child and Adolescent Origins of Current Problems
             A. General narrative of client’s early history
             B. Speciﬁc early core unmet needs (and linked to speciﬁc origins)
             C. Possible temperamental/biological factors
             D. Possible cultural, ethnic, and religious factors
             Most Relevant Schemas
             List of 1–5 of the EMS most relevant to the client’s current problems, and a narrative description of
             common antecedents (triggers) and negative consequences the client experiences when this
             schema is triggered.
             Most Relevant Schema Modes
             List of 1–5 of the schema modes most relevant to the client’s current problems, and a narrative
             description of common antecedents (triggers) and negative consequences the client experiences
             when this schema mode is triggered.
             A. Child modes
             B. Maladaptive coping modes
             C. Dysfunctional Critic (Parent) modes
             D. Other relevant modes
             E. Healthy Adult mode (Summarise the client’s positive values, resources, strengths and abilities)
             The Therapy Relationship
             Description of the therapist’s positive and negative reactions to the client countertransference up
             until this point.
             Reparenting Relationship and Bond
             A. Description of the reparenting relationship and bond between the therapist and client up until
                this point.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          88            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Table 4.1 (cont.)

              B. Reﬂection on how the reparenting relationship and bond between therapist and client might
                 be improved.
              Therapy Objectives: Progress & Obstacles
              Create a list of 1–5 of the most important therapy objectives that are the focus of treatment. Be as
              speciﬁc as possible. For each objective, describe how the Healthy Adult mode could be changed
              to meet it. Then discuss the progress thus far. Also describe any obstacles and how they might be
              overcome.



               Box 4.1 Full Case Conceptualisation Example (Initial Sessions): The Case of Samira


               Client Background Information
               Client Name/ID: Samira
               Age: 38
               Current Relationship Status/Sexual Orientation and Children: Married with two children
               (both boys, aged 6 & 9)
               Occupation/Position: Full-time mother/homemaker
               Highest Educational Level: MBA – Business
               Country of Birth/Religious Aﬃliation/Ethnic Group (if relevant): India/Islam/N/A

               Key Problem Areas
               1. Chronic worry, perfectionism, and over-control
               2. Chronic avoidance behaviour
               3. Practical dependence and lack of assertiveness in relationships
               4. Chronic loneliness

               General Impressions of the Client
               Client presents as anxious and needy, and ‘in need of saving’. At times also presents as
               articulate, perhaps reﬂecting her high level of education.

               Current Diagnostic Impression
               1. Major depression
               2. Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD)
               3. Dependant personality disorder (with avoidant traits)
                  Current level of functioning across ﬁve major life areas: client’s current function is rated on
                  a 6-point scale (1=Not Functional/Very Low, 6=Very Good or Excellent Functioning) and
                  elaborated on via a more qualitative explanation.
               1. Occupational/school performance (Rated 1/6). Client has avoided any activities related to
                  competence and achievement since immigrating to the UK in 2010. Becomes panicked at
                  the thought of working outside the house. Even household duties are generally avoided
                  (e.g., cooking). The husband’s solution to her lack of functioning has been to either do it
                  himself or employ domestic help for just about all duties.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping             89




             2. Intimate/Romantic Relationships (Rated 1/6). Client has struggled to feel valued in her
                marriage, more or less since having the two children. Partner has pulled away
                emotionally and physically and will not talk with her about the relationship. When
                pushed he has said that he doesn’t love the client, but that he will fulﬁl his ‘duties’ as
                a father and husband and ‘look after’ the family. Client feels powerless in this situation as
                mostly unable to look after herself, feels dependent on her husband for practical needs
                (which he fulﬁls), but feels desperately alone and angry. Feels there is ‘no point’ and no
                solution to his behaviour towards her.
             3. Family Relationships (Rated 3/6). A real strength is her relationship with her two young
                boys. Spends as much time as she can with them, tries to help them with their
                homework, plays with them as much as she can, and is there for them to take them to
                cricket. Bonds with them around this activity, although recently her avoidance behaviour
                is even interfering with this. Also feels isolated from her wider family in India. Has no
                other family in the UK.
             4. Friends and other Social Relationships (Rated 3/6). Also somewhat of a strength, Samira
                has a small group of female friends (not from her culture) who she met at mothers’ group
                after the birth of her second boy. Seems to interact well with them and feels supported
                when she makes time, but because of her depressed mood and avoidance seems not to
                make enough time for this. Client avoids engaging with other potential social
                connections from her culture for fear of judgement.
             5. Solitary Functioning and Time Alone (Rated 2/6). Client is an avid reader and tries to
                read to relax when she can but struggles to really do this a lot of the time due to chronic
                worry. Personal hygiene is ﬁne but struggles to do household chores, relying mainly on
                her husband and domestic helper to do the bulk of the household duties.


             Major Life Problems and/or Symptoms (On Admission)
             Problem 1: Worry, Perfectionism, and Over-Control
             Life Pattern: Client is overly concerned with controlling her world to avoid potential disaster to
             the degree that she engages in several hours of worry per day resulting in a loss of functioning
             associated with axis I GAD (e.g., concentration, sleep problems, muscle tension, uncontrol-
             lable worry). Tends to worry mostly about her performance and potential failure and incom-
             petence. This was the most prominent initial complaint that had sparked motivation to
             engage in therapy.
             Problem 2: Low Self-Esteem and Related Chronic Avoidance Behaviour
             Life Pattern: Client avoids and procrastinates doing just about anything that may result in
             a perceived failure/defectiveness experience and activating self-criticism and shame. This has
             become severe to the point that she is too scared to write forms or submit paperwork of any
             kind for fear of making a mistake. Client has recently also started avoiding leaving the house
             (including taking her kids out for activities and community engagement) for fear that others
             would judge her. This avoidance relieves her of having to confront her feeling of failure and
             defectiveness, but ultimately leaves her depressed and feeling like a failure as she is not
             engaging with key life goals (e.g., gaining meaningful employment, taking her kids to
             activities).
             Problem 3: Sense of Incompetence, Practical Dependence, and Lack of Assertiveness in Relationships
             Life Pattern: Perhaps her most pertinent problem. Client almost completely depends on her
             husband and domestic helpers for practical support, maintaining her feelings of incompe-
             tence and fears of failing these tasks. She also almost completely submits to her husband’s




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          90            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




               requests and demands. This is despite her husband’s critical and stonewalling behaviour
               towards her. Feels unable to consider leaving given her practical dependence.
               Problem 4: Chronic Loneliness and Lack of Intimacy
               Life Pattern: Stays with her husband despite his critical and distant behaviour. Client feels very
               distant from him, feels that he does not care, does not meet her needs, except for practical
               needs (e.g., food, shelter etc.). Stays in the relationship because she feels that no one else
               would want her (Defectiveness/Shame), no one else would look after her practical needs
               (Dependence/Incompetence), and that divorce/separation would make her a bad person in
               the eyes of others in her cultural community (Defectiveness/Shame and Social Isolation).


               Child and Adolescent Origins of Current Problems
               Grew up in India to working-class but ‘perfectionistic’ parents. Parents had escaped extremely
               poor socioeconomic conditions through considerable hard work. Client had no siblings;
               parents overinvested in her, resulting in extreme pressure on her to succeed in achieve-
               ment/academic domains. Set very high standards for academic performance and was sent to
               an expensive private school at great personal cost and sacriﬁce from her parents, a school
               where she felt she did not belong due to her lower ‘social class’. Parents had a pattern of
               expecting her to be perfect at school, and when Samira returned home she was not taught
               anything practical (e.g., cooking, cleaning, etc.). Her ‘duty’ was to perform at school and gain
               entry into a top university. Any violation of these family rules or expectations resulted in harsh
               criticism/demands for better performance and threats of abandonment. Both parents appear
               to have had a similar distant relationship with her and presented a relatively united front
               when it came to these extreme demands.


               Speciﬁc Early Core Unmet Needs
               1. Speciﬁc Early Unmet Need: Unconditional Acceptance
                  Parents’ early and unrelenting focus on academic performance coupled with criticism
                  and scolding when imperfect left her feeling like nothing she ever did was ‘good
                  enough’.
               2. Speciﬁc Early Unmet Need: Stability of Emotional Connection and Attachment
                  An early extreme and pressurising approach to academic performance was coupled with
                  threats of abandonment if she did not perform or comply. On occasion, this materialised:
                  her parents would stonewall her for days or even weeks if they were not ‘happy’ with
                  her. The demanding nature of the relationship often left her feeling misunderstood and
                  alone.
               3. Speciﬁc Early Unmet Need: Competence and Independence
                  Parents ‘sacriﬁced everything’ for her education, sending her to an expensive private
                  school and ‘relieving her’ of any chores or domestic duties. While the client became
                  academically quite proﬁcient, she lagged behind at the basic skills required to be an
                  adult (e.g., looking after herself, household chores, even the skills necessary for paying
                  bills or using public transport). Parents would take her to and from school so she could
                  be ‘maximally’ focused on her studies. She never learned the basics of everyday adult
                  functioning as her parents took full responsibility for everyday functioning.
               4. Speciﬁc Early Unmet Need: Spontaneity and Play
                  In Samira’s family of origin, there really was no time for fun and play. An unrelenting and
                  demanding focus on studies and over-control of her behaviour meant that spontaneity
                  and play was at best absent, and at worst – punished.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping        91




             Possible Temperamental/Biological Factors
             Reports being introverted and reserved as a child. Father seemed to suﬀer from undiagnosed
             depression. Client was clinically depressed on intake, was started on SSRI by her GP on
             admission and responded well in terms of overall mood.

             Possible Cultural, Ethnic, and Religious Factors
             Samira reported feeling that her Indian cultural heritage, particularly the culture of the state/
             city she was from in India, was highly competitive, thus reinforcing her parents’ demanding
             approach to academics. She also felt considerable pressure from her family, religion, and
             culture to stay in her marriage and to suppress her needs in the relationship.


             Most Relevant Schemas
             List of 1–5 of the EMS most relevant to the client’s current problems, and a narrative descrip-
             tion of common antecedents (triggers) and negative consequences the client experiences
             when this schema is triggered.
             1. Unrelenting Standards
                  This is one of Samira’s important EMS as it is linked to most of her other (core) schemas.
                  Her central way of relating to her caregivers was through the lens of unrelenting standards
                  and associated demands. This schema is triggered these days by just about any
                  performance, or even everyday tasks (e.g., paying a bill, looking for work, getting together
                  her CV). Such tasks trigger either intense anxiety and vulnerability and/or self-criticism or
                  self-pressure that she needs to be ‘perfect’. This typically leads to coping through episodes
                  of worry and/or avoidance/withdrawal.
             2. Defectiveness/Shame and Failure
                  Her parents’ early and unrelenting focus on academic performance coupled with
                  criticism and scolding when imperfect left her often feeling like nothing she ever did was
                  ‘good enough’. In situations that are imperfect, or where she shows her imperfection or
                  vulnerability, the client experiences considerable feelings of shame and self-criticism.
                  When in this state, she readily identiﬁes as ‘feeling defective’.
             3. Emotional Deprivation and Abandonment
                  The client experiences chronic loneliness on a daily basis, particularly when home
                  alone or when being isolated by her husband. On occasion, when he pulls away for
                  several days or weeks, she experiences considerable anxiety and fears that he will
                  leave her. This is partially because she will lose the relationship, and partially
                  because she will lose access to practical ‘support’. This often leads to some form of
                  surrendering behaviour.
             4. Dependence/Incompetence
                  The client is greatly impaired with regards to her feelings of competence in everyday
                  activities and tasks. Whenever she is pushed or asked or pushes herself to take
                  responsibility for everyday tasks (e.g., cooking, paying the school fees), she becomes
                  ﬂooded by self-doubt and associated anxiety that she will ‘make a mistake’.


             Most Relevant Schema Modes
             List of 1–5 of the schema modes most relevant to the client’s current problems, and a narrative
             description of common antecedents (triggers) and negative consequences the client experi-
             ences when this schema mode is triggered.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          92            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




               Backstage Modes
               Vulnerable Child mode: This mode is often triggered either in performance situations where she
               has a task to complete (predominant feeling of anxiety), or at times when she is isolated and
               alone for long periods or has been rejected by her partner (predominant feelings of
               loneliness and abandonment).

               Angry Child mode: This mode is mostly suppressed in her daily life but is coming out more in
               therapy, especially when talking about her marital situation or times when she feels a ‘lack of
               support’ from her husband.

               Demanding Critic mode: This is a very dominant mode for the client; it appears to be activated
               pretty much from the time she wakes up to some degree, commenting, and putting pressure
               on the client (e.g., ‘you’re lazy’, etc.). However, this mode becomes very loud and dominant
               in any performance situations or situations where she notices she has made a mistake or
               been imperfect.

               Front-Stage (Coping) Modes
               Compliant/Helpless Surrenderer mode: The client’s general way of operating around other people,
               especially those she is close to, is to surrender in one way or another. When she is in this
               mode the client is either submissive (to others’ preferences or demands) or helpless (which
               seems to function to elicit help or ‘support’).

               Overcontroller/Over-Analyser mode: When the client does push herself to engage in performance-
               related tasks she tends to approach them in a rigid and perfectionistic manner, aiming to ‘get it
               perfect’. This mode also has an overanalysing aspect that looks like worry and rumination. When
               approaching tasks, Samira tends to overthink things, trying to anticipate and plan for everything
               that might go wrong. After engaging in such tasks, Samira tends to engage in post-event
               rumination, torturing herself about all the aspects that were not perfect.

               Avoidant Protector mode: Ultimately, if Samira cannot master an approach perfectly, or rely on
               others to complete tasks, she will fall back on avoidance as a way of managing the feelings of
               being overwhelmed with anxiety and vulnerability that come with such tasks. When in this
               mode, she often becomes pessimistic, saying ‘What’s the point? Nothing ever works for me!’

               Healthy Adult mode: The client is intelligent and psychologically minded, curious about her
               background and how they link to her current schema-based problems. She is also clear
               about her values and what matters to her (e.g., family, intimacy, competence, and inde-
               pendence) and is relatively motivated to tackle these issues. She is also ultimately a very
               social and easy to engage person who wants to connect, and is easy to connect with once
               she develops rapport.


               The Therapy Relationship
               I feel that a strong limited reparenting relationship has been established, especially given the
               early phase of the therapy. There is a warm and open candour to the relationship, and the
               client has been able to quickly develop trust in me and the therapy process. She responded
               well to the conceptualisation and was quick to engage in self-monitoring. There have been
               challenges, mainly in my understanding of her cultural and religious background and the
               inﬂuence of these on her schema patterns and sense of ‘stuckness’. I want to be very helpful to
               the client. She has a very adolescent aura and approach to many issues that triggers my




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping      93



             empathy and urge to be helpful and provide guidance. I feel I must be careful of this too, as my
             own urge perhaps to self-sacriﬁce, while perhaps somewhat helpful up to a certain point (the
             client feels my genuine care), risks thwarting development of her autonomy and competence.


             Initial Therapy Objectives
             Therapy Objective 1: Help the client to reduce her feelings of Defectiveness and set more
             realistic standards for herself; reduce the constant feeling of ‘pressure’ and increase self-
             compassion in the Healthy Adult mode. This seems to be an obvious initial target in the
             therapy as this problem often shows up in the therapy room and is central to her problems.
             This will involve targeting her Demanding Critic mode and its underlying themes of defect-
             iveness and unrelenting standards and building her healthy compassionate side.
                Therapy Objective 2: Build a sense of competence and mastery in everyday activities,
             and work/achievement strivings. This will involve working to reduce her reliance on her
             Surrender and Avoidant modes, and gradually encouraging her to build a (Healthy Adult)
             commitment in order to increase engagement with competence- and mastery-related tasks.
             This will of course involve negotiating a hierarchy that perhaps starts with everyday function-
             ing (e.g., feeling conﬁdent enough to cook regular meals for the children), and eventually
             looking at higher-order tasks such as feeling conﬁdent enough to think about engaging in
             meaningful employment, which is a key medium- to long-term goal for her. It is likely that, as
             she reduces her reliance on these coping modes, she will need considerable therapy focus to
             help her manage and heal her Demanding Critic and Vulnerable Child modes.
                Therapy Objective 3: Increasing independence and autonomy and asserting her needs.
             This will involve reducing her over-reliance on Avoidance and Surrender mode behaviour as
             a starting point, then starting to communicate more openly regarding her need for autonomy,
             independence, and competence, with signiﬁcant others. Those around her will need to
             develop an understanding that, while they may be trying to help, by doing things for her
             they ultimately maintain her sense of incompetence. As the client is encouraged to express
             her needs more, and as she becomes stronger, it will be important also to support her to
             confront issues to do with verbal abuse and stonewalling in her relationship. This will involve
             helping her confront her fears of abandonment (Vulnerable Child mode) and Critic mode
             messages (that she is worth a better relationship).



         to the therapist. The mode map can be conveyed in a number of ways, but we have found
         relaying it as a narrative can be particularly helpful, starting with the developmental origins.
         For example, ‘From what I can understand, things were not easy for little Samira growing
         up. It was really hard for her to get her needs met in important ways . . . especially when it
         came to . . .’. The therapist ﬁnishes the narrative by explaining the presenting key problem
         areas as resulting from these developmental experiences and adaptations.
             Once the mode map has been completed in collaboration with the client, the therapist
         encourages the client to familiarise themselves with the map. Mode awareness is a key
         attribute of the Healthy Adult mode, and reviewing the map develops mode awareness.
         Typically, early in treatment the sharing of the mode map is coupled with setting take-home
         tasks involving some form of self-monitoring or ‘mode monitoring’.
             Often, the ﬁnal task in a mode-mapping session is to make some explicit links between
         the client’s mode map and an initial set of planned treatment objectives. Clients will often
         ask directly at this stage ‘OK, so now what? How do I ﬁx this?’; you will need to be able to
         oﬀer them some plausible and appropriate response about the initial plan and focus for



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          94             The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




             Healthy Adult Mode                         SCHEMA MODE MAP                         Critic Mode

                                                  Key Problem Areas




                        G1
                     PIN
                   CO
                            G2
                         PIN
                      CO
                                3
                         COPING

                                                 Vulnerable Child         Angry Child
             Core Schema/s                                                                 Developmental Unmet
                                                                                           Needs (Origins)
             1.
                                                                                           1.
             2.
                                                                                           2.
             3.
                                                                                           3.
             4.
                                                                                           4.
             5.
                                                                                           5.


          Figure 4.1 Template/example of a schema mode map




                  Box 4.2 Example of How to End a Mode Mapping Session

                  Therapist: So Samira, now that you are more aware of your modes, I wonder if you could try to
                  use this awareness to try to understand when your modes get triggered and what mode(s)
                  you are in when you are experiencing these problems? Perhaps it would be a good idea for
                  you to take a photo of your mode map, and even put it on your phone as a screensaver, as
                  a reminder of your map, and a prompt to think about your schemas and modes when things
                  get triggered for you?



          intervention based on the Initial Therapy Objectives identiﬁed in the full case conceptual-
          isation. Figure 4.1 is an example of a template that can be used for mode mapping, but
          various formats have been used for this purpose. Figure 4.2 shows a completed mode map
          for Samira using a format devised by Simpson [3]. As you can see, there is considerable
          creative licence in generating these maps. The goal is to generate an engaging map of the
          client’s predominant modes, their strength or dominance, and their relationships.

          Concluding Remarks
          This chapter has illustrated the two key tasks that bridge the transition from time focused
          mainly on assessment to time focused mainly on therapy. We have illustrated how detailed and
          comprehensive the therapist’s conceptualisation should be, which provides a marked contrast to



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                   Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping                    95




                 Compliant/Helpless Surrenderer           Mode Map for Samira
            Minimisation of emotional needs,
            gives away control, subjugates. Avoids         Healthy Adult Mode ‘Adult
            communicating needs – but feels                          Samira’
                                                                 • Seeking help          Demanding Inner Critic (the
            vulnerable or aggrieved when others don’t
                                                          • Wants to develop autonomy             ‘pressure’)
            meet them. Seeks ‘help’ for adulting tasks
                                                              and address needs.         ‘You should have done better’
            ‘I can’t do it. I need ‘help’ or ‘support’.
                                                                                         ‘That is not good enough’
            ‘I’m hopeless, I can’t do anything.’
                                                                                         ‘You’re a failure, you fail
                                                                                         everything!!’
                   Overcontroller/Overanalyser
                               Mode
                                                                                                          Angry Child
                 ‘I need control’
                                                                                                          Mode (mostly
                 ‘I will only do it if I can do it
                                                                                                          unexpressed)
                 perfect.'
                                                                                                          ‘No-one
                 Overthinking, rumination
                                                                                                          cares!!!’

                            Avoidant Protector
            ‘I can’t do it’
            ‘I can’t cope’                                                                 Vulnerable Child
            Stays home, withdrawn, avoids leaving the
            house as a way of managing anxious feelings                                    ‘I’m all alone, no one cares, my
                                                                                           needs don’t matter, I’ve failed’
                                                                                           Feels alone and anxious




          Figure 4.2 Example of a completed mode map



         those usually developed in short-term psychotherapies. The therapist aims to identify the key
         targets of any psychotherapeutic assessment – presenting problems, client goals, possible
         psychological disorders and socio-occupational functioning – and the predisposing factors of
         temperament and early socialising and child-rearing experiences. The therapist then seeks to
         understand how problems are perpetuated and progress stymied by the operation of schemas
         and modes. The therapist collaborates with the client to produce a user-friendly, workable
         initial understanding of the client’s progression from their early history to their current
         challenges, via a shared narrative and visual mode map. Care and attention during this mapping
         process are critical for ensuring that the client feels seen and heard, and to lend focus and
         direction to treatment. Schema therapy – as a long-term, multicomponent therapy – can be
         overwhelming for both client and therapist. The conceptualisation makes this manageable.
             In the next chapter, we aim to help beginning (and more advanced) schema therapists
         try envision what a long treatment programme might entail, and explain in more detail how
         the conceptualisation guides therapy.

         References
         1. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                              3. Simpson S. Schema therapy
            therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                             conceptualisation of eating disorders. In
            Press; 2003.                                                          Simpson S, Smith E, eds. Schema
         2. Schema Therapy Case Conceptualisation                                 therapy for eating disorders: Theory and
            form (2nd Ed., Version 2.22). International                           practice for individual and group
            Society of Schema Therapy (ISST) Case                                 settings. Routledge; 2020.
            Conceptualization Committee; 2018.                                    pp. 56–66.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Envisioning the Road Ahead

                        5            A Model for the Course of Schema
                                     Therapy

          Introduction
          Many psychotherapists seeking to learn schema therapy will not have had experience in
          maintaining a structured therapy over such a long timeframe. It can take several years to
          experience a satisfactorily completed course of therapy, and thus it can be very diﬃcult for
          the neophyte to envisage how a client’s course of treatment will evolve over its journey. The
          purpose of this chapter is to sketch a model of how schema therapy might look at diﬀerent
          points throughout its course and provide signposts to the clinician as to when to maintain or
          alter their focus and emphasis on diﬀerent in-session schema therapy activities over time.

          The Challenges of Long-Term Therapy
          Those learning schema therapy often seek a model of how the treatment should unfold, step
          by step, from start to ﬁnish. Given the longer treatment orientation, complexity of individ-
          ual cases, and transdiagnostic approach, it is diﬃcult to illustrate a manualised, sequential
          schema therapy approach. Schema therapy is formulation-driven but not formulaic. It is
          a highly ﬂexible and idiosyncratic approach, the true essence of which unfortunately resists
          a set of steps. Nonetheless, it is important to provide clinicians with general principles that
          will guide the therapy regardless of presentation. Speciﬁc techniques and methodologies are
          important in diﬀerent stages in treatment. Knowledge of the core principles, processes, and
          treatment considerations can assist in therapeutic decision making and treatment planning.
              Schema therapy was designed speciﬁcally to treat chronic and enduring psychological
          issues whose lineage can usually be traced to chronic unmet needs in childhood. Such clients
          often attract diagnostic labels of ‘personality disorder’ and are often experienced by therap-
          ists as the most diﬃcult clients to treat. As a result, treatment typically involves an extended
          timeframe. The length of treatment can depend on several factors, such as the severity of the
          presenting issue, the strength of schema coping modes and styles, and the client’s willing-
          ness to engage in experiential techniques.
              Longer-term therapy with chronic clients can easily lose focus and eﬃcacy due to
          common treatment roadblocks. One danger is that schema therapy sessions remain an
          intellectual process, with the clinician using schema therapy terminology without activating
          enough emotional experiencing in the sessions to promote deeper emotional change. In
          these cases, the therapy relationship remains at a surface level; core material central to the
          presenting problem is not examined. Second, practitioners may earnestly implement spe-
          ciﬁc interventions rigidly when they are not indicated by the clinical situation. In these
          circumstances, the clinician becomes overly focused on using a ‘schema technique’ rather
          than considering the case conceptualisation and the predominant issues presenting in the
          96


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   97



         session. For example, a therapist might plan some techniques for a client session to bypass
         Detached Protector but is unable to pivot to emotion-focused or limited reparenting
         techniques when the client attends in a vulnerable state. Fluctuation in a client’s emotional
         state and the related verbal material communicated in session can confound treatment aims
         and objectives. Clients may suddenly disagree with a plan after previously having agreed to
         it. These kinds of rapid mode ﬂips can derail the proposed treatment course of a session that
         would otherwise be clear.

         Schema Interventions Are Guided by Clear Treatment Goals Linked
         to Agreed ‘Key Problem Areas’
         Chronic treatment-resistant clients most often present with several comorbid disorders and
         varying clinical problems [1]. Comorbidity is the rule rather than the exception. It is
         common for such clients to present with a complicated array of presenting issues. To
         manage the degree of complexity, it is very important to obtain speciﬁc goals for treatment
         that are linked to agreed key problem areas identiﬁed in the case conceptualisation.
             The identiﬁcation of key problem areas is a major component of a schema therapy case
         conceptualisation (see Chapter 4: Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping in Schema
         Therapy). The conceptualisation should be used to guide the treatment plan generally, as
         well as more micro-level in-session decisions regarding therapist responses. The key
         problem areas provide the client’s motivation for attending treatment: ‘Why am I here?
         What is the point of treatment?’ The goals for treatment and the therapist’s chosen
         interventions need to be broadly aligned. To use a metaphor, the client wants to drive to
         a destination (goals/problem focus); the therapist knows of several eﬀective routes (schema
         therapy interventions) to reach this destination. For example, a client may present with
         chronic low mood (key problem area) and is seeking to reduce depressive symptoms
         (therapy goal); accordingly, the therapist will employ several treatment strategies based
         on the conceptualisation (e.g., chair dialogues, limit setting).
             Therapists will choose or prioritise diﬀerent therapeutic strategies depending on the
         stage of treatment. Such shorter-term objectives feed into the more general longer-term
         treatment aims. For example, the shorter-term objective of bypassing avoidance of experi-
         ential techniques is a necessary early step towards a longer-term aim of increasing self-
         compassion and self-care. Shorter-term objectives typically change over time, depending on
         the client’s needs and the presenting problems that arise through the therapy process, and
         will generally support the longer-term objectives. Box 5.1 provides a useful metaphor to
         illustrate the unfolding schema therapy treatment as a ‘journey’.


             Box 5.1 The Schema Therapy Journey

             ‘Navigating schema therapy is like sailing across a vast ocean, where currents, landmasses, and
             weather inﬂuence the journey. At the commencement of the trip (as the ship captain) you
             cannot see the destination ahead. You will be able to sketch a basic map (your case
             conceptualisation). You will also carry a compass to guide you (the schema therapy model),
             knowing that if you head northeast, you will reach your destination. You will need some
             necessary seafaring skills to manage where there’s no breeze (these are your skills in bypass-
             ing problematic coping modes), or, if bad weather hits, you will have to ride out the storm
             (skills in helping clients manage their emotional arousal).’



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          98            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Core Principles of Schema Therapy Practice
          Several core principles within schema therapy are fundamental and help to distinguish the
          model from other psychotherapeutic treatments. Such concepts overarch the speciﬁc
          interventions used in the treatment and help the therapist guide the therapeutic process.

          1. Develop a Safe Therapeutic Relationship and Treatment Alliance
          A central vehicle of change within the schema therapy model is the therapy relationship [2].
          The style of therapist interaction – termed limited reparenting – aims to go beyond ‘standard
          therapist’ caring and warmth, within the appropriate boundaries of the therapeutic rela-
          tionship [3]. Here, the therapist seeks to meet the client’s emotional needs directly in the
          therapy relationship, creating an environment of genuine care and empathy (see Chapter 6:
          Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 1: Limited Reparenting). For many clients,
          bonding with the therapist in this way can trigger schemas related to safety and safe
          attachment. Without ﬁrst having established this safe relationship, the chronic client may
          not be inclined to engage in other schema change procedures. It is thus a crucial ﬁrst step in
          the process of schema therapy. Box 5.2 gives a clinical example of how this might unfold
          early in the treatment.

          2. Bypass Coping Modes, Help Clients Connect to and Share Schema-Driven Cognitions
          and Emotions
          Accessing emotion is central to schema therapy’s design and its focus on providing correct-
          ive emotional experiences. Directly evoking emotional components of schemas and modes
          that are part of a client’s presenting problems can facilitate change at cognitive, aﬀective,
          and behavioural levels. The client’s clinical conceptualisation determines which emotions
          are the speciﬁc focus.
              Many clients remain stuck largely because their habitual ways of coping (e.g., Protector
          modes) severely limit awareness of their thoughts and emotions, resulting in neglect of their
          own core emotional needs. To change the schemas and modes that perpetuate their
          emotional and interpersonal problems, clients need to be able to access and share schema-
          relevant cognitions and feelings. This will be impossible when the client’s coping modes are
          too dominant. Helping clients bypass maladaptive coping modes and access their emotions
          is therefore the next most important intervention priority, after establishing safety and
          bonding. Indeed, unless the client is spontaneously expressing their inner world, the
          therapist will be unable to accurately meet the client’s needs (highest treatment priority)
          without ﬁrst bypassing their coping modes. For therapy to be successful, the therapist must



               Box 5.2 Clinical Example of Limited Reparenting Early in Schema Therapy

               Greg had a childhood of neglect. His experience of caregiving was detached, unattuned, and
               withholding. The belief ‘I don’t matter, I’m not important’ (Emotional Deprivation schema) was
               developed within this home environment. His therapist was direct in meeting his core needs
               and was genuine and straightforward in his caring responses: ‘I care about you, Greg,
               I genuinely do. I can see how hard it is for you.’ The therapist made a conscious eﬀort to
               demonstrate care throughout therapy: for example, by acknowledging Greg’s birthday or
               other signiﬁcant events, such as wishing him luck for a job interview (via a message or within
               the session).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   99



         not collude with the client’s coping modes that desire to remain detached, avoidant, or
         otherwise engaged in counterproductive activity.
             Client emotional expression typically occurs naturally as a result of the therapist attun-
         ing to them. The therapist encourages healthy emotional expression in session because,
         historically, clients may have been punished for displaying emotions or suﬀered invalida-
         tion, rejection, or neglect. Such encouragement provides the client with an opportunity to
         not rely on their habitual methods of coping (within the therapy relationship or their lives in
         general) and experience healthy responses from others to their emotions.
             Experiential exercises are used to evoke further emotion. The therapist then responds
         with limited reparenting, responding directly to the client’s emotional needs as they become
         evident during these exercises. As the clinician notices the client struggling to access
         thoughts or emotions, they suggest an imagery or chair dialogue exercise likely to intensify
         schema or mode activation to a level at which thoughts or emotions are ‘visible’. At the same
         time, the therapist takes care not to stimulate so much emotion that it overwhelms or
         ‘ﬂoods’ the client. Exercises are adjusted and adapted to allow clients to feel and identify
         emotions while being able to attend to the therapist’s limited reparenting communications
         and understand them.
             Accessing core emotions in treatment sessions also assists the therapy more directly.
         First, the client can be more aware of the emotions linked to their schemas and modes,
         rather than having just an ‘intellectual’ understanding of schemas and modes. Clients may
         be unaware of the origins of schemas and modes or have false narratives about why they feel
         things or act in particular ways. Discussing a schema or mode without emotion is analogous
         to a traveller who wants to experience a region they have never visited and seeking only to
         experience it via books or webpages in a library (rather than travelling there and exploring
         for themselves). Via techniques such as imagery rescripting, clients can gain a deeper
         understanding of the origins of their beliefs and experiences. Clients experiencing schema
         therapy describe this as a vital strength of the treatment [4].
             Second, when emotion is activated in the session, the therapist can respond in a way that
         meets the client’s emotional needs. Thus, emotion activation provides more opportunity for
         corrective emotional experiences [5]. These include the client experiencing feelings of
         comfort, validation, and care, which directly transform the expectancies associated with
         EMS. Through receiving corrective emotional experiences from the therapist, the client
         learns to adopt new ways of regulating their emotions [6]. The therapist aims to model how
         to respond to emotions and relate to themselves in healthy ways.
             Evoking emotion will often also activate the client’s coping modes. This is to be
         expected. Such modes can restrict engagement with the therapist and block meaningful
         change. Speciﬁcally, as a result of diﬀerent forms of detachment, clients will often demon-
         strate poor emotion awareness and regulation. Emotions can signal when our needs and
         values are threatened. They can also communicate the eﬀect of frustrated needs to others
         and help give other feedback about their impact. Furthermore, emotions can motivate
         clients to pursue meeting their needs and enacting their values. By blocking emotions,
         clients’ physiological reactions and behavioural inertia may not make sense. For example,
         a client may be left with vague impressions that something is wrong but with no clear
         direction to correct the situation. Furthermore, interpersonal problems may ensue because
         their non-verbal communication is inconsistent with their words or behaviour or is
         disproportionate to the situation (i.e., they may come across as ‘diﬀerent’ to others). It is
         thus crucially important that the client learns how to experience and share their feelings



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          100           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          throughout the therapy. The therapist is initially there to help in this process and, over time,
          it is hoped that the client internalises this healthier way of approaching emotions.
               Clients whose emotional dysregulation presents as a pattern of both extreme emotional
          arousal and extreme emotional avoidance can be challenging for therapists to manage. In
          these cases, clients may generally avoid aﬀect; however, when they experience emotions,
          they are overwhelmed and in crisis. This pattern reinforces a ‘black and white’ experience of
          emotions as either present and unsafe or absent and safe. It is essential for the therapist not
          to collude with the emotional coping of the client. Instead, the therapist remains steadfast in
          pursuing emotional activation within a window of tolerance (i.e., not absent but not
          overwhelming). Use of the mode framework to bypass coping modes is exempliﬁed in
          Box 5.3.

          3. Help Clients Identify and Address Critic Mode Activation
          Critical and punitive self-talk is likely to increase as the client’s reliance on coping modes is
          reduced. It is important not to leave punitive messages unchallenged, and to instead
          repeatedly demonstrate to the client that these messages are not authoritative, accurate,
          or helpful. Messages generated from critic modes and schemas are often initially considered
          by clients to be central to their self-concept (i.e., ego-syntonic). A major aim within schema
          therapy is to help increase clients’ awareness of punitive and critical messages and their
          origins. The next aim is to externalise the Critic so that self-criticism and self-blame become
          criticism and blame from another source [7]. The therapist aims to create separation
          between the client’s self-concept and punitive, critical, and demanding messages so that
          these become ego-dystonic or defused from the self. In sessions, the therapist will refer to
          Critic messages as ‘coming from the mode/schema’, referring to the schema or mode in the
          third person (see Box 5.4 for an example). The use of experiential techniques such as mode


              Box 5.3 Clinical Example of Bypassing a Coping Mode to Activate Emotion

              Greg presented reporting ‘no feelings’ about what would appear to be an understandably
              challenging altercation with his partner. Greg denied that the interaction had ‘bugged him’
              and seemingly spoke about the encounter in a matter-of-fact manner. The therapist could
              have taken Greg’s position at face value and not probed more deeply into the altercation.
              Instead, the therapist attempted to bypass Greg’s ‘Numb Man’ mode (Detached Protector
              coping mode) by asking how ‘Vulnerable Greg’ felt about his partner speaking to him this way.
              By doing so, Greg could access feelings of humiliation and shame (pervasive, deeply held
              feelings linked to the Defectiveness/Shame schema). The therapist was then able to respond
              to Greg’s shame, providing corrective emotional experiences of acceptance, care, and valid-
              ation. If the therapist had not probed for aﬀect and bypassed coping, Greg would have missed
              a valuable therapeutic exchange.




              Box 5.4 Clinical Example of Externalising Critical/Punitive Thoughts

              Nikki presented in session with self-loathing, stating ‘I’m a loser, what’s wrong with me?’ The
              therapist encouraged Nikki to view these sentiments as being derived from a Punitive Critic
              mode (‘The Punisher’); ‘Nikki, that’s The Punisher talking, she’s saying you’re a loser, that side of
              you is taking things out on you.’



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   101



         work or chair work can help with such separation (see Chapter 8: Intervention Strategies for
         Schema Healing 3: Experiential Techniques).

         4. Strengthen Healthy Adult Functioning Over Time
         The ultimate aim of schema therapy is to strengthen the client’s Healthy Adult mode so that
         they can eventually self-regulate without the need for ongoing therapy. This mode acts as an
         ‘executive’ that healthily regulates diﬀerent aspects of self (i.e., the other modes). The
         Healthy Adult mode is akin to an internalised ‘healthy parent’ who is compassionate,
         rational, encouraging, sets boundaries on their own behaviour, and is wise in decision
         making. As a result, the mode propagates healthy, logical cognitive processes, functional
         emotional expression, and adaptive behaviours. The Healthy Adult mode can rationalise
         and challenge negative core beliefs, underlying assumptions, and self-talk. At an emotional
         level, the Healthy Adult mode contains feelings of compassion, courage, indignation,
         strength, and a connection to personal values.
             The Healthy Adult mode’s strength can vary signiﬁcantly from case to case, from very
         weak to largely resilient. In clients with poorer functioning, we would typically expect the
         Healthy Adult mode to be underdeveloped and/or less active, with the client’s coping style
         governing their day-to-day functioning. In such cases, the therapist spends more time
         providing a model of the Healthy Adult mode (rather than expecting the client to have
         the internal resources). Opportunities to model healthy dialogues occur through experien-
         tial exercises (see Chapter 8: Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 3: Experiential
         Techniques), limited reparenting (see Chapter 6: Intervention Strategies for Schema
         Healing 1: Limited Reparenting), and reviewing mode/schema diaries.
             Wherever possible, it remains useful for the therapist to acknowledge the presence of the
         client’s emerging Heathy Adult mode rather than assume it is not available. The treatment
         goal is to build upon the client’s internal resources (no matter how weak they are), rather
         than the therapist being solely responsible for the clients’ well-being. Just as in other
         cognitive-behavioural therapies, the schema therapist asks questions to elicit healthy per-
         spectives and behavioural responses wherever the client is capable of generating them.
         Ultimately, the eﬀective schema therapist balances providing direction, care, and guidance,
         encouraging the client to take greater responsibility over the course of the treatment.

         Phases of Schema Therapy and Practice Guidelines
         Knowledge of the therapeutic sequence within schema therapy can help treatment stay on
         course and inform the practitioner’s decision making throughout. Across a course of
         schema therapy, several key phases are typically observed. Within each phase, several
         goals and objectives will drive the treatment process.
             A common question we receive in trainings is ‘How long should schema therapy go on
         for?’ This really depends on a myriad of factors, some of which we consider here. A shorter-
         term treatment might be expected for clients that are higher functioning or whose problems
         do not have a chronic trajectory. For these clients, 12–20 sessions may be suﬃcient to
         address the presenting issues. Conversely, longer-term treatment will likely be required if
         the client’s problems: (a) are chronic, perhaps based on longstanding issues related to
         childhood; (b) meet diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder; or (c) are related to
         chronic issues of attachment. Previous studies can also provide an indication of the expected
         duration of treatment needed based on diagnosis. For example, a 50-session treatment




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          102           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Table 5.1 Treatment length in schema therapy treatment trials

              Study                                        Clinical population              Treatment length

              Bamelis et al. (2014) [8]                    Avoidant/dependant/OCPD          50-session protocol
              Malogiannis et al. (2014) [9]                Chronic depression               60-session protocol
              Giesen-Bloo et al. (2006) [10]               BPD                              3-year protocol
              Bernstein et al. (2021) [11]                 Forensic personality disorders   3-year protocol
              Huntjens et al. (2021) [12]                  Dissociative identity disorder   222-session protocol



          protocol was eﬀective with clients with Avoidant, Dependent, or Obsessive-Compulsive
          Personality Disorder [8]. Another factor that may determine the duration of treatment is the
          degree of deprivation of essential basic needs in childhood and adolescence. Typically, more
          entrenched and rigid coping responses as an adult can ensue from the severe and early
          frustration of needs. For example, extreme deprivation of safety (a very early and basic core
          emotional need) in childhood may require longer courses of therapy. In contrast, clients
          deprived of the opportunity to develop autonomy (a need that becomes more central later in
          the developmental process, e.g., in adolescence) may beneﬁt from a shorter treatment
          duration. A guide to previous research and treatment length can be viewed in Table 5.1.
              It can be helpful to think of a course of schema therapy as being divided into four phases.
          The ﬁrst phase is a pre-treatment phase and consists of enough assessment, psychoeduca-
          tion, and conceptualisation that the client can give informed consent to undertake a full
          course of schema therapy and the clinician can ascertain the client’s ability to do so.
          Treatment itself can then be structured to have a beginning, middle, and end phase. By
          evaluating each stage on predetermined criteria, the therapy process can thus be closely
          monitored and possibly adjusted. Methods and techniques are used diﬀerently in each
          phase, and the therapist’s attitude and reparenting approach also changes for each step.
          Although the overall expected duration of the treatment will be impacted by the client’s
          needs and disorder-speciﬁc proﬁle, the typical sequence of the sessions across time and
          within sessions is somewhat standardised. These are discussed in later sections in this
          chapter. One consideration of how the treatment unfolds is the focus across sessions, within
          a treatment phase, on particular treatment techniques: limited reparenting, cognitive
          techniques, experiential techniques, and behavioural pattern breaking. In the following
          sections, we describe how the distribution of these basic classes of therapeutic activity might
          vary during the diﬀerent phases of schema therapy.

          Phase 1: Pre-Treatment – Assessment, Education, and Case
          Conceptualisation
          The main activities of this phase were described in Chapter 3: Schema Therapy Assessment
          and Chapter 4: Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping in Schema Therapy. The
          purpose is to gather enough information about the client to develop a case conceptualisa-
          tion, which, in turn, is necessary for developing an initial treatment plan. The treatment
          plan will estimate how long the treatment will last, identify treatment goals, and state how
          the treatment will be structured. This plan also describes the most relevant treatment
          techniques and highlights any expected challenges or obstacles. The pre-treatment phase



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   103



         is a period of undertaking enough assessment of the client and providing enough informa-
         tion about what schema therapy for the client would involve that the clinician and client can
         make an informed decision about whether to undertake schema therapy together.

         Phase 2: Beginning Treatment Phase – Connecting with the Client
         and Building Schema/Mode Awareness
         Awareness of schemas and modes in daily life is an initial objective within the beginning
         phase of therapy. Building such awareness will be an important step if the client is to beneﬁt
         from the full schema therapy package wherein the therapist aims to generate corrective
         emotional experiences. Internalising such experiences will be an essential basis for strength-
         ening the client’s Healthy Adult mode.
             The duration of the therapy’s initial phase is strongly dependent on the therapy plan
         drawn up during the case conceptualisation. The choice of duration for this initial phase is
         often based on how best to distribute the available time. For example, a treatment plan of 50
         sessions for a Dependent PD client can mean that the initial phase lasts 20 sessions, leaving
         enough time for the middle phase (20 sessions) and the ﬁnal treatment stage (10 low-
         frequency sessions). Box 5.5 provides a framework for evaluating the client’s readiness to
         move into the middle phase of treatment.
         Limited Reparenting (Healthy Relating). The therapeutic relationship is an important area
         in which the client can gain new corrective experiences. In this initial phase, the client’s
         emotional development can often be best compared to that of a young child of primary
         school age. As a result, the therapist takes a more active lead, taking the initiative in
         recognising and clarifying feelings and patterns as a role model of a ‘good enough parent’
         [13]. The therapist also seeks to generate experiences that meet the client’s unmet basic
         emotional needs and helps the client internalise these experiences. The therapist can use
         empathic confrontation to help the client gain more insight into the impact of coping and
         critic modes on the therapy and the therapeutic relationship. However, the emphasis for
         many clients in this early phase of treatment is on empathy, and the use of such confronta-
         tion is often limited.


             Box 5.5 Evaluating Whether the Client Is Ready to Move Into the Middle Phase
             of Treatment

             It is advisable to schedule moments to evaluate the treatment plan and the progress made in
             treatment. Planned informal evaluations can help the treatment be more focused. Some pre-
             deﬁned speciﬁc evaluation criteria can clarify whether the client does not achieve these
             objectives.
                 Evaluation criteria after the initial phase of therapy can include:
             • Does the client use schema concepts/language?
             • Is it possible to use techniques (such as experiential exercises) essential to schema
                   therapy?
             • Is it possible to create corrective emotional experiences for the client via techniques such
                   as imagery rescripting?
             • Is the client able to retain such experiences, new insights, and skills between sessions?
             • Is there any eﬀect on assessment measures?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          104           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Cognitive Techniques (Healthy Thinking). Emotion-focused techniques aim to generate
          meaningful emotional experiences. Cognitive techniques provide rational responses to
          and understanding of such experiences. In the early phase of schema therapy, the therap-
          ist’s role is to provide psychoeducation about basic needs, healthy child-rearing and
          upbringing, and schemas/modes. To assist, the therapist may use a ﬂipchart or whiteboard
          to draw out the mode model. The therapist may also use audio recordings (ideally
          accessible via their mobile phone as a voice memo), whereby the therapist records
          important messages for the client. Triggering situations can be further documented and
          explored via schema diary forms with which clients practise recognising, monitoring, and
          challenging schemas/modes.
          Experiential Techniques (Healthy Feelings). In this initial phase, emotion-focused tech-
          niques aim to link current problems to their origins and generate corrective emotional
          experiences. Mode dialogues can assist in helping the client build more awareness of
          diﬀerent modes and to make such modes more ‘ego-dystonic’ (‘a part of me doesn’t want
          to talk about it’ vs ‘I don’t want to talk about it’). Imagery rescripting can help the client gain
          more insight into the origins of schemas and modes and allow the client to experience how
          genuine and appropriate care would have been in such experiences. The choice of methods –
          such as imagery rescripting or chair work (or any other emotional focused method) – will be
          partly determined by how the client responds to experiential work. If a client refuses to do
          imagery work, it is useful to use mode work and chairwork dialogues (see Chapter 8:
          Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 3: Experiential Techniques) to explore the
          reluctance. It may be helpful to blend imagery and chairwork approaches to allow for
          more variation in therapeutic content.
          Behavioural Techniques (Healthy Coping). There is typically less of a speciﬁc emphasis on
          behavioural change in this initial treatment phase; instead, there is usually a greater focus on
          feeling and thinking domains. Behavioural interventions within this phase may involve the
          therapist actively coaching the client in how to handle diﬃcult situations. Just as a parent
          might provide instructional guidance to a young child, the therapist may also simply
          provide direct advice regarding client problems at work, in their studies, or in their
          relationships, more so at this point than in later phases. Inﬂuencing client behaviour in
          this way mainly aims to prevent or limit further problems in the client’s life, while at the
          same time strengthening the therapeutic relationship.

          Phase 3: Middle Treatment Phase – Titrating Therapist Involvement
          and the Client Taking More Responsibility
          Overall Therapist Objective. Within this phase, the therapist seeks to elicit a greater level of
          responsibility and action from the client within the therapy exchange. The therapist’s view
          of the client’s role can be likened to how a parent’s expectations change as their child moves
          into adolescence. The client contributes to setting the agenda, initiates formulating diﬃcult
          situations and generating healthy perspectives and action plans, and takes the initiative in
          suggesting therapeutic exercises and activities. By now, the client is aware of the schemas,
          modes, and life patterns that perpetrate presenting issues. The middle phase’s general aim is
          to strengthen the client’s Healthy Adult mode and encourage the engagement and use of this
          functional mode in daily life (e.g., work, relationships).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   105



         Limited Reparenting. Within this phase, the therapist encourages the client to take more
         responsibility for their emotional and behavioural responses. The therapist may express to
         the client in sessions that they ‘believe in them’ and that they ‘have their back’, illustrating to
         the client that they have greater faith in their problem solving and self-care. The therapist is
         ultimately encouraging the client to place more signiﬁcant levels of trust in themselves and
         their capacity. Empathic confrontation is also used increasingly in sessions, whereby the
         therapist starts to confront behaviour outside of session that perpetuates schema material.
         Box 5.6 provides a clinical example of limited reparenting during the middle phase. Box 5.7
         provides a framework for evaluating the client’s readiness to move into the ﬁnal phase of
         treatment.
         Experiential Interventions. Emotionally focused approaches in the middle phase increas-
         ingly seek to identify, strengthen, and utilise the client’s Healthy Adult mode. Exercises such
         as historical role-play can help the client explore making a desired behaviour change in
         which they gain experience in standing up for their basic needs. Imagery exercises can help
         the client form a visual image of their Healthy Adult mode. Furthermore, in imagery
         rescripting, the therapist can encourage the client to visualise themselves as the Healthy
         Adult who stands up for the needs of the Vulnerable Child in the image. Within mode work
         and chairwork, the therapist may allocate a separate chair for the Healthy Adult and coach
         the client in how to respond from that chair. More speciﬁcally, the therapist may coach the
         client to express compassion to the Vulnerable Child part (represented by another chair) or
         read a warm letter to that child part, while seated in the Healthy Adult chair. Having the
         client complete the exercise while facing a mirror can further intensify the experience.


             Box 5.6 Clinical Example of Limited Reparenting During the Middle Phase

             Greg had been oﬀ work for 18 months. He had been employed as a gardener before his
             mental health declined and he was unable to work. His anxiety had improved over the last few
             months, and his therapist thought he could now work part time. The therapist encouraged
             Greg to compose a CV: ‘I think you have so many great skills, people need to see it.’ He used
             empathic confrontation, challenging Greg’s reticence to submit his CV to employers: ‘Part of
             me feels like backing oﬀ, accepting that you didn’t get around to it this week, but my healthy
             side thinks, “Greg, you need to get this done ASAP”.’




             Box 5.7 Evaluating Whether the Client Is Ready to Move Into the Final Phase
             of Treatment

             The following criteria can be used to help evaluate whether the objectives of the middle phase
             have been achieved:
             • Can the client recognise schema modes in retrospect?
             • Is the client able to visualise a Healthy Adult?
             • Is the client capable of accessing and using elements of the Healthy Adult mode?
             • Is the client able to have compassion for the Vulnerable Child mode?
             • Is there a cognitive awareness of why critic and coping modes are maladaptive?
             • Can the client show diﬀerent, more adaptive behaviours in the session?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          106           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Cognitive Interventions. In the middle phase, the client’s beliefs and assumptions about
          themselves, others, and the world should become increasingly more aligned with a Healthy
          Adult perspective. The main objective in this phase is that the client understands and
          remembers how a Healthy Adult mode functions and operates.
             A framework for the function of the Healthy Adult mode in response to triggering events
          can be translated into three steps:
          1) Compassion: First, the client should learn to look at their emotional reactions to problematic
             situations with understanding and compassion. Compassion is something many clients have
             not experienced in their upbringing. As a role model of a healthy caregiver, in the preceding
             therapy stages the therapist has demonstrated care and compassion to the client. Now, the
             therapist seeks to hand this skill over to the client. Compassion often means acknowledging
             that the emotions evoked are very understandable from the current problem situation, and
             certainly understandable from the past’s emotional deﬁcits.
          2) Cognitive Restructuring: In this middle phase, beliefs and assumptions related to
             schemas and modes are more directly challenged and modiﬁed. Cognitive techniques
             such as reattribution of causal elements linked to schemas and modes (typically
             identiﬁed in the conceptualisation) are used. The therapist may look at ways of healthy,
             balanced thinking in the client’s current life. Here, the therapist can educate the client
             about unhelpful thinking styles and impart skills to challenge unhelpful thoughts and
             provide a more balanced, Healthy Adult, logical response. In this phase, the client is
             increasingly responsible for ﬁlling in the cognitive diaries independently and examining
             whether automatic beliefs are realistic.
          3) Behavioural Modiﬁcation: Finally, the therapist encourages the client to respond to the
             problem situation in a healthy way. Speciﬁcally, clients are coached to develop solutions
             that are realistic and that meet their needs.

          Behavioural Interventions. Therapy is a safe haven in which clients practise behaviour change.
          The therapist can coach the client to break through old behaviour patterns and try out new,
          healthier behaviour in session. The therapist can encourage the client to share more of what they
          feel or think, to be more active in bringing up meaningful topics, and to express positive self-
          reﬂections or receive compliments. Audio ﬂashcards can be used to remember these experiences,
          in which the emphasis is increasingly on choosing a healthy way to handle problem situations.

          Phase 4: Final Treatment Phase – Pushing for Change and Autonomy
          General Concepts. The last phase of therapy aims to strengthen the client’s Healthy Adult as
          preparation for the post-therapy period. The scheduling of such sessions is typically less
          frequent (e.g., once a month), to give the client enough time to apply the learned skills
          independently in their life. In the ﬁnal phase, therapy focuses on helping clients achieve the
          practical goals they initially presented with at the start of therapy.
          Limited Reparenting. Continuing the parallel with a child’s developmental stage, the client
          is now starting to move more and more towards young adulthood. As a result, the therapist
          increasingly emphasises that the client applies the learned skills independently in their life.
          The therapeutic position changes from coaching to insisting on behavioural change. To this
          end, the tone and content of limited reparenting messages is more direct, as it would be
          when dealing with a young adult rather than a young child.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   107



         Experiential Interventions. The emotion-focused techniques now concentrate on strength-
         ening the client’s Healthy Adult side and enforcing the necessary behaviour change. For
         example, imagery rescripting in the ﬁnal phase is more focused on future problematic
         situations; exercises enable the client to practise new behaviours and manage common
         challenges. In chairwork exercises, the therapist encourages the client to negotiate with the
         coping modes and combat critic modes. The therapist may also prepare the client for future
         challenges by articulating typical coping mode messages and encouraging the client to
         dispute them, generating alternative adaptive statements.
         Cognitive Interventions. Cognitive interventions during the ﬁnal stage become more and
         more like traditional cognitive therapy. Underlying assumptions and core beliefs are
         assessed and challenged using schema diary forms. There is also an increasing emphasis
         on behavioural experiments. The therapist encourages the client to test whether their
         assumptions are correct by trying them out and letting go of old coping styles.
         Behavioural Interventions. In this ﬁnal phase, the necessity of behaviour change is concert-
         edly emphasised; without breaking old behavioural patterns, the risk of relapse is extremely
         high. All methods and techniques that can facilitate this behavioural change are permitted,
         including skills training, couple relation interviews, and self-monitoring procedures.
         Termination Activities. In addition to seeing through the fulﬁlment of long-term therapy
         tasks, the therapist also must be aware of issues related to the conclusion of the therapy
         (see Chapter 12: Preparing for Termination and the End Phase of Schema Therapy for
         a full overview). Box 5.8 provides a framework to help evaluate and guide decisions about
         the conclusion of therapy. Box 5.9 provides a clinical example overviewing a complete
         course of treatment for clients ‘Jack’ respectively (see also Figures 5.1 and 5.2).

         Schema Therapy Session Structure
         Although schema therapy is rarely delivered with a prescribed session plan throughout the
         whole course of therapy, sessions should nevertheless be organised and strategic. It is easy
         for the therapist to be distracted from the client’s core needs and issues that treatment could
         address. A balance between ‘being with’ the client’s presenting concerns and providing
         change (or ‘doing to’) techniques needs to occur.
             Frequently, a client’s coping mode may impact the ﬂow and focus of the session. For example,
         a rational and unemotional exchange may result from an unchallenged display of detachment
         and emotional avoidance in session. Here, the therapist needs to guide the structure of the
         session, focusing on critical issues that are most pertinent to the client’s presenting problems and
         goals.

             Box 5.8 Evaluating When to Conclude Therapy

             The following criteria can help evaluate whether the objectives of therapy have been met:
             • Can the client recognise modes in problem situations and switch back to the Healthy
                Adult mode?
             • Can the client, looking back at trigger situations, independently bring in arguments
                against Coping and Critic modes?
             • Is the client able to display diﬀerent behaviour outside the sessions?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          108           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 5.9 Clinical Example Overviewing a Complete Course of Treatment for ‘Jack’

              Jack was a 43-year-old male referred for treatment of depression after losing his job. However,
              on initial presentation, he did not seem entirely depressed, but rather arrogant, intimidating,
              and irritated, which was palpable within seconds of meeting him. In initial sessions, the
              therapist could have attempted to extract information about his background and provide
              assessment questionnaires. However, such an approach would have resulted in Jack dismiss-
              ing the treatment. Furthermore, the unaddressed and understood bullying and alienating
              behaviours in session may have resulted in the therapist ending the therapy.
                 Instead, the therapist immediately prioritised the use of a mode conceptualisation and
              provided this to Jack after three sessions. This case conceptualisation noted three central
              modes: the ‘Top Dog Bully Mode’ (Aggrandiser), the Detached Self-Stimulator (who used
              gaming and gambling to distract himself from painful emotions), and his ‘vulnerable side’
              (primarily linked to Emotional Deprivation and Defectiveness/Shame schemas). Jack was open
              to the conceptualisation and how this linked to his presenting problem of not being able to
              hold down a job and be ‘successful’.
                 The initial treatment plan primarily focused on helping Jack to become aware of his modes
              and understand that his ‘top dog mode’ was self-defeating, particularly because it alienated
              others and ultimately stopped him from being a ‘success in his work’. In the proceeding
              sessions, Jack gained a better understanding of the origins and functions of his modes and
              schemas. It became apparent that Jack had been bullied a great deal in primary school about
              his weight, and his parents had been unavailable emotionally and practically. The therapist
              developed a way to manage Jack’s in-session overcompensation modes using empathic
              confrontation, and Jack subsequently become much more forthcoming with information
              useful to building the case conceptualisation.
                 Over the next four months, the focus of the treatment moved to the use of two primary
              change strategies: (1) schema mode work and (2) limited reparenting, speciﬁcally empathic
              confrontation. Mode work typically was completed via the use of chairs. Chairwork was used
              to manage in-session ‘Top Dog’ behaviours, such as criticism of the therapist and others,
              bragging, and subtle contempt of other people’s feelings. When Jack began to belittle or
              compete with the therapist, the therapist would ask Jack to speak brieﬂy from the Top Dog
              Chair, whereafter the therapist would ask Jack to move out of this chair while he listened to
              the therapist empathically confront the Top Dog mode (see Chapter 6: Intervention Strategies
              for Schema Healing 1: Limited Reparenting).
                 The therapeutic relationship and limited reparenting was critical to Jack changing.
              Empathic confrontation was repeatedly used to challenge Jack’s in-session behaviour, and
              link it to its childhood origins of inadequacy and neglect, to enable access to Jack’s Vulnerable
              Child mode. The therapist focused on the prospect of Jack losing his professional standing as
              leverage in treatment. If he were to continue operating in Top Dog mode, it would limit his
              career success, a prospect that was sobering to Jack. Furthermore, it was made clear that the
              therapeutic relationship echoed relationships with others in his life outside of therapy. The
              take-home point was that if the therapist felt criticised and alienated, others would feel the
              same way. The therapist would continue to care and support; however, others would be more
              hostile and less accommodating of his needs. As a result, the therapist provided care and
              empathy to Jack’s displays of vulnerability while at the same time providing strong confron-
              tation of aggrandising behaviour.
                 Overall, Jack was impressed with how diﬀerent this had been to other interventions with
              mental health professionals. Typically, other clinicians had not addressed in-session behaviour
              and had instead focused on supportive psychotherapy or oﬀering cognitive change sugges-
              tions. After ﬁve months, Jack allowed himself to partake in an imagery rescripting exercise and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   109



             became more aware of the origins of his ‘Top Dog’ behaviour. Rescripting by the therapist of
             the images of bullying and intimidation Jack experienced as a child resulted in him experien-
             cing lower levels of shame and reduced his pervasive preoccupation with others ‘doing better’
             or ‘having a go’ at him. Jack was then willing to proceed with more imagery rescripting,
             helping him to understand the origins of his reactions at work and experience corrective
             experiences of unconditional acceptance from the therapist. In this phase, most of the
             sessions were focused on chair work and imagery rescripting, with some time allocated to
             addressing Jack’s aggrandising and status seeking in sessions where this was triggered.
             Overall, in-session Jack had become more reasonable and displayed less alienating behaviour
             towards the therapist.
                Over the next four months, the therapist generally used two-thirds of each session to focus
             primarily on experiential exercises (such as imagery rescripting or chair work exercises), with
             one-third of each session focusing on in-session issues and mode activation and some more
             structured cognitive change work. Speciﬁcally, the therapist challenged beliefs encapsulating
             Jack’s Unrelenting Standards schema (i.e., the inﬂexible, high demands he placed on others
             and himself). Also, beliefs about self-acceptance and his ‘weaknesses’ were addressed and
             restructured.
                By session 30, Jack demonstrated greater self-awareness and was more willing to lead chair
             work and imagery rescripting experiential exercises. He had also entered a new intimate
             relationship, and the therapist spent time teaching him how he could express his needs to his
             new partner in a non-aggressive and non-demanding way. Here, the therapist provided
             didactic information, modelling, and coaching through role-plays in session. Behaviour
             change strategies also included prompting Jack to take speciﬁc time to consider his new
             partner’s perspective (akin to practising empathy). Jack was initially resistant to the task as it
             was so alien to him. Consequently, the therapist used chair work to understand (conceptual-
             ise) the resistance to behaviour change.
                After session 40, Jack sought to reduce the frequency of his sessions (with sessions
             being biweekly or monthly). He remained in stable employment and had managed to
             sustain a mostly healthy relationship. During the next ten sessions, Jack’s Heathy Adult,
             ‘The Wise Guy’, was increasingly evident. He demonstrated awareness of problematic
             modes and, in particular, displayed a greater capacity to respond to his urge to
             aggrandise and ‘dominate others’ in and out of session. The therapist typically used
             15–20 minutes of session time either in imagery rescripting or chair dialogues to help
             him become primed to use his ‘Wise Guy’ mode, practice Healthy Adult self-talk and
             make new healthy plans for the following weeks.



            The session structure needs to be ﬂexible enough to meet the client’s core emotional
         needs at the time. A typical session can be viewed as having three phases, with 15–20
         minutes of session time spent on each phase:
         1. The Attunement Phase.
         2. ‘The Work’
         3. ‘The Wash Up’

         The Attunement Phase (First Third of the Session)
         In the ﬁrst third of the session, the therapist actively attunes to the client’s presentation ‘in
         the room’. The therapist pays careful attention to gauging the client’s current emotional
         state, looking for recent triggers and possibly reviewing homework assessments or following



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          110            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




                                                                                                      Imagery Rescripting,
                                                                                                        Links to Origins


                          Provision of
                        Conceptualisation            Mode Work via Chairs,
                                                    Defusion from Aggrandiser                                Strengthening of Healthy Adult
                                                              Mode

           Assessment

                                       Limited Reparenting, Empathic Confrontation, & Limit Setting




                                       Mode Awareness




             Session 1       Session 4      Session 30       Session 40

          Figure 5.1 Jack’s treatment timeline




          up conversations from previous sessions. Limited reparenting is prominent in this section,
          with the therapist responding to the client’s needs via empathy, validation, and attunement
          to verbal and non-verbal cues. The therapist may suggest focusing on one speciﬁc triggering
          event or topic and deeply attune to the emotions and meanings associated with the event.
          Furthermore, the therapist makes links between current triggers and emotions and past life
          events.
              Ultimately, the aim is for the client to feel understood and attuned to at the beginning
          of the session. This allows for intervention targets to emerge, and for any interventions
          that ensue to accurately target the relevant underlying needs and schema themes. Such
          attunement to current emotional states typically takes precedence over homework assign-
          ment follow-up and evaluation. However, if there is no signiﬁcant initial emotional
          presence in the session, the therapist can explore homework assignments set in previous
          sessions.

          ‘The Work’ (Second Third of the Session)
          In this section of the session, the therapist may use speciﬁc strategies for change (such
          as experiential, cognitive, or behavioural techniques or discussion of the therapy
          relationship itself). A linking comment to this section may include ‘So, what would
          be a good use of the time today? How would you feel about doing X’? Here, the
          therapist can provide some guidance on what could be useful and helpful to the client
          and, at the same time, be collaborative and attuned to core emotional needs. For
          example, the therapist may suggest a chairwork exercise (to explore feelings linked to
          a pertinent trigger discussed earlier in the session) or suggest time spent writing
          a ﬂashcard to help with such triggers outside of the session. Here, the critical factor
          is that the therapist oﬀers an invitation to do some ‘work’. Rather than colluding with
          the client’s Coping modes and providing empathy and care throughout the session,
          the therapist seeks to move into a change sequence.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead   111



         The ‘Wash Up’ (Final Third of the Session)
         In the ﬁnal section of the session, the therapist aims to capitalise on insights and
         changes made in ‘the work’ section. The therapist may seek to highlight the ‘take-
         home message’ of the exchange or discuss further feelings and thoughts observed in
         the sequence and link these to overarching life patterns and goals. Within this
         sequence, the therapist may also encourage some self-reﬂection or ‘assignments’
         outside of session. These can range from relatively general to more concrete.
         Suggested activities need to be meaningful to the client, and related to the current
         session’s content and the overall therapeutic goals and needs (see Chapter 9:
         Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 4: Behavioural Pattern-Breaking
         Techniques for a full overview of homework/take-home tasks in schema therapy).
         Box 5.10 provides a clinical example of the ﬂow of a schema therapy session.

         Tips to Encourage a Steady Direction in Schema Therapy
         Be Aware of Client Coping Modes
         Clients’ habitual ways of coping are typically present in the session. When therapists
         collude with coping modes, treatment sessions have poorer focus, direction, and
         outcomes. In other words, therapists who fail to prompt the client to identify
         a coping mode in operation during the session allow the client to remain in habitual
         ways of ineﬀective interaction. For example, a therapist might not challenge the
         client’s Self-Aggrandiser mode and associated behaviour in session, resulting in the
         exchange being dominated by the client bragging about their achievements and



             Box 5.10 Clinical Example of Session Structure

             Greg arrives in session to the therapist asking ‘How has your week been?’ Greg notes
             several issues linked to illness in the family and then indicates recent hostility with his
             girlfriend. One of Greg’s therapy aims is to enter into and sustain a healthy relationship.
             The therapist appraises Greg as having limited awareness of his schemas and modes.
             With the conceptualisation in mind and knowing Greg’s life pattern related to diﬃculties
             in relationships, the therapist slows down Greg’s description of the events with his
             girlfriend and seeks to access emotional and cognitive components of the experience.
             Following this, the therapist empathises, validates, and meets Greg’s emotional need
             related to the trigger, which in this case was understanding and care (the ‘Attunement’
             section). Next, the therapist asks Greg, ‘How would you feel about doing an imagery
             exercise to understand the feelings related to what happened with your girlfriend?’ Greg
             agrees to complete an imagery rescripting exercise in which the therapist links the
             recent altercation between Greg and his girlfriend with an associated memory related
             to childhood deprivation (the ‘Work’ section). After completing the imagery exercise, the
             therapist discusses the links between past events and the present trigger. This increases
             Greg’s awareness of schema activation. Greg is encouraged to write a small message
             from his ‘Healthy Side’ (Healthy Adult mode) to his ‘Shut Down Avoider’ (Detached
             Protector) highlighting the need to engage with his girlfriend rather than detach and
             withdraw (the ‘Wash Up’ section).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          112           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          successes, topics that are unrelated to the presenting problem. Alternatively, the
          client might speak superﬁcially about emotionally laden material while suppressing
          their emotional reactions (Detached Protector mode), and the therapist then misses
          an opportunity to provide understanding and care to the client. In such cases, the
          therapist should attempt to use mode work to bypass the coping mode and access the
          Vulnerable Child mode.

          Conceptualisation as a Compass
          The case conceptualisation and awareness of the client’s core emotional needs can be
          akin to a therapy compass: a helpful reminder of the treatment direction and thera-
          peutic objectives for the client. A useful conceptualisation should be able to remind
          the clinician of several speciﬁc elements of the case; these include the presenting
          problems, background of the client (including the experience of caregiving and
          traumatic events), central schemas/modes of coping, and therapeutic objectives and
          goals. Although it may not be pragmatic to have a large conceptualisation document
          in view every session, therapists can employ a basic mode conceptualisation diagram
          to refer to within each discussion, highlighting the reason for a suggested intervention
          or treatment objective and noting when particular modes are activated in session or by
          recent triggers.

          Enhancing Client Motivation and Responsibility
          The length of a course of schema therapy can aﬀect the client’s motivation to change,
          especially if phases are prolonged because of suboptimal responding to the client’s
          presentation. Habitual use of coping modes and styles by the client can result in low
          motivation to change. Furthermore, clients may evade challenges when they ﬁnd
          themselves within the ‘titration phase’ of treatment, and are expected to take more
          responsibility for self-care and healthy behaviours. Here, empathic confrontation can
          be used to encourage further client eﬀort and heighten the emotional meaning of
          change. Also, mode dialogues can be employed to assist in localising and understand-
          ing the modes that are blocking change.

          Concluding Remarks
          Schema therapy requires more time than traditional cognitive-behavioural psychotherapies.
          It can be challenging to maintain adherence to the model’s techniques over this extended
          timeframe. Furthermore, the choice of interventions and how they are used changes across
          the course of treatment. As a result, it is wise for the therapist to bear in mind speciﬁc three
          sources of direction:
          1. Objectives/goals of the client: what is the client seeking help with? What do they want
              from therapy?
          2. Primary schema therapy aims and principles: to identify and meet core emotional needs
              and provide schema- and mode-corrective emotional experiences.
          3. The treatment phase in which the client is positioned: see the client as taking
              more responsibility and exercising more autonomy as the course of treatment
              progresses.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                  Envisioning the Road Ahead            113



         References
           1. Zimmerman M, Rothschild L,                                        Psychotherapy Integration. 2013;23
              Chelminski I. The Prevalence of DSM-IV                            (2):166–78.
              Personality Disorders in Psychiatric                         8. Bamelis LL, Evers SM, Spinhoven P,
              Outpatients. American Journal of                                Arntz A. Results of a multicenter
              Psychiatry. 2005;162(10):1911–18.                               randomized controlled trial of the clinical
           2. Behary W, Dieckmann E. Schema therapy                           eﬀectiveness of schema therapy for
              for pathological narcissism: The art of                         personality disorders. American Journal of
              adaptive reparenting. In Ogrodniczuk J,                         Psychiatry. 2014, 171(3), 305–22.
              ed., Understanding and Treating                              9. Malogiannis I, Arntz A, Spyropoulou A et al.
              Pathological Narcissism. American                               Schema therapy for patients with chronic
              Psychological Association; 2013. pp.                            depression: A single case series study. Journal
              285–300.                                                        of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
           3. Fassbinder E, Arntz A. Schema therapy                           Psychiatry. 2014;45(3):319–29.
              with emotionally inhibited and fearful                      10. Giesen-Bloo J, van Dyck R, Spinhoven P
              patients. Journal of Contemporary                               et al. Outpatient psychotherapy for
              Psychotherapy. 2018;49(1):7–14.                                 borderline personality disorder. Archives
           4. Tan Y, Lee C, Averbeck L et al. Schema                          of General Psychiatry. 2006;63(6):649.
              therapy for borderline personality disorder:                11. Bernstein DP, Keulen-de Vos M,
              A qualitative study of patients’ perceptions.                   Clercx M et al. Schema therapy for
              PloS ONE. 2018;13(11):e0206039.                                 violent PD oﬀenders: A randomized
           5. Alexander F, French T. Psychoanalytic                           clinical trial. Psychological medicine.
              therapy: Principles and application.                            2021 Jun. 15:1–5.
              University of Nebraska Press; 1946.                         12. Huntjens RJ, Rijkeboer MM, Arntz A.
           6. Brockman R, Stevens. B, Roediger.E.                             Schema therapy for dissociative identity
              Contextual schema therapy: An integrative                       disorder (DID): Rationale and study
              approach to personality disorders, emotional                    protocol. European Journal of
              dysregulation, and interpersonal functioning.                   Psychotraumatology. 2019 Dec. 31;10
              New Harbinger Publications; 2018.                               (1):1571377.
           7. Kannan D, Levitt H. A review of client                      13. Bettelheim B. A good enough parent. Pan
              self-criticism in psychotherapy. Journal of                     Books; 1987.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Intervention Strategies for

                        6            Schema Healing 1
                                     Limited Reparenting

          Introduction
          Schema therapy has a characteristic style of therapeutic relationship which likely diﬀers
          from the style that most readers would have been trained in. The schema therapist
          consciously and intentionally provides a role model of a good parent. The therapist seeks
          to partially replace the child-rearing and socialising experiences the client actually received
          with healthier responses, healthier guidance, and healthier limits where necessary.
          Consequently, schema therapy has a more intensely personal ﬂavour than most short-
          term therapies, and the therapist remains mindful of how each of their responses addresses
          or fails to address the client’s core emotional needs. Over the course of therapy, the therapist
          adjusts their manner of interacting with the client analogously to changing from addressing
          a young child, to an adolescent, to, ﬁnally, a young adult. This chapter unpacks this style of
          interaction, called limited reparenting.

          Limited Reparenting: An Overview
          Helping clients discover (or rediscover) their core emotional needs and experience them
          being satisﬁed (‘getting their needs met’) is at the heart of schema therapy. Clients who
          experience their needs being met are likely to also experience a reduction in schema
          activation and then, over time, schema healing. We have observed that the emotional
          development of many chronic clients has been blocked through the chronic frustration of
          their core emotional needs as children. We have had many adult clients report feeling that
          their emotional maturity has been stunted, and that they function at a lower level than their
          same-age peers. Limited reparenting aims to provide limited but powerful doses of need-
          satisfying interpersonal experiences within the therapeutic relationship that had not been
          adequately experienced in childhood. It is hoped that in helping the client experience
          satisfaction of their core emotional needs, we ‘kick start’ the emotional development of
          the client.
              Rather than allowing the therapeutic relationship to simply ‘develop over time’, limited
          reparenting provides a speciﬁc architecture that guides how the therapist can leverage the
          therapeutic relationship to provide corrective emotional experiences. Limited reparenting is
          both a method and an orientation; the therapist attends to the client’s speciﬁc needs proﬁle,
          and fosters a robust, authentic therapeutic relationship, idiosyncratic to their individual
          case conceptualisation. For example, the kind of therapeutic relationship that is fostered for
          a client suﬀering primarily with issues related to trust (e.g., Mistrust/Abuse schema) is likely
          to vary signiﬁcantly from those whose problems emanate from fears of abandonment. In
          using the therapeutic relationship to directly meet needs, the schema therapist aims to go
          114


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting                115



             Table 6.1 Therapeutic relationship themes and treatment

             Therapy Model                    Purpose of Therapeutic                       Characteristic Therapist
                                              Relationship                                 Responses

             Cognitive Behaviour              •    The client ought to be their            Let’s look at that belief ‘I
             Therapy                               ‘own therapist’                         don’t have what it takes’.
                                              •    Emphasises the client solving           How have you come to that
                                                   problems                                conclusion?’ ‘Is it 100% true
                                              •    Socratic questioning and                that you can’t do your job?’
                                                   guided discovery                        ‘What’s a more balanced
                                              •    The therapist often in coach/           view?’
                                                   educator role
             Psychoanalytic                   •    ‘Blank slate’                           ‘So, for you, it seems you
             Therapy                          •    No self-disclosure                      consider yourself as not
                                              •    The therapist provides an open          “having what it takes”.’
                                                   space for the client to explore
                                                   and analyse meaningful
                                                   experiences
                                              •    Therapist withholds emotional
                                                   reactions towards the client
             Schema Therapy                   •    Appropriate self-disclosure             ‘Listen, I see a person who is
                                              •    Therapist acts as a parent-like         trying so hard … I believe in
                                                   ﬁgure to meet some of the               you, I really believe you can
                                                   needs directly in the                   do it’
                                                   relationship
                                              •    This role is modelled and
                                                   gradually adopted by the
                                                   client’s own Healthy Adult side



         beyond a ‘standard level’ of therapist care (e.g., in warmth, therapeutic alliance, uncondi-
         tional positive regard) to become a genuine source of support and understanding, within the
         appropriate boundaries of the therapeutic relationship [1].
             Limited reparenting is not a focused intervention or technique in the traditional sense of
         ‘doing’ something ‘to’ a client in a series of steps or phases; rather, it is a therapeutic style
         interwoven throughout the treatment and therapeutic relationship. At times, however, the
         process of limited reparenting may be more overt in the session (such as when the therapist
         is providing nurturance to a distressed client, or when the therapist is directly challenging
         a client’s dysfunctional behaviour). In our training programmes we often say that the
         essence of limited reparenting is to ‘be with’ the client rather than ‘doing to’. The distinct-
         iveness of this approach, in contrast with other psychotherapy models, is illustrated in
         Table 6.1.

         Theoretical Change Process
         Many clients grew up in environments where their core emotional needs were largely
         unmet. While they concentrated on coping with these harmful conditions, to some degree




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          116           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          their emotional development as children stagnated; they did not learn to give words to
          feelings, understand and regulate their emotions, or employ adaptive coping repertoires.
          Limited reparenting, through directly meeting needs, aims to provide the client with
          corrective emotional experiences, directly modifying the EMS associated with speciﬁc
          needs. In the limited reparenting approach, the therapist acts as a model of the ‘good
          parent’ that the client should have received earlier in life. Throughout therapy, the schema
          therapist authentically models responses to the client’s emotional needs. As a result, the
          client comes to internalise the therapist’s example as a basis for new, healthy scripts for
          cognition (i.e., healthy schemas) and more functional behaviours (i.e., coping).

          The Process of Providing Care in Limited Reparenting: Meeting
          Needs Directly Using the Therapy Relationship
          Limited reparenting is a style of interacting with clients in which the therapist aims to give
          the client experiences of having their emotional needs met directly within the therapeutic
          relationship. As an example, imagine a client who might present with a Defectiveness EMS
          and an underlying unmet need for acceptance and praise. In other approaches, such as
          traditional cognitive therapy, the therapist may primarily seek to undermine or challenge
          the Defectiveness schema in an indirect, Socratic way: ‘What has led you to see things that
          way? How have you come to that conclusion about yourself?’ In a limited reparenting
          relationship, the maladaptive schema content could be corrected more directly: ‘I want you
          to know there is nothing wrong with you, and I look forward to our sessions.’ This style of
          response is akin to how a parent would respond to a child: directly meeting their needs with
          warmth and compassion, rather than approaching the situation from a logical position.
              With chronic client, schema therapists do not assume that the client has had access to
          suﬃcient healthy parenting to be able to access healthy functional scripts for thought and
          behaviour without the therapist’s direct input. For example, if a ten-year-old child presented
          in a distressed state to a parent, saying ‘Dad, I have no friends, I feel like a loser’, a Socratic
          way to challenge the belief would be: ‘How have you come to this conclusion? Is it 100% true
          that you have no friends?’ Clearly, a purely cognitive approach to parenting in this situation
          risks the parent failing to attune to the child’s attachment need. A Socratic approach
          primarily engages the rational/cognitive capabilities. However, in clients with personality
          disorders or chronic emotional problems, this ‘healthy’ rational side can be underdeveloped
          or seemingly absent. Furthermore, the modelling of rational methods from caregivers
          without also responding to the child’s emotional needs such as warmth/connection/accept-
          ance (i.e., ‘got the words and not the hug’) results in the rational responses having less
          impact than they would if delivered with warmth and acceptance. So, in other words, what
          people with impoverished (compared with healthy) childhoods feel in response to ‘healthy
          cognitive dialogues’ can be quite diﬀerent: the latter might feel comforted by rational words,
          but the former don’t have the same positive emotional connotations and so are less likely to
          feel comfort or reassurance.

          Qualities of a ‘Good Enough Parent’
          To understand what limited reparenting might look like in practice, we must ﬁrst consider
          some of the core ingredients of ‘good enough parenting’ from the perspective of core
          emotional needs [1, 2, 3].




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting   117



         Care, Attunement, Nurturance
         Above all else, a good parent provides adequate care, but beyond this they also oﬀer safe and
         supportive involvement in a child’s life. They are attuned to the emotions and needs of their
         child and can respond with compassion when their child suﬀers. Through attuning and
         attending to their child’s needs and feelings, the good parent provides a healthy model of
         self-regulation to the child. Through their dependability and stability, a good parent signals
         safety to the child and provides a stable, ‘safe base’ from which the child can explore the
         world, supporting healthy development.

         Guidance, Direction, Conﬁdence, and the Support of Autonomy
         and Competence
         A good parent provides guidance and direction. In infancy, the parent makes all decisions
         aﬀecting their child. However, as the child develops, the parent balances encouraging their
         child to make healthy choices and decisions with allowing their child to increasingly exercise
         autonomy and develop their own individual identity. The healthy parent will also instil
         conﬁdence and support the competence of the developing child directly with support and
         belief in the child’s developing attributes, and through modelling conﬁdent and competent
         behaviours and attitudes.

         Boundaries, Limits, and Respect for Others
         So far, we have described the central behaviours of a good parent as those of a nurturer. But
         a good parent must also help the child understand limits and boundaries in the world and
         manage any unhelpful and destructive behaviour or feelings of frustration. A child that
         never learns how to deal with feelings of frustration and anger may go on to struggle with
         these feelings in adulthood. A good parent teaches their child to balance meeting their own
         needs with co-operating and respecting others. The good parent actively discourages their
         child from engaging in behaviour likely to damage their relationships and teaches them how
         immature coping will, in turn, lead them to miss out on having their own needs met. How
         the schema therapist embodies these ‘good parent’ qualities to the fullest extent possible
         within the boundaries of a psychotherapeutic relationship is the focus of the rest of this
         chapter.

         The Practice of Limited Reparenting
         Schema Attunement: The Foundation of a Limited Reparenting
         Relationship
         Like a good parenting relationship, a successful limited reparenting therapeutic relationship
         rests upon a solid foundation of attunement. Schema attunement is itself a powerful schema
         change strategy – perhaps even ‘the glue of schema therapy’ (p. 36) [4]. A key skill of any
         therapist is the ability to listen and empathise, but in schema therapy we endeavour to go
         beyond a standard level of therapeutic listening skills to directly provide a high level of
         attunement within the session. Many client, through histories of emotional neglect and
         invalidation, have not received adequate levels of attunement from their caregivers. The
         schema therapist – by providing attunement directly, in vivo – creates an opportunity for



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          118           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          correcting the client’s negative expectations and schemas, particularly those involving
          emotional deprivation and emotional inhibition. The attuned therapist can communicate
          to the client a deep understanding of the client’s own ‘internal reality’ [5].
              In therapeutic contexts, attunement has been conceptualised as a two-part process that
          begins with (1) empathising – being sensitive to and experiencing an understanding of
          another person’s sensations, needs, and/or feelings, and (2) communicating that understand-
          ing to the other person with the aim of creating the experience of resonance [6, 5].
          Attunement has several important therapeutic eﬀects:
          1) Bypasses Maladaptive Coping Modes – Attuned moments in therapy, in which the
              therapist makes space for the client to share their feelings and needs related to triggering
              events, are the antithesis of the maladaptive coping modes implicated in the client’s
              psychopathology. Creating these moments more frequently in sessions helps the
              therapist bypass coping modes and starts the process of pattern-breaking in vivo, using
              the therapeutic relationship.
          2) Provides in vivo Opportunities for Schema Healing – Through communicating their
              understanding, the therapist directly validates the client’s needs, feelings, and
              experiences, providing a corrective experience that contrasts with experiences from their
              family of origin. This kind of attuned understanding was likely missing from their
              childhood experience and very likely meets their core emotional needs in vivo.
          3) Socialises the Client to Experiential Work – Attending to and seeking to understand
              the client’s emotional experiences teaches the client to value emotions and reinforces the
              expectation promoted at the outset that therapy will be experiential. After a lifetime of
              experiential avoidance, clients are reintroduced to experiencing, sharing, and processing
              their emotions at a manageable pace.
          4) Enhances the Case Conceptualisation – The process of attuning aids the therapist’s
              conceptualisation of the speciﬁc underlying schemas and associated needs that are
              driving clinical problems. It is very important in schema therapy that the
              interventions are ‘hitting the mark’ by addressing the correct schema-related need.
              Higher levels of successful attunement (marked by clients indicating that they feel
              understood) in session increases the therapist’s conﬁdence in the case
              conceptualisation, and the likelihood that any interventions targeting speciﬁc needs
              will be successful. Without a high level of attunement, the therapist risks providing
              limited reparenting and experiential exercises haphazardly, with clients less likely
              to progress as a consequence. For example, the therapist may respond as though
              the core concern of the client is defectiveness, when in fact the core concern might
              be abandonment. Such misattunement is very likely to ‘miss the mark’, and the
              client may feel misunderstood.
              As stated earlier, a high level of attunement is so important that it can be thought of as
          the ‘glue’ of schema therapy: a necessary skill that underpins the eﬃcacy of all four broad
          schema therapy intervention strategies (limited reparenting, experiential, cognitive, behav-
          ioural) [5]. We have also noticed that persistent problems in the eﬃcacy of experiential
          techniques can often be traced back to a poor capacity for attunement on behalf of the
          therapist and/or the client. We have come to understand that higher levels of within-session
          attunement between the therapist and client appear to be a good predictor of readiness for
          emotion-focused interventions. Attunement is thus a foundational skill for schema
          therapists.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting   119



         A Process-Based Approach to Building Schema
         Attunement in Session
         Background and Aim
         We have found that clients who have not learned healthy ways of processing and expressing
         needs and emotions from their caregivers are also those who experience the most diﬃculties
         ‘tuning in’ to their emotional world [5]. Consequently, these clients are likely to have
         developed strong coping modes to deal with emotions when they are triggered. In trying
         to orient clients towards their emotions it is likely that, at times, therapists will face the
         client’s coping modes. An initial goal of attunement is to make space with the client to share
         emotionally evocative material within the therapy relationship. The therapist aims to
         ‘trigger’ the client’s schema-based experiences in a safe and contained way in the therapy
         room so that they can be understood, attuned to, and co-regulated. The easiest way to do
         this is to enquire about speciﬁc recent triggering episodes for the client.
             1. Focus on Speciﬁc Episodes of Distress. A good portion of schema therapy sessions
         should generally focus on understanding the client’s recent emotional experiences or
         ‘triggers’. This process often ﬂows naturally from homework tasks (e.g., mode awareness
         forms, attempts at pattern-breaking) which can prompt the client to recall recent relevant
         triggering experiences. For some clients who are extremely avoidant or detached, sharing
         information about triggers may be diﬃcult as this information may be ordinarily avoided or
         pushed out of awareness. It is important in these cases to be client and assume that all
         emotional episodes generally have triggering antecedents. For example, many clients report
         that there is no trigger to their feelings of intense loneliness and that they experience them
         occurring ‘out of the blue’. However, close inspection of the antecedents might reveal this
         feeling to most often be triggered late at night when alone at home.
             We have found that obtaining speciﬁc and detailed information about the trigger
         situation is more likely to help bring emotions into the room than generalised, abstract,
         or broad ‘stories’ about an episode. Ask direct, probing questions such as ‘What was the
         speciﬁc moment that really did it for you?’ It is often something speciﬁc, such as a particular
         act, non-verbal event (disapproving look), or verbal communication from other people. At
         other times it may be a lack of stimulation or connection that eventually triggers feelings of
         disconnection and loneliness. In any case, speciﬁc descriptions of the triggering situations
         are generally more conducive to clients sharing their emotions, while broad narratives are
         generally more conducive to clients remaining in maladaptive coping states.
             As discussed in Chapter 5, it is generally advisable to structure schema therapy sessions
         such that the ﬁrst third of the session (say, 15–20 minutes) will be spent discussing any
         recent triggering experiences. This can often be combined with a review of any homework
         tasks, which often trigger strong emotions. Over time, the client becomes socialised to
         expect that the ﬁrst third of the session provides a space for exploring recent triggering
         events (see Box 6.1 for an example).
             2. Tune in to the Emotional Response. This should be done by exploring the nature of
         the emotional reaction to the triggering event by identifying appropriate emotion labels
         (e.g., ‘I felt scared’) and/or related bodily sensations (e.g., ‘My heart started pounding’).
         Box 6.2 illustrates this process.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          120           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 6.1 Example Identifying a Triggering Experience During the First Third
              of The Session
              THERAPIST: So Jenny, you were saying that you have been beating yourself up all week, can
                 you tell me about a speciﬁc time this week when you were feeling this way?
              JENNY: Yes, last Friday was the worst!
              THERAPIST: Can you tell me about a speciﬁc moment on Friday, perhaps when you were most
                 triggered that day?
              JENNY: My boss was on my back all day!
              THERAPIST: Can you focus on a speciﬁc moment with your boss, Jenny? What exactly was it
                 that was so upsetting about the way he was treating you?
              JENNY: It was the words, he kept saying . . . ‘this is not good enough’ . . . but it was also the
                 frown . . . he was really angry.
              THERAPIST: OK . . . it was the words . . . not good enough . . . but also his frown, and angry
                 tone?
              JENNY: Yes . . . like I’m in trouble.




              Box 6.2 Example Identifying the Emotional Response to a Recent Triggering
              Experience
              THERAPIST: And how did you feel in response to being treated that way?
              JENNY: I felt anxious . . . like pressure.
              THERAPIST: And where could you feel this pressure or anxiety building up [therapist gestures
                 towards her own body] in your body?
              JENNY: In my stomach . . . like a churning . . . and up into my chest.
              THERAPIST: [summarising the understanding so far, and empathising] OK, so let’s see if I am
                 understanding this right so far . . . your boss was badgering you, and frowning, and
                 generally acting in an angry manner, and this led to you feeling intense anxiety and
                 a kind of pressure, felt in your stomach and chest?
              JENNY: Yes.
              THERAPIST: That sounds really hard for you . . . no one likes being treated like that in their
                 place of work, and I know how much you have been trying in this job! [Also communi-
                 cating empathy with facial gesture.]
              JENNY: Yes.



              3. Uncover Underlying Schema/s and Needs. In schema therapy, it is important to
          attune not only to the feelings, but also to the underlying schemas and needs driving the
          emotional distress. Thus, we can call this process schema attunement, to diﬀerentiate it from
          attunement that might be solely focused on a person’s emotional experience. In most cases,
          we ﬁnd that episodes of emotional distress can be understood in terms of the activation of
          speciﬁc schema themes and their underlying needs. Here, we use our knowledge of the
          eighteen schemas to understand the speciﬁc meanings behind a person’s distress or
          emotional reaction. What did this event mean to them, in terms of speciﬁc schema themes?
          Take a curious stance of enquiry to continue questioning about the meaning of the trigger



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting        121



             Box 6.3 Example of Attuning to Underlying Schemas and Needs in a Recent
             Triggering Event
             THERAPIST: OK . . . Jenny, I could easily assume why you were feeling that way, but I’d like to
                check with you. What did it mean to you in that moment that your boss was treating you
                that way?
             JENNY: I’m in trouble . . . I’ve done something wrong.
             THERAPIST: Right . . . and what would that mean to you if you were in trouble for doing
                something wrong?
             JENNY: It’s my fault. [Activation of emotions becomes evident.]
             THERAPIST: OK . . . [pause] . . . and if it was your fault, what would that mean about you?
             JENNY: I’m not good enough.
             THERAPIST: Ah . . .. OK, I think I’m starting to get it. It was that ‘not good enough’ theme
                again? [Therapist checks the emerging understanding in terms of one of the eighteen
                schema themes.]
             JENNY: Yes, of course . . . I always feel that way when others criticise or are angry with me.
             THERAPIST: That feeling of ‘not good enough’ . . . does it capture all of that anxious-pressured
                feeling or is there something else too? [Therapist checks to see if there are other schemas
                at play; sometimes there are multiple schemas triggered.]
             JENNY: No that is it, I just feel worthless, like nothing I do is ever good enough!
             THERAPIST: It sounds to me like you really needed your boss to show more respect in that
                moment, even if he had to give constructive feedback. [Therapist validates the under-
                lying need for validation and basic respect.]
             JENNY: Yes! That would have been nice!




         and feeling for them, using cognitive techniques such as downward arrowing and Socratic
         questioning. Uncovering speciﬁc schema themes deepens the therapist’s understanding and
         helps to pinpoint speciﬁc underlying needs. See Box 6.3 for an example.
             4. Summarise and Check Your Understanding, Empathise, and Link to Historical
         Origins. At this stage, the client has really opened up about their inner feelings, their
         antecedents, and the schema themes that have been activated. They are much more likely to
         be ‘in’ their emotional experience. Tentatively summarise your understanding of what the
         client has communicated about their experience so far. The goal is to create a resonance
         between the client and therapist such that the client, in that moment, understands and can
         acknowledge that the therapist accurately comprehends their experience. This kind of
         attuned understanding is often a powerful antidote for clients with Emotional
         Deprivation EMS who often feel that ‘no one gets me’. You may need to repeat steps 1–3
         as necessary to ﬁne-tune your understanding based on the client’s feedback until the client
         reports a high degree of resonance. Once the client communicates this resonance, oﬀer
         some empathic statements and look for opportunities to link to relevant childhood experi-
         ences, making such links explicit (see Box 6.4).
             5. Bridge into Intervention Strategies – ‘The Work’. Higher levels of within-session
         attunement, ‘being with’ the client in this way, will on most occasions be experienced as
         need-satisfying. However, now that the client is more in touch with their feelings and related



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          122           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 6.4 Example of Summarising Recent Triggering Events and Linking
              to Historical Origins
              THERAPIST: OK, so I think I’m starting to get it now: you were at work trying your best as usual,
                 when your boss scolded you in a way that was invalidating and aggressive, making you
                 feel like YOU were not good enough as a person. Is that right?
              JENNY: Yes.
              THERAPIST: Is it fair to say that this triggered oﬀ your own Punitive Critic, like YOU started
                 believing it was true?’ [Therapist links to Punitive Critic in shared case conceptualisation.]
              JENNY: Yes . . . there it goes again . . . I always do this!
              THERAPIST: Look, Jenny . . . this makes a lot of sense to me that you would react so strongly,
                 you know . . . it’s not the ﬁrst time you have been treated this way by people in
                 authority. In a way this is kind of like other times when you basically got the message
                 you weren’t good enough from someone in authority . . . It’s a little similar to the kind of
                 pressure, and message that mum would give you . . .?
              JENNY: Yes . . . I can see that . . . I can’t handle that . . . it’s so hard . . .
              THERAPIST: I’m really sorry to hear this Jenny because I don’t think you deserve this
                 from the people that you work with. I know you are always trying your best at
                 work and you deserve more respect than that. At the same time, I’m really glad
                 that you shared this with me. I feel like I understand you a lot more, particularly
                 about the relationship with your boss and how he triggers oﬀ that old ‘not good
                 enough’ critic feeling so easily.




              Box 6.5 Example of Segue from Attunement Portion of Session to Intervention
              THERAPIST: This issue of feeling ‘not good enough’ seems really important for you at the
                 moment, Jenny; you’ve had this critic on your back all week [reference to the prominent
                 activated mode]. I’m wondering if it would be a good use of our time today if we focus
                 on this theme of ‘not good enough’ and put it on a chair [for some chair work]?




          schemas and needs, schema therapists will capitalise by becoming more active in the session
          and skilfully bridge into intervention techniques (see Box 6.5).

          Therapist Tips for Successful Attunement
          It is usually helpful to slow things down during your attempts at attunement. Slowing down
          seems more conducive to emotional processing, while a faster pace of sharing seems to be
          more conducive to a ‘cognitive’ level of processing. Sometimes it may be necessary to
          heighten the experience by asking the client to close their eyes during this process. This
          may be particularly necessary in cases where the coping mode is strong, blocking emotional
          processing. For clients who are more easily able to process and share their emotional
          experiences, this may not be necessary. For those who are easily overwhelmed by their
          emotions, this kind of heightening is usually not desirable, so be guided by the client’s
          ‘window of tolerance’.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting     123



         The Central Task of Limited Reparenting: Balancing Nurturance
         and Boundaries
         In limited reparenting there is a balance between two ‘poles’ of client interaction that are
         always in some state of tension: (a) nurturance and support, whereby the therapist attends to
         the vulnerabilities of the client’s emotional state by directly providing nurturance and care;
         and (b) boundaries and confrontation, whereby the therapist seeks to provide healthy
         boundaries and challenge the client to express themselves in healthy ways. Figure 6.1 depicts
         the four central types of limited reparenting interactions that lie on a spectrum from care,
         guidance and empathic confrontation through to outright limit setting. Throughout ther-
         apy, the therapist considers the overarching core emotional needs and presenting issues of
         the client. On some occasions, the therapist may need primarily to provide nurturance and
         attuned care to the client. However, as in real parenting, at other times the therapist may
         need to challenge behaviour and take a more assertive stance. For example, the therapist
         may need to set limits and challenge the client in managing unhelpful or inappropriate
         requests. Although care and nurturance are crucial aspects of limited reparenting, the
         therapeutic relationship needs to operate within secure, appropriate therapeutic boundar-
         ies. These therapeutic and ethical boundaries aid the client and protect the therapist. For
         example, a client may want extra out-of-session contact and care. However, the therapist
         needs to balance their own needs for personal privacy and professional boundaries (see
         Table 6.2). Attunement to the client’s particular needs in the moment provides a guide as to
         which ‘leg’ the therapist needs to stand on: care or boundaries. Many vulnerable clients tend
         to require many more nurturance and care tasks. Overcompensating and aggressive clients
         often require more of a focus on boundaries and limits. Box 6.6 provides a clinical example
         of ﬁnding this balance.

         Providing Guidance and Direction
         The provision of developmentally appropriate guidance and direction is an important facet
         of the limited reparenting approach. Just as a good parent would not leave important
         decisions to a child without guidance, the schema therapist seeks also to ‘have an opinion’,
         particularly about client behaviours or decisions that seem to be driven by schemas or
         modes. This is most important for clients that appear to be operating from a low (emo-
         tional) developmental age and is less important for clients with a strong Healthy Adult self.




                                     Care               Guidance            Empathic       Limit Setting
                                                                           Confrontation




                           Nurturance & Support                                 Boundaries & Confrontation


         Figure 6.1 Core elements of limited reparenting




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          124           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Table 6.2 Examples of healthy limit setting vs problematic boundary violations

              Situation                   Healthy Limited Reparenting                      Problematic Boundaries

              Client seeking              Contacting client for a brief                    Regularly spending signiﬁcant
              more support out            solution-focused discussion out                  time on the phone (outside
              of session                  of session (e.g., 10 minutes)                    normal work role)
              Client asking how           General noting of how the trip                   Discussing very personal account
              a holiday was for           was for the therapist                            of holiday
              the therapist
              Client noting               Empathic confrontation and limit                 Validating and being ‘too kind’ to
              some romantic               setting ‘I’m your therapist, and it’s            the client and refraining from
              feelings for the            important that it is clear to you                setting a limit in a strong way out
              therapist                   that it’s no more than that’                     of ‘fear I would hurt their feelings’



              Box 6.6 Clinical Example of Balancing Nurturance and Support with Setting Limits
              and Boundaries

              Therapist Ben likes aspects of the limited reparenting approach. He is a warm and nurturing
              clinician and ﬁnds that validating and aﬃrming ﬁts with his natural inclinations as a therapist.
              His client, Mary, is at ﬁrst very detached and challenging for Ben to engage. He provides
              appropriate care and tries hard to demonstrate his willingness to support Mary. He allows for
              some email contact out of session and contacts Mary when she was expecting news from the
              family court about her son. In the proceeding months, Mary becomes more invested in the
              relationship. Ben notices that Mary drops into the clinic, wanting to pass on four long letters to
              Ben out of session. She then lingers around the clinic waiting room for an hour, seemingly
              hoping that she may have contact with Ben. In the following weeks, Ben avoids bringing these
              events up with Mary even though he feels unnerved by the communication. In the following
              weeks, Mary starts to initiate contact with him on his personal Facebook account. Similarly,
              Ben is uncomfortable in confronting Mary about these transgressions, feeling that it may
              ‘trigger her defectiveness’.

              Supervision Response
              Although Ben is demonstrating good care and nurturance, he needs to set limits and boundar-
              ies on Mary’s attempts to make contact outside of sessions. Understandably, Ben is worried
              about upsetting Mary; however, he needs to model good, healthy boundaries and limits to the
              therapeutic relationship. The supervisor suggests identifying speciﬁc schemas that are blocking
              Ben in asserting the boundary. Ben and his supervisor practise a way to communicate his
              concerns via empathic confrontation and role played this in his supervision meeting:

                  Mary, I know it’s not your intention, but I need to talk to you about your contact with me
                  out of session and online. A part of me is saying ‘just let this go’, but my Wise Therapist
                  side is saying I really need to discuss this with you. Outside of sessions I need to be able to
                  sign oﬀ and be human, and it doesn’t really feel right for me as your therapist to be
                  friends on Facebook. Another thing I wanted to mention is that I know that one thing that
                  enables me to ensure that I am the best therapist I can be for you is through keeping
                  some kind of boundary between my personal and work life. It’s important for me to take
                  care of our relationship by protecting it from these sorts of confusions.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting   125



         Such an approach contrasts with schools of therapy that refrain from ‘giving advice’ to the
         client. The schema therapist is encouraged to play an active role, at least at the beginning of
         therapy, in guiding clients’ decisions in essential areas of life, such as study, work, relation-
         ships, and friendships. However, this is also done in a way which is mindful of the unmet
         needs that underlie the client’s schemas. For example, a client whose Dependence EMS
         developed due to not getting enough direction or guidance will need more guidance at ﬁrst,
         before transitioning to more independent functioning. In contrast, a client whose
         Dependence EMS arose from overprotective parenting which failed to meet their need for
         autonomy will need earlier opportunities and encouragement to make their own decisions
         to enable them to develop a sense of competence and self-reliance.
             Authentic limited reparenting includes directly expressing genuine concern for the client
         and their needs. For example, ‘I don’t want you to re-enter into a relationship in which your
         needs aren’t taken into account; I want you to live a life in which you feel loved and in which
         you feel safe with someone close.’ Note that such advice and direction is not solely based on
         the values of the therapist but also on an understanding of the needs of the client. Therapists
         may oﬀer direct opinions if this will encourage clients to take better care of their own needs.
         We have noticed that, in the early stages of practice, many schema therapists need to work on
         incorporating more expressions along the lines of ‘I want you to . . . ’, ‘I think it could be a bad
         idea to . . . ’. This guiding language illustrates the therapist’s desire to play an essential role in
         the client’s life and provide a role model for the client’s emerging Healthy Adult self. Such
         a stance can unnerve beginner schema therapists into thinking that their clients might
         become ‘dependent’ on them. The ‘dependence paradox’ [7], can help illustrate the role of
         the schema therapist: a level of healthy dependence in close relationships when needed is
         associated with increased self-suﬃciency and autonomous functioning. Accepting one’s
         attachment needs paradoxically enables more independent engagement with the wider
         world over time. In line with this idea, schema therapy views a temporary hierarchical
         relationship as necessary for some clients to internalise the qualities of a healthy adult. The
         ultimate aim is an autonomously functioning adult so, over time, more responsibility is given
         to the client to drive change. Just as the schema therapist meets the client’s dependency needs
         early in the therapy, they also push for the client’s Healthy Adult to ‘take over’, thereby
         promoting autonomy in the latter stages of therapy. Box 6.7 provides more detail on how
         guidance may be provided by the therapist in regards to the client’s relationships.



             Box 6.7 Guidance in Relationships

             A client may not yet have learned how to establish healthy relationships or partnering. Many
             clients become accustomed to neglectful or abusive relationships because that is all they have
             known as a child. Clients like this are often attracted to repeat these patents in their current
             relationships, a phenomenon called schema chemistry. Acting as a role model of a ‘good
             parent’, the therapist can interrupt this ‘path of least resistance’ by educating and supporting
             the client when they are entering into a new relationship, to look out for their needs. To what
             degree does a potential partner represent a good ﬁt in terms of their core emotional needs?
             Such an approach can include providing the client with simple principles such as ‘Does this
             potential new partner apologise if they have done something wrong?’, ‘Are they interested in
             your feelings?’, ‘Do they let you speak out and have a voice?’, ‘Are they attentive/responsive to
             what you tell them?’




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          126           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Empathic Confrontation
          It is clear that the nurturing qualities of care, compassion, and guidance are elements of
          ‘good parental care’. However, a good parent is also required to manage and set boundaries
          on a child’s unhelpful or disruptive impulses. Empathic confrontation is one of the most
          important therapeutic tools within schema therapy [1]. Within this approach, the therapist,
          in an empathic and non-punitive manner, challenges unhealthy behaviours that are typic-
          ally mode- or schema-driven and which seem to perpetuate the client’s presenting prob-
          lems. Empathy grows from the therapist establishing an understanding of how the client’s
          basic core emotional needs were neglected in childhood: ‘What happened to you that you
          have to be this way (to survive)?’
              Empathic confrontation is analogous to a faucet with two taps: (1) confrontation, which
          can feel painfully cold, and (2) empathy, which can heat the cold to a bearable temperature.
          How ‘warm’ or ‘cold’ the empathic confrontation is can depend on factors such as the stage
          of therapy and the emotional capacity of the client. Typically, in the early stages of treatment
          the therapeutic relationship is developing and the client’s emotion regulation skills may not
          be suﬃciently developed. As a result, a relatively high level of empathy may be required
          within the empathic confrontation. Towards the end of the therapy, however, the intention
          is to encourage more behavioural change, which leads to more confrontation compared to
          the beginning of treatment. The schema therapist is likely to begin with more ‘gentle’ or
          ‘warm’ empathic confrontation with a client with borderline personality disorder, com-
          pared to working with a client with narcissistic patterns, who may require a more direct
          approach earlier on in therapy.
              When the therapist judges that the client’s within-session behaviour is impeding thera-
          peutic progress, the therapist typically confronts the client in a personal way, describing the
          dysfunctional pattern and the eﬀect on the therapist. Often, confrontation is mitigated and
          defused by naming these patterns based on the mode conceptualisation of the client. For
          example, the therapist may note the impact of a coping mode on the session: ‘That
          dominating part (mode) of you makes it very diﬃcult for me to be there for you and to
          care for you the way you need’.
              There are many ways in which empathic confrontation can be initiated. Often, therapists
          are more naturally adept in providing care and guidance to clients but ﬁnd empathic
          confrontation challenging. Beginning schema therapists may beneﬁt from some guidelines
          or ‘scaﬀolding statements’ that can serve as a guideline for conducting this intervention (see
          Box 6.8).

          Limit Setting
          Limit setting, just like empathic confrontation, aims to change interpersonally challenging
          client behavioural patterns which are impeding progress both within therapy and in daily
          life. Where empathic confrontation aims to achieve this change through clients developing
          insight and awareness, limit setting aims to stop the problematic behaviour immediately
          through responses designed to act as direct natural consequences of the client’s actions.
          Typically, this means empathic confrontation is preferable to limit setting if the circum-
          stances allow for it. Limit setting should be the ﬁnal stage of a process in which various
          ‘softer’ interventions have been applied to change dysfunctional patterns without success,
          including attempts at empathic confrontation, or when the behaviour being addressed
          requires a strong boundary (e.g., aggression).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting        127



             Box 6.8 Guidelines for Empathic Confrontation


             Before the Session
             •    Identify the problematic behaviour that needs to be addressed.
             •    Check whether it is an appropriate time for this intervention. Is the client
                  suﬃciently emotionally stable in the session to hear feedback? Are there particular
                  presenting issues that should take precedence? (e.g., a relationship breakup, very
                  recent suicide attempt).
             •    Identify the primary emotional response you experience when confronted with this
                  behaviour.
             •    Identify your immediate behavioural response when faced with this behaviour.

             During the Session
             •    Indicate that you want to discuss what is happening in the relationship.
             •    Identify the behaviour in a concrete and speciﬁc way and check whether the client
                  recognises it as an issue.
             •    Describe how it aﬀects you emotionally and what your behavioural response would
                  be if this behavioural pattern does not change: ‘When you criticise me in that way,
                  it’s hard for me to be there for you, a part of me wants to disengage; I don’t want
                  that for you.’
             •    Use the relationship to extrapolate to other aspects of the client’s life; ‘I’m your therapist,
                  I understand why you act this way, but other people don’t have the training that I do and
                  will just distance themselves from you.’
             •    Ask how the client feels; what is their reaction to your comments?
             •    Describe this behaviour as a ‘schema’ or a ‘mode’ (i.e., a pattern) in the client’s life.
                  Discuss this behaviour as part of a ‘mode’ of the client. Initiate the confrontation in
                  a non-personal way: ‘It is the bully mode that is attacking me’ vs ‘You are
                  attacking me’.
             •    Identify the background in this mode – the basic needs that were neglected in the past.
             •    Indicate what could become a healthy alternative for the client, a healthy way of
                  handling feelings and interpersonal relationships.

             Example
             THERAPIST: Mary, I need to speak with you about how you talk with me sometimes,
                particularly last session. A part of me wants to let this slide, but another side (my
                Healthy Therapist mode) thinks it’s really important for you to know how it comes
                across. When you get angry at me in the way that you did last session, it makes me want
                to shut down. It’s hard for me to take. Can you see what I’m saying?
             MARY: Yeah, okay I messed up again [looking defensive].
             THERAPIST: Well, I don’t see you messing up. I think if you act in this way with me, then
                I am assuming that you do this with others too. But I’m a psychologist.
                I understand what’s happening for you and where it’s coming from, but others
                out there don’t, and they will just back away from you. I want to be there for you,
                to help you. But it’s hard for me to do that when you’re speaking harshly to me.
                What do you think about what I’m saying?
             MARY: Look, I was having a bad day, ok! [looks away, less defensive tone].




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          128           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




              THERAPIST: I know it’s not your intention to be harsh, but I’m a human, I have feelings too.
                 I think it’s your Fireball Mode [Angry Child mode], I think it comes out when you’re
                 feeling that others are not tuned in to you . . . when you’re not feeling considered or
                 understood. This reminds me of how things were in your family – people didn’t take the
                 time to hear you. Am I right?
              MARY: Yeah. It just comes out sometimes. Yeah, I’m not rational.
              THERAPIST: I know it’s not easy, but we have to ﬁnd a way to speak to each other where we
                 both feel safe and ok. Can we spend a little bit of time today working out a way to
                 understand your anger last week?




               Setting a limit to curtail a speciﬁc behaviour is like taking a one-way street; there is no
          turning back once you have taken it. The therapist should ask themselves ‘if this client
          behaviour does not change, is it important enough to interrupt the therapy by trying to limit
          it?’ For example, forms of client aggression will have to be immediately limited to guarantee
          the safety of the therapist and/or the client. With many other behavioural patterns, however,
          there is no urgent need to set limits. Examples of these ‘mild’ forms of unacceptable
          behaviour can include such things as the client arriving late, the client asking too many
          personal questions, and the client regularly interrupting therapy. These are generally best
          managed using empathic confrontation.
               Prolonged acceptance of mild forms of inappropriate behaviour can lead to the therapist
          losing sight of the conversations or becoming otherwise demoralised, or even abused, in the
          therapy. Although most therapists would agree with the importance of limiting aggression,
          limits on milder forms of inappropriate behaviour will vary from one therapist to another. It
          is up to the therapist to decide when a limit should be set. However, with the freedom to
          determine the right timing comes the responsibility to observe proper boundaries as
          a therapist. This is not an evident skill for many therapists as they often focus more on
          the needs and feelings of their client and less on recognising their own needs and boundar-
          ies. Like all aspects of limited reparenting, limit setting should be carried out in a personal
          way (see Box 6.9 for an example). The therapist explains what the boundary is and why it is
          important, just as a good parent would.
               Inseparable from setting limits is specifying the consequences of any further crossing of
          these limits. The consequences should be related to the nature of the inappropriate behav-
          iour (e.g., no extra session time for those that are late) and must not be conveyed in
          a punitive or rigid way. The therapist may consider consequences such as the shortening
          of the session or therapy, or asking the client to apologise (if they have not already done so)
          or to make an extra eﬀort to repair the ‘damage’ caused by crossing the limit, for example by
          engaging in additional forms of journaling or similar activities.

          Therapeutic Stance of the Therapist
          Authentic Therapist, Appropriate Self-Disclosure, ‘Realness’
          Authentic, genuine responses and appropriate self-disclosure from the therapist are central
          qualities of limited reparenting [8]. Such ‘realness’ contrasts with a therapist appearing to be




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting      129



             Box 6.9 Example of Limit Setting
             THERAPIST: I’ve explained to you that I don’t want you to be so rude. I want you to stop doing
                this. But if it happens again, I want you to apologise and let me know you really
                understand why it’s not ok to treat me this way.



         ‘just doing their job’ or robotically following manualised procedures. Being ‘real’ may
         involve the client knowing some small but meaningful elements of the therapist’s life
         (such as if they have a family or if they enjoyed their holiday). It also means that the
         therapist does not attempt to appear ‘perfect’ or free from any personal troubles or
         diﬃculties. Being authentic often involves sharing honest personal reactions (both positive
         and negative) about the eﬀects of the client’s behaviour (such as criticism or anger) in
         session.
             Therapists might sometimes wonder whether a potential disclosure would be authentic
         or wonder exactly how authentic to be. Three key questions the therapist should consider in
         guiding their decisions to self-disclose are:
         (1) Will my disclosure strengthen the therapeutic relationship?
         (2) Is my disclosure generated from my Healthy Adult/Therapist mode? Or is it being
              driven by a Vulnerable Child mode or maladaptive coping mode?
         (3) How would such a disclosure be therapeutic, meeting the needs of the client?
             Box 6.10 provides an illustration of how a therapist might weigh up whether or not to
         make a self-disclosure.
             Disclosures about personal reactions or experiences could be driven by a therapist’s
         maladaptive coping mode or reveal a deep vulnerability (an activated Vulnerable Child
         mode). For example, a client may be critical and hostile to the therapist for being late to
         a session. Suppose the therapist was to respond via their Healthy Adult. In that case, they
         might take a moment to compose themselves and respond (rather than react) to the client’s
         grievances: ‘To be honest, a part of me did feel criticised when you reacted like that. I don’t
         think it was your intention, but if you did this with others it would be very tough for them to
         hear.’ The resultant disclosure allows the client to understand the impact of their behaviour,
         healthily empathise with the therapist’s experience, and understand how this interaction
         relates to more general diﬃculties they might have interacting with other people. In
         contrast, a therapist in Vulnerable Child mode may struggle to hold back tears, feel belittled
         and anxious, and disclose that they ‘didn’t like the way you were speaking to me!’. Here, the
         client could feel responsible for the therapist’s emotional state or distrust the therapist’s
         ability to assist them. Alternatively, a therapist driven by an avoidant coping mode may
         simply fail to address the client’s behaviour, depriving the client of a valuable learning
         opportunity and delaying the client’s recovery. An assumption of the schema therapy model
         is that the therapist has a well-developed Healthy Adult mode, enabling them to deal with
         a range of behaviours and schema patterns. For this reason, self-therapy and/or self-practice
         and self-reﬂection is highly encouraged for schema therapists [9].

         Limited Reparenting Informed by the Background and Formulation
         Attunement describes the process by which the therapist improves their understanding of
         the client’s inner experience by a combination of careful listening, observation, and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          130           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 6.10 Clinical Illustration of Therapist Choosing Whether to Disclose

              Greg is accessing treatment for alcoholism from therapist Ben. Greg presents to session
              following an alcohol relapse and is hungover and unwell in session. Ben empathises with
              his client’s predicament; he had a large 40th birthday party two nights before and was very
              hungover himself the day before. He notes to his client, Yeah, I know how bad hangovers are,
              I had a horrible one yesterday’. In this case, would this therapist disclosure work to strengthen
              the therapeutic alliance? It would be very likely that the disclosure would result in the client
              feeling invalidated or that his struggle was being trivialised.
                 Furthermore, the client may feel unsure whether Ben is trustworthy or reliable enough to help
              support him. In contrast, if Ben was in recovery from addiction with a substantial period of
              sobriety behind him, self-disclosure could enhance the therapeutic bond. For example,
              a disclosure such as ‘I know how hard hangovers and relapses are, I was there too ten years
              ago, and it will get easier, you can get through this’ could convey a great depth of understanding.



          checking in. This process of the therapist attuning to the client directly meets a need for
          understanding, but also models to the client how they can better understand themselves.
              The schema therapist goes beyond basic empathic counselling by recognising past as
          well as current inﬂuences on the client’s emotional reactions. For example, both a counsellor
          and a schema therapist might say ‘Of course you are feeling this way (anxious, angry, sad);
          this is a diﬃcult situation. Anyone in this situation would feel sad or anxious’, but only the
          schema therapist is likely to go on to say ‘And I want you to know that you matter here.
          I care about you, especially knowing what you have experienced in the past. I understand
          why this is a diﬃcult situation for you! I can understand, you are feeling this upset not only
          because of this situation but also because when you felt this way as a child. It was because
          you thought it meant that you would never be able to rely on anyone to care for you, and it’s
          hard not to believe that now.’
              Having demonstrated attuned understanding, the schema therapist then aims to correct
          the EMS and meet the unmet need (e.g., in the above example, recognising the client’s
          Emotional Deprivation EMS and past unmet need for nurturance and care). The most
          useful therapist disclosures depend on which schema predominates at that moment and
          which schemas are pertinent in the client’s formulation. Table 6.3 lists examples of state-
          ments that could be useful depending on which schema is active in the context of speciﬁc
          unmet needs.

          What If?
          In some cases, the direct style involved in limited reparenting can be challenging for the
          therapist trained in traditional notions of therapeutic ‘boundaries’, and they may fear being
          judged by other therapists for impropriety. Genuine care may entail the therapist being
          more aware of meaningful events within the client’s life (speciﬁc meetings, exams, job
          interviews). It may involve writing the client a birthday message or encouraging their
          treatment progress. Transitional objects can be utilised within the therapy relationship to
          promote and strengthen the therapist–client bond. For example, the therapist may give the
          client a symbolic object (such as a rock or a keyring) and suggest that they remind
          themselves (when looking at the item) that the therapist cares about them, ‘has their




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting                     131



             Table 6.3 Schemas, unmet need, and therapist limited reparenting sentiments

             SCHEMA                           UNMET NEED                    POSSIBLE LIMITED REPARENTING
                                                                            SENTIMENT

             MISTRUST/ABUSE                   Safety                        ‘I can guarantee you that I won’t intentionally
                                                                            hurt you or mess you around, I will make this
                                                                            a safe place for you.’
             EMOTIONAL                        Nurturance,                   ‘I care about you; this is a space where we can
             DEPRIVATION                      attunement, care              talk about anything.’
             ABANDONMENT                      Secure and                    ‘I’m here; I’m not going anywhere, we are
                                              reliable                      going to ﬁgure this out together, regardless
                                              connection                    of what is happening in your life.’
             DEFECTIVENESS/                   Acceptance,                   ‘I really think you’re a good person; you are
             SHAME                            praise                        ﬁne the way you are.’
             SOCIAL ISOLATION/                Belonging,                    ‘You are a cool and interesting person. I wish
             EXCLUSION                        acceptance                    you would let others see that side of you the
                                                                            way I know you.’
             FAILURE                          Praise,                       ‘I believe in you; you can do this!’
                                              encouragement
             DEPENDENCE/                      Autonomy,                     ‘You know what to do, and I have faith that
             INCOMPETENCE                     guidance                      you will make the right decision.’
             VULNERABILITY TO                 Security, safety              ‘Everything is going to be ok’; ‘You can
             HARM                                                           manage and handle whatever comes
                                                                            your way.’
             ENMESHMENT/                      Autonomy                      ‘You have diﬀerent needs and feelings to
             UNDEVELOPED SELF                                               your parents, and you’re not responsible for
                                                                            their feelings.’
             SUBJUGATION                      Autonomy, safety              ‘You can do what you want, and you are
                                                                            stronger than you think.’
             SELF-SACRIFICE                   Autonomy,                     ‘It’s ok to think of yourself; you have
                                              realistic                     needs too.’
                                              responsibility
             APPROVAL SEEKING                 Acceptance in                 ‘It’s good to have your opinion’; ‘Trust in your
                                              expressing views/             views and ideas.’
                                              emotions
             EMOTIONAL                        Modelling of                  ‘Emotions are normal; I like it when you are
             INHIBITION                       emotional                     more open about how you feel.’
                                              expression
             UNRELENTING                      Realistic                     ‘It’s ok to take time out’; ‘It’s ok not to get it
             STANDARDS                        expectations/                 right all the time.’
                                              demands
             NEGATIVITY/                      Joy, fun, play                ‘There are also good things in life; it doesn’t
             PESSIMISM                                                      go all wrong. Look at how successful we’ve
                                                                            been working together already.’




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          132           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Table 6.3 (cont.)

              SCHEMA                           UNMET NEED                    POSSIBLE LIMITED REPARENTING
                                                                             SENTIMENT
              PUNITIVENESS                     Self-forgiveness              ‘I don’t think you deserve to be punished that
                                                                             way, I would like to see you be more kind to
                                                                             yourself.’
              ENTITLEMENT                      Limits, awareness             ‘Other people have needs too; you’re not
                                               of other’s needs              special and better.’
              INSUFFICIENT SELF-               Self-directed                 ‘You need to say “no” to yourself sometimes,
              CONTROL                          limits                        and sit with any frustration.’




          back’, and wants to help. Such symbols of care and therapist thoughtfulness can deepen the
          therapeutic bond between the client and the therapist and is particularly meaningful for
          clients with schemas within the Disconnection and Rejection domain, whereby their
          emotional needs centre around care, stability, safety, and attunement. Box 6.11 provides
          guidance on some classical clinical dilemmas therapists might experience trying to provide
          limited reparenting.

          Limited Reparenting of Strong Within-Session Activation
          of Angry Child Mode
          The Angry Child mode typically is linked to a client’s perception of some threat to their core
          emotional needs. Clients can present as irritated and hostile towards the therapist (and often
          surrounding staﬀ). The tone of the Angry Child is typically akin to a child throwing
          a tantrum.
              In limited reparenting, the therapist needs to strike a balance between tolerating the
          activation and ventilation of the Angry Child mode and empathically confronting and
          reality-testing the expression of the mode. The therapist demonstrates that it’s okay to be
          angry; however, the expression of the anger needs to occur healthily. This means that the
          therapist will balance their attunement stance with the need to potentially set some
          boundaries or communicate the maladaptive or disproportionate nature of their reaction
          in the here and now.
              Whilst the interaction can at times be abusive, critical, and attacking to the therapist, the
          function of the Angry Child mode is not to dominate, humiliate, or attack (like some
          overcompensation modes, such as Bully and Attack mode). Instead, the mode is mostly
          viewed as a child-like attempt to get their needs met.
              Often tied to feelings of hostility, frustration, and anger (within the Angry Child mode)
          is the pain and distress associated with the Vulnerable Child mode. The interplay of these
          two Child modes is akin to two sides of a coin. The therapist may experience the Angry
          Child mode as incensed and angry. However, tied to this is the Vulnerable Child mode that
          feels overlooked, uncared for, criticised, or unsupported. Clients who are in touch with their
          Angry Child mode within sessions will most likely beneﬁt from attunement (discussed
          earlier in this chapter). However, for clients who present as overwhelmed by the Angry



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting      133



             Box 6.11 Clinical Dilemmas in Limited Reparenting

             Supervision Question: What if your care and nurturance results in the client having sexual
             feelings towards the therapist? I’m worried that my care may encourage the client.
             Answer: Appropriate care and nurturance provided by the therapist is not considered
             problematic. Instead, problems may reside in how the client interprets the care and nurtur-
             ance. It would be useful for the therapist to understand what modes and schemas in the
             client may be involved. In some cases, clients with high levels of emotional neglect may have
             romantic feelings for the therapist. When the therapist meets the client’s need for care, this
             can function as a trigger, putting the client in touch with their longstanding (but buried)
             longing for closeness. In contrast, a client may ﬂirt with the therapist as part of an overcom-
             pensation coping mode to manage deeper feelings of vulnerability and insecurity. In any
             case, the therapist needs to acknowledge appropriate therapeutic boundaries and use
             empathic confrontation and limit setting to address such issues.

             Supervision Question: What if my care is ‘too much’, too awkward for the client? I worry that
             they will react negatively to my caring sentiments.
             Answer: Some clients may not be accustomed to appropriate attention, direct care, and
             nurturance. Here, the therapist could validate the diﬃculty, understand the problem in schema
             and mode terms, and possibly tailor their method of care to the client. Speciﬁcally, the therapist
             may need to adapt their tone and language. The therapist may use an empty chair and provide
             reparenting to the Vulnerable Child in the chair, allowing for the care to be indirectly received.
             The overall goal is to help the client accept care, compassion, and nurturance and learn to adapt
             to such new experiences. Further, when the client is in touch with their Vulnerable Child side,
             attuned therapeutic care and nurturance will resonate for them. On the other hand, if the client
             is in a coping mode, this care is likely to be rejected, treated with disdain, or dismissed. The
             therapist must also be alert to the fact that sometimes a Complaining Protector, Helpless
             Surrenderer, or Self-Pity/Victim coping mode can present in a similar way to the Vulnerable
             Child mode. In this case, the therapist should use empathic confrontation to bypass the coping
             mode and reach the authentic Vulnerable Child, to carry out reparenting. Reparenting of these
             coping modes can strengthen them, which is, of course, counter-therapeutic.


         Child mode within the session, the following three-step model can be useful for therapists to
         implement. The aim is to allow for ventilation, care, and attunement, followed by some
         opportunity for empathic confrontation or reality testing.

         A Three-Step Model of Working with Angry Child Mode in Session
         The central aim is to build the Healthy Adult mode’s capacity to regulate, modify, and
         functionally express underlying anger. Accessing the Vulnerable Child mode and under-
         standing the associated frustration of needs is also central to helping the client manage their
         expression of anger.
         Step 1: Ventilate. Here, the therapist takes a neutral and fact-ﬁnding approach, allowing for
         anger to be fully vented. The therapist asks the client ‘So you’re angry about X, is there anything
         else?’ The therapist also reﬂects the list of complaints to the client: ‘So let me get it right, you’re
         angry about X, Y, and Z. Is there anything else? I want to make sure I understand it all.’ Overall,
         the therapist remains neutral, refraining from empathy or validation. The primary reason for
         this position of neutrality is that the therapist’s provision of care can sometimes curb the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          134           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          expression of anger without addressing its source, so it becomes reactivated later in the session.
          Such sessions can become derailed by intermittent activation of anger.
          Step 2: Attune, Empathise, and Validate. Once the client has fully ventilated, the therapist
          typically experiences the client as having fully aired their grievances (e.g., Client: ‘No, that’s
          it, it’s been a hard day, okay.’). The therapist then provides care and empathy and validates
          the client’s emotional reaction and underlying needs (although the therapist does not
          necessarily need to agree with all aspects of the client’s original complaint). The provision
          of attunement, empathy, and validation in this context typically results in some connection
          to the core emotional needs, and even some activation of the Vulnerable Child mode. For
          example, the client may then speak about the hurt and sadness tied to their anger, and their
          experience of the therapist’s care.
          Step 3: Empathically Confront the Anger and Look for Opportunities to Reality-Test.
          Once the client has been empathised with and has had their needs for care and understanding
          met, they may be more receptive to some empathic confrontation and/or reality testing. Here,
          underlying assumptions driving the reaction can be reality tested: ‘I know you wanted to see
          me this morning, but do you really think that I don’t care about you at all?’ The therapist can
          challenge distorted assumptions and black-and-white thinking that may be driving the
          distress using the therapy relationship (e.g., Therapist: ‘I know it was painful for you when
          I did not respond right away, of course I understand that, but also, it is only realistic that this
          might happen from time to time. Either with me, or with other relationships in your life.’).
          The therapist then considers whether they need to empathically confront the way in which the
          client expressed their anger. For example, the therapist can highlight that anger expressed in
          this way alienates others and prevents others from providing understanding and care. The
          core notion is that anger is not a ‘problem’, but how anger is expressed may not be consistent
          with getting their needs met via healthy means.

          Pushing for the Expression of (Suppressed) Anger Using
          the Therapy Relationship
          Where people with Cluster B personality disorders can be characterised as exhibiting
          occasional excessive expressions of anger, people with Cluster C presentations, such as
          Avoidant Personality Disorder and Dependent Personality Disorder, are primarily charac-
          terised by an absence of anger and suppression of the Angry Child mode. For these clients,
          shutting down all expressions of anger robs them of the ability to also be assertive and to
          communicate early signs of dissatisfaction in their relationships. In schema therapy, the
          anger of the Angry Child mode is seen as a natural source of strength that underpins more
          healthy expressions of strength and assertion in the Healthy Adult mode. One of the therapy
          objectives in the treatment of these clients is thus to stimulate the acknowledgement and
          expression of anger. Work is carried out to achieve this goal during each phase of treatment.
          The goal is to induce and communicate Healthy Adult expressions of anger and/or dissatis-
          faction as a way of asserting one’s needs. This process is described here as it might unfold
          across phases.
          The Case Conceptualisation Phase. The therapist places anger in the mode model, includ-
          ing for clients who say they never get angry. Clients are taught that anger is a natural
          emotional response that can serve as a source of strength and healthy self-protection, which,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting        135



         in turn, is necessary for the change processes that therapy involves. Even though such clients
         report that they never experience anger, the (‘missing’) Angry Child mode is still included
         on the mode map, and the therapist begins reminding the client they need to hear from the
         Angry Child mode too.
         Start Phase. In this phase, the therapist acts as a role model for expressing healthy forms of
         anger (e.g., when confronting the Punitive Critic mode).
         Middle Phase. In this phase, negative assumptions about anger are questioned and more
         realistic cognitive ideas about anger are formulated, using mainly cognitive techniques as is
         necessary (see Box 6.12).
         End Phase. In this ﬁnal phase, the client is stimulated to learn how to express anger in
         a more regulated and safe way. Learning to express anger can be done in a playful way by
         using a ‘complaining exercise’ (see Box 6.13).




             Box 6.12 Clinical Example of Addressing Suppressed Anger in the Middle Phase
             of Schema Therapy
             THERAPIST: We have talked about anger before and, as you know, I would like you to become
                better at expressing diﬀerent forms of anger.
             CLIENT: Yes, but I don’t understand why that’s necessary. I always ﬁnd it very unpleasant
                when people get angry.
             THERAPIST: I know that you see all kinds of reasons why anger is a negative thing, especially
                when it’s expressed in unhealthy ways. But there are also a lot of good things about
                anger. So, let’s take a moment to reﬂect on that question: ‘What are the advantages of
                anger?’
             CLIENT: I really have no idea.
             [The therapist goes to the ﬂip chart and writes at the top of it the following question: ‘What is good
             about anger?’ and then takes the lead in listing positive aspects of anger.]
             THERAPIST: Your Protector complies with the needs of others, but because of that you
                sometimes do things that you would rather not do, don’t you?
             CLIENT: Yes.
             THERAPIST: Exactly, anger helps to establish boundaries so that you do not have to do the
                things that you don’t want to do.
                [The therapist writes this down as an advantage: ‘Helps establish boundaries’.]
               Together, the therapist and the client draw up a list of the advantages of anger, including
             things such as:
             • anger gives energy
             • it clears the air to address what does not feel good
             • anger helps to express needs
             • by showing more clearly what your needs are and are not, you can connect better with
                 others
             • anger is also fun; just think about the comedians you laugh at when they get worked up
                 about injustices in their life/society




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          136           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 6.13 The ‘Complaining’ Exercise
              THERAPIST: We’re now in the end phase of the therapy and I’m impressed by everything you
                 have already achieved during this course of treatment. But anger is still pretty diﬃcult
                 for you. You still have a hard time expressing it, is that right?
              CLIENT: Yeah, that’s something I’m not really comfortable with . . . no.
              THERAPIST: Although I can see that in some ways you have come to think diﬀerently about
                 anger, haven’t you? What exactly are the advantages of anger again?
              [Some of the advantages are brieﬂy discussed with the aim of activating the client’s Healthy
              Adult.]
              THERAPIST: Great! And don’t forget that anger can also be fun!
              CLIENT: Euh . . . well . . .
              THERAPIST: Let’s improve your ability to express anger but then in a more enjoyable way.
                 Anger doesn’t just have to be heavy and upsetting. In a moment, we’ll sit opposite each
                 other and take turns expressing what made us angry last week.
              CLIENT: But I never get angry.
              THERAPIST: Well, you are a human being so you are bound to get angry, but maybe ‘anger’ is
                 too strong a word for you, and it is more of a feeling ‘of not really liking the fact that . . . ’.
                 I’ll start.
              [The therapist places a chair opposite the client and talks about a few minor irritations in their life.]
              THERAPIST: The alarm clock woke me up early this morning and I honestly didn’t like that, it
                 was really a feeling of ‘Bleugh!’ Okay, now you!
              CLIENT: . . . Yes, I know the feeling, I also had something like that this morning –
                 ‘noooo . . . ’
              THERAPIST: Yes, exactly, I notice you frowning with your forehead, what else did you feel
                 apart from that feeling of ‘don’t like that . . . ’?
              CLIENT: Well . . . it kind of feels heavy, and tired as well . . .?
              THERAPIST: Yes, I’m familiar with that feeling, I also had it the other day when I got stuck in
                 a traﬃc jam, then I really thought ‘Nooooo!’ and felt heavy and tired as well as some
                 tension in my hands [the therapist clenches their ﬁsts for a moment].
                In this way, voicing life’s minor irritations is stimulated by becoming aware of the various
              aspects involved in how you experience anger and irritation. The next step is learning to vent
              your frustrations about other people.
                A ﬁnal step is to ask the client about any irritations they may have regarding the therapy
              and/or the therapist. This last step is the hardest for a lot of clients but is a good way to prepare
              for the expression of anger in everyday life.



          Concluding Remarks
          Limited reparenting is a foundational component of schema therapy. The frustration of core
          emotional needs underpins the development and perpetuation of schemas, coping styles,
          and modes. The schema therapist looks for any opportunities to meet these needs directly
          within the bounds of the therapy relationship. The aim is to provide corrective experiences
          that ‘kick start’ the emotional development of the client [1]. The therapist aims to provide
          a healthy model or template of caring, self-control, and guidance that can be internalised by



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          Intervention Strategies 1: Limited Reparenting                 137



         the client over time into their own Healthy Adult mode. Based on a thorough assessment
         and formulation, limited reparenting oﬀers a speciﬁc roadmap to leveraging the power of
         the therapeutic alliance to promote schema change.

         References
         1. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                              Identifying and bypassing overanalysing
            therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                          coping modes and building schema
            Press; 2003.                                                       attunement. 1st ed. Routledge; 2019.
         2. Louis J, Louis K. Good enough parenting.                           pp. 69–81.
            Morgan James Publishing; 2015.                                6. Erskine R. Attunement and involvement:
         3. Louis J, Wood A, Lockwood G.                                     therapeutic responses to relational needs. In
            Development and validation of the Positive                       Relational Patterns, Therapeutic Presence.
            Parenting Schema Inventory (PPSI) to                             Routledge; 2018. pp. 43–55.
            complement the Young Parenting Inventory                      7. Feeney B. The dependency paradox in close
            (YPI) for Schema Therapy (ST). Assessment.                       relationships: Accepting dependence
            2018;27(4):766–86.                                               promotes independence. Journal of
         4. Roediger E, Stevens B, Brockman R                                Personality and Social Psychology. 2007;92
            Contextual schema therapy: An integrative                        (2):268–85.
            approach to personality disorders,                            8. van Vreeswijk M. Authenticity and personal
            emotional dysregulation, and interpersonal                       openness in schema therapy. In Heath G,
            functioning. New Harbinger Publications;                         Startup H, eds. Creative methods in schema
            2018.                                                            therapy: Advances and innovation in clinical
         5. Brockman R, Stavropoulos A. Repetitive                           practice. 1st ed. Taylor & Francis; 2020,
            negative thinking in eating disorders:                           pp. 237–252.
            Identifying and bypassing overanalysing                       9. Farrell J, Shaw I. Experiencing schema
            coping modes and building schema                                 therapy from the inside out: A self-practice/
            attunement. In Simpson S, Smith E, eds.                          self-reﬂection workbook for therapists.
            Schema therapy for eating disorders:                             Guilford Publications; 2018.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Intervention Strategies

                       7             for Schema Healing 2
                                     Cognitive Strategies

          Introduction
          The concept of schemas has been central to cognitive models of psychopathology now for
          more than half a century [1]. Core beliefs, underlying assumptions, and negative automatic
          thoughts constitute cognitive aspects of schemas and modes. The cognitive elements of EMS
          provide various layers of meaning for the client, structuring how they view themselves,
          others, and the world. Schema therapy aims to change this cognitive architecture, resulting
          in more functional, ﬂexible, adaptive, and ultimately ‘healthier’ patterns of thinking. In this
          chapter, we describe when and how interventions targeting cognitive change are deployed in
          schema therapy.

          Cognitive Elements of Schemas and Modes
          Before administering cognitive interventions in schema therapy, it is crucial to identify and
          clarify the speciﬁc cognitive aspects of schemas and modes in the case conceptualisation.
          Fennell [2] describes three levels of cognition: (1) core beliefs or ‘bottom lines’; (2)
          underlying assumptions; and (3) self-talk or negative automatic thoughts. These diﬀerent
          levels of cognition can be thought of like the parts of a large, old tree. Beneath the ground,
          there is a root network, akin to the themes of core beliefs of a schema or the ‘bottom lines’
          (e.g., Defectiveness/Shame schema: ‘I am worthless, pathetic, unwanted’). These roots may
          not be observable or accessible to the onlooker but hold up the tree. Above the ground, there
          is the tree’s trunk; this is more noticeable to the onlooker. The tree’s trunk represents
          underlying assumptions. Underlying assumptions are typical ‘if–then’ assumptions linked
          to core beliefs (e.g., ‘If I open up to someone, then they will reject me’). Finally, there are the
          tree’s branches and leaves, which are its most noticeable features. These represent the self-
          talk and automatic thoughts which are accessible to conscious awareness (e.g., ‘They don’t
          like me; they prefer to talk to their ex-boyfriend’). Although all three levels of cognition are
          important in schema therapy, it is the core beliefs, or ‘bottom lines’ that are most synonym-
          ous with the EMS. When initially learning the 18-schema model, it is useful for trainee
          schema therapists to conceptualise the schemas via their associated core beliefs.
              Cognitive interventions in schema therapy overlap substantially with those used in
          mainstream cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT). CBT provides a wealth of eﬀective
          strategies designed to challenge the assumptions created through activated schemas and
          adjust these into more realistic, adaptive thoughts. However, schema therapy diﬀers signiﬁ-
          cantly from CBT in how able it assumes clients are to change perspectives at the beginning
          of therapy. Therefore, CBT methods are often not viable for use in schema therapy in exactly
          the same way as in traditional CBT.
          138


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies   139



             Beckian cognitive therapy relies heavily on Socratic philosophical principles [3, 4].
         Socrates assumed that people have the capacity to become aware of their beliefs and reﬂect
         on them; they already have the answers to life’s questions and merely need help to ﬁnd these
         answers within themselves. Therefore, Socrates described his questioning style as a ‘midwife
         technique’ [5], in which questions are utilised to help the person ‘give birth’ to their answers
         and responses. This principle forms the basis of many cognitive techniques used within
         a traditional CBT framework [6]. In schema therapy terms, CBT would assume that the
         client has a suﬃciently developed Healthy Adult mode to be aware of their beliefs, reﬂect on
         them, and draw realistic conclusions in response to the therapist’s questions. For example,
         suppose a client with a social anxiety disorder is afraid of being laughed at when making
         a mistake. The underlying assumption appears to be that ‘making a mistake will lead to
         social ridicule’. When the assumption is stated in this form, logically this would mean that
         when other people make mistakes, they will also experience social ridicule. Following this
         line of argument, the therapist can then ask if this is true: ‘Does ridicule for making
         a mistake also apply to other people? Would it apply to me too, for example?’ If the client
         denies this, there must be a logical explanation for why the rule applies to him but not to
         others. The process of concretising, logical reasoning, and questioning these assumptions
         begins anew.
             CBT would also assume that all clients have been exposed to enough working models of
         a Healthy Adult to have access to healthy scripts across all domains of functioning.
         However, in many clients with chronic problems, this adaptive and rational mode is not
         suﬃciently developed, and there are large gaps in their experience of healthy role models. As
         a result, clients often experience their activated schemas as reality and are not able to
         distance themselves from these schemas or adopt alternative healthy, adaptive perspectives.
         Therefore, a purely Socratic or ‘guided discovery’ approach to changing cognitive aspects of
         schemas and modes may be less eﬀective, especially in cases with more severe or chronic
         problems. For example, messages and beliefs linked to severe childhood abuse or neglect can
         overpower the client’s eﬀorts to identify counter-messages. Open Socratic questions and
         dialogue intended to encourage the client to be aware of these convictions and examine
         them critically may end up conﬁrming the negative self-image when the client is unable to
         put schema-driven messages aside. For example, the therapist may oﬀer ‘So, you believe you
         are worthless. Is it 100% true that you are worthless?’ and the client may respond ‘I don’t
         know; I’m not doing this right, am I?’
             In severe cases, schema-driven cognitions often seem ego-syntonic; core beliefs seem
         like truths – rigid and ‘fused’ to the client. In such cases, the client has a limited reservoir of
         healthy knowledge to draw on, which is inconsistent with the assumption of the Socratic
         principle.
             Schema therapists view a client’s capacity for reasoning and cognitive change in relation
         to their level of overall psychological developmental. The strength of the client’s Healthy
         Adult mode inﬂuences the amount of cognitive intervention employed at the commence-
         ment of treatment. For clients with a severely weak Healthy Adult mode, the schema
         therapist approaches sessions as if working with a young child. Young children are ‘fused’
         with their convictions, not yet fully capable of defusing themselves from these beliefs or
         thinking in nuanced or realistic ways, and typically need active support from attachment
         ﬁgures. Typical childhood thinking styles are also often found in adults presenting with
         chronic and enduring psychological problems. Such clients may think in very black-and-
         white terms (‘no one cares’, ‘all of me hates this’) or have diﬃculty taking the perspective of



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          140           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          others. Also, they may have a pattern of internalising (‘they don’t like me, I’m bad’) or
          externalising (‘they made me angry’) explanations for why they are unhappy. Later in
          development, a child’s capacity for rational and reasoned thinking increases and such
          resources can be more actively utilised. For example, people correctly expect adolescents
          to be more able to draw independent and realistic conclusions than younger children. The
          ﬁnal phase of schema therapy can be characterised by the therapist expecting the client to
          have the reasoning capacity of an adolescent. Cognitive interventions used during this ﬁnal
          phase of schema therapy will most closely resemble cognitive interventions as described in
          the mainstream CBT literature. Early in schema therapy, cognitive interventions should be
          adjusted to the client’s capacity for rational thought.
              The stage of treatment and its immediate therapeutic aims also need to be considered in
          selecting cognitive interventions. Rational thinking can function to divert attention from
          emotional experience. It can be easier for therapists to utilise more familiar cognitive
          interventions and avoid experiential interventions, thereby colluding with coping styles
          and modes. It may be helpful for the therapist to consider: (a) ‘Is using a cognitive
          intervention going to result in collusion with a coping mode?’; and (b) ‘Does the client
          prefer cognitive interventions because they can experience less emotion in session?’
              Therapists should also keep in mind that exploring cognition and meaning without
          trying to change it is an important part of schema therapy. For example, a therapist’s
          knowledge and understanding of a client’s experience can be clariﬁed and reﬁned via
          understanding cognitions about triggering events. Understanding the particular meaning
          behind schema and mode activation helps the therapist to attune to the client [7].
          Attunement to meaning is often achieved by the therapist clarifying the cognitive aspects
          of triggering events and cognitions linked to emotions (e.g., Therapist: ‘If the sadness could
          talk, what would it say?’; Client: ’I don’t matter, like I’m nothing to him’, suggesting the
          client’s Emotional Deprivation EMS was activated).

          Application of a Socratic Approach in Schema Therapy
          The Socratic dialogue can help question the protective coping modes. The goal of schema
          therapy is for the therapist to bypass the client’s protective modes and increasingly interact with
          their emotion-experiencing parts. The strategy used is often a form of negotiation with that
          coping mode. Coping modes are akin to gatekeepers guarding a fortress. The Socratic dialogue
          can be appropriate in this negotiation because it is a more open questioning method that gives
          the client space to make their own decisions instead of feeling pressured to change something
          (see Box 7.1 for an example).

          Beginning the Process of Cognitive Change in Schema Therapy:
          The Psychoeducation Phase – Building Schema/Mode
          Awareness
          Positive cognitive change can begin to develop when the client gains knowledge about
          normal human emotional needs, child development, and schemas and modes. At the
          commencement of treatment, the client, just like a young child, needs explanation and
          guidance to become more aware of schemas and modes, and to relate them to their
          own speciﬁc set of problems. As clients learn to recognise them, they become able to
          label their emotional experiences when schemas or modes are activated. At the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies       141



             Box 7.1 Example Using Socratic Dialogue to Bypass Coping Modes
             THERAPIST: OK, it sounds like you’re stuck in an experience where it’s better to feel nothing, is
                that right?
             CLIENT: Yes, I don’t see how feeling more will help me, I’m busy, and I have to keep
                functioning.
             THERAPIST: Can you be that protector mode who is now keeping the gate closed, convinced
                that it’s best not to feel. As a protector, I’d like to ask you a few questions, OK?
             CLIENT: Sure.
             THERAPIST: You may be right; it might be best not to feel anything right now, but why are you
                so sure that things would go wrong today if I would be able to connect more with your
                feelings?
             CLIENT: Well, I always feel bad when I start feeling.
             THERAPIST: But if that’s the case, then things should have always gone wrong here as well,
                although I remember that you felt better last time when we talked about your feelings.
             CLIENT: Yes, OK, that’s true . . .
             THERAPIST: But if you didn’t feel worse and, in fact, felt better, how do you know that you’ll
                feel worse now? I understand that you, as a protector, want to make sure things don’t go
                wrong, but it also sounds like you’re not sure that that will happen.




             Box 7.2 Example of Ad Hoc Psychoeducation: Healthy Care Giving

             During a session with Nicole (client), the therapist receives a call from his young daughter.
             After asking Nicole for permission, the therapist quickly takes the call to see if there is an
             emergency. He hangs up after a brief interaction of 10 to 20 seconds, after which Nicole asks
             him incredulously: ‘Is this always how you talk to your children? Words like “sweet” and “I love
             you” really made me feel sick . . . ’ The therapist uses the client’s question to explain what
             a normal upbringing involves; children need explicit appreciation and care, and that this is
             what Nicole lacked during her childhood.



         beginning of therapy, the therapist explains basic human needs, optimal child-rearing
         practices and family life, and how deﬁciencies and disruptions lead to schema and
         mode development. This will culminate also in at least one session focused on
         communicating the case conceptualisation, usually by way of a mode map (see
         Chapter 4: Case Conceptualisation and Mode Mapping in Schema Therapy), which
         will also help the client to understand and conceptualise their problems from a more
         distanced and, hopefully, rational standpoint. This process of schema/mode education –
         educating the client about the universality of human needs – begins a process of
         depathologising the client’s experiences in a way that starts to also challenge many of
         the common schemas (e.g., Defectiveness: ‘You are broken and defective’; ‘There’s
         something wrong with you’). Such psychoeducation can be more formal (such as
         involving an overview of their mode map) or more spontaneous and ad hoc, as the
         opportunities present (see Box 7.2).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          142           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 7.3 Whiteboard Summary
              THERAPIST: So, you have two diﬀerent sides. Firstly, there’s an emotional Nicole. When you
                 are in that mode, you feel sad.
                The therapist draws a circle on the board containing the words ‘Little Nicole’ and adds the
              words ‘alone’, ‘unseen’, and ‘sadness’ – words Nicole used earlier in the dialogue to describe
              how she felt – and ‘This side believes she doesn’t matter, that she’s a burden.’
              THERAPIST: To survive this pain, you’ve learned to withdraw yourself, to close yourself oﬀ
                 from your feelings, almost like closing a gate in a wall which allows you to numb these
                 feelings to some degree.
                 The therapist now draws a wall around the small Nicole circle and adds the words
              ‘Protector’ and ‘withdrawing, not feeling’.



          Identifying Cognitive Components of Schema- or Mode-Driven
          Experiences During Psychoeducation
          The psychoeducation phase of treatment aims to help clients learn to become aware of
          the schemas and modes within their case conceptualisation. Speciﬁc cognitions and
          emotions associated with each mode can be attuned to and clariﬁed (e.g., Therapist:
          ‘So, if your Detached Protector mode could talk, what would it say about speaking
          with me more?’; Client: ‘What’s the point? If I open up, I will be overwhelmed,
          I won’t cope.’).

          Drawing a Diagram of a Speciﬁc Instance of Schema/Mode
          Activation
          Emotional experiences activated by schemas and modes can be so overwhelming that
          a client’s understanding of, insight into, and awareness of these experiences can be drowned
          out at the time of activation. A therapist can walk through and map out triggering events in
          a session, constructing a visual representation of the client’s schema and mode activation via
          a whiteboard or work pad. This post-hoc analysis of a trigger is an essential tool for
          consolidating cognitive insights, allowing the client to internalise and better understand
          the model. A copy of the visual depiction can then be provided to the client to be reviewed
          for homework (see Box 7.3).

          Use of Speciﬁc Cognitive Interventions
          Beyond taking a generally educative approach, certain speciﬁc interventions may help to
          change the cognitive component of schemas. Therapists can apply any cognitive techniques
          typically used in cognitive therapy within schema therapy, although they may need to
          provide more active assistance and support than in traditional cognitive therapy.

          Downward Arrow Technique
          The Downward Arrow technique [8, 9] uses Socratic questioning to reveal and
          understand core beliefs and meanings linked to events. The therapist explores the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies   143



             Box 7.4 Example of the Downward Arrow Technique

             (NB: In the following example, the client has a Subjugation schema)
             CLIENT: I really don’t want to be late for the meeting.
             THERAPIST: Well, if that was true, and you were late, what would that mean?
             CLIENT: Well, I would be disrespecting my colleagues.
             THERAPIST: And say if that was true, what would be so bad about that?
             CLIENT: They would get irritated and angry.
             THERAPIST: And if they did get angry, what does that mean?
             CLIENT: I don’t like it when people are like that.
             THERAPIST: So, if you’re late, others will get angry, and you couldn’t manage it?



         meaning of events via asking questions such as ‘If this was true, what would that mean
         to you? What would that say about you? What would be so bad about that?’ Following
         the client’s response, the therapist continues to inquire about the meaning of the
         belief, using the questions mentioned earlier, until a core meaning is revealed. The
         therapist can continue with this process until an absolute and conclusive statement is
         reached. In schema therapy, these bottom lines are usually understood to be one or
         more EMS themes (see Box 7.4 for an example).

         Schema/Mode Monitoring Forms
         A helpful set of tools for increasing awareness of schemas and modes are the various
         schema/mode monitoring forms, or what used to be called cognitive diaries. Schema/
         mode monitoring forms allow the client to reﬂect on a meaningful event and learn to
         recognise which schemas or modes were activated during it. Monitoring forms typic-
         ally start by describing the triggering situation, followed by the client describing
         emotions, thoughts, and behaviours related to the event. The therapist asks the client
         to reﬂect on the beliefs/assumptions and self-talk involved in schema or mode activa-
         tion associated with a triggering event. The idea is to use the initial information to
         help the client become aware of their schema or mode pattern being activated. Such
         a technique has two broad aims: (1) to help the client become aware of their schema/
         mode patterns as early as possible, thus inducing a Healthy Adult mode of self-
         reﬂection; and (2) to give the client an opportunity to identify a healthier attitude
         or response to a given situation. Depending on the therapy phase, the client will
         require a diﬀerent degree of support to complete diary forms. During the initial phase
         of treatment, the therapist may take more of a leading role in recognising and
         labelling schemas and modes. During the therapy’s middle and ﬁnal phases, there is
         a greater expectation that the client will complete the diary independently.
             A commonly used type of monitoring form is the schema/mode circle diary [10] (see
         Figure 7.1). This diary follows a more circular investigation process wherein the initial
         recognition of thoughts, feelings, and behaviour expands into the underlying basic needs.
         Furthermore, the process reﬂects how the client can act to better connect to their core
         emotional needs in a given situation.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          144           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




             SCHEMA DIARY


                                The event that upset me …




              What part of my                       Underlying need linked
              reaction was too                      to event
              strong?
                                                                                           Physical
                                                                                           awareness
                                                                                           ‘Feeling in your
                                                                                           body’
            If so, in what way
            did I misinterpret the
            situation (cognitive                    Healthy adult response
            distortions)?                           ‘What is the best way to manage
                                                    this situation?’
                                                    ‘Is there a helpful way to             Thoughts
                                                    respond?’                              ‘What’s running
                                                                                           though your mind
                                                                                           at the time?’




             What part of my
             reaction was                                                                  Feelings
             justified (Healthy
             Adult mode)?




                                                         The Schema and/or
                                                         Mode involved


           Adapted from Amtz & Van
           Genderen, (2020). D. Edwards,
           (personal communication)


          Figure 7.1 Schema diary example




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies                                 145



          Schema Flashcard Outline
          Right now, you feel
                                                                        (note central emotions)
          Because
                                                              (state specific triggering event)
          This is really about your                                                                                                   Schema(s)
                                                                      (note related schemas)
          This Schema came about from
                                                                      (background events that effected development)
          This Schema(s) leads you to exaggerate the degree to which
                                                                                                          (state cognitive distortions)


          Even if you think
                                                                     (central state beliefs, self-talk)
          The reality is
                                                              (note adaptive/healthy beliefs/self-talk)
          This is backed and supported by the fact that
                                                                                            (note the evidence refuting)


          So even though you feel like doing
                                                                         (note the typical way of reacting behaviourally)
          You need to instead
                                                                  (describe healthy alternative behaviour)

         Figure 7.2 Flashcard outline


             Box 7.5 Example of a Schema Flashcard

             ‘Right now, you’re feeling tense and anxious because you are about to assert yourself with
             someone; this is your Subjugation schema that developed when you were bullied at school.
             This Subjugation schema leads you to overestimate the extent that others will be hostile and
             underestimate your ability to manage conﬂict. Even if you believe that others may get angry,
             the reality is that conﬂict is a part of life, and you can handle someone being displeased with
             you. In the past, you have spoken your view at work, asked for what you need, and managers
             have responded well. So even if you want to avoid the conversation or go along with things,
             you need to hold your head up high and assert what you need.’



         Schema and Mode Flashcards
         Clients can prepare for speciﬁc triggering events or themes linked to schemas and modes via
         schema and mode ﬂashcards (see Figure 7.2) [11]. Here, the therapist works with the client to
         develop a statement that outlines a schema’s or a mode’s eﬀect and provides a rational, healthy
         response that the client can rehearse when triggered. This prepared message also guides healthy
         behavioural responses. The therapist can then record the ﬂashcard statement on a client’s
         smartphone to be listened to out of session (see Box 7.5 for an example). As a result, the
         cognitive intervention can act as a quasi-transitional object encouraging a greater therapeutic
         connection between the therapist and client.

         Evidence for and Against a Core Belief of a Schema
         The therapist can look for evidence supporting and refuting a core belief linked to a schema
         or mode (both in childhood and adulthood), and could introduce the exercise as follows:



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          146           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 7.6 Case Example of Exploring Evidence for and Against the Core Belief
              of a Schema

              Nicky presented describing strong anxiety and inadequacy related to some work challenges.
              The therapist identiﬁed her Failure schema as being central to this distress. The therapist
              identiﬁed the core belief that she was ‘stupid and intellectually inferior’ and suggested that
              they look at the evidence for and against the core belief (both as an adult and a child). They
              came up with the following grid:

              Belief ‘I am stupid, intellectually inferior’
              Evidence for (as a child)
              Did poorly academically in primarily school
              Stayed down a year in year 3
              Parents called into school to discuss learning diﬃculties
              Had to do extra tutoring

              Evidence for (as an adult)
              Peers are in more senior jobs, have degrees
              Management have been slower to promote me
              And old colleague (three years ago) said I ‘shouldn’t be doing this sort of work’

              Evidence against (as a child)
              My teachers were encouraging
              No teacher ever said I was ‘stupid’

              Evidence against (as an adult)
              Management wants me to study and be promoted
              I passed my university entry course
              I recently got a B for my ﬁrst assignment




          ‘Let’s look at the evidence that supports and argues against the idea that you’re unintelli-
          gent’. See Box 7.6 for an example.

          Undermining and Reattributing Supporting Evidence
          Reattribution of supporting evidence can be employed to help undermine a negative core
          belief. See Box 7.7.

          Cognitive Techniques for Self-Blame and Negative Self-View
          It is beyond the scope of this book to extensively discuss all existing cognitive techniques. To
          further explain the available techniques and methods, we refer the reader to the current
          literature [12, 13]. However, included in the following sections are several helpful cognitive
          techniques related to personal responsibility and guilt or calculating risk or danger.
          Responsibility Pie Graphs. Responsibility pie graphs [14, 15] are particularly useful in cases
          where client diﬃculties are exacerbated by an overinﬂated sense of personal responsibility.
          A core negative belief is deﬁned (e.g., ‘It’s all my fault that the project failed’), and the client
          is asked to rate the strength of their belief in the statement (e.g., 85%). The therapist asks the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies   147



             Box 7.7 Example of Undermining and Reattributing Supporting Evidence
             for a Negative Core Belief
             THERAPIST: So, you’re saying that your school grades in primary school are evidence that
                you’re stupid. I’m wondering how domestic violence at home during that time
                aﬀected your schoolwork. I would say that the violence and chaos at home wasn’t
                conducive to doing well at school.




         client to identify all the factors that may have played a role in causing the adverse event. Each
         factor is then added into a pie graph, with each pie segment reﬂecting the client’s estimation
         of how much it was responsible for the outcome (i.e., what percentage of all causes of the
         event was due to this factor). Importantly, the client’s attribution for their own involvement
         is left until all other factors have been accounted for, leaving the client less responsible for
         the outcome.
         Dimensional Evaluation or ‘Continua’. In the continua technique [9, 13, 14, 16], the
         therapist asks the client to list speciﬁc traits, qualities, or factors that contribute to a ‘ﬁnal
         verdict’ or core belief about themself or others. This technique is mainly suitable for editing
         a strong negative self-image – for example, when the client believes they are ‘unacceptable’ –
         and hence is a helpful cognitive method for investigating and challenging assumptions
         derived from a Punishing Critic mode.
             This technique begins by identifying a speciﬁc belief linked to a schema or mode. The
         therapist then writes this core belief (often on a whiteboard), for example, ‘I’m a bad
         mother’, and to rate the belief’s strength (typically, using a percentage or a visual analogue
         scale). The therapist then has two options:
         1. List several traits that make up a global evaluation. For example, for the core belief ‘I’m
             a bad mother’, the traits ‘abusive’, ‘harsh’, ‘neglectful’, and ‘unsupportive’ might be
             listed. The client rates their level of each trait (e.g., from 0 to 10). The therapist then
             makes an average score from the chosen traits. Because clients’ global evaluations are
             usually unduly inﬂuenced by a single dimension, the average usually prompts the client
             to consider that, overall, they do not embody their negative global evaluation in most
             respects.
         2. Several traits that make up a global evaluation are drawn as bipolar ‘sub-continua’ via
             a visual analogue scale. The client then marks where they ‘lie’. NB: it is essential to ensure
             these sub-continua are bipolar: from the most negative extreme of the trait to the most
             positive (e.g., Emotionally Abusive vs Emotionally Nurturing/Caring). Clients then look
             at their visual proﬁle across the sub-continua and re-evaluate their original belief.
         Continua methods broaden the client’s perspective to re-evaluate the severity of their
         human foibles in proper proportion.
         The Courtroom Method. The courtroom method [17] is an experiential cognitive tech-
         nique that uses forms of drama therapy to investigate and adjust assumptions regarding
         guilt and responsibility. It is mainly suitable for clients who often feel guilty because of
         alleged mistakes or shortcomings. The cognitions regarding guilt should ﬁrst be investi-
         gated using one or more of the methods discussed previously – for example, using a pie



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          148           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          chart or discussing the deﬁnition of guilt as responsibility (the fact of having deliberately
          and intentionally caused harm or diﬃculty) and questioning whether the client meets this
          deﬁnition. If this does not lead to suﬃcient change, the therapist can propose investigating
          how a court of law would view feelings of guilt. The rationale for imitating a court of law is
          that the court is an institution with centuries of experience in establishing whether a person
          is guilty or not.
              After the usefulness of investigating the clients’s actual guilt (as responsibility) is
          established, the therapist stands up and invites the client to set up a court of law in the
          therapy room. A decision on where the judge, the prosecutor, and the lawyer will sit is made,
          with the client given a defence lawyer’s role.
              The therapist opens the role-playing game by standing up as seriously as possible and
          turning to the imaginary judge to announce the charge. For example: ‘Your honour, we are
          gathered here today because the accused is depressed and therefore causes others around
          him unacceptable suﬀering’ or ‘The accused is depressed, and therefore it is his fault that his
          spouse has a bad life.’ The therapist now asks the client to stand up, turn to the judge and
          explain why the accused (the client) is not guilty and should not be convicted. By assigning
          the client the role of a defence lawyer, the client must critically assess their automatic
          assumptions. Moreover, this role-playing game capitalises on a phenomenon known in
          social psychology that speaking arguments out loud leads to them having greater credibility
          than if they had been only heard or read. The therapist notes both the charge and the defence
          and ﬁnally asks the client to sit on the judge’s chair and deliver a verdict: guilty or not guilty.
          The therapist can also ask the client to repeat this verdict in the ﬁrst person, so instead of ‘the
          accused is not guilty because . . .’, they can ask the client to say, ‘I’m not guilty because . . .’.

          Concluding Remarks
          Cognitive change in schema therapy aims to help the client develop a capacity to reason and
          challenge beliefs and assumptions. Cognitive approaches can help the therapist develop greater
          attunement and understanding of the client’s experience. Furthermore, cognitive change can
          work synergistically with experiential methods, allowing for change at both the ‘head’ and the
          ‘heart’ levels of knowing. Therapists need to be aware of the client’s level of emotional
          functioning and tailor cognitive interventions to their needs. Furthermore, it is essential not
          to use cognitive techniques to detract from the treatment’s overall aims and goals by focusing on
          cognitive interventions at the expense of emotions and colluding with client coping strategies.

          References
          1. Beck A. Thinking and depression:                                   European Congress of Behavioural and
             Idiosyncratic content and cognitive                                Cognitive Therapies, London. 24 Sep.,
             distortions. Archives of General Psychiatry.                       1993 (Vol. 24).
             1963;9(4):324–33.                                             4. Clark G, Egan S. The Socratic method in
          2. Fennell M. Low self-esteem: A cognitive                          cognitive behavioural therapy: A narrative
             perspective. Behavioural and Cognitive                           review. Cognitive Therapy and Research.
             Psychotherapy. 1997;25(1):1–26.                                  2015;39(6):863–79.
          3. Padesky C. Socratic questioning:                              5. Overholser J. The Socratic method of
             Changing minds or guiding discovery.                             psychotherapy. Columbia University Press;
             A keynote address delivered at the                               2018.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Intervention Strategies 2: Cognitive Strategies            149



           6. Beck J, Beck A. Cognitive behaviour                         12. Beck A, Davis D, Freeman A. Cognitive
              therapy. Basics and beyond. Guilford                            therapy of personality disorders. Guilford
              Publication; 2011.                                              Publications; 2016.
           7. Roediger E, Stevens B, Brockman R.                          13. Beck J, Cognitive behaviour therapy. Basics
              Contextual schema therapy: An                                   and beyond. Guilford Publication; 2020.
              integrative approach to personality                         14. Greenberger D, Padesky C. Mind over
              disorders, emotional dysregulation, and                         mood: A cognitive therapy treatment
              interpersonal functioning. New Harbinger                        manual for clients. Guilford Press; 1995.
              Publications.
                                                                          15. Davis D. Cognitive therapy for personality
           8. Beck A. Cognitive therapy and the                               disorders. In: Leahy R, Abramson L,
              emotional disorders. Penguin; 1979.                             Alloy L, Arntz A, Beck A, eds. Science and
           9. Leahy R. Cognitive therapy techniques:                          practice in cognitive therapy: Foundations,
              A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                                mechanisms, and applications. 1st ed.
              Publications; 2017.                                             Guildford Press; 2018, pp. 376–402.
         10. Arntz A, Van Genderen H, Schema therapy                      16. Padesky C. Schema change processes in
             for borderline personality disorder. Wiley-                      cognitive therapy. Clinical Psychology &
             Blackwell; 2020.                                                 Psychotherapy. 1994;1(5):267–78.
         11. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                        17. Bögels SM, van Oppen PC. Cognitieve
             therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                        therapie: theorie en praktijk. 3rd ed. Bohn
             Press; 2003.                                                     Staﬂeu van Loghum, 2019.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Intervention Strategies

                       8             for Schema Healing 3
                                     Experiential Techniques

          Introduction
          Part of the impetus for the development of schema therapy was the insight that although
          cognitive interventions might alter people’s rational conviction in schema-driven beliefs,
          they very often didn’t feel diﬀerent. Even after developing intellectual insight, people with
          EMS still frequently experience intense unwanted schema-driven emotions. Experiential –
          or emotion-focused – techniques in schema therapy have been selected to take away the
          emotional power of EMS. Schema therapy characteristically uses imagery, chair dialogues,
          and psychodrama to activate and alter EMS within and between sessions. This chapter
          describes why, how, and when to use experiential techniques in schema therapy.

          The Importance of Experiential or Emotion-Focused
          Interventions
          Experiential techniques in schema therapy aim to directly focus on the emotional elements
          of a client’s presenting issues. Experiential techniques can be synergetic to changes within
          cognitive or behavioural domains or within the therapy relationship. A fundamental object-
          ive of experiential approaches is for the therapist to provide corrective emotional experi-
          ences to the client [1]. Experiential techniques aim to provide the client with real
          experiences that correct maladaptive schemas and modes.
              Despite such techniques contributing to the eﬀectiveness of therapy, they are often
          challenging for the therapist to use, or omitted. Some experiential techniques can be
          demanding for the client. For example, clients may have a shallow threshold for feeling
          vulnerable or exposed. It is also common for many schema therapists in training to delay or
          avoid using experiential techniques. Such avoidance typically is driven by two factors: (1)
          a lack of conﬁdence in using such approaches, with the therapist preferring to use more
          familiar techniques (commonly cognitive, behavioural, or supportive psychotherapy); and
          (2) fear that accessing emotion will destabilise or make clients feel ‘worse’. Therapist
          avoidance can limit the client’s progress and prevent the therapist from developing valuable
          skills. This chapter will present ways to increase therapist conﬁdence.
              There are several reasons why it is necessary to activate the client’s emotional responses
          in session. First, the therapist can respond to the emotional needs of the client. For example,
          the therapist can provide care, protection, and nurturance to the client who might be
          deprived of these experiences. Second, the therapist can provide a new model or ‘template’
          for the client to internalise; they can demonstrate how to experience emotions without
          avoiding them, listening to learn what deprived needs their emotions may be signalling. The
          therapist provides a model of a Healthy Adult that the client can emulate. Third, schema
          150


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   151



         therapy’s experiential techniques are consistent with Lang’s theory of emotion [2] and other
         eminent information processing models (summarised in [3, 4]) which suggest that there are
         two systems to process information. One is a ‘rational’ system accessible and mediated via
         verbal/linguistic means and a second is a parallel ‘experiential’ system wherein behaviour is
         governed by directly experienced emotional consequences. In schema therapy, cognitive
         approaches are thought to target the ‘head’, and experiential methods target the ‘heart’.
         Finally, even if the theories for why it is essential to experience aﬀect in session prove
         ultimately to be incorrect, aﬀective processing in session nevertheless remains correlated
         with successful therapeutic outcomes [5]. Experiential methods in schema therapy aim to
         bypass coping modes that block emotions, cognitions, and behaviours, revealing the
         interplay and impact of modes on the client, and the emotional needs that are otherwise
         obscured.

         When Do We Target Emotion?
         Typically, the therapist’s initial goal is to bypass coping modes so that the client can identify
         their child modes and associated EMS when active. The longer the client spends in a coping
         mode during a treatment phase session, the more time is wasted and the longer the delay to
         recovery. Therefore, the use of experiential techniques is encouraged early in the treatment
         phase. The intensity of focus on the emotional aspects of diﬃculties can be titrated based on
         the client’s capacity. For example, suppose a client declines the option of an imagery
         exercise; in that case, the therapist could use a chairwork exercise to understand the motives
         of the part of the client – typically, a coping mode – blocking the intervention.

         Rationales That Can Be Provided to Clients for Targeting
         Emotions
         As in all schema therapy interventions, the case conceptualisation will guide the therapist’s
         use of experiential techniques. The therapist should consider what they are trying to achieve
         from an experiential exercise and educate the client with a rationale. Possible speciﬁc aims
         include to: (1) access emotions obscured by coping modes; (2) increase understanding of the
         impact and origins of problems; (3) help clients experience corrective emotions (such as
         empowerment, compassion, care, and nurturance).

         Experiential Mode Modiﬁcation Exercises
         Mode dialogues are a central element of schema therapy. The ultimate aim of schema
         therapy is to strengthen the client’s Healthy Adult mode so it can respond to their child
         modes, coping modes, and critic modes. The use of experiential techniques such as imagery
         rescripting, chairwork, therapeutic letter writing, and forms of psychodrama can ﬁt within
         a spectrum of intervention (see Figure 8.1).
             The model suggests ﬁve stages that can be implemented, depending on the needs of
         the client:
         1) Imagery rescripting of images or memories linked to schemas and/or unprocessed
             trauma memories.
         2) Mode dialogues in an imagery context: Modes are visualised in imagery and
             dialogues conducted between them (e.g., modes visualised around an imaginary
             table).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          152            The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



           Schema Mode Work and Experiential Exercises




                     1                                 2                               4                                 5
                   Imagery                         Mode                             Mode                     Chairwork/
                   rescripting                  dialogues                         dialogues                   historical
                   of images/                      in an                            using                      role-play
                   memories                      imagery              3             chairs               e.g., with figures
                                                  context                                              linked to schemas
                   e.g., ‘Get an
                                                                   Mode                                – creating a forum
                   image of when
                                                                   work                                to discuss events/
                   you first felt
                                                                                                                ambience/
                   inadequate’                                e.g., whiteboard                                   decisions
                                                              work, gesturing
                                                                talking about
                                                                    modes


            e.g., ‘Get an image of your tough side,                                 e.g., ‘Sit in the Critic chair, be the Critic, what
            so there’s little X and your tough side’                                  does it say about the mistake you made?’

          Figure 8.1 Mode work and experiential techniques


          3) Informal mode work discussion and dialogues: Modes may be discussed informally,
             referring to modes on a whiteboard, and the use of gesturing to build and trigger
             a client’s awareness of modes.
          4) Mode dialogues using chairs: Use of chairs to represent the modes (e.g., chairwork with
             the Punitive Critic).
          5) Chairwork or historical role-plays with ﬁgures and issues related to schemas and/or
             problems (e.g., chairs represent people involved in schema formation, or chairs provide
             a forum for expressing feelings or weighing decisions typically blocked by coping).

          Imagery Work in Schema Therapy
          Imagery has been a central feature of schema therapy since its formation [6]. Imagery has
          long been utilised to access and ‘amplify’ emotion and is particularly useful in providing
          adaptive/corrective experiences, counteracting the messages of EMS [7]. The use of imagery
          work is broad and its applications are wide ranging. However, several diﬀerent variants of
          imagery used in schema theory include:
          1. Safe place and ‘container’ imagery
          2. Mode dialogues via imagery
          3. Imagery rescripting for schema change
          4. Imagery that strengthens the Healthy Adult

          Safe Place or Container Imagery
          Therapists can use safe place imagery to create positive experiences that promote a sense of
          safety and calmness for the client [8]. Safe place imagery can also be used at the end of
          sessions when there are high levels of emotion. A general principle is to let the client



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   153



             Box 8.1 Safe Place Script

             Can you close your eyes and get an image of a place where you feel safe and at ease? It may be
             somewhere you have been, somewhere you want to be. Get a sense of being there. What do
             you see? What is happening around you to feel at ease?
               What can you hear around you? There may be sounds close and far from you. Just notice
             this, notice the feeling of being calm and at ease and safe.
               What can you smell around you? Just notice that experience, feeling safe, feeling OK.
               What can you feel? Pay attention to where your body makes contact with the ground, the
             eﬀect of gravity, your feet or hands touching the ground. Just take a moment to stay with
             these safe feelings in your safe place. A place you can come back to when you need to.



             Box 8.2 The ‘Vault’ Imagery

             Close your eyes and get an image of a bank vault, like the vaults you see in James Bond, where
             you can walk inside. See if you can get an image of standing outside it. What do you see? Now
             I want you to imagine you have a trolley full of old ﬁles; these are old memories, distressing
             events from long ago. Can you get a sense of this? Now, I want you to get an image of you
             walking into the vault, pushing the trolley with the old memories and moving inside. What do
             you see? What colour are the walls? Is there furniture? Are there deposit boxes? Shelving?
             Now, I want you to imagine leaving these ﬁles in the vault; place them where you want. Where
             do you put them? Now, get an image of you leaving the vault. What do you see when you go,
             what kind of door is there, how does it close? Now, close that door, can you see yourself doing
             so, knowing that the door opens when you choose to open when we meet next? How does
             that feel? What’s that like knowing that these things are sorted away and we can open the
             vault if you want next time?
                Adapted from [9]


         immerse themselves in the image and for the therapist to enrich the experience by prompt-
         ing the client to attend to sensory components (such as visual, tactile, olfactory, and
         auditory). See Box 8.1 for an example script.
             Imagery can also be used to ‘contain’ and restrict memories and painful experiences. For
         example, in trauma work the client may have diﬃcult memories or experiences that cause
         them distress between sessions and overwhelm them. The therapist can ask the client to
         envisage a sealed and secure container that can hold and restrict painful destabilising
         memories (see Box 8.2). Such a skill can also be an example of ‘healthy distancing’, where
         the client learns to distance themselves from distress via helpful means.
             It is essential to note, however, that many clients may not require the frequent use of safe
         place imagery. Since these exercises can be used by clients to detach from, avoid, and
         disconnect from feelings, the unnecessary use of safe-place and containment exercises
         risks delaying access to more important experiences. The use of these exercises should be
         limited to helping clients keep’ emotional arousal levels within a window of tolerance.

         Mode Dialogues via Imagery
         In early schema therapy texts [10] there was little mention of ‘chairwork’ in inter-
         ventions targeting schema modes; instead, mode work often occurred within imagery



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          154           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.3 Example of Mode Dialogues via Imagery
              THERAPIST: Can you close your eyes and get an image of the ﬁght with your boyfriend you
                 just mentioned
              KATIE: [eyes closed] I can’t seem to get anything.
              THERAPIST: Is a part of you not wanting to get too close to those feelings?
              KATIE: Yeah, I’m not sure I see the point.
              THERAPIST: Can you get an image of your tough side, the side that wants to keep others away
                 and shut down feelings? Can you get a sense of that? Can you be that side, stand in front
                 of the side that is hurting and alone after your partner yelled at you.
              KATIE: Yeah, I can do that.
              THERAPIST: Can you be ‘Tough Katie’? Step in her shoes. I’m going to ask her some questions:
                 ‘I know you’re trying to help but what will happen if I get close to Vulnerable Katie? Why
                 not let her get some help with what happened?’ … Be that tough side. What does she
                 say back? [attempting to create a mode dialogue]
              KATIE: She will get upset, so what’s the point?
              THERAPIST: [continuing the dialogue] ‘I know you’re trying to protect and support her;
                 She has needed you for such a long time. But I know she also needs some
                 understanding and care right now. Last night was very tough for her, and I want
                 her to know that I’m here for her. ’ … What’s happening?
              KATIE: Tough Side isn’t sure about the idea; it’s wanting to disengage from talking.
              THERAPIST: Tough Side, I’m not here to upset Katie. If you’re always around, I can’t help her in
                 the way she needs. I feel that this was really hard for her. I want to help her with her
                 emotions, not to make it worse.’ … How is she responding?
              KATIE: I don’t want to be diﬃcult, but I have to go to work afterwards. It will just make
                 me upset.
              THERAPIST: Tough Katie, I know it’s not easy, but if you’re always around in our sessions, I can’t
                 help Katie the way she needs it. I’ll help Katie to settle things, so she’s not overwhelmed,
                 so she can go to work settled and feel supported too.
              KATIE: Yeah, I get it, it’s just not easy to think about, but I see your point.
              THERAPIST: So, can you get an image of the argument now?
              KATIE: Yes, I’m walking in from work, and he’s sitting watching TV. He doesn’t even respond
                 or acknowledge me. It’s like I’m invisible.



          rescripting. In imaginal mode work, the client is encouraged to embody speciﬁc
          modes (e.g., Therapist: ‘Be the detached side of you’) and construct dialogues with
          the therapist’s assistance. This approach can be advantageous when an imagery
          rescripting exercise is ‘blocked’ midway by a coping mode (see Box 8.3).

          Imagery Rescripting
          Imagery Rescripting is a powerful experiential method and a central change mechanism in
          schema therapy. The technique aims to change the legacy of childhood experiences, images,
          and memories linked to the development of schemas and modes. Rescripting results in the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   155



         formation of new adaptive meanings and access to feelings and insights. Rescripting can
         take diﬀerent forms; this chapter will discuss the protocols noted by Weertman and Arntz
         [11] and De Haan and colleagues [12].

         Selecting Meaningful Images for Rescripting
         Imagery rescripting requires the therapist to access images linked to the development of
         schemas and modes. The therapist privately poses the question ‘What happened to you’ (to
         have such schemas and modes) as a way to conceptualise schema and mode development.
         Accessing meaningful images to rescript can be achieved in diﬀerent ways.
         1. ‘Aﬀect Bridge’ Imagery. Clients often experience emotional responses to events during
            daily life that seem objectively ‘out of proportion’ to what happened. These events often
            contain stimulus elements that overlap with the conditions that established their
            schemas and modes. We can capitalise on how emotions organise associated memories
            by using recent episodes of disturbing emotions to improve recall of events that led to
            schema or mode establishment. Attunement to emotion and the cognitive meaning of
            current life triggers can link current events with the past. Here, the therapist aims to
            understand the coordinates of emotion (longitude) and meaning/cognition (latitude)
            associated with triggers before vaulting to past events. The sequence is summarised in
            Box 8.4.
         2. Assessment, ‘Google Image Technique’, Young Parenting Inventory and the use of
            Photos. The therapist can access childhood imagery via experiences noted during
            assessment. Speciﬁc touchstone events or examples of parental care (obtained in
            a developmental history-taking) can be good targets to rescript. The Young Parenting
            Inventory [13] can provide a detailed stimulus to help the therapist obtain examples of
            caregivers not meeting core emotional needs (e.g., Therapist: ‘Give me an example of
            mum treating you as if you were younger than you really were’). An alternative option is
            the ‘Google Image Technique’ [14]; this technique is typically used in eye movement
            description and reprocessing [EMDR] therapy. Here, the client is asked to think of
            memories linked to schemas as being akin to completing a Google image search. For
            example, as a homework exercise, clients can be asked to record ﬁve images representing
            memories that may be linked to a particular schema (e.g., ‘I am defective’), thereby
            priming the client for imagery in the next session.




             Box 8.4 The Sequence in Imagery Rescripting Incorporating an Aﬀect Bridge
             A) Access an image of a recent triggering event. Therapist: ‘What do you see, where
                are you?’
             B) Attune to feelings and thoughts related to the event. Therapist: ‘How are you feeling?
                What’s running through your mind?’
             C) Focus on emotion and physical elements and the idea of X (thoughts/meaning) related
                to the recent trigger and ask the client to let go of the current trigger and access an
                image when they felt the same as a child.
             D) Access childhood image and proceed with the rescript.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          156           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Imagery Rescripting – Phase 1 (Therapist Rescripts)
          The initial phase of imagery rescripting typically focuses on the therapist entering the image,
          meeting the child’s needs, speciﬁcally responding to antagonists in the image, and comfort-
          ing the child. It is important that the therapist rescripts before the client attempts to do so,
          for two reasons. First, the therapist models how to respond to antagonists and provides
          appropriate care and nurturance. In many cases, clients have had limited exposure to models
          of healthy caregiving. The therapist has more inﬂuence over adverse experiences when they
          are an active part of the image. For example, if the client becomes overwhelmed by parental
          actions, the therapist can enter the image and provide tailored responses. Second, by
          entering the image and giving care, the therapist aims to create a secure therapeutic
          attachment and meet the client’s attachment needs via limited reparenting (see Chapter 6).
              Initially, the therapist’s primary objective is to provide safety within the image. The
          therapist can position themselves between the client (as a child) and any antagonist ﬁgure.
          Alternatively, the therapist can use fantasy to increase the perceived power and strength of
          themselves as the ‘helper’ ﬁgure, thereby increasing the client’s feelings of protection. For
          example, the therapist can increase their size (Therapist: ‘Make me bigger, so I’m standing
          over him’) or use some form of barrier (‘Place a bulletproof screen with you and me standing
          on one side and your mother on the other side’). Other fantasy elements can also be used,
          such as using ‘child protectors’ or helpers to provide a sense of safety.
              The therapist is asked to enter and intervene close to the ‘hot spot’ of the imagery.
          Here, the client has some emotional activation towards the antagonist (e.g., when the
          critical parent is demanding towards the child). However, in the case of violence, abuse,
          or trauma, the therapist enters and intervenes before the abusive act takes place,
          protecting and meeting the needs of the child in the image [15]. The steps of imagery
          rescripting by the therapist are outlined in Box 8.5, and an example of its application is
          provided in Box 8.6.

          Highlighting Mastery and Communicating a Purpose
          It can be helpful for the therapist to state the ‘purpose’ for imagery rescripting and
          communicate this to the client. For example, the therapist may aim to increase the client’s
          self-compassion or empowerment, validate the client’s needs, or provide safety. Making the
          rationale clear will help clients accept the value of imagery rescripting and be more willing to
          continue to participate. It is also essential to inform the client that the ultimate goal of the
          imagery process is for them to respond to antagonists and meet their child self’s needs in the
          image. When clients understand and see the value of achieving this, they may be more likely
          to actively engage in the exercises, rather than take a more passive role in the imagery. Such
          a process is similar to a chef modelling how to cook a meal to an apprentice. The chef may
          highlight to the apprentice that even though they may prefer to watch, they should be
          involved in cooking the meal because they will be preparing the meal on their own in the
          future.

          Imagery Rescripting: Phase 2 (Client Rescripts)
          The second phase of imagery rescripting begins during the middle and later stages of
          treatment. Here, the client’s Healthy Adult mode has developed; the client has become




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   157



             Box 8.5 Imagery Rescripting Script


             Imagery Rescripting Script
             Stage 1: Therapist Rescripts
             Therapist Instructions
             1) Discuss imagery and gain consent to do imagery rescripting
             2) Ask the client to get an image of the childhood event (‘Can you get an image where
                you felt really vulnerable?’)

             Identify a Memory
             3) What do you see (hear, smell)? What’s happening for you to feel this way?
                Please note: make sure the client is immersed in the image (using ﬁrst 1st person present
                tense – e.g., ‘I’m in the lounge room and he’s across the room . . .’)
             4) What are you feeling?
             5) What are you thinking to yourself?
             6) What do you need? What would help right now?
             Therapist Rescripts
            7) Therapist enters the image and provides what the client needs
               (e.g., stand up to the perpetrator, call the police, speak to the parents, etc.)
            8) How does the antagonist respond?
               Continue with meeting the need
            9) How does the client feel as a result?
               ‘What’s it like, me speaking to mum that way?’
           10) Return to step 6 and see if anything else is needed
               (check on aﬀect as a result of your intervention)
           11) If possible, focus on a corrective emotional experience
               (i.e., feeling supported, safe, cared for) and ask the client to open their eyes
                •   Please note: there is no need to ‘play out’ the extent of the trauma – the therapist
                    enters the image and stops the abuse/protects the client
                •   Get client into 1st person, present tense
                •   Focus on the ‘corrective emotional experience’.




         more insightful and has had some modelling of how to respond to antagonists. In addition,
         emotions such as fear and shame should have subsided due to rescripting in phase 1.
             In the imagery, the therapist asks the client-as-adult to enter the image and meet the
         client-as-child’s needs (i.e., stand up against antagonists, provide care to the child in the
         image). One way to facilitate development of the client’s Healthy Adult mode is through
         ‘priming’: starting the imagery exercise by having the client visualise their healthy side. The
         exercise then consists of three segments:
         1. A description of the memory (often from an observer perspective), especially the events
             before the scene’s most emotive part.
         2. The client, as an adult (as they are now) entering the image and rescripting.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          158           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.6 Example of Phase 1: The Therapist Rescripts the Image
              THERAPIST: Now, get an image of you as a child when you felt the same way, when you felt
                 unloved and rejected.
              CLIENT: My dad is angry at me; I’ve dropped a can of soft drink in the car, and it’s made
                 a mess.
              THERAPIST: Where are you? What do you see?
              CLIENT: I’m coming into the house from being in the car. Dad is in front of me as we walk up
                 the path.
              THERAPIST: What’s happening?
              CLIENT: He’s angry and saying I’m a stupid child, he has the can of drink in his hand, he’s
                 so angry.
              THERAPIST: How are you feeling?
              CLIENT: I just feel like he hates me [tearful].
              THERAPIST: What do you need?
              CLIENT: I wish he would be less mean.
              THERAPIST: You just want someone to be nice to you, protect you?
              CLIENT: Yes.
              THERAPIST: Bring me into the image. Can you get a sense of me there, standing between you
                 and your dad?
              CLIENT: Yes, I can see you.
              THERAPIST: I’m standing tall and strong between you and your father. I’m going to talk
                 to your dad [Greg]: ‘Greg, you are going to stop right there, this is unacceptable.
                 I’m not going to let you carry on like this. You are dealing with me now.’ What
                 happens next?
              CLIENT: Dad isn’t happy, he’s saying, ‘Who are you?!’, and that he can parent how he likes.
              THERAPIST: [continuing with the exchange] ‘Greg, I don’t care for this, I’m right, and your
                 parenting is unacceptable. You need to leave, I’m not putting up with this.’ Can you see
                 me taking dad away?
              CLIENT: [tearful] Yes.
              THERAPIST: What’s that like having someone there for you, standing up for you?
              CLIENT: It feels good. No one has spoken to dad like that.
              THERAPIST: [To the client in imagery] ‘You’re a good kid, a lovely kid, and dad is intolerant and
                 mean. He’s the one with the problem.’ How does that feel?
              CLIENT: Better, like someone cares.
              THERAPIST: [in imagery] ‘How about we get out of here? Do something nice, something you
                 like doing?’
              CLIENT: I loved climbing the tree out the front.
              THERAPIST: Great, can you see yourself there? ‘Can I come too? I like to watch you climb.’
                 What do you see?
              CLIENT: I’m up the tree. You’re down the bottom looking up at me.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques          159




             THERAPIST: I’m smiling, ‘You’re a brilliant climber!’ How is it? What is it like being up the tree
                with someone kind there?
             CLIENT: It’s a nice feeling.
             THERAPIST: Hold on to that nicer, cared-for feeling and let the image dissolve away; become
                aware of the room’s sounds, and slowly open your eyes.




         Cartoon 8.1 Imagery Rescripting with the Punitive Critic


         3. The client taking the child’s perspective and observing their self-as-adult providing care
             and meeting their needs.
         As a result, the client can experience two levels of emotion: advocating for the child
         (such as healthy indignation, self-compassion) and feelings related to receiving care
         and protection. An example of a client rescripting their own image is provided in
         Box 8.7. Some tips for how to deal with common roadblocks in providing imagery
         interventions are provided in Box 8.8.

         Chairwork in Schema Therapy
         Chairwork has a long history in psychotherapy, particularly in the Gestalt Therapy tradition
         [18]. Chairwork has been used both as a stand-alone psychotherapeutic approach [19] and



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          160           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




          Cartoon 8.1 (cont.)




          integrated into cognitive-behavioural therapy [20]. Chairwork is a very useful vehicle for
          delivering and enhancing schema mode therapy [21]. First, mode chair dialogues can
          illustrate mode interplay clearly and vividly to the client. Second, it facilitates the client’s
          defusion from dysfunctional modes and schemas and viewing them as ego-dystonic. For
          example, the therapist can confront an empty chair representing a problematic mode, with
          the client sitting alongside. Here, the chairwork helps the client see that the therapist is
          speaking to the mode rather than confronting the client.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques    161




         Cartoon 8.1 (cont.)



             Box 8.7 Example of Phase 2 in Which the Client Rescripts the Image
             THERAPIST: Bring up that image of you with dad being angry at you. What do you see?
             CLIENT: We’re coming into the house after I’ve dropped the can of drink in the car. Dad’s
                angry . . . really angry. He’s yelling at me, saying I’m stupid.
             THERAPIST: OK, bring yourself into the image as an adult, as you are now. Maybe place
                yourself between little Nicky and your dad. How do you feel about what’s happening,
                how he’s treating little Nicky?
             CLIENT: It’s pathetic. It’s wrong. She’s just a kid.
             THERAPIST: Can you bring yourself in, an adult, as you are now, feeling angry that this is
                happening?
             CLIENT: OK, I’m there standing next to him.
             THERAPIST: Be that strong, healthy adult. What do you want to say to dad?
             CLIENT: [in a deﬁant tone] ‘Leave her alone, you’re a bully, and I’m sick of it.’
             THERAPIST: [coaching the client] ‘ . . . and I’m not afraid of you’.
             CLIENT: [to the father in deﬁance] ‘I am not afraid of you; you’re dealing with me’.
             THERAPIST: How does he respond?
             CLIENT: He looks stunned. No one questions him.
             THERAPIST: What happens next? What do you say or do?
             CLIENT: I take him by the shoulder, out of the room. I say, ‘Don’t ever do that again. She’s
                a good kid’.
             THERAPIST: Who’s in the scene now?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          162           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




              CLIENT: It’s just little Nicky and me.
              THERAPIST: How are you feeling? What do you say?
              CLIENT: ‘Hey, little one, it’s not your fault, your dad has problems, and I’m not going to let
                 him do that anymore.’
              THERAPIST: How does she respond?
              CLIENT: She looks a bit uncertain but happier.
              THERAPIST: What do you want to say to her?
              CLIENT: ‘I’m here for you, don’t be afraid, you’re a good kid’.
              THERAPIST: How does she respond?
              CLIENT: She smiles. It’s good to see her safer and at ease.
              THERAPIST: OK, notice that good feeling and the smile on little Nicky. Now, I want you to
                 rewind the tape to the start of the imagery, to the moment that ‘adult you’ arrives in the
                 image. Now, I want you to be little Nicky. Being little Nicky, what do you see?
              CLIENT: I can see adult me coming into the room. She’s standing between dad and me.
              THERAPIST: What’s happening?
              CLIENT: She’s [Adult Nicky] saying to my dad to back oﬀ, that he’s a bully and she’s not going
                 to take it anymore.
              THERAPIST: How does he respond?
              CLIENT: He’s surprised and tries to respond, but Big Me is having none of that! She says ‘I’ve
                 heard enough!’, and she’s not afraid of him.
              THERAPIST: How does that feel?
              CLIENT: Feels good. Someone is there to protect me. Stand up for me.
              THERAPIST: What is happening now?
              CLIENT: She leads him out of the room, sort of pushing him out.
              THERAPIST: What happens next?
              CLIENT: He’s gone, it’s just me and Big Me. She’s saying I’m a good kid and that dad’s a bully.
                 She says that she will take care of things.
              THERAPIST: How does that feel? What do you need?
              CLIENT: Feels good to have someone on my side who cares. I need a hug.
              THERAPIST: Can you ask Big You, say it out loud? ‘I need a hug.’
              CLIENT: ‘Adult Me, can I have a hug?’
              THERAPIST: How does she respond?
              CLIENT: She says ‘Absolutely!’ and gives me a big hug. It feels great.



              In addition to mode dialogues, chairwork can also provide a ‘forum’ for clients to explore
          mixed feelings, dilemmas, or decision making. Exploration of associated emotions and beliefs
          may typically be blocked or obstructed by coping modes. For example, if a client needs to
          decide on the future of a relationship but avoided thinking about the issue because of a coping
          mode, the therapist could construct a decision-making chair dialogue between the side of the
          client that wanted to pursue the relationship and the part that wanted to leave [19].



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques      163



             Box 8.8 Imagery Tips and Troubleshooting


             What If the Client Becomes Overwhelmed?
             Therapists are often concerned about clients becoming overwhelmed during imagery exercises.
             It is essential to demonstrate to the client that you have conﬁdence in the technique and are
             conﬁdent that you can manage their emotions accessed via imagery. Clients are often anxious
             about aﬀect and have beliefs related to not coping with emotion. The therapist can use their
             inﬂuence within the image to modulate the client’s emotional arousal (this is preferable to
             asking the client to suddenly open their eyes and end the exercise). For example, the therapist
             can enter the image and provide safety and reassurance. Alternatively, the therapist can remove
             the antagonist from the image and focus on reparenting and care. To elaborate on feeling
             connected to the therapist (and grounded in the here and now), a shawl or rug can be held
             between the client and therapist [16]. The therapist gently can gently tug on the fabric,
             reminding the client that they are safe and connected with the therapist.

             Do I Have to Start with a Highly Distressing Memory or Image?
             Less distressing imagery can be initially used if the client is fearful of the process: for example,
             rescripting an image of the child alone focusing on care and safety. However, including the
             more aversive elements of the memory enhances the eﬀectiveness of the imagery rescript-
             ing [17].

             What Do I Do If the Client Jumps into the Abusive Act of the Trauma?
             It is helpful to note to the client that there is no need to replay traumatic events in their
             entirety. If the client does jump into abusive content, the therapist can ask the client to pause
             and then ‘rewind’ the memory to a point just before the abusive act.

             What If My Client Is Very Apprehensive or Doesn’t Want to Close Their Eyes?
             The therapist can assure the client that they have control over the process. The client may wish
             to look at the ﬂoor or away from the therapist. Alternatively, the therapist can talk through
             what they envisage would happen in the image. Describing the proposed imagery and
             possible helpful outcomes can provide less aversive expectancies.

             What If the Client Fears Retribution from an Abusive Figure After the Session?
             During the latter parts of imagery exercises, the client may fear retribution from antagonists.
             Here, the therapist can ask the client to imagine having a pager or ‘magic phone’ that, once
             pressed, brings the therapist into the image to protect and stand up for the client. The
             therapist conveys a sense of conﬁdence in dealing with the antagonist.

             What If the Client Says, ‘I Can’t Do Imagery’ or ‘I Don’t Remember My Childhood?’
             There are several reasons for such client statements. Clients’ coping modes can typically block
             access to images or memories. At the same time, they may assume that the therapist is
             seeking vivid and clear experiences via imagery. Therapists can ask the client to visually
             describe a neutral place or situation drawing upon a mental image: ‘What is your daughter
             doing right now? Paint me a picture of what she is up to at school. Where is she and what is
             she doing?’ Regarding not having a clear recollection of childhood, the therapist can ask the
             client to ‘get a sense’ of themselves as a child feeling sad, anxious, or distressed. Here, it is
             essential that the client leads with the experience (primarily to prevent the therapist from
             being involved in suggestive actions).


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          164           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



             Chairwork mode dialogues are an opportunity for the schema therapist to be creative.
          Chairwork can also help provide an active and energising element to therapy sessions that
          might otherwise feel ﬂat and disconnected. Several principles can help guide more eﬀective
          chairwork within schema therapy.

          Separation of Modes Using Chairs
          A speciﬁc chair can be allocated for each mode. The client then speaks with the ‘voice’ or
          sentiment of this mode only from this chair, which anchors the mode to that location. For
          example, a client’s self-blaming for an error is ascribed to the Punitive Critic and a chair is
          allocated to this mode, more playfully labelled ‘the Punisher’. If the client were to resume self-
          critical statements within the session, the therapist might gesture to the ‘Punisher chair’
          (Therapist: ‘That’s coming from the Punisher mode’, gesturing to the empty seat), or they
          might ask them to move to the prescribed chair and continue speaking. This is an attempt to
          contain punishing sentiments to a speciﬁc chair. The therapist may also assign a chair to the
          Vulnerable Child mode (‘the Punished’), ascribing the thoughts, feelings, and sensations of being
          criticised to this seat.
              Mode separation (or mode de-contamination) has several aims. First, the therapist aims to
          alleviate chaotic psychological processes associated with ‘mode ﬂipping’. Separating the modes
          makes the motives, associated emotional states, and ideas of each mode clearer, which in turn
          makes the impact of their interplay clearer. Second, the client can defuse from the ideas (beliefs,
          rules, and assumptions) of problematic modes and more easily adopt a healthier perspective.
          As a result, the therapist can help the client strengthen their Healthy Adult mode.
              Once the client can reliably discriminate modes, the therapist can gesture towards the
          chair representing a particular mode, rather than having clients moving rapidly from chair to
          chair. For example, while gesturing to the Punitive Critic seat the therapist may say ‘The
          Punisher mode is saying that you’re a “loser”, just like your brother did, just like the bullies
          did, and it’s been internalised in you. We have to stand up to this side of you and say (looking
          at the chair) back oﬀ!’

          Embodying and Personalising the Mode
          When sitting in a chair during chairwork exercises, the client is encouraged to
          embody the mode and take the mode’s perspective, giving the mode a ‘voice’ [19].
          On these occasions, the client is supported to speak from the mode, expressing its
          thoughts, feelings, and sentiments. At other times, the client can be encouraged to
          look at an empty chair representing a mode and be asked how they ‘see’ the mode, so
          as to humanise the mode – for example, ‘when you look over to the chair that takes
          the role of the punitive side of you, what do you see, what does it look like to you?’ On
          some occasions, it may be helpful for the client to envisage speciﬁc antagonists from
          their life that helped form the mode and whose voice and messages the client may
          have internalised. For example, the therapist can ask the client to imagine their
          punitive father sitting in the seat, to access punitive messages.

          Anchoring to a Context
          It is usually helpful to provide a speciﬁc context or ‘anchor’ when initiating chairwork,
          rather than just saying ‘Move into the Punisher seat, what does that side say?’ The therapist




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques         165



             Box 8.9 Example of Anchoring Chairwork to a Speciﬁc Context
             THERAPIST: So, from the Punisher seat, what does that side say about your friendships and
                reaching out to your friends?
             [NB: The therapist does not simply say ‘Move to the Punisher seat, what does that
                side say?’]
             CLIENT: [in the Punitive Critic chair] ‘What’s the point? They don’t really like you. They put up
                with you’.

         might anchor the exercise using a recent triggering situation, by referring to a behavioural
         pattern that the client wants to break, or by analysing an instance of a mode being activated
         within the session. For example, with a client who has noticed a pattern of retreating from
         his friends, the therapist could anchor a chairwork exercise to a recent opportunity to
         socialise with friends. The therapist might ask the client to move to a chair representing the
         Punitive Critic mode (see Box 8.9).

         Physical Location of and Number of Chairs
         The physical location of the chairs can symbolically facilitate the quality and intensity of
         emotional activation, perspective-taking, and, consequently, how much and exactly what
         the client learns from the exercise. Typically, the therapist may seek to sit alongside the
         client as a dyad. The therapist–client dyad can then initiate dialogues with speciﬁc
         modes. Furthermore, the therapist can model Healthy Adult responses to various modes
         within the client’s case conceptualisation and help prompt and coach responses from the
         client. Such a seating arrangement can help with enhancing the ‘team therapy’ aspect of
         the interplay.

         ‘Empty Chair’ When Directly Confronting or Challenging
         A primary objective of using chairwork is to help the client distance their perspective
         from that of maladaptive modes. Were the therapist to challenge or confront modes
         and schemas by talking directly to the client (e.g., ‘You seem to be avoiding my
         question’), the client might fuse further with the mode (i.e., the client experiences the
         therapist as making no distinction between the client’s mode and the client’s self).
         Moreover, the client may become defensive and resolute. However, the therapist can
         emphatically confront an empty chair (typically with the client sitting alongside them).
         As a result, the therapist can eﬃciently address therapy-interfering issues, while the
         client sees the challenge as being directed more towards a circumscribed way of
         behaving than towards themselves as a whole person.

         Chairwork Technique in the Various Phases of Treatment
         Chairwork is suitable for each phase of treatment. However, the exact method of
         working with chairs will change throughout the phases of therapy. Table 8.1 presents
         an overview of how mode work can be enhanced via the use of chairs in various
         phases of treatment. The use of the chair technique will then be explicitly elaborated
         upon in each phase.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          166           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Table 8.1 Chairwork in diﬀerent phases of treatment

              Phase of treatment                Application

              Case conceptualisation            •    Chairs for diagnostics
                                                •    Interview modes
              Initial phase                     •    Chair technique ‘from the sidelines’
                                                •    ‘Moding out’ triggers
                                                •    Negotiate with Protector
                                                •    ‘Contaminate’ the chair of the Vulnerable Child
                                                •    Manage and restrict the impact of critic modes
                                                •    Limited reparenting to the empty child mode seat
              Middle phase                      •    Coaching Healthy Adult in compassion
                                                •    Practise the three steps of the Healthy Adult
                                                •    Use of chairwork as a forum to discuss change/explore feelings
                                                     (e.g., grief) ambivalence
              Final phase                       •    Strengthen Healthy Adult: Therapist plays coping or parent
                                                     mode; client responds
                                                •    Client responds to Vulnerable Child in the empty chair




          Case Conceptualisation Phase
          Within the case conceptualisation phase, the main aim of chairwork is to increase schema or
          mode awareness. At this stage, interviewing and identifying the mode interplay is suﬃcient.
          In subsequent phases, chairwork is used to manage and/or reduce the activation of those
          modes: to limit the internalised Critic modes and bypass the Protector modes through
          ‘understanding and negotiation’ so that contact can be made with the emotional part(s) of
          the client for corrective experiences.
              A mode conceptualisation of a triggering event or life pattern can be translated into
          a chairwork exercise. Here, the therapist can allocate chairs to modes and provide
          a cognitive understanding of the interplay of modes in the client’s life and treatment. The
          therapist can explore a mode’s function and experience relative to a speciﬁc ‘anchor’ via an
          interview. In Box 8.10, the therapist invites the client to sit in an adjacent seat and ‘be the
          mode’.

          Initial Phase
          The two main objectives of the initial phase of therapy are: (a) to learn to become more
          aware of the modes; and (b) to gain corrective emotional experiences. Chairwork is an
          essential tool for meeting both objectives. Therapists can explore recent triggers or prob-
          lematic situations described by the client via chairwork approaches.
          ‘Moding Out’ a Trigger. A case conceptualisation can be ‘moded out’ via the use of chairs.
          Here, the therapist anchors the conceptualisation to a speciﬁc trigger or life pattern (e.g.,
          a mode interplay around substance misuse), associating particular modes with chairs and
          then asking the client to move between each location, noting each mode’s perspective
          towards the triggering event (see Box 8.11).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques         167



             Box 8.10 Case Example Using Chairwork to Complete a Mode Dialogue

             A client speaks about feeling ‘bad’ the previous week and, as a result, cancelling the last
             appointment and withdrawing.

             THERAPIST: [pointing to empty adjacent chair] In this chair, I would like you to be that
                withdrawn side of yourself. Be that withdrawn person when you [gesturing at the
                adjacent chair] felt so bad. How do you help her [gesturing at the other chair] by
                withdrawing like that? What would have happened to her [gesturing at the other
                chair] if you weren’t there or hadn’t intervened?
                After this active mode has been explored, the therapist asks the client to return to the
             initial chair. In this way, the client can distance themselves from that mood and reﬂect
             upon it.




             Box 8.11 Moding Out a Trigger
             THERAPIST: OK, sounds like a part of you wanted to have the drink on the weekend,
                another part was really angry at you for drinking, and another side felt overwhelmed.
                Would it be OK if we tried a chairwork exercise?
             CLIENT: Sure.
             THERAPIST: OK, here’s three seats. One seat here is the part of you that is sad, alone, hopeless:
                your Vulnerable Child side. [Getting a second chair] Here is the Self-Soother side of you,
                the drinker part of you. This side is the part that relapsed on the weekend. [Getting the
                third chair] The last chair is the Punisher mode, the Critic that is activated for relapsing.
                Can you sit in this chair that wants to drink? Be that side. What does that side say about
                drinking?
             CLIENT: [Now sitting in the Self-Soother seat] ‘Drinking is inevitable. You won’t feel as bad if
                you drink; it’s easy to just forget.’
             THERAPIST: Yes, this makes sense. It helps ease the pain and loneliness. OK, how about
                moving into the Punisher chair now, be this side. How does this react to your relapse?
                What does that say to your vulnerable side?
             CLIENT: [In the Punisher mode seat] ‘You messed up again. It’s because of you. You’re weak,
                and you have hurt the people you love. You keep making stupid decisions’.
             THERAPIST: OK, I now want you to leave the Punisher in the chair and move to the Little Nikki
                seat. How does it feel hearing this from the Punisher?
             CLIENT: ‘I just feel alone [tearful]. Hopeless. What’s wrong with me!’.
             THERAPIST: It’s hard. Giving up drinking is tough stuﬀ. I’m guessing when you feel this way,
                the Self-Soother side of you [gestures to the chair] is wanting to drink more. Am I right?


         Negotiating with Coping Modes. Unlike the conceptualisation and assessment phase, the
         initial phase of therapy aims to generate new, corrective emotional experiences. The client
         should now be aware of their mode conceptualisation. The therapist must reason with and
         negotiate with coping modes to bypass this protective state and help the client experience



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          168           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          underlying feelings. Once the client’s schema-driven emotions and associated beliefs are
          identiﬁed, the therapist can provide experiences of emotions and beliefs that counteract the
          schema.
          ‘Watching From the Sidelines’. Some clients have trouble doing these emotionally oriented
          exercises. The related resistance can cause them to not want to switch chairs. In those situations,
          chairwork can also be applied ‘from the sidelines’. The client remains seated in their original
          chair, but the therapist shapes the situation and related feelings using chairs placed in the space.
          As a result, the therapist ‘works around’ the client’s reluctance. The approach allows the client to
          examine the various modes and their mutual interaction from the sidelines. The therapist uses
          chairs to sketch the mode model as they could do on a whiteboard.
              The therapist can use chairwork to explore the pros and cons of a coping mode. For
          example, a ‘protective chair’ can be viewed as a gatekeeper guarding the entrance to the
          client’s emotional inner world. Excessive pressure will not make a gatekeeper allow passage.
          Using a great deal of understanding, acknowledgement, and reassurance, and giving
          control, the therapist must oﬀer suﬃcient security for this coping mode to be willing to
          share more of the client’s underlying feelings. A typical case example for the use of chair-
          work to engage with a Protector mode is given in Box 8.12.


              Box 8.12 Case Example of Working with the Protector Mode
              THERAPIST: OK, so you protect her [gesturing to the empty chair where the client ﬁrst sat]
                 by just keeping all those feelings away, concentrating on other things and cer-
                 tainly not talking too much about the feelings . . . I can imagine that you try to
                 keep those feelings away if they bother you so much. I also have a protective side
                 that tries to keep sadness or fears away. But what happens to her emotions when
                 you do that? Does pushing them away solve them?
              CLIENT: No . . . No, well, at that moment, yes, but I could feel the same way again later.
              THERAPIST: OK, so you can protect her from that sadness very well at the moment, but this
                 doesn’t solve the feelings. It just pushes them away temporarily. I think we can do more.
                 I think I can actually help her to feel better. How does that sound to you?
              CLIENT: Well . . . Great, but I can’t really imagine it.
              THERAPIST: I understand. It might not sound believable. I would like to have the opportunity
                 to prove that it’s possible. But I do need your cooperation: if you give me a chance, I’d
                 like to get in touch with her and let her know that there are more options than just
                 pushing away sadness and fear. Could you give me this chance? You can always
                 intervene if you want to stop. You’re in control!
              CLIENT: Alright.
                 [Therapist asks the client to switch chairs.]
              THERAPIST: OK, I’m now going to ask you to get up from this chair and sit on the chair next to
                 me. But do bear in mind that when you get up from that chair, the Protector stays there.
                 Leave her superglued there while you come and sit here next to me.
                     [Now to the client in the chair next to the therapist, who says in a softer voice]: So there
                 [gesturing to the protector’s chair] is that Protector who is trying to help you by pushing
                 away all your sadness and fears. see above does that by thinking about it as little as
                 possible,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques      169




                 by staying focused on work. But in the meantime, you feel sad, and you have felt anxious
                 in the past week. Can you tell me what made you so sad and anxious in the past week?
             CLIENT: [becoming tearful] ‘It’s hard coming here.’
             THERAPIST: When I listen to you, I don’t ﬁnd it strange at all that you felt sad and anxious.
                I think everyone in this situation [gesturing to a place near the client] would feel a bit
                uncomfortable: it would be a tricky situation for anyone. Of course, you also feel sad and
                anxious. But when I think of your history, I also realise that you often experienced these
                kinds of situations in your life. It is the umpteenth time that you are alone, and you feel
                threatened. Of course, you are completely out of sorts at that moment because, after all,
                it is an old pain that plays a part.
                     How does it feel when you hear me say that it makes sense, the way you felt? How
                does it feel to be understood in this? Is it a nice feeling to be understood [the therapist
                holds his thumb up] or not so nice [moving thumb down].
             CLIENT: [gives thumbs-up gesture.]

             Attention is placed on the positioning of the chairs: the therapist sits closer to the
         Vulnerable Child mode than the Protector mode. Furthermore, the therapist’s tone of voice
         is modiﬁed based on which mode is being addressed in the exercise. Responses to the
         Vulnerable Child mode can have a softer, more emotional tone than the rational and ‘adult’
         negotiation with the Coping mode.
             Although oﬀering compassion has a soothing eﬀect, it is still essential to ensure the client is
         aware of this eﬀect. Clients tend to mainly pay attention to the situation that made them feel
         rotten and the emotional pain caused as a result. Focusing attention on the eﬀect of compassion
         can increase its impact. In some cases, the client does not yet wish to participate in this kind of
         chairwork; in those cases the therapist can invite an exercise where they will ﬁrst play the
         ‘vulnerable side’ as a way of scaﬀolding the client’s participation (see Box 8.13 for an example).
         Chairwork and Child Modes. Nurturance and care may have been scarcely experienced in the
         life of the client. As a result, limited reparenting can be uncomfortable and awkward when
         applied face to face with the client. The therapist can use an empty chair and respond to the
         client’s needs in an indirect way that the client tolerates. Moreover, by observing the therapist’s
         care and nurturance towards the client’s child modes, the client is better positioned to model
         appropriate forms of care and nurturance to the self. Chairwork can also help the client
         understand and manage anger emanating from the Angry Child mode. The therapist may
         use two back-to-back chairs to highlight the interplay between anger and more vulnerable
         feelings. For example, Chair A = Angry Child mode: ‘This is ridiculous, what is this? . . . “Forget
         the client day” or something?!’ Chair B = Vulnerable Child mode: ‘This side feels like I don’t
         matter. No one is there for me.’ In addition, the Angry Child mode can be allocated to an empty
         chair, and the therapist can then validate, empathise, and ultimately contain the anger within
         this mode. Typically, this approach is conducted when the client has gained some distance from
         the Angry Child mode and is more reﬂective. For example, the therapist may say ‘So, the angry
         “Fireball” side of you is in this [empty] chair in front of me. [Addressing the empty chair] It’s not
         nice for the therapist to be late, I really want you to know that, but stomping around giving me
         the silent treatment limits me in understanding what’s going on for you. We have to work out
         a way for you to communicate how you feel without doing it in this way.’



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          170           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.13 ‘Contaminating the Chair’

              Although mode work in chairs can be an eﬀective way to bypass coping modes and contact the
              vulnerable part of the client, some clients don’t feel any diﬀerent when they sit in various chairs.
              This lack of response may be due to several factors. The coping mode might be too active: the
              client may have never learned to allow and experience vulnerable emotions. In this case, the
              therapist can use chairwork to ‘infect’ the chair with emotions. Here, the therapist can ask the client
              (who remains detached or unaware of feeling) to sit in the therapist’s seat. The therapist then sits in
              the seat representing the Vulnerable Child mode and starts talking ‘from this side’ based on
              knowledge derived from the client’s conceptualisation. The therapist imagines the client’s
              Vulnerable Child mode and acts out and verbalises their probable feelings and needs.
              THERAPIST: If I was to think about you as a child, and I connected and stepped inside and
                 vocalised your Vulnerable Child mode, I would say . . . why doesn’t anyone like me?
                 I wish people were kind to me; I just want someone to like me being around, to notice
                 me. I feel really lonely sometimes.
              The therapist asks the client to take their place in the Vulnerable Child chair (which has been
              ‘infected’ by emotion). The therapist can then encourage the client to express and build upon
              notions laid out by the therapist. In this case, the therapist names potential core feelings and
              sentiments linked to the case. Doing so provides the client with an opportunity to express
              such feelings that may be typically blocked or avoided.



          Chairwork and the Management of Critic Modes. A central aim of schema therapy is to
          provide corrective emotional experiences. Chairwork can oﬀer the therapist a method to
          generate experiences that combat old dysfunctional rules and internalised messages from
          the past. The client can experience someone standing up for them and disagreeing with
          noxious and demanding sentiments. As noted in Chapters 3 and 4, Critic modes are
          conceptualised and managed in varying ways. In chairwork exercises, the therapist needs
          to adapt their responses based on the type of mode.
           a. Punitive Critic mode: The therapist aims to defend and stand up for the client in
              chairwork. When confronting Punitive modes in chairwork, the therapist’s tone is
              generally deﬁant, stating that the punitive and blaming notions and rules are
              wrong. For example, Therapist: [to the empty Punitive Critic chair] ‘I don’t agree
              with you, I don’t care what you say; it’s wrong, you’re not good for her, and I’ve
              had enough of it.’ Box 8.14 provides a case example of the use of chairwork with
              a Punitive Critic mode
          b) Demanding Critic mode: The therapist does not generally take an adversarial stance in
              interactions with this mode via chair work. In contrast, the therapist appeals to and
              reasons with the mode that is pressuring and demanding. For example, Therapist: [to the
              empty Demanding Critic chair] ‘Look, I know you have good intentions, but if she keeps
              listening to you, she will always be unhappy, is that what you want?’
          c) Guilt-Inducing Critic mode: The therapist aims to be a strong advocate for the client’s
              needs. The therapist appeals for the client’s needs and rights, taking an unwavering
              stance. Therapist: [to the empty Guilt-Inducing Critic chair] ‘Nikki is allowed to have
              some time to herself. It’s normal for her to have an opinion. You put all this
              responsibility on her – it’s too much! I want you to back oﬀ and give her some space.’




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques             171



             Box 8.14 Case Example: Chairwork with a Punitive Critic Mode
             THERAPIST: Listening to you, it sounds like you’re looking at yourself [gesturing to a place
                diagonally from the client] not with compassion, but with anger and criticism. Is that true?
             CLIENT: But it’s true, I mess everything up!
             THERAPIST: Exactly, that’s what I notice. It’s like you’re looking at yourself being completely
                convinced that you’re a loser. If that punitive side is so active, let’s literally give it a place
                in this room and hear what it has to say.
                    Come over here and sit in this chair [Therapist pulls up a chair]. Now be that critical
                voice, that punitive side. And I want you to look at [clients’s name and pointing to the
                original chair] from this experience and tell me what you have to say about him.
                It can be useful for the therapist to look at the original, empty chair too, not to draw the
             clients’s attention to the interaction with the therapist but to focus more on the dynamic of self-
             criticism. Many clients do not ﬁnd it diﬃcult to come up with a list of criticisms of themselves.
             The therapist then wants to know what the substantive criticism is so they can provide
             substantive counter-arguments. It is, however, not advisable for the client to berate them-
             selves with critiques. After several pieces of criticism, the therapist stops the client and asks
             them to return to the original chair.
             THERAPIST: OK, OK, I’m going to interrupt you. You’re doing ﬁne, but I’d like to ask you to
                come and sit beside me. But do bear in mind that when you get up from that chair, I’d
                like you to leave behind the angry, critical voice. This [gesturing at the chair of the
                punitive side] is where you can express all that criticism, but when you get up, you leave
                the punitive voice superglued to that chair.
             THERAPIST: [Leaning towards the client and talking in a soft tone, gesturing to that other, empty
                chair] When I hear the criticism from that corner, it’s pretty harsh. It’s not just the words
                but the tone in which they are said. It sounds a bit like dad speaking to you. When I hear
                this criticism, in that tone, I wonder how you feel when this is being said?
             CLIENT: I don’t know . . . rotten . . . I think sad.
             THERAPIST: I don’t agree with that punishing voice, but I know it’s normal for you to speak to
                yourself that way. I know how much criticism you had growing up, and when I imagine
                you as a child with your dad speaking to you harshly, it makes me angry. I feel a strong
                urge to say [facing the empty punitive chair and speaking in a determined and uncom-
                promising tone] ‘Stop! Stop talking to [name of the client] like that. Stop it. What you’re
                saying doesn’t make any sense, and you’re wrong.’
             THERAPIST: [softly to the client next to him] How do you feel when you hear me say this, that
                there’s nothing wrong with you [pointing to the critic side], that you’re not the problem
                here, but he is?
               Clients regularly answer that they agree with the punitive side. This response is understand-
             able because they’re so used to hearing and believing punitive messages. However, it is
             important to note that the therapist didn’t ask if the client believed the punitive messages, but
             how it felt to have someone stand up for them.
             CLIENT: Well, it’s nice of you, but let’s face it, I’m a loser.
             THERAPIST: OK, but now I hear you say that you believe and agree with that punitive voice.
                But to be honest, that’s not what I was asking you. I was asking how it felt when I stood
                up for you. What was it like?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          172           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




              CLIENT: Well, it was nice to hear, of course.
              THERAPIST: That’s good to hear! And how does he [gesturing to the punitive side] respond to
                 what I’m saying? Is he behaving?
              CLIENT: That punitive side? No, he really wouldn’t let you speak to me like that and would
                 just get angry at you.
                 In some cases, the critic mode can be strong and dominant. However, the therapist seeks to
              win the exchange and provide a corrective experience: one of reattribution and someone
              standing up to the critical sentiment. In such cases, the therapist can then move to take away
              the chair and dramatically reposition it from the exchange.

              THERAPIST: Oh, he’s getting angrier? Then he should get out of here! [The therapist stands up,
                 diagonally in front of the client, facing the empty chair of the punitive side. He stands here brieﬂy
                 and once again addresses the punitive side in a strong, uncompromising tone.] ‘I’ve had it up to
                 here with you. I won’t stand by and watch how you talk to [name of the client] like that! She’s
                 not the problem. You are!’ [Turns to the client and says softly] You’re not the problem, they are
                 [pointing at the punitive side]. [Now again facing the punitive side, in a strict voice] ‘I want you
                 to leave now’ [points to the door, picks up the chair, opens the door, removes the chair and
                 closes the door. Sits back down beside the client]. This is a safe place for you, where there is care
                 and support, not those old punitive messages that don’t make any sense. How do you feel
                 now that the punitive side is gone?
                 What if …?
                 What if the client keeps emphasising that the Punitive Critic cannot be dismissed?
                 On some occasions, the client can be very ‘fused’ with the critic mode. Linking these
              punitive or demanding messages to historical ﬁgures can assist the client in gaining more
              insight into the origins of such rules and messages. Naming the Critic as the historical ﬁgure
              that initiated the message can be helpful. For example, ‘Your Father, together with those
              bullies from primary school, are sitting in the chair, and they’re saying all those bad things
              about you again.’



          Middle Phase
          In the initial phase of treatment, the therapist provides a model of the Healthy Adult mode.
          In later stages of treatment, the therapist takes a receding role in mode work with chairs.
          Instead, the client is encouraged to access their own Healthy Adult mode and manage their
          problematic modes. Box 8.15 outlines a ﬁve-step chairwork exercise for strengthening the
          Healthy Adult mode.

          Chairwork in the Final Phases
          The ﬁnal phase aims to further strengthen the Healthy Adult part of the client (see
          Table 8.2). In the ﬁnal stage of chairwork, the therapist acts out the client’s problematic
          modes (e.g., Protector, Critic modes). The client practices their Healthy Adult responses in
          direct dialogues with the therapist, increasing the challenge for the client and building their
          conﬁdence to face their modes alone once therapy is concluded.
              The therapist can also help coach the client to refute sentiments as in Box 8.16. Several
          tips for overcoming common roadbloacks to chairwork are outlined in Box 8.17.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   173




         Cartoon 8.2 Chairwork with the Punitive Critic


         Other Experiential and Emotion-Focused Techniques
         Historical Role-Play
         Therapists can use role-play to come to new interpretations and insights. In a role-play
         session, meaningful situations from the past or present are re-enacted. When situations


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          174           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




          Cartoon 8.2 (cont.)



          from the past are re-enacted, this is referred to as a historical role-play. Re-enacting an
          historically signiﬁcant situation can have various objectives:
          • To identify relevant schemas and their historical roots
          • To gain greater insight into the interaction patterns between the client and attachment
              ﬁgures
          • To provide an opportunity to try out new behaviour




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   175




         Cartoon 8.2 (cont.)


             In several respects, historical role-play resembles imagery rescripting. In both tech-
         niques, meaningful situations from the past are brought to life and, in doing so, oﬀer insight
         into the meaning of those events. In addition, both techniques also oﬀer an opportunity to
         rewrite these events and thereby generate corrective emotional experiences in the process.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          176           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.15 ‘A Five-Step Chairwork Exercise’ for Strengthening the Healthy Adult Mode

              The following exercise can assist the client to strengthen their Healthy Adult mode. It involves
              rehearsing facilitative statements in three key domains when facing events that would usually
              trigger Critic, child, and maladaptive coping modes:
              1. Compassion to self and others: explicitly acknowledging, understanding, and accepting
                 emotions evoked from problematic situations and adopting an attitude of willingness to
                 alleviate them.
              2. Cognitive restructuring: correcting old beliefs from the protector and critical modes and
                 realistically approaching the challenging situation.
              3. Behaviour modiﬁcation: rather than reverting to old coping-mode-induced behavioural
                 patterns, the Healthy Adult mode tries to handle the problematic situation and maintain
                 awareness of the self’s basic needs.

              This chairwork exercise can help the client internalise the three components of responding to
              schema and mode triggers. Instead of each chair representing a separate mode, a chair now
              represents a particular step in the Healthy Adult response to triggers.

              Step 1: Exploration of the Problematic Situation
              The therapist and client identify a problematic situation that recently occurred or look ahead
              towards a potentially challenging situation in the future. The therapist can help identify
              emotional experiences, critical or demanding mode cognitions, and schema/mode-driven
              behavioural responses (that either did occur [for past events] or might occur [in future events]).


              Step 2: Place Three Chairs Opposite the client
              The therapist explains that this situation is used to practise the three steps of the Healthy
              Adult. The three chairs are placed and named as the three steps of the Healthy Adult.

              Step 3: Allocate a Chair for Compassion
              In this chair, the client is initially asked to embody their Healthy Adult side. A short imagery
              exercise can assist them in accessing compassionate sentiments whereby the client visualises
              their Healthy Adult mode. The therapist can then coach the client in expressing explicit
              compassion and understanding towards the chair where the client was initially seated.
                 The therapist coaches the client to express out loud their understanding of the client’s
              diﬃculties and challenges and their compassion towards the client.
              THERAPIST: So, now be that Healthy Adult and look back on that situation you were just
                 talking about (gesturing to the original empty chair, naming the client). I think we can
                 easily understand why he felt so sad and alone in that situation, right? Could you
                 express that out loud: ‘Of course you feel so alone and sad because . . .’

              Step 4: Allocate Chair for Cognitive Restructuring
              In this chair, the critical or coping mode is identiﬁed. The therapist and client discuss how to
              counter distorted and unhelpful assumptions. Following this, the therapist coaches the client to
              contradict the punishing or coping mode. The therapist may encourage the client to repeat
              statements with a ﬁrmer tone or support them by adopting more assertive postures or gestures.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques    177




             CLIENT: ‘Well, I really did my best, and I don’t know how to better prepare myself for that
                situation.’
             THERAPIST: So, what do you think about the accusation that you should not have made
                mistakes?
             CLIENT: It’s actually not true.
             THERAPIST: Can you say that directly to that punitive side? That you disagree with him?
             CLIENT: [turns to the imaginary punitive side] ‘Well, what you’re saying is not true.’
             THERAPIST: Say it louder, 20 per cent louder.
             CLIENT: ‘What you’re saying is not true!’
             THERAPIST: Great! How does it feel to say that?
             CLIENT: Yeah, good. Powerful, better.

             Step 5: Allocate a Chair for Behaviour Modiﬁcation
             In this chair, the therapist and the client discuss a healthy way of responding to the problem-
             atic situation. The best solution is the one that best meets the relevant core emotional needs
             of the client. At the same time, the therapist cautions that, in ﬁnding a solution, compromises
             will always need to be made, and situations can never be ideal.
             THERAPIST: If there’s one thing that’s important for you to keep an eye on, what is it?
             CLIENT: [Seated in the Behaviour Modiﬁcation chair, embodying the Healthy Adult’s response]
                Well . . . I’m allowed to feel OK about myself, and I don’t have to immediately withdraw
                when I start feeling nauseous.
             THERAPIST: Exactly! So, what’s the best way of dealing with this situation without having to
                withdraw when you feel nauseous? Can you say that to him: ‘What you have to do now
                is . . .’ What would you advise him to do?

             Step 6: Return to the Initial Chair Switching Perspective
             As a ﬁnal step, the client may return to the original chair (where they started the exercise),
             after which the therapist can summarise and reﬂect on the previous sentiments from the
             three?! elements of the Healthy Adult. As a result, the client can receive messages instead of
             expressing them, intensifying the experience.




             Table 8.2 Chairwork to develop Healthy Adult in various treatment phases

             Initial phase
             • Stand up with the client and look at the chairs together
             Middle phase
             • Have the client sit in the therapist’s chair and coach in expressing compassion
             • Arrange a separate chair for the Healthy Adult side of the client with a chair for the
                  Vulnerable Child between the client and the therapist
             • Use three separate chairs to practise the three components of the Healthy Adult side
             Final phase
             • The therapist sits in the chair of the Protector or Critic mode and the client responds to the
                 sentiments of the problematic modes



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          178           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.16 Example of Therapist Coaching Client to Refute Critic mode Messages
              THERAPIST: We have another ten sessions left. I suggest that we use the ﬁnal sessions to
                 prepare you more for the diﬃcult moments you’re bound to encounter in the future.
              CLIENT: Yes, alright.
              THERAPIST: Let’s use the chairs again but in a slightly diﬀerent way.
              CLIENT: Oh . . .?
              THERAPIST: Yes, now I realise that there will be many situations in which your Protector will
                 take over, and that means that at that moment, you may believe that it’s better to
                 withdraw. Let’s prepare for those situations, in which I will now play your Protector
                 mode.
              CLIENT: Oh?
              THERAPIST: I would like you to contradict my arguments from the chair of the Healthy Adult.
                 But don’t worry – if it’s tricky I’ll help you. You don’t have to do it all on your own yet.
                 We’re just practising how to do it in the future.



              Box 8.17 Chairwork Tips


              What Chair Goes Where?
              Chairwork is a rich methodology, and therapists can apply it in many diﬀerent ways. There are
              no exact rules for using this technique, only the guiding principle to make it an emotionally
              oriented approach. Each chair represents a diﬀerent side of the client, almost as if there were
              multiple people in the room.
                 There are various options as to who is being addressed in the original chair. Some therapists
              opt to approach this chair as the Healthy Adult, the client who came to therapy, with
              reﬂections being made towards the other modes from this location. Other therapists choose
              to address the more emotional part of the client in the original chair.

              What If the Client Doesn’t Want to Move?
              If the client doesn’t want to move or is hesitant, you can still proceed with mode work and
              bypass the client’s resistance. Put the part that ‘doesn’t want to move’ (typically a Coping
              mode or Angry Child mode) into a chair. Here, the therapist can respond to the mode within
              the empty chair without the client moving.

              I’m Not Sure If My Client Will ‘Buy Into’ Chairwork
              Clients can be cynical or pessimistic about doing chairwork. Typically, this is a way to avoid
              doing the exercise and throw the therapist oﬀ track. However, clients typically seek and respect
              a therapist who is conﬁdent in their skills and suggestions: if a client isn’t buying a chairwork
              technique, back yourself and your suggestions.

              THERAPIST: Yes, I know, I’m talking to a chair, you can laugh at me, but I’m serious. This
                 technique can be really helpful. I would prefer to do something helpful than just to
                 avoid it because it might look silly to you.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques   179




             What Can I Do If the Client Flips Modes During a Chair Work Exercise?
             If a client ﬂips to a new mode, you can do several things. First, you can acknowledge the mode
             activation and use hand gesturing. For example, ‘It sounds like the Critic is showing up
             [pointing to the corner of the room]. She can stay out of this exchange. Come back to that
             side of you that is hurting.’ Alternatively, the therapist may want to allocate another chair to
             represent the new mode and continue with a dialogue with this mode.

             How Many Chairs Do I Need? I Have a Small Oﬃce!
             Keep things simple. Many therapists typically work with one mode at a time. In this case, you
             will only need one chair to base your mode work.




             Box 8.18 Example of a Situation Suitable for Historical Role-Play

             Sandra felt rejected by her friend when she told them about her relationship problems and
             they didn’t respond to what she said. Sandra felt sad and alone, didn’t say much more and left
             as soon as possible. The therapist recognises that this behaviour is emblematic of the pattern
             of avoidance which the therapy has previously focused on, and therefore suggests that
             another situation be examined more closely.




         The physical interaction with another person in a historical role-play can increase the
         vividness and authenticity of the experience.
             The re-enactment of meaningful events makes historical role-play inappropriate for
         situations in which the basic need of safety was missing. Memories involving verbal,
         physical, or sexual violence are therefore not suitable for this technique. However, historical
         role-play lends itself particularly well to all other situations.
             The speciﬁc impetus in the session for considering historical role-play could be that the
         client talks about a strong emotional or behavioural response which is an illustration of the
         patterns that the therapy focuses on. For example, the client could talk about a situation in
         which avoidance, surrender, and/or overcompensation are at play. Or, the client may talk
         about a recent situation in which they felt ignored, attacked, or excluded (see Box 8.18).
             If the therapist and the client agree that this situation is worth examining, a signiﬁcant
         situation from the past is identiﬁed that may be related to this recent event. When the
         therapy is still in its initial phase, a diagnostic imagery exercise can be conducted to gain
         insight into this historical experience (see Box 8.19). When there is already greater insight
         into the historical roots of the patterns, the therapist and client can discuss together which of
         these historical events will be explored in more depth.
             Now that a historical event has been selected, this situation can then be re-enacted. The
         re-enactment of this event takes place in a diﬀerent part of the room than the chairs where
         the conversation has taken place so far. A clear distinction between the area in which the
         past is staged and another spot in the room in which that situation is reﬂected on contributes
         to the vividness and authenticity of the historical event.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          180           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 8.19 Example of Imaginal Assessment Linking Recent Situation to Historical Event

              The therapist asks whether the client has any idea as to how this withdrawal behaviour as
              a reaction came about in her life. The therapy is still in its early stages and the client doesn’t
              have a clue how this pattern evolved. At this point, the therapist asks if the client would like to
              close her eyes and allow an image of the situation with the friend to form in her mind.
              THERAPIST: If you think back to the situation with that friend, and then in particular, the
                 moment that you felt genuinely aﬀected by it, what can you see now?
              CLIENT: That moment when she looks away a bit bored.
              THERAPIST: Describe what you can literally see now.
              CLIENT: I’ve just told her that Tom [my boyfriend] and I have been having a lot of arguments
                 lately and she doesn’t say anything and she looks away.
              THERAPIST: How do you feel right now when you see this now?
              CLIENT: As if I’m a burden to her . . . Sad . . .
              THERAPIST: Concentrate brieﬂy on that feeling, that sadness, believing that you are a burden
                 to the other person . . . Hold on to that feeling but allow the image to fade away . . . Is
                 this a familiar feeling for you?
                 [Client nods.]
              THERAPIST: Then concentrate on this feeling and just allow images to emerge from your past,
                 images of situations which, in one way or the other, aﬀect this feeling of being a burden
                 to the other person . . . what can you see now?
              CLIENT: . . . My mother . . . In the kitchen and I am just coming in from school . . . I want to tell
                 her about my day but she is tired, and she waves me away . . .



             Historical role-play has three phases:
          1. The original event is re-enacted as realistically as possible and the client plays herself as
             a child (see Box 8.20).
          2. Historical role-play featuring role reversals where the client now plays the role of the
             other person and the therapist interprets the role of the client as a child (see Box 8.21).
          3. Trying out new behaviour in a last role-play wherein the client tries out new, schema-
             breaking behaviour (see Box 8.22).

          Therapeutic Letter Writing
          Therapeutic letter writing and journaling can be used as a powerful way to develop compas-
          sion, empower, motivate, grieve, and assign responsibility [22]. In schema therapy, the
          therapist may encourage the client to write an unsent letter to caregivers involved in the
          development of EMS. Typically, the therapist encourages the client to write from their Healthy
          Adult mode on behalf of their child self. In contrast, the client may also write to various modes
          that are a part of the conceptualisation. For example, the client may write a letter from their
          Healthy Adult mode to their Vulnerable Child mode expressing care and compassion, or from
          their Healthy Adult mode to a coping mode highlighting the lack of future reliance on this
          mode. The therapist can then ask the client to read aloud the passage in session, enhancing the
          experiential aspects of the task. The therapist can enhance healthy emotional responses via



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                       Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques           181



             Box 8.20 Example of Historical Role-Play – Step 1: Re-Enactment of Original Event
             THERAPIST: Good, this has evidently been a signiﬁcant event for you. In order to gain a good
                understanding of what exactly you have learned there, I want to suggest re-enacting
                this situation as if it is taking place again. I also want to ask you to play yourself as
                a young girl and then I’ll play your mother. Can you explain to me once more what
                exactly she is saying in that situation, as well as how she is saying it?
               [The client describes her mother’s behaviour as speciﬁcally and realistically as possible so that
             the therapist knows how to interpret this role.]

             THERAPIST: We are going to re-enact this situation in a moment. So, I would ask you to try to
                put yourself in the shoes of the girl you were in this situation as best as you can. How old
                are you?
             CLIENT: . . . I don’t know . . . Eight years old, maybe?
             THERAPIST: Otherwise just close your eyes for a moment . . . And just imagine that girl in this
                situation . . . Can you see her?
             CLIENT: Yes . . . I believe I can . . .
             THERAPIST: Could you describe her to me, so that I can see her too?
             CLIENT: She’s little, she’s wearing a dress and has her hair hanging in two pigtails on each
                side of her head . . . She is standing close to her mother but her mother is busy doing the
                dishes . . .
             THERAPIST: Now just be that little girl, put yourself in her shoes . . . You are now standing next
                to your mother and she is busy washing dishes . . . When you’re ready, open your eyes . . .
                [Client opens her eyes and the role-play begins.]
             Debrieﬁng. The ﬁrst question asked about the role-play is whether this situation resembled
             how the client remembers it. The role-play may have taken a diﬀerent form than the client
             remembers and may need to be re-enacted in a slightly revised manner. Afterwards, the
             meaningful learning experiences related to the self-image and the image of the others are
             identiﬁed and scored on a credibility scale.



             Box 8.21 Example of Historical role-play – Step 2: Role Reversals
             THERAPIST: Let’s re-enact this situation again to make sure that we have a good overview of
                everything. But I want to suggest that I play the role of you as a child and you therefore
                play the role of your mother. So, put yourself in your mother’s shoes as best you can.
                What did her life look like back then?
             CLIENT: Well . . . she was a housewife, and her husband, my father, was often absent because
                he worked so hard. I believe my father was experiencing problems at work during that
                period – the threat of redundancy or something like that . . . So, I think they were
                worrying about that . . .
             THERAPIST: Can you close your eyes for a moment? Now try to picture your mother, as you see
                her standing in front of you in that situation . . . Just be her, put yourself in her shoes . . .
                You are married, a housewife, your husband works hard, there are worries about his
                work . . . When you’re ready, you can open your eyes and we will begin . . .




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          182           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



                 [The client opens her eyes and the situation is re-enacted again.]
              Debrieﬁng: During the debrieﬁng, the therapist gives feedback from the role as a child as to
              how the mother’s behaviour came across. The fact that the therapist also experiences being
              ignored due to the mother’s behaviour can help the client reattribute responsibility for their
              feelings of being neglected away from their own defectiveness and towards the mother’s
              actions. The role reversal can prompt a shift in perspective that can lead to new insights. For
              example, the client may discover that the father was mainly preoccupied with his own problems
              and not necessarily judging the client in a negative way. Alternatively, the client may come to
              the realisation that the behaviour of the mother is more likely to stem from a sense of
              powerlessness than any intentional criticism of the client. On the other hand, a change in
              perception may not occur at all. For example, it can happen that, after the second role-play, the
              client has become even more convinced of the original assumption about the other person.
              Indeed, an often-seen change is that the client comes to the realisation that the problem did
              not so much lie with the client as with the other person, whether that was intentional or not.



              Box 8.22 Historical role-play – Step 3: Trying out Schema-Breaking Behaviour

              This last part of the technique is analogous to the rescripting phase of imagery
              rescripting. The aim of this phase is to generate a corrective emotional experience.
              The client can experience what it is like to express his or her opinion, to set a boundary,
              or to demand respect. Just as is the case with imagination exercises, this experience is
              not expected to lead directly to a change in behaviour in their present-day life. And, just
              like imagery exercises, nor is it the aim to change the antagonist, but mainly to stand up
              for your own basic needs.
              THERAPIST: So, we now have a better understanding of how that feeling of ‘not
                 mattering’ has come about in your life. These situations that we are now re-
                 enacting have contributed to this. At the same time, we have also come to
                 understand more clearly that it is not so much you that is the problem in this
                 but that your mother was not in a position to oﬀer you the time and attention
                 that you needed. In that situation, you had no choice but to withdraw because,
                 after all, you were still only a child. As a child, that was how you had to survive
                 and I am pleased that you were able to. But now you are no longer a child, and
                 you have learned a lot over the years, just like in the therapy sessions with me. If
                 you now look back at that situation with all the knowledge you now have and
                 imagine that you could then go back to that time, knowing everything you know
                 now, what would you want to say to your mother?
              CLIENT: . . . Well . . . Simply that she’s my mother and that she should just give her child a bit
                 of attention.
              THERAPIST: That sounds very good! Once again, as a child you were unable to say that, but as
                 an adult you can . . . Shall we re-enact the situation again, but now you stand up for
                 what you need, tell her what you would like to say? Just so you can experience what it’s
                 like to stand up for your own needs?
                The situation is then re-enacted, but the client now includes the adult insights and
              resolutions in the role-play. At that moment when the client stands up for her needs, the
              therapist will have to decide how the mother would respond in this new situation. In




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Intervention Strategies 3: Experiential Techniques           183




             some cases, it is conceivable and credible that the mother would respond in a healthy
             way and the therapist can play this. In many other situations, however, it is really not
             plausible that the parent would be able to respond in a healthy manner. The therapist
             can then choose to brieﬂy interrupt the role-play, explaining that they don’t properly
             understand how the parent would have responded but that they are able to show how
             they, as a parent, would respond in such a situation. This is how the therapist models
             a response that is considered good enough from a loved one.
                [The client just said to her mother that she ﬁnds it unacceptable that she is not paying any
             attention to her child. She has made that known in a powerful and clear manner.]

             THERAPIST: Ok, I just want to stop here for a moment because I honestly don’t know how your
                mother would respond to what you are saying now. So, I am not able to play her
                properly in this new situation. But I can tell you how I as a parent would respond if you
                were to say something like that to me. As a father I would say: ‘There, there kiddo, it’s
                great that you’re telling me this! I’m so happy you told me because the last thing I would
                want is for you to feel ignored! I’m really happy to hear that you’ve had a good day.’ And
                then I’d make a cup of tea and sit down to hear all about what you’ve done today. How
                does that feel when you hear that?
             Debrieﬁng. In the debrieﬁng, the experience of this schema-breaking behaviour is given
             careful consideration: How did it feel for the client to express their opinion? Where in
             particular do they feel that in their body? What did they like most about it? This explicit
             attention to the corrective emotional experience helps with the internalisation of it. The
             implications of this experience for current situations in the client’s life can also be considered:
             What would it be like to speak up for her own needs more often in present-day situations?



         blending the technique with a chairwork technique. For example, the therapist may encourage
         the client to imagine the caregiver linked to adverse childhood experiences in an empty chair,
         with the client reading out the written material to the empty chair.

         Concluding Remarks
         Experiential techniques are essential methods for eﬀecting change in schema therapy. The
         approaches allow for new, healing, corrective experiences to occur for the client.
         Furthermore, the client can receive modelling from the therapist on how to understand
         and meet core emotional needs. Often, emotional techniques are avoided by therapists
         learning the schema therapy model, typically because they lack conﬁdence in using the
         interventions and fear making things ‘worse’. It is essential for the schema therapist to learn
         how to use emotion-focused exercises in ways that are helpful and tolerable for the client.
         Such techniques can result in powerful therapeutic changes for the client and synergs with
         the other important aspects of treatment (e.g., cognitive, behavioural, limited reparenting).

         References
         1. Patterson C, Alexander F, French T.                           2. Lang P. Imagery in therapy: An information
            Psychoanalytic therapy. Journal of Social                        processing analysis of fear. Behavior
            Psychology. 1948;28(1):179.                                      Therapy. 1977;8(5):862–86.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          184           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



            3. Epstein S. Cognitive-experiential theory: An                      randomised clinical trial. The British
               integrative theory of personality. Oxford                         Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;217(5):609–15.
               University Press; 2014.                                     13. Louis J, Wood A, Lockwood G.
            4. Teasdale J. Clinically relevant theory:                         Psychometric validation of the Young
               Integrating clinical insight with cognitive                     Parenting Inventory-Revised (YPI-R2):
               science. In Salkovskis P, ed. Frontiers of                      Replication and extension of a commonly
               cognitive therapy. The Guilford Press; 1996.                    used parenting scale in Schema Therapy
               pp. 26–47.                                                      (ST) research and practice. PloS One.
            5. Aafjes-van Doorn K, Barber JP. Systematic                       2018;13(11):e0205605.
               review of in-session aﬀect experience in                    14. De Jongh A, ten Broeke E, Meijer S. Two
               cognitive behavioral therapy for                                method approach: A case
               depression. Cognitive Therapy and                               conceptualization model in the context of
               Research. 2017;41(6):807–28.                                    EMDR. Journal of EMDR Practice and
            6. Young J. Cognitive therapy for                                  Research. 2010;4(1):12.
               personality disorders: A schema focused                     15. Arntz A. Imagery rescripting as
               approach. Professional Resource Press;                          a therapeutic technique: Review of clinical
               1999.                                                           trials, basic studies, and research agenda.
                                                                               Journal of Experimental Psychopathology.
            7. Simpson S, Arntz A. Core principles of
                                                                               2012;3(2):189–208.
               imagery. In: Heath G, Startup H, eds.
               Creative methods in schema therapy.                         16. Farrell J, Reiss N, Shaw I. The schema
               Routledge; 2020. pp. 93–107.                                    therapy clinician’s guide: A complete
                                                                               resource for building and delivering
            8. Utay J, Miller M. Guided imagery as an                          individual, group and integrated schema
               eﬀective therapeutic technique: A brief                         mode treatment programs. John Wiley &
               review of its history and eﬃcacy research.                      Sons; 2014.
               Journal of Instructional Psychology. 2006;33
               (1):40–43.                                                  17. Dibbets P, Arntz A. Imagery rescripting: Is
                                                                               incorporation of the most aversive scenes
            9. Najavits L. Seeking safety: A treatment                         necessary? Memory. 2016;24(5):683–95.
               manual for PTSD and substance abuse.
               Guilford Press; 2002                                        18. Polster E, Polster M. Gestalt therapy
                                                                               integrated. Brunner; 1974.
          10. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema
              therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                    19. Kellogg S. Transformational chairwork:
              Press; 2003.                                                     Using psychotherapeutic dialogues in clinical
                                                                               practice. Rowman & Littleﬁeld; 2014.
          11. Weertman A, Arntz A. Eﬀectiveness of
              treatment of childhood memories in                           20. Pugh M. Cognitive behavioural chairwork:
              cognitive therapy for personality disorders:                     Distinctive features. Routledge; 2019.
              A controlled study contrasting methods                       21. Roediger E, Stevens BA, Brockman R.
              focusing on the present and methods                              Contextual schema therapy: An integrative
              focusing on childhood memories. Behaviour                        approach to personality disorders, emotional
              Research and Therapy. 2007;45(9):2133–43.                        dysregulation, and interpersonal
          12. De Haan K, Lee C, Fassbinder E, et al.                           functioning. New Harbinger Publications;
              Imagery rescripting and eye movement                             2018.
              desensitisation and reprocessing as                          22. Pennebaker J, Evans J. Expressive writing:
              treatment for adults with post-traumatic                         Words that heal. Idyll Arbor. Inc,
              stress disorder from childhood trauma:                           Enumclaw; 2014.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
               Chapter
                                    Intervention Strategies

                      9             for Schema Healing 4
                                    Behavioural Pattern-Breaking Techniques

         Introduction
         Behavioural pattern-breaking is arguably the most important phase of schema therapy.
         Whilst some behavioural changes may take place spontaneously alongside positive shifts in
         cognition and emotion, the last phase of therapy is dedicated to addressing the schema-
         driven behaviours that contribute to the perpetuation of presenting issues, and which often
         serve to block the client’s capacity to get their needs met in healthy ways. In this chapter, we
         discuss how schema therapists’ attention to client behaviours shifts across the course of
         treatment, how they prioritise which behaviours to address and which to leave, and how
         they employ schema therapy interventions to address clients’ behaviour at diﬀerent stages of
         treatment.

         Behaviour Changes During Early Phase of Therapy
         In the early stages of therapy, the schema therapist emphasises forming an attuned thera-
         peutic connection with the client to establish trust and rapport. Often, schema therapists are
         more tolerant of minor transgressions or therapy-interfering behaviours during this stage,
         whilst the client becomes accustomed to the therapeutic process. This is especially the case
         when working with clients with BPD traits as they are expected to have a reduced capacity to
         understand the boundaries of a healthy relationship and to manage their impulses and
         coping behaviours at the start of treatment.

         Behaviour Change Interventions to Address Therapy-Interfering
         Behaviours
         Although the focus on behavioural pattern-breaking largely takes place during the second
         half of therapy, it is often necessary to start to incorporate some speciﬁc behaviour changes
         during the earlier phases. Early in therapy, behaviour pattern-breaking may be required to
         reduce avoidant coping that either blocks attendance or prevents the client from engaging
         fully in sessions. During this phase, empathic confrontation may also be used to confront
         other overcompensatory therapy-interfering behaviours. The limited reparenting relation-
         ship, formed at the beginning of therapy, is then used to leverage and push for behaviour
         change throughout the subsequent phases. Many therapists wait too long before confront-
         ing therapy-interfering behaviours, such that these become the established norm, making it
         increasingly diﬃcult to raise them as problems. This can lead to ruptures in the therapy
         relationship due to unexpressed resentment on the therapist’s part. In the following
         sections, we discuss several common therapy-interfering issues that might come up in the
                                                                                                     185


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          186           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          early phases of treatment that would likely require an initial focus in terms of behaviour
          change.
          1. Maintaining Regular Session Attendance. Behavioural change interventions that may
          need to take place in the earlier phases of therapy may address issues such as late cancella-
          tions and non-attendance of sessions, use of addictive substances that aﬀect the client’s
          engagement in therapy sessions, and other compulsive or avoidant behaviours that might
          lead to decreased eﬃcacy of the session (e.g., co-rumination). Therapy-interfering behav-
          iours often mirror the kind of problems clients experience in daily life, and thus become
          a useful initial target in therapy. To adequately address the entrenched schema-driven
          patterns characteristic of personality disorders and other severe acute psychological diﬃ-
          culties, schema therapy sessions must take place regularly – and ideally, in the initial phases,
          at least weekly. For those attending both group and individual sessions this can be managed
          relatively easily. For clients with an Abandonment schema, sessions that are too infrequent
          or spaced out will lead to ongoing activation of the Abandoned and Angry Child modes,
          with associated acting out or detached coping behaviours. For those with avoidant person-
          ality traits, an infrequent session schedule is likely to reinforce avoidance associated with the
          Defectiveness, Emotional Deprivation, and Social Isolation schemas, in which the client
          keeps the therapist at a distance, thereby reducing the opportunity to challenge fears that
          vulnerability and interpersonal connection will lead to rejection.
          2. Maintaining Boundaries Linked to Entitled or Demanding Behaviours. Clients with
          narcissistic or overcompensatory traits may also beneﬁt from early challenges to therapy-
          interfering behaviours such as not paying for sessions or acting entitled to the therapist’s
          time (e.g., demanding additional time when they are late for an appointment), acting in
          a domineering or aggressive manner, or other aggrandising behaviours which prevent them
          from engaging in experiential therapeutic work. The fee-for-service arrangement that
          characterises much of our therapy work can trigger issues to do with basic respect and
          boundaries that may reﬂect the client’s wider problems. Everyday ﬁnancial transactions can
          often activate a kind of ‘master–slave’ expectation from the client that needs addressing
          early. If you work in a setting that is not fee-for-service, self-aggrandising may manifest
          more as a devaluing of your time – for example, an attitude of ‘it’s free anyway, isn’t it?’
              Box 9.1 provides an example of narcissistic behaviours presenting early in therapy. In
          this vignette, Fern’s behaviour was primarily linked to an Entitlement/Grandiosity schema.
          She had learned that she came from a family with special status and privileges and that she
          should not have to follow the same rules as others. Furthermore, she struggled to take
          responsibility for the eﬀects of her behaviour on others, instead perceiving herself to be the
          victim of their lack of understanding of her plight. The origins and unmet needs linked to
          this therapy-interfering behaviour were a lack of limit setting in childhood, whereby she did
          not have an opportunity to learn the basic principles of reciprocity. These grandiose-entitled
          behaviours were further modelled and normalised by her narcissistic mother. Consequently,
          she also developed an Emotional Deprivation schema through consistent emotional neglect
          and invalidation. She had learned to hide her vulnerability and presented in therapy either
          in a Self-Aggrandiser or Victim/Self-Pity mode. Unbeknownst to her, these entitled coping
          behaviours actively sabotaged her relationships outside of therapy, causing others to keep
          her at a distance and ultimately preventing her from getting her needs for genuine connec-
          tion and support met. At this early stage of therapy, it was important for the therapist to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking         187



             Box 9.1 Example of Narcissistic Behaviours Early in Therapy

             Fern was a 42-year-old woman with a history of interpersonal diﬃculties. Her husband was
             threatening divorce because of her highly critical and demanding interpersonal style.
             However, during the ﬁrst sessions she complained that he was unsupportive and inadequate
             as a partner. She was also on poor terms with her two adult children, but she viewed this as
             mostly due to their lack of cooperation and attentiveness to her stress levels. Behavioural
             patterns characteristic of narcissistic traits emerged relatively early in the therapy. She would
             commit to paying for sessions, then ‘forget’ to bring her credit card or default on paying and
             fail to reply to messages about payment after each session. Although she was given the
             beneﬁt of the doubt on the ﬁrst couple of occasions, this behaviour continued intermittently.
             When questioned about this, she protested that her husband was withholding funds, whilst
             indicating that she expected the fees to be waived, claiming that others (such as her GP) had
             taken pity on her and recognised her ‘special’ circumstances. She then began to take phone
             calls during sessions, on each occasion stating ‘This is very important, I have to take this’. These
             conversations would continue for several minutes, and, on one occasion, even beyond the
             ﬁnishing time for her session.




                                                                          Illustration 9.1 Self-Aggrandiser mode




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          188           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 9.2 Example of Empathic Confrontation of Narcissistic Therapy-Interfering
              Behaviours Early in Therapy
              THERAPIST: Fern, I know you are going through a really tough time at the moment and that
                 ﬁnances are really tight, and I can see how stressful that must be. I realise as well that this is
                 a source of friction between you and your husband. However, as we are intending to work
                 together, it’s really important that we can be really upfront and honest with each other. You
                 probably don’t realise it, but when you promise to pay for our sessions but then drop oﬀ
                 the radar without following through, it has the eﬀect of making me feel like you don’t
                 respect me or the time that we have spent working together in therapy. The therapist part
                 of me understands that of course there are a lot of diﬃcult circumstances that are
                 contributing to this happening, but there is also a part of me that feels slightly irritated
                 about not being paid. Although it might not seem signiﬁcant to you, I want our time
                 together to be focused on your needs, and so although on the one hand it’s no big deal,
                 there is a bigger issue of us respecting each other. I don’t want anything to get in the way of
                 us working together, so that is why I am being so upfront with you. It’s also important to
                 talk about because if you do this with others, including your friends, then they might not be
                 so understanding and may distance themselves from you. This sort of thing gets in the way
                 of others getting close to you and giving you the care and understanding that you deserve.
                 That’s why it’s important for me to raise this. Can I check in with you now . . . what did you
                 hear me say?




          empathically confront this behaviour and encourage her to be respectful of the needs of
          others. As this was the early stages of therapy, the therapist placed strong emphasis on the
          empathic aspect of this interaction to ensure that rapport was not unduly aﬀected. The
          therapist started by empathically confronting the behaviour that interfered most with
          therapeutic rapport and phrasing the confrontation in a way that helped the client link
          the behaviour to their own unmet needs (see Box 9.2).
          3. Empathically Confront Inconsistent Attendance. If a client consistently misses or
          cancels sessions at the last minute, this should be empathically confronted. Once we have
          begun to introduce the modes, we can also use chairwork to facilitate these dialogues (see
          Box 9.3).

          Identifying Other Relevant Therapy-Interfering Behaviours
          In the early phase of therapy, the schema therapist works consistently to uncover behav-
          ioural patterns which perpetuate the client’s schemas. A detailed list of problematic behav-
          iours should be constructed and linked to common triggers described by the client. This, of
          course, will inform the therapist’s conceptualisation of the predominant modes that are
          responsible for the behaviour. Whereas some of these patterns may become apparent within
          the therapy room, it is also essential to diﬀerentiate the client’s narrative of interpersonal
          interactions from the schema-lens through which they are perceived, and which is poten-
          tially distorted. It is essential that the schema therapist asks questions to gain a less biased
          perspective on the speciﬁc behaviours (i.e., as they actually took place). Box 9.4 provides an
          example of this type of interviewing.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking           189



             Box 9.3 Empathically Confronting Non-Attendance Through Chair Dialogues
             THERAPIST: Trevor, there is a part of me that feels awkward about bringing this up, as the last
                thing I want to make you feel is uncomfortable, but there is also another part of me that
                is determined to help you to get your needs met through our work together. So, I need
                to let you know that when you miss sessions we have planned, it makes me worry about
                what’s going on with you. Does that surprise you at all? Do you remember that we
                discussed the idea that we all have diﬀerent ‘parts’? I wonder, could it be that the same
                Avoidant Protector part that stops you going to work sometimes, and other events that
                you have been invited to, also stops you from coming to therapy sometimes? I wonder if
                we could put that part in the chair, so I can understand what that side is afraid will
                happen on those times that it persuades you to avoid? . . .. Trevor’s Protector, I know
                that you have helped Trevor to survive by keeping a low proﬁle when he was a little boy.
                You helped him back then, but I wonder what you are afraid might happen on those
                days that you get him to skip therapy sessions?
             TREVOR: [in Protector chair] ‘By keeping him at home, I stop him feeling hopeless. Nothing
                will ever feel better. It’s better just to hide away, that way you won’t be disappointed.’
             THERAPIST: [speaking to empty Protector chair] Protector, I can see you are working hard to
                stop Trevor from feeling disappointed, but at the same time I worry that if he doesn’t
                come here, he will end up feeling even more hopeless, because we can’t work together
                and make changes. I know that in the past things were diﬀerent, and this might have
                been the best way to protect him. You learned to protect him by keeping him out of his
                parents’ way so that they wouldn’t criticise him. But now it’s diﬀerent; I am here and
                I want to help him learn healthier ways of coping. So, it’s important that you don’t hold
                him back, otherwise, you’ll end up having the opposite eﬀect to your intention: instead
                of protecting him, your avoidance will make it harder for him to have a better life.
                I wonder if you could let go a little bit, and test out what it might be like to come to all of
                our sessions, and allow Trevor to tell me if he is feeling afraid or hopeless, instead of
                avoiding?
             THERAPIST: [speaking to Trevor in the Vulnerable Child chair] I know this is scary, but it’s not like
                it was back then, you can count on me to be here to support you. I want to hear about
                how you feel.



             Unpacking the exact details of the interaction gives the therapist a more accurate
         understanding of how their schemas increase the client’s sensitivity to speciﬁc interpersonal
         triggers, and an opportunity to observe how clients’ coping behaviours perpetuate their
         diﬃculties, preventing them from getting their needs met. From the vignette in Box 9.4,
         Mary’s Mistrust/Abuse schema developed during childhood as a consequence of parents
         and other family members taking advantage of her and lying to her. Her father was
         emotionally and sexually inappropriate and reacted aggressively if she tried to protect her
         privacy. He behaved as if she were his ‘property’. She learned to be suspicious of others’
         behaviours and wary of their hidden agendas. Mary had recently moved into a property and
         hadn’t checked the deeds in suﬃcient detail to know that her neighbours rightfully had
         access to the woodshed. When she saw them approaching, she automatically assumed
         the worst: that they were intruding on her property and taking advantage of her. Her



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          190           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 9.4 Clinical Example of Schema-Perpetuating Problematic Interpersonal
              Behaviour

              Mary attended the session complaining that her neighbours were rude to her. She described
              an incident whereby a neighbour had come to collect wood from their woodpile alongside
              her house, and she had become angry with him for intruding on her property. The therapist
              asked a series of questions to uncover the way in which this interaction had unfolded:

              MARY: My neighbour was so rude, I can’t believe this sort of thing always happens to me.
                People just have no respect!
              THERAPIST: Mary, I’m really curious, can you think back to how the argument started?
              MARY: Just like I told you, my neighbour came down and started taking wood from the pile.
              THERAPIST: Okay, and what exactly did you say? What were your exact words? And what was
                 your tone?
              MARY: What does it matter, I am telling you what happened, can’t you just take my word for
                it? He was rude, and I just had to put him in his place.
              THERAPIST: Of course, I can see it’s frustrating to go through it all again, but it’s really crucial
                 for us to understand this in detail. How did you ‘put him in his place’? Can you replay it
                 for me in the exact words and tone?
              MARY: I told him . . . ‘Back oﬀ, what do you think you’re doing?! How dare you come down
                here. You’re invading my privacy!’
              THERAPIST: What were you feeling at that point?
              MARY: Annoyed! How dare he just barge in like that!
              THERAPIST: How did he reply? What did he say?
              MARY: He told me that the wood pile is on his property, and it’s his right to access it.
              THERAPIST: What do you think he was feeling? . . .. What happened next?


          accusatory tone is also likely to have increased the probability of some kind of retaliation or
          counter-response, thereby reinforcing her perspective that they were ‘not nice people’.
          Ultimately, this schema-driven behaviour is likely to have resulted in her neighbours
          keeping their distance from her, thereby removing future opportunities for neighbourly
          connection and support.
              Where feasible, the therapist should also consult with signiﬁcant others in the client’s life
          to gather details of behaviours that may create interpersonal diﬃculties (and thereby
          perpetuate the underlying schemas). Diﬃculties are especially likely to arise when clients
          exhibit overcompensatory coping behaviours. Signiﬁcant others should be asked to provide
          detailed examples of how coping modes play out in interpersonal situations. This will enable
          the therapist to identify which EMS are repeatedly being triggered within the client’s
          relationships. Again, the therapist should ask speciﬁc questions to ﬁnd out the exact details
          of what the client said and how they behaved in speciﬁc situations. Speaking with signiﬁcant
          others may also reveal discrepancies between the client’s account of events and others’
          perspectives, thereby highlighting the schemas that may be inﬂuential on both sides.
              Schema inventories can provide a useful mechanism for identifying behaviours that
          cause diﬃculties in the client’s relationships. The Young Schema Questionnaire is useful for
          identifying behaviours in clients who are surrendering to their schemas (i.e., where high



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking   191



         scores indicate that the client is aware of their EMS, and believes their cognitive content is
         true). However, other questionnaires are likely to be more useful in identifying overcom-
         pensatory or avoidant coping behaviours: the Young-Rygh Avoidance Inventory [1], the
         Young Compensatory Inventory [2], and the Schema Coping Inventory [3].

         The Importance of Understanding Therapist Schemas when Pushing
         for Change
         To provide an attuned reparenting response when clients are faced with making diﬃcult
         behavioural changes, schema therapists must maintain a parallel awareness of both the
         schemas and unmet needs of their clients, alongside their own schemas and needs. In the
         case of Mary (in Box 9.4), if the therapist had a Subjugation schema, they might avoid
         exploring this scenario in suﬃcient detail due to a fear of conﬂict and being faced with the
         client’s Angry Protector mode. If the therapist had an Abandonment schema, they might be
         fearful that if they empathically confronted the client, the client would leave. Or, if the
         therapist had an Unrelenting Standards schema, they might push the client too much,
         prioritising their own urge to strive for achievement over the client’s needs. In each
         scenario, the therapist’s lack of awareness of their own schemas has the potential to prevent
         them from ensuring that the client’s needs are met. This demonstrates the importance of
         therapists maintaining an ongoing awareness of their own schema-driven coping responses,
         especially when they block capacity to meet their clients’ needs. Box 9.5 presents an example
         of a self-reﬂection exercise for therapists.

             Box 9.5 Therapist Self-Reﬂection Exercise

             Identify a situation in which you feel triggered by a client’s behaviour in session that is linked
             to your own schemas. For example, are you fearful that the client will become angry if you
             push for change (due to a Subjugation schema)? Are you fearful that the client will leave
             therapy if you challenge their schema-driven behaviour (Abandonment, Defectiveness
             schemas)? Are you pushing the client too hard (Unrelenting Standards schema)? Are you
             overidentifying with client’s schemas and not providing suﬃcient encouragement and
             empathic confrontation to motivate change?
               Notice which of your behaviours may be activating or clashing with the client’s schemas.
               What are the client’s underlying needs, and how can you work with them in a direct way to
             meet these?
               What are the limited reparenting messages that they need to hear from you that they didn’t
             get when they were growing up, to support them in making behavioural changes?
               For example:
             • I believe in you, you can do this! (Failure)
             • I am here for you, I’m not going anywhere (Abandonment)
             • It’s going to be okay, you’re safe now (Vulnerability to Harm)
             • You are so much more capable than you know. I really value your ideas, and I can see that
                 you have what it takes to do this! (Dependence)
             As the therapist, what do you need in this situation? What does your little side need from you?
             What will you do to meet that need?
               More detailed information about therapist schemas, and the role of self-reﬂection for the
             schema therapist, are discussed in Chapter 18: Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          192           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Middle Phase of Therapy: Breaking Patterns of Life-Interfering
          Schema-Driven Behaviour
          Once the client has entered the middle stage of therapy, there will be a strong emphasis on
          experiential, interpersonal, and cognitive change work, which represents a lot of the ‘healing
          work’ in schema therapy. Once the client can: (1) understand the childhood origins of their
          schemas and modes; (2) recognise and label them when triggered; and (3) engage in schema
          dialogues, the schema therapist starts to prompt the client to transition into taking on the
          Healthy Adult role, whilst learning coping mechanisms which are more aligned with their
          values and getting their needs met. When the client has begun to demonstrate a capacity to
          protect and nurture themselves within imagery rescripting and chairwork exercises, this will
          indicate a readiness to start behavioural pattern-breaking.
              The ﬁrst behavioural pattern-breaking target midway through therapy is for clients to try
          out small behaviour adjustments without prematurely resorting to major life changes that they
          may later regret (such as leaving a marriage or a job). When clients report a sudden unexplained
          improvement, the therapist should be alert to the possibility that this may be a manifestation of
          an avoidant or overcompensatory coping mode, masquerading as Healthy Adult mode. If the
          client expresses a desire to embark on a signiﬁcant change, the therapist should investigate this
          thoroughly with the client through evaluating the pros and cons of taking an ‘act-now’ versus
          ‘wait-and-see’ approach. The schema therapist provides guidance in making healthy choices
          and taking manageable steps (and discourages impulsive decisions that may lead to regret). The
          client is encouraged to make incremental changes within their current circumstances and
          relationships to see whether these can transform their circumstances suﬃciently to allow
          them to get their emotional needs met. For example, in a poor relationship that the client has
          been considering leaving, the therapist might ﬁrst assist the client to attempt to address some of
          the speciﬁc sources of dissatisfaction (e.g., lack of intimacy), before considering more perman-
          ent solutions (e.g., divorce). For signiﬁcant life decisions, in the ﬁrst instance the client is
          coached to manage diﬃcult aspects of these situations before making decisions about leaving
          (except in situations involving abuse). Although it may appear that the other person is solely the
          problem, the client must learn how to overcome their own schemas, to connect with their
          vulnerability and express their emotional needs more directly, before reaching any decisions
          about ending a relationship. Furthermore, clients will need help to prepare in advance of any
          signiﬁcant changes, such as through learning to regulate emotions, endure discomfort, and
          manage practical and/or unexpected diﬃculties.
              There are two key things that characterise a schema therapy approach to behaviour change.
          The ﬁrst is that we scaﬀold everything. Schema therapists are patient; the client can make as
          much change as they like, so long as they are supported to make such changes incrementally.
          We often use the term ‘slicing it thin’. This makes the change process less overwhelming (and
          risky) for the client, as the impact of changes can be analysed and understood over time. Second,
          in schema therapy, behavioural pattern-breaking is thought to be most powerful when it is done
          in the service of a client’s needs. Any proposed behaviour change should be explicitly linked
          to the client’s stated needs in a situation. Behavioural pattern-breaking tasks are not undertaken
          to achieve habituation or ‘exposure’, as may be done in traditional CBT, but are designed to
          connect the client with their stated needs and evaluated on the extent to which this occurs. This
          helps to optimise client motivation for change.
              Box 9.6 provides the case example of Fern again, illustrating problematic behavioural
          patterns that occur both inside and outside therapy sessions. The therapist’s observations of



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking    193



             Box 9.6 Clinical Example: Problematic Behavioural Patterns Inside and Outside
             the Session

             Fern attended therapy complaining that her husband was insensitive to her needs, describing
             him as an ‘emotional dolt’. She and her husband had lived together as a married couple for more
             than twenty years and had three grown-up children together. She was on the verge of leaving
             him, having concluded that he would never be able to meet her needs, and that he had never
             really understood her or supported her in the way she wanted. She described a recent incident as
             evidence that he was the problem. In this situation, she was adamant that she had told him how
             she had felt, had shown her vulnerability, but he had not been supportive of her in any way. When
             asked about the words and tone that she used to communicate her vulnerability, it turned out
             that she believed that because she felt hurt and upset, he should be able to recognise this and
             provide the support she craved. However, it became apparent when she repeated what she had
             said that her tone had been angry and accusatory, making it almost impossible for anyone to
             detect her vulnerability or to ascertain what she needed in that moment. Although she felt that
             her needs should have been blatantly clear to her husband, in reality her overcompensatory
             coping mode manifested as defensive and passively angry, making it diﬃcult for him to hear her
             plea for support or sense her underlying need for connection.
                The therapist’s understanding of this dynamic was also informed by Fern’s schema-driven
             behaviours in therapy sessions. When asked how she was feeling, she rarely, if ever, used
             emotional labels to describe her inner experience, instead relying on lengthy, intellectual descrip-
             tions of her state of mind. She repeatedly stated that the therapist should come up with ‘solutions’
             to her problems, but insisted that the therapeutic model did not really resonate for her and that
             the experiential techniques were not relevant to her diﬃculties. In the countertransference, the
             therapist sensed that whatever she did and however much she strived to meet Fern’s emotional
             needs, it would never feel enough – and that Fern would remain dissatisﬁed and misunderstood.




         Fern’s behaviour within sessions and her exploration of countertransference reactions enabled
         her to begin to conceptualise the relationship dynamics between Fern and her husband. It
         became clear that it was important to address overcompensatory behavioural patterns in
         therapy by encouraging Fern to learn to express her vulnerability more explicitly before she
         would be able to make a clear decision as to whether she should stay in the relationship or end it.
         In the sessions ahead, the therapist began to gently and empathically confront Fern. By the
         middle phase of therapy, the therapist was more insistent that these changes would be essential
         to enable Fern to overcome her longstanding pattern of not getting her needs met. Chairwork
         was used to encourage Fern to dialogue with her overcompensatory mode and learn about the
         unmet needs underlying this way of coping. As she learned to take risks and express her
         vulnerability more often in sessions, she was encouraged to practise the same at home with her
         husband, keeping a detailed diary of how these dialogues unfolded and her own emotional and
         behavioural reactions. As Fern learned to communicate more openly with her husband, she
         discovered a new side to her relationship, as well as the possibility of getting her needs met. She
         was surprised to ﬁnd that there was a side to her that was unfamiliar and uncomfortable with
         getting her needs met and the newfound intimacy that ensued from this. It was at this point that
         she made the decision to commit to working on her relationship further rather than leave.
         Therapy then shifted focus to helping Fern to build skills for dealing with conﬂicts and
         relationship blocks in the future, and especially for maintaining openness and vulnerability in
         times of stress and during moments of schema activation.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          194           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



             Box 9.7 presents recommended steps in the development of targets for behavioural
          pattern-breaking.


              Box 9.7 Steps in Developing Targets for Behavioural Pattern-Breaking
              1. Collaboratively develop a list of behavioural targets based on the client’s common triggers
                 and coping mode patterns.
              2. Prioritise behaviours based on the client’s primary presenting problems – the ones that
                 will impact on their capacity to get their emotional needs met in relationships.
              3. Explain that behaviours will be targeted one-at-a-time, rather than focusing on the entire
                 schema-driven pattern all at once.
              4. Start by assisting the client to identify one behaviour to change. Choose the most
                 problematic behaviour, with the highest impact on emotional well-being and both
                 personal and work functioning.
              5. If client feels unable to tackle the highest-priority behaviour, identify the behavioural
                 target highest on the list that they can manageably address.
              6. After establishing the ﬁrst target behaviour, use motivational strategies to stimulate
                 change.
                 a. Clarify the link between the target behaviour and childhood experiences and unmet
                    needs to increase self-understanding and the capacity to relinquish attachment to this
                    coping mechanism in the here and now.
                 b. Link behaviour to previous experiential and cognitive work that has been carried out in
                    therapy.
                 c. List pros and cons of coping behaviour, with a focus on capacity to reach life goals and
                    ﬁnd emotional well-being.

             7. If the client feels the current behavioural goal is too overwhelming, break it into smaller
                more manageable steps.
             8. If the client still feels too overwhelmed to address changes related to the main presenting
                issue, switch to another presenting problem, and then return later to re-target the original
                behavioural patterns linked to the primary problem.
             9. Client and therapist write a detailed plan of a behavioural homework task, based on
                a comprehensive list of tangible steps. The client is encouraged to complete the
                homework, using the ﬂashcard as support, and to record the outcome, including
                thoughts, feelings, and reactions of others.
            10. The therapist prioritises enquiry about homework at the start of the following session, and
                provides praise and reinforcement for progress, and support and encouragement in the
                face of failure.
            11. Therapist and client work together to adjust the behaviour plan (e.g., break task down into
                smaller steps, change incentives) to facilitate progress.
            12. Develop awareness of blocks, then challenge schemas and modes creating the block.
            13. Develop ﬂashcards to address blocks.

              Therapist Tip: This process can be aided by use of the pattern-breaking forms, as seen in
              Figures 9.1 and 9.2




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking                                        195




            Towards My Need for                     Towards My Need for                    Towards My Need for                     Towards My Need for

           Current Level/10.........               Current Level/10.........              Current Level/10.........               Current Level/10.........
           Importance/10........                   Importance/10........                  Importance/10........                   Importance/10........

             10                                      10                                      10                                     10

              9                                       9                                      9                                       9

              8                                       8                                      8                                       8

              7                                       7                                      7                                       7

              6                  What Mode/s          6                 What Mode/s          6                  What Mode/s          6                 What Mode/s

              5               Or Behaviour Might      5              Or Behaviour Might      5               Or Behaviour Might      5              Or Behaviour Might

                                Get in the Way?                        Get in the Way?                         Get in the Way?                        Get in the Way?
              4                                       4                                      4                                       4

              3                                       3                                      3                                       3

              2                                       2                                      2                                       2

              1                                       1                                      1                                       1

              0                                       0                                      0                                       0
                    Away (Avoid)                            Away (Avoid)                            Away (Avoid)                           Away (Avoid)
            Small Commitment Exercise for this      Small Commitment Exercise for this     Small Commitment Exercise for this      Small Commitment Exercise for this
                  Week to connect to this                 Week to connect to this                Week to connect to this                 Week to connect to this
           need:                                   need:                                  need:                                   need:




         Figure 9.1 Blank pattern-breaking form



             Towards My Need for                    Towards My Need for                    Towards My Need for                     Towards My Need for
                 ...Intimacy...                     ...Family Connection...                  ...Competence...
             Current Level/10...6                   Current Level/10..6                    Current Level/10..3                     Current Level/10......
             Importance/10...9                      Importance/10..10                      Importance/10...8                       Importance/10.....

              10                                     10                                      10                                      10

               9                                      9                                       9                                       9

               8                                      8                                       8                                       8

               7                                      7                                       7                                       7
                                 What Mode/s                            What Mode/s                            What Mode/s                              What Mode/s
               6                                      6                                       6                                       6
                              Or Behaviour Might                     Or Behaviour Might                     Or Behaviour Might                       Or Behaviour Might
               5                                      5                                       5                                       5
                                Get in the Way?                        Get in the Way?                        Get in the Way?                         Get in the Way?
               4                                      4                                       4                                       4
                               Vulnerable Child                       Demanding Critic                       Demanding Critic
               3                                      3                                       3                                       3

               2                   Avoidant           2                 Perfectionistic       2                  Avoidant             2
                                   Protector                            Overcontroller                           Protector
               1                                      1                                       1                                       1

               0     Away (Avoid)                     0     Away (Avoid)                      0     Away (Avoid)                      0     Away (Avoid)
                                                                                                                                    Small Commitment Exercise for this
            Small Commitment Exercise for this     Small Commitment Exercise for this     Small Commitment Exercise for this              Week to connect to this
           Week to connect to this need: Organise Week to connect to this need: Schedule Week to connect to this need: Investigate need:
           a “Date Night” with my Partner (without time in the next fornight to catch up  possible short courses that will be a
                 the kids!!) for this Thursday                 with siblings                  stepping-stone in my career




         Figure 9.2 Example of completed pattern-breaking form




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          196           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Identifying Schema-Driven Behaviours That Cause Problems
          and Impede Goals: Linking Behaviours to Childhood Unmet Needs,
          Schemas, and Modes
          To structure the behavioural pattern-breaking work, therapists can make a list of all of the
          behaviours that the client recognises are self-sabotaging, behaviours that are reported as
          problematic by signiﬁcant others, and any remaining therapy-interfering behaviours.
          Before working on actually changing behaviour, the next step is to conceptualise the
          relationship between each behaviour and its underlying schemas (and modes) and explore
          how the behaviour was learned during early experiences in the client’s life. For example,
          a client with an Emotional Deprivation schema may be emotionally avoidant, use humour
          to avoid showing their vulnerability, and ask for their emotional needs to be met in direct
          ways. Alternatively, they might actively engage in self-sacriﬁcing behaviour (Compliant
          Surrenderer mode) as a means of trying to show others what they need or exert a sense of
          obligation on others to meet their needs, whilst avoiding expressing their needs directly.
          A client with a Defectiveness schema might cope via overcompensation, by ﬁnding subtle
          ways of putting the therapist down or giving the impression that the therapist is taking up
          his valuable time. Box 9.8 presents a case example (Mario) demonstrating the role of
          schemas and modes in inﬂuencing coping behaviours that arise in therapy.
              In the case presented in Box 9.8, the therapist works alongside the client to explore
          the ways in which their behaviour can be made sense of within the context of their
          childhood experiences, schemas, and modes. This can open a discussion of the role of
          schema-perpetuating behaviours, including distorted thinking patterns that exaggerate
          information that is consistent with schemas, whilst minimising other information that
          is inconsistent. The therapist and client can then explore ways in which these behav-
          iours prevent the person from getting their emotional needs met, such as through
          distancing or alienating others. This would lead to a clear plan for incremental
          behaviour change, to be set via homework.


              Box 9.8 Case Example: Addressing Schemas and Modes Inﬂuencing Client Coping
              Behaviours in Session

              Mario grew up in a rural environment and his parents were farmers. His father had missed out
              on opportunities to achieve his full potential due to poverty. He therefore expected Mario to
              be achieving at all times, either by helping on the farm or carrying out his schoolwork to
              perfectionistic standards. Mario was expected to use every hour of the day in a productive
              manner. Mario’s father was highly authoritarian, setting strict rules that Mario and his siblings
              were expected to follow without question. He would often become angry or use guilt-
              inducing statements to ensure Mario’s compliance. Mario’s mother was caring, but passively
              compliant, and focused on serving her husband and managing the domestic aspects of farm
              life to her husband’s high standards. Mario’s primary schemas were Emotional Deprivation,
              Unrelenting Standards, Emotional Inhibition, and Subjugation.
                 Mario repeatedly turned up late for therapy sessions from approximately session 12
              onwards. Up until this point, Mario had attended promptly and had been highly compliant
              with the therapeutic process. Although he was outwardly compliant, the therapist began to
              notice some passive resistance to his suggestions. Homework was completed intermittently,
              and whenever he gently questioned Mario about this, he noticed that Mario reacted in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking        197



             a defensive and irritated manner. The therapist began to suspect that a transference reaction
             was taking place, whereby his therapeutic requests were activating Mario’s Subjugation
             schema and a behavioural coping pattern characterised by passive resistance, just as he
             had done with his father. In the following dialogue, the therapist starts by making tentative
             links to help Mario to make sense of his own behaviour. He then works with the client to
             identify other situations which trigger this behaviour and discusses tentative steps towards
             learning healthier ways of expressing the underlying needs.
             THERAPIST: Mario, I have noticed that in recent times you have been late for many of our
                 sessions. I know that you have a lot on your plate, and there are practical reasons that
                 make it tricky for you to ﬁt everything in. But you know me . . . as your therapist I can’t
                 help but wonder about the role of your schemas and modes, and how they might be
                 impacting on you. One of the aspects of your childhood that appears to have made a big
                 impact on you was your father’s controlling parenting style. You have told me about his
                 demanding standards and many rules, leaving not much space for you to have any
                 autonomy or freedom over your own life. His high expectations were attached to almost
                 everything you did, and as a result you learned to subjugate to avoid him getting angry
                 with you. It’s not uncommon that if we subjugate our own needs, the Angry Child side
                 simmers away under the surface, feeling annoyed that he has lost his freedom.
                 Sometimes this angry side might try to regain his freedom in small ways, such as by
                 breaking rules or rebelling against others’ demands, often without the person even
                 being consciously aware of it. This mode has learned to go underground for fear of
                 being crushed or punished. I wonder, could it be that this [Angry Child] freedom-ﬁghter
                 side of you comes to the surface when I tell you that our session starts at a particular
                 time . . . almost like in that moment this side perceives that I am just like dad?’
             MARIO: Maybe . . . I don’t really think about it that way. All I know is that you set the time of
               the sessions, and here I am, late again.
             THERAPIST: When I set the time of our sessions, does it feel like you don’t have a say in it, that
                you are not allowed to have a voice? Could you possibly close your eyes and notice what
                feelings come up for you? Where those feelings arise in your body?
             MARIO: In my throat and chest . . . a tension. It’s a feeling that I often get, I don’t
               know why . . .
             THERAPIST: Throughout your childhood, you didn’t have enough opportunities to get your
                needs for control and autonomy met. You were punished and made to feel guilty for
                speaking out, for asking for what you needed. As a result, you have learned to disown
                this part of you that has the power to voice what you want and what you need. I would
                very much like to see more of that part. It’s not like it was when you grew up; I want to
                see this freedom-ﬁghter part of you. And although there might not be much scope to
                change the time of our sessions, I wonder if there are other aspects of our time together
                where you could take more control and be more assertive . . . how would that feel . . . to
                practise getting those needs met?
                    I also wonder if you might consider noticing when this feeling comes up in your day-
                to-day life, and seeing if you can ﬁgure out what you really want or need in those
                moments . . . just notice the times when that Angry Child part inside feels frustrated and
                digs his heels in because his needs have been overlooked in some way? Would that be
                useful to you?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          198           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Behaviour Change Targets for Pattern-Breaking
          Whereas the earlier phase of therapy might focus on behaviours within the therapeutic
          relationship, towards the latter end of the middle phase of therapy behavioural pattern-
          breaking focuses on behaviours that interfere with the client’s capacity to get their needs met
          in their daily life. A behavioural hierarchy can be generated collaboratively by therapist and
          client, based on common triggers and coping mode patterns. Traditionally in schema
          therapy, this kind of real-life behaviour change is often reserved for the middle to later
          stages of therapy when the client has a severe disorder (e.g., a personality disorder), but in
          practice, with less complex clients or clients with a capacity for early change, this can be
          brought forward to achieve some early success. Behaviour patterns to change can then be
          prioritised according to their current impact on the client’s life, especially on interpersonal
          relationships. The ﬁrst step is to choose the highest-priority target on the hierarchy that the
          client can realistically manage. The aim of starting with high-impact behaviours is to
          increase the probability that the client will experience a positive change in their life as
          soon as possible. Motivation for addressing behavioural patterns can be enhanced through
          revisiting the origins of this behaviour as a survival mechanism linked to coping with unmet
          needs during childhood. This linking can enhance the client’s capacity for self-empathy; it
          reminds them that this coping behaviour emerged in the context of having limited options
          during their early years. Furthermore, revisiting the pros and cons of the behaviour in the
          present can highlight potential advantages of change and bolster motivation to invest in the
          eﬀort required to make changes. The general strategy at this stage is for the therapist to
          remain focused on prompting new behavioural patterns whilst addressing interfering
          modes as they arise. Box 9.9 illustrates how behaviour change targets might be selected by
          the client and therapist together.



              Box 9.9 Clinical Example of Setting Behavioural Pattern-Breaking Goals

              Fern’s overeating behaviours were linked to her Abandonment and Defectiveness schemas.
              During early childhood, her mother repeatedly told her that she was ‘too much’ and a burden.
              She frequently left the family home, announcing that she was sick of Fern and would not be
              coming back. In the absence of a consistent nurturing relationship, Fern learned to rely on
              food as a form of self-soothing, and to escape feelings of fear and shame linked to rejection
              and abandonment. Behavioural change work started with reminding her of these links and the
              work that had already been carried out in therapy to address these schemas. Her ﬁrst
              behavioural goal, decided in collaboration, included two key steps: (1) to express her vulner-
              ability and emotional needs with trusted friends (2) to reduce her pattern of turning to her
              overeating (Detached Self-Soother mode) as a way of tuning out her emotions.
                 With the help of her therapist, she explored the pros and cons of coping through overeat-
              ing. Advantages of this coping behaviour listed by Fern included having a reliable and
              dependable source of comfort, an opportunity to indulge in tasty foods, reduced risk of
              rejection, a feeling of euphoria, escape from diﬃcult feelings, an excuse to avoid social
              interactions, and that it ‘gives a reason for why I don’t see my friends’. The cons were ‘I eat
              so fast that I don’t get to experience the pleasure of food’, ‘I am gaining weight and losing
              ﬁtness’, ‘I have lots of health problems’, ‘my clothes no longer ﬁt me’, ‘I feel sluggish and
              lacking in energy’, and ‘I feel worse about myself’. By reﬂecting on this list, Fern was able to
              recognise that most of her pros were linked to short-term avoidance and relief, whereas the
              cons were linked to ongoing perpetuation of her diﬃculties and loneliness. This was followed



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking   199



             by the development of an audio ﬂashcard in her own Healthy Adult voice, which provided an
             additional source of motivation that she could tap into in the context of changing her
             behaviours.
                In order to ensure that her expectations were realistic and to reduce the likelihood of giving
             up, Fern was warned that it is very common to encounter some initial discomfort, ‘withdrawal
             eﬀects’, and awkwardness throughout the adjustment period associated with changing
             entrenched behaviours. Behaviours with an addictive quality can be particularly diﬃcult to
             address due to the fact that they tend to be highly compulsive, habit-driven, and provide
             more intense and immediate reinforcement. As such, Fern was encouraged to write a detailed
             plan describing concrete steps needed to fulﬁl her homework task, including contingency
             management steps that would increase motivation and the likelihood of success. She decided
             that the ﬁrst step that she would take in breaking this pattern was to reduce overeating
             through introducing three regular meals, and two snacks, each with a distinct start and end
             point. The only change that was introduced at this point was the time of eating; to avoid
             overwhelm, the quantity and content of food was not addressed. Fern believed that focusing
             on avoiding a negative consequence would provide more motivation than generating
             a reward for limiting her overeating. She therefore decided that she would look at a picture
             of the eﬀects of diabetes (something her doctor had cautioned her about) for ﬁfteen minutes
             for each day that she did not stick to the mealtimes. Furthermore, she decided to reward
             herself with her favourite coﬀee only on the days that she was able to meet her goal. In the
             following weeks, she went on to address further aspects of this pattern, through gradually
             introducing ‘forbidden’ foods into her mealtimes whilst adhering to her new meal structure.
             Naturally, this process was not straightforward and involved numerous setbacks, which
             provided an opportunity for problem solving and ﬁnding solutions that met her needs. Fern
             was then encouraged to work on the second aspect of her behavioural pattern, which was
             associated with her longstanding avoidance of seeking support and directly expressing her
             vulnerability and needs with others. Both aspects of this pattern (the overeating and the
             interpersonal contact) were equally important and required multiple steps to accomplish,
             with opportunities for troubleshooting in the face of setbacks.




             These kinds of tasks are set as realistic and collaborative homework tasks. It is common
         for clients to come back to therapy sessions after setting pattern-breaking tasks having
         struggled to complete them in some way. In schema therapy, this is an opportunity to work
         on the ‘blocks to change’ within the session (see Box 9.10).

         Fine Tuning the Case Conceptualisation Through
         the Pattern-Breaking Process over Time
         Exploring behavioural coping mechanisms at this stage provides additional information
         that allows the therapist to ﬁne-tune the case conceptualisation. In turn, the case
         conceptualisation provides a roadmap that enables the therapist to carry out behavioural
         pattern-breaking in an attuned way. For example, many clients have not experienced
         suﬃcient guidance or direction and will not be capable of generating Healthy Adult
         alternative courses of action on their own. A client with a Self-Sacriﬁce schema who was
         always given the message that her needs were secondary to everyone else’s will beneﬁt
         from a direct message from the therapist that gives permission for them to focus on
         their own needs: ‘You are allowed to have your own job, and to take time for yourself



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          200             The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 9.10 Addressing Blocks in Behavioural Change Work

              Investigate ‘stuck points’ that prevented the client from completing the behavioural home-
              work task [4].
              a. Is the client aware of the reasons for their lack of progress?
              b. If not, explore the reasons:
                     i.    Did new impediments arise when the client tried to make changes?
                    ii.    Does the client fear the repercussions of change? (Vulnerable Child).
                   iii.    Is the client angry that they need to work so hard to bring about change? (Angry
                           Child).
                   iv.     Is the client struggling to manage the discomfort and persistence required to bring
                           about change? (Undisciplined Child).
                    v.     Is the client feeling hopeless about the possibility of change? Or fearful of trying
                           and facing the disappointment of failing? (Vulnerable Child; Hopeless Resigned
                           coping mode).
              2. If the block is still elusive, use imagery to take the client through the behavioural change
                 step by step, to identify the point at which they become stuck.
              3. Set up a mode dialogue (chairwork or imagery, empathic confrontation) between the
                 stuck side and the Healthy Adult side to work through the block.
              4. Develop a ﬂashcard to manage the block through challenging maladaptive schemas and
                 coping modes, including information from the pros and cons exercise, and skills for
                 managing diﬃcult moments.
              5. Fine-tune contingencies whereby the client rewards themselves for progress as part of
                 the homework task.
              6. Client re-attempts behavioural change for homework.
              7. If the client continues to incur diﬃculties, consider breaking the task into smaller steps
                 and re-attempting for homework.
              8. If the client continues to be unable to manage homework, refocus on a diﬀerent
                 behavioural pattern for a period of time, before returning to the original behaviour.
              9. Use empathic confrontation to push for behavioural changes and emphasise the
                 importance of breaking patterns in the context of client’s long-term goals.

              In highly resistant cases: Following a lengthy period wherein the client is unable to make any
              changes, suggest a provisional break in therapy, making it clear that the therapist is ready
              and willing to recommence sessions when the client is able to proceed with the behavioural
              change work. Life circumstances may need to change for the client to reach a point where
              the cons outweigh the pros of the coping behaviours.




          apart from your family . . . this is healthy, and something that everyone needs.’ A client
          with a Failure schema who has never received suﬃcient encouragement and praise is
          likely to beneﬁt from the therapist providing these unmet needs in a direct way: ‘I know
          that your schema is telling you something diﬀerent, but I really believe in you. I know
          you are smart and capable. I’ve seen this in our work together. You can do this!’ It is
          essential that these messages are expressed with gusto, with the therapist in the position
          of cheerleader, just as we would when parenting our own child or supporting a good
          friend. Emotional authenticity is key; we want the client to really feel that the message



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking              201



         stems from an experiential connection, rather than simply being a rational response.
         Furthermore, the therapist must also take into account the client’s fears associated with
         behaviour change and ensure that these are incorporated into the preparatory planning.
         For example, a client with a Subjugation schema may fear that if they are assertive and
         ask for what they need, others will become angry and reject or abandon them. A client
         with an Unrelenting Standards schema may fear making mistakes, performing at less
         than 100%, or being criticised by peers. A client with an Abandonment schema may fear
         that if they stop clinging, others will leave and they will be left all alone. A client with
         a Grandiosity schema may fear that if they give up striving for status, others will judge
         them as mediocre or ‘nothing’.
            In the example in Box 9.11, Mario and the therapist agreed to use imagery rescript-
         ing to work with his Subjugation schema, whilst encouraging him to be more assertive
         about his needs and to take more control of other aspects of the therapy process.


             Box 9.11 Clinical Example of Chairwork to Address Therapy-Interfering Behaviour
             (Non-Attendance)
             THERAPIST: Mario, I’m really curious about the side that is blocking you from coming on
                time . . . could we get to know that part a bit better to ﬁnd out what is making it diﬃcult
                for it to come along? I know that, from what you have told me, this side also aﬀects your
                work attendance, so it might help us both to understand what is happening a bit better
                if we do some detective work together and give this side a voice. Would you be okay
                with that?
             MARIO: Ok, it seems a bit strange.
             THERAPIST: Yes, it can seem that way at ﬁrst, but using the chairs can help us to understand
                more easily what is happening under the surface . . . So, can you sit on that empty chair,
                and really embody that side of you that slows things down before you come to our
                sessions. Really try to get into the head and body space of that side. What is it saying?
             MARIO: [long pause] . . . There’s really no point. It’s hopeless . . . I’ll just mess it up anyway. I’ll
               fail.
             THERAPIST: If I understand correctly, it sounds like there are two parts coming up . . . one part is
                the part that feels hopeless and downhearted, and another part that is telling you that you
                will fail. Am I getting that right? So, this side of you would be the child part, that holds the
                emotions and feelings.
             MARIO: I guess so.
             THERAPIST: [introducing an extra empty chair] Can you now move to the chair of the critical
                side, that is telling Little Mario that he will fail? What does he say?
             MARIO: [moves to chair] ‘You will fail at this just like you do with everything. Face the facts,
               you are a loser. Why you even bother to go to therapy, I don’t know. It will come to
               nothing, just like everything that you attempt.’
             THERAPIST: Ok, Mario can you please move back to Little Mario’s chair, so that I can talk to that
                critical chair? What does it feel like to hear that message?
             MARIO: It feels normal . . . hopeless, like nothing will ever be possible. It makes me feel like
               giving up. And ashamed of myself.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          202           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




              THERAPIST: [therapist shifts to a stronger tone of voice] Critical side, it’s not okay that you
                 treat Mario this way. It’s too much. It’s over the top. You are the one who is sabotaging
                 his progress when you treat him in this mean way. How do you expect him to feel
                 motivated, when you are dragging him down? You are from the past, but you are still
                 interfering too in his life. This has to stop. I won’t allow you to hold him back in this way!
                 [Therapist re-directs attention to Mario in ‘Little Mario’ chair.] Mario, you have been
                 working so hard, and I want you to know that I believe in you. I see that you are capable
                 of doing this work. I really mean it . . . you can do it! I will be right by your side. To set
                 limits on that Critic that is stuck in the past, and to remind you that change is possible,
                 that you don’t always have to feel this way . . . that what you learned as a child
                 was wrong. You are capable of so much more than you know . . . what is it like to
                 hear me say that?
              MARIO: It feels good . . . its always felt this way, I’ve never believed in myself. But your words
                felt diﬀerent . . . it touched me somehow.
              THERAPIST: We will be doing more of this work, to change the old messages in your head. And
                 to strengthen your healthy side so that you can give your little side the encouragement
                 that he missed out on in the past. Could you move over here to stand behind the
                 Healthy Chair for a moment. Is there anything you would like to say to your little side
                 from this part? This is the part of you that sticks up for justice. The compassionate,
                 strong part. What do you want to say?
              MARIO: [softly] ‘You can do this.’
              THERAPIST: Can you say it 10% louder? Can you show him you mean it?
              MARIO: [louder] ‘You can do this!’
              THERAPIST: Excellent. And we will be working together to help this part of you to grow
                 stronger and to help you to get more of the things you need. Shall we make an audio
                 ﬂashcard together to help you to connect with your health voice and to set limits on the
                 Critic to use before our sessions?




          A ﬂashcard was generated to help him to access his Healthy Adult mode when his
          Subjugation pattern was triggered, and he was encouraged to use the ﬂashcard before
          sessions. Mario promised to work on coming to sessions on time and agreed that this
          topic would be re-visited in future sessions. However, after ﬁve further sessions, the
          same pattern re-emerged and Mario felt unable to ﬁnd an explanation. In order to
          investigate further, the therapist invited ‘the part that is blocking you from attending
          sessions on time’ to sit in an empty chair.

          Final Phase of Therapy
          In the ﬁnal phase of therapy, behavioural pattern-breaking increases, with a strong
          emphasis on working through the hierarchy of behaviours that aﬀect their daily functioning
          outside of therapy. Most schema-driven behaviours are highly entrenched and, although
          they cause distress, they provide familiarity, a sense of coherence in the client’s world.
          Giving them up can feel frightening and disorienting. We warn the client that schemas ‘ﬁght



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking   203



         for their own survival’ and will try to convince the client to continue their familiar schema-
         perpetuating behaviours. When blocks are encountered, the therapist helps the client to
         identify which schemas and modes are involved, and to work through these therapeutically
         and make continued attempts to change the pattern.
             The speciﬁc patterns addressed in the behavioural change phase must be driven by the
         client’s case conceptualisation. A list of general behavioural targets linked to common
         modes is presented in Table 9.1.

         The Use of Future Pattern-Breaking Imagery and Chair
         Dialogues to Support Behaviour Change
         Future pattern-breaking imagery is, in a sense, the opposite of imagery rescripting.
         Rather than rescript childhood and other painful memories of the past, future pattern-
         breaking imagery connects the client to images of problematic or avoided scenarios,
         usually represented on the client’s behaviour change hierarchy. This kind of imagery
         becomes a useful experiential technique especially in the later phases of treatment as
         the therapist pushes the client for concrete change. The aim is to be able to help the
         client experientially process and rehearse new, more adaptive patterns of behaviour
         that have been identiﬁed for behaviour change. This allows clients – with the help of
         the therapist – to become aware of, work through, and ultimately anticipate problem-
         atic schema-based reactions to support behaviour change. Generally, if the client is not
         able to carry out behaviour change in imagination (or through other methods such as
         chair dialogues), their chances of doing so in the real-life situation change are
         signiﬁcantly reduced. However, to the degree that clients can participate assertively
         and adopt a Healthy Adult perspective in the imagery, they are better prepared to
         make changes in their daily lives. It should be noted that the dialogues can also often
         be processed similarly using chairs (e.g., having an assertive conversation with
         a parent). The basic steps for the implementation of pattern-breaking imagery are
         given in Box 9.12 [5]. You will notice that they basically describe the process of
         imagery rescripting, but in reverse, applied to future scenarios.

         Concluding Remarks
         Behavioural pattern-breaking is arguably the most important phase of schema therapy.
         Although some degree of behavioural pattern-breaking occurs throughout the thera-
         peutic process, the most signiﬁcant changes occur primarily in the middle and ﬁnal
         phases of therapy. Empathic confrontation is used to gently push for changes to take
         place in the early phases of therapy, to address therapy-interfering behaviours, and to
         set limits on behaviours which may lead to danger for clients and/or others. As
         therapy proceeds, the therapist becomes more insistent about the need for behavioural
         changes, such that old habitual schema-driven coping mechanisms must be overcome
         to ensure that the client can get their needs met in healthy ways. If coping modes
         continue to dominate, schemas will be perpetuated and lasting progress will not be
         possible. It is therefore crucial that the therapist work to address both their own
         schemas and the client’s schemas that block change, to enable them to overcome
         presenting issues and to facilitate authentic emotional vulnerability and interpersonal
         connection.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Table 9.1 Common behaviour change targets for common modes

                                                                                           Coping Modes                                       Behavioural Targets

                                                                                           Surrender               Compliant Surrenderer      •   Set limits and boundaries on other’s demands and intrusive behaviours
                                                                                                                                              •   Reduce urge to ‘rescue’ others
                                                                                                                                              •   Find balance between own needs and those of others
                                                                                                                                              •   Practise asking for needs to be met, rather than ‘acting out’ or trying to ‘earn’ the right to get needs
                                                                                                                                                  met by self-sacriﬁcing
                                                                                                                                              •   Learn to express healthy anger and assertiveness
                                                                                                                   Helpless Surrenderer       •   Practise taking responsibility for own emotional needs
                                                                                                                                              •   Practise asking others to meet needs in direct ways
                                                                                                                                              •   Maintain awareness to ensure relationships are based on reciprocity rather than dependency
                                                                                                                                              •   Develop balance between own and others needs
                                                                                           Avoidant                Detached Protector         •   Practise mindful awareness of interoceptive and proprioceptive experience
                                                                                                                                              •   Allow underlying Vulnerable Child to express emotional needs when appropriate
                                                                                                                                              •   Practise choosing to adjust the switch of detachment/numbness in daily life
                                                                                                                   Detached Self-Soother      •   Notice tendency to rely on compulsive behaviours (drugs, alcohol, eating, work, gambling, sex,
                                                                                                                                                  etc.) as a means of numbing self




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                              •   Recognise needs and emotions underlying compulsive behaviours, and work to actively get these
                                                                                                                                                  needs met
                                                                                                                                              •   Learn to seek connection (rather than relying on substances to disconnect)
                                                                                           Overcompensatory        Self-Aggrandiser           •   Reduce grandiose behaviours, boasting, put-downs, scathing remarks
                                                                                                                                              •   Reduce tendency to ‘use’ others, or to treat relationships as transactions
                                                                                                                                              •   Learn to respect the rules and to pay your way
                                                                                                                                              •   Practise reciprocity in relationships
                                                                                                                                              •   Practise showing vulnerability to trustworthy others and asking for emotional needs to be met
                                                                                                                                              •   Reduce focus on appearances, status, materialism, and nurture values that are focused more on
                                                                                                                                                  connection with others and nature
                                                                                                                                              •   Learn to be respectful of others’ needs and to provide nurturing for signiﬁcant others
                                                                                                         Perfectionistic    •   Introduce play and fun into daily life
                                                                                                         Overcontroller     •   Allow self to make mistakes and perform less than perfectly
                                                                                                                            •   Resist urge to describe experiences in overly detailed way
                                                                                                                            •   Tune into bodily experience (interoception)
                                                                                                                            •   Develop somatic awareness/mindfulness skills
                                                                                                                            •   Tune into emotions of Vulnerable Child
                                                                                                                            •   Learn to communicate about vulnerability
                                                                                                                            •   Resist urge to intellectualise or ‘ﬁx’ problems
                                                                                                                            •   Resist urge to objectify self and others, and to reduce relationships to transactions
                                                                                                                            •   Increase capacity to connect to vulnerability and to nurture self and others
                                                                                           Child Modes   Vulnerable Child   •   Allow closeness with others who are trustworthy and capable of meeting your needs
                                                                                                                            •   Practise asking directly for needs to be met
                                                                                                                            •   Allow healthy interdependency
                                                                                                         Angry Child        •   Validate underlying unmet needs
                                                                                                                            •   Learn to ask for needs to be met in direct ways
                                                                                                                            •   Reduce tendency to avoid anger through suppression, somatisation, or acting out/discharge of
                                                                                                                                anger




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                            •   Process unresolved childhood anger and rage through Imagery Rescripting
                                                                                                                            •   Express healthy anger in the present and set healthy boundaries
                                                                                                                            •   Find constructive focus for expression of anger
                                                                                                         Impulsive Child    •   Practise setting healthy limits on behaviours
                                                                                                                            •   Set healthy incentives and rewards that reinforce healthy behaviours
                                                                                                                            •   Get needs (e.g., for freedom and self-expression) met in overt ways so that Impulsive Child is not
                                                                                                                                forced to ‘grab and run’
                                                                                                                            •   Identify fears associated with giving up impulsive behaviours, and address directly to meet the
                                                                                                                                needs
                                                                                           Table 9.1 (cont.)

                                                                                           Coping Modes                                    Behavioural Targets
                                                                                                                   Undisciplined Child     •   Practise setting realistic goals
                                                                                                                                           •   Break goals into small steps
                                                                                                                                           •   Use ﬂashcards as mechanism for staying connected to short-term and long-term life goals
                                                                                                                                           •   Explore pros and cons of setting limits on undisciplined child
                                                                                                                                           •   Gradually build up self-control ‘muscle’ by practising every day
                                                                                                                                           •   Reward self for meeting mini-goals and more signiﬁcant goals
                                                                                           Inner Critic [Parent]   Punitive Critic         •   Set limits/challenge Inner Critic in daily life
                                                                                           Modes                                           •   Make a list of all of the aspects of life that are avoided due to feeling ‘undeserving’ – arrange in
                                                                                                                                               a hierarchy (most to least diﬃcult)




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                           •   Gradually work through behavioural hierarchy
                                                                                                                                           •   Be actively rebellious against Inner Critic – use anger in constructive manner to ﬁght back
                                                                                                                                           •   Challenge Critic through ﬂashcards and chairwork
                                                                                                                   Demanding Critic        •   see above as for the punitive critic
                                                                                                                   Guilt-Inducing Critic   •
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking        207



                                                                          Illustration 9.2 Punitive Critic mode




             Box 9.12 Future Pattern-Breaking Imagery: Step by Step


             Step 1: Provide a Rationale and Negotiate a Future Image Target
             It is important to provide a rationale for applying future pattern-breaking imagery. By the time
             the client has made it towards the ending phases of treatment, they are generally socialised to
             the use of imagery techniques. The rationale (as with Imagery Rescripting) should emphasise
             both the advantages of experiential learning and the opportunity to practise. Processing
             future challenges in imagery provides the client with an opportunity to anticipate and
             rehearse overcoming any obstacles, with the beneﬁt of the therapist’s support. Once the
             client agrees to participate, the therapist works with the client to agree on an imagery target
             that is representative of their future chosen pattern-breaking scenario (e.g., having an assert-
             ive conversation with dad). It is useful at this stage to also help clients to anticipate and discuss
             any obstacles they might experience in the image.

             Step 2: Visualising Healthy Adult (Optional)
             This step is a more recent addition to the protocol and, as such, can be considered optional.
             The idea is to activate and prime the client’s Healthy Adult mode in a brief imagery exercise as
             preparation for sending the client, in the next step, in to confront their agreed future pattern-
             breaking image. A full protocol for visualising the Healthy Adult mode is outlined in
             Chapter 10: Building Connection to Healthy Modes: The Healthy Adult and Happy Child
             Modes as a stand-alone technique. When visualising the Healthy Adult mode in this context,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          208           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




              it may be useful to use a positive image that is thematically related to the schema/s and needs
              activated in the future image (e.g., autonomy and healthy boundaries).

              Step 3: Activate an Image of a Future Pattern-Breaking Scenario
              THERAPIST: Can I get you to close your eyes now and get an image of your upcoming meeting
                 with your father. Really take the time to paint the picture of this scene. Where is your
                 dad? What is happening in the scene? What do you see in the image? What do you hear?
                 What do you feel?

              Step 4: Bring in the Healthy Adult Part to Implement Healthy Behaviour (Pattern-Breaking)
              THERAPIST: Now I want you to imagine your healthy side . . . big, strong Jenny . . . the side of
                 you that knows you need to set a boundary with dad. Can you do that? Can you imagine
                 big Jenny ‘tapping in’ in this scenario?
              CLIENT: Yes.
              THERAPIST: Great. Now just sit upright . . . adjust your posture . . . you are in charge now. Now,
                 what do you need to say to your father? [Encourage the client to implement the new
                 behaviour.]

              Step 5: Coaching in Self-compassion, Cognitive Restructuring, Behavioural Change
              Allow the client to complete the dialogue. The goal is to give the client an experience of
              mastery over the future situation. If the client is at some risk of failing to master the image, the
              therapist can play a coaching role, feeding healthy messages and cognitions.

              THERAPIST: . . . I want you to tell him that it is ok for him to share his opinion, but it is also OK
                 for you to disagree, and have your own thoughts on the matter . . .
                If the client struggles to master the image with this coaching, then the therapist can enter
              the scene and take charge, modelling what might be needed (from a Healthy Adult) in the
              scenario, as is done in imagery rescripting of past images.

              Step 6: Reﬂection and Homework
              Once the scene is complete, have the client open their eyes, and spend some time reﬂecting
              on the imagery exercise. What were the key takeaways from this experience? What did they
              learn? Would this change anything about how they approach the situation in vivo? What
              barriers to change remain? What does all of this mean for our behaviour change hierarchy? Are
              you ready to work on one of the steps this week?
                 Once the client has been able to imagine being successful at changing the pattern,
              collaborate with the client to attempt some pattern-breaking ‘for real’ as part of homework.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking   209




         Cartoon 9.1 Future Pattern-Breaking Imagery




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          210           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




          Cartoon 9.1 (cont.)




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               Intervention Strategies 4: Pattern-Breaking           211




         Cartoon 9.1 (cont.)




         References
         1. Young JE, Rygh J. Young-Rygh Avoidance                             coping inventory. University of Utrecht
            Inventory (YRAI). Cognitive Therapy                                Press.
            Centre; 2003.                                                 4. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema
         2. Young JE. Young Compensatory                                     therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford
            Inventory (YCI). Cognitive Therapy                               Press. 2003.
            Centre; 1995.                                                 5. Van der Winjgaart R. Imagery rescripting:
         3. Rijkeboer MM, Lobbestael J, Arntz A,                             Theory and practice. Pavilion Publishing &
            van Genderen H. (2010). Schema                                   Media; 2021.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Building Connection

              10                     to Healthy Modes
                                     The Healthy Adult and Happy
                                     Child Modes
          Introduction
          Although schema therapy is often characterised by its focus on healing painful and mal-
          adaptive aspects of a client’s presentation, it is equally important to nurture and grow
          psychological health and resilience.
              Jeﬀ Young, in his seminal book, outlined the importance of two positive modes that
          often require development during schema therapy: the Healthy Adult mode and the Happy
          Child mode [1]. In this chapter, we elaborate on the nature and function of healthy modes,
          and present when and how schema therapists seek to develop these capacities in clients
          throughout treatment.

          Conceptualising the Healthy Adult Mode
          The Healthy Adult mode is primarily responsible for healthy self-regulation. As maladaptive
          modes become more readily identiﬁed and appropriately addressed in therapy, it becomes
          important to also focus on strengthening the healthy aspects of the self. A central aim of schema
          therapy is to strengthen the Healthy Adult mode of clients well enough that they can take care of
          their own core emotional needs outside of therapy. In the early phases of schema therapy, the
          therapist acts as a role model for this Healthy Adult side. For the most complex clients, the
          therapist may present the ﬁrst healthy role model and limited reparenting provider they have
          encountered. It is hoped that the healthy, adaptive attitudes (cognitions) and responses
          (behaviour) of the therapist will be internalised and serve as building blocks for the develop-
          ment of the client’s own Healthy Adult repertoire. During the middle to ending phases of
          schema therapy, the client must also learn to be able to invoke the Healthy Adult by forming
          a mental image of this mode and imagining how they would deal with common problematic
          situations in daily life. It is useful to think about the Healthy Adult mode as both a trait and
          a state; schema therapy aims to build both a healthy general pattern of responding (Healthy
          Adult as a trait), but also help the client to be able to access or invoke this mode to eﬀectively
          regulate emotion and behaviour in the face of life’s challenges (Healthy Adult as a state).

          Functions of the Healthy Adult Mode
          Young and colleagues [1] described several functions of the Healthy Adult mode. The
          Healthy Adult mode is characterised by:
          1. Higher functioning and healthy schemas of capability and strength.
          2. Adaptive behaviours and cognitions that are required for undertaking appropriate adult
             functions, such as taking responsibility, working, parenting, commitment, etc.
          212


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes   213



         3. Positive or adaptive schemas.
         4. Being motivated by the satisfaction of core emotional needs. This mode is primarily
            concerned with helping meet needs in a stable and enduring way.
         5. Its role as a nurturer to the Vulnerable Child.
            In Chapter 1 we provided a broad description of the Healthy Adult mode:
             The Healthy Adult recognises, protects, and nurtures the inner Vulnerable Child and their
             needs, and demonstrates compassion for self and others. This mode demonstrates
             ﬂexibility, seeking to balance prioritising the needs of self and others, and can manage
             adult responsibilities (sustaining a job, self-care, managing ﬁnances, caring for others).
             The Healthy Adult strives for a ﬂexible balance between pleasant adult activities (intel-
             lectual/cultural/physical) and maintaining commitments. This mode experiences the
             body and mind as integrated aspects of the self, can give and receive nurturance and
             care, and gains meaning from authentic self-expression and connection with others and
             the world. This mode, when activated, can step back with awareness from one’s
             automatic schema-based reactions and choose adaptive reactions with respect to one’s
             longer-term needs. (P10)

         Recently, authors have built and expanded upon the original deﬁnition, describing the
         Healthy Adult mode as involving two key processes or abilities [2]:
         1. Healthy self-processing characterised by self-awareness, mindfulness, and distancing (or
            defusion) from schema or mode activation (e.g., ‘I notice that a part of me is afraid that
            you will leave if I ask for my needs to be met’).
         2. Accessing healthy beliefs about the self and the world (positive/adaptive schemas) and
            related functional patterns of behaviour (e.g., ‘It will be OK . . . it’s normal to ask for my
            needs to be met. Other people expect that relationships should be a two-way street and if
            they don’t then that is their problem’).

         Strengthening and Connecting with the Healthy Adult Mode
         In Young, Klosko, and Weishaar [1]), the process of strengthening the Healthy Adult mode
         was described mostly as an implicit process, derived through observing the therapist and via
         interventions largely focused on healing maladaptive schemas and modes. Considerable
         attention has been paid in recent years to methods of explicitly building the Healthy Adult
         mode as a separate therapy objective. A plethora of cognitive, experiential, and behavioural
         treatment strategies have been proposed to explicitly strengthen the healthy side of the client
         [2, 3, 4]. However, this range of methods can be narrowed down to four core skills necessary
         for healthy self-regulation: (1) healthy self-awareness; (2) self-compassion; (3) cognitive
         restructuring and accessing healthy perspectives; (4) behaviour change. These can be
         considered the building blocks of the Healthy Adult, and key targets for positive schema
         therapy. These abilities both build the Healthy Adult ‘trait’ over time and can be used to
         induce or ‘connect with’ the Healthy Adult ‘state’ within treatment sessions or during daily
         life (e.g., for mode management). These four skills are presented here as a series of steps.
         Before beginning skills development, schema therapists will gauge the strength of the
         client’s Healthy Adult mode by assessing the client’s existing strength in these four areas.
         If the client has diﬃculties in any speciﬁc areas, these can be used to prioritise relevant
         positive interventions.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          214           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Four Aspects of Healthy Adult Functioning
          Step 1: Healthy Self-Awareness (Mindfulness)
          In the early phases of schema therapy, clients typically present as overwhelmed or domin-
          ated by the activation of maladaptive modes (e.g., critics, Vulnerable Child, Detached
          Protector). Consequently, they have very poor self-awareness: they do not understand
          their feelings, where they come from, what their needs might be, or how to adaptively
          respond to challenging situations. Such clients are often stuck in automatic and engrained
          patterns of mode-responding, which allow them to survive but ultimately disconnect them
          from satisfaction of their core emotional needs. To the degree that clients are not aware of
          these automatic, schema-driven patterns of responding, they remain destined to repeat
          them. Thus, it is important in the early phases of treatment for schema therapists to help
          clients to identify their schemas and modes and understand which childhood memories,
          emotions, bodily sensations, cognitions, and coping responses are associated with them.
          The goal is for clients to understand how to notice and label these experiences (as schemas
          or modes) as they arise in the here and now, while recognising any links to developmental
          origins and their experience of their current problems. It is hoped that by doing so, clients
          learn to be able to ‘step back’ and notice their automatic schema- or mode-driven reactions
          when their schemas and modes are activated, providing them crucial time to be able to
          formulate healthy or adaptive responses. An important part of this process is that clients
          also become aware of their needs and values in the situation. Schema activation will often
          indicate that one’s needs and values are threatened in some way. Knowing which needs and
          values seem threatened is necessary to select an adaptive behavioural response.
              Building schema and mode awareness traditionally occurs via the education and con-
          ceptualisation process at the beginning of therapy, through the use of schema/mode
          monitoring forms, and via attunement within the therapy relationship (see Chapter 6:
          Intervention Strategies for Schema Healing 1: Limited Reparenting). In recent times,
          authors have recognised the potential applicability of mindfulness practices and other
          ‘third wave therapy’ approaches (e.g., values clariﬁcation exercises) to explicitly build or
          induce healthy self-awareness (see [2] for a more thorough overview). For example, highly
          ruminative clients (high in Over-Analyser coping) might be encouraged to start treatment
          sessions with a brief mindfulness practice as a way of connecting them to the present
          moment and, in turn, to their Healthy Adult mode at the start of a treatment session.


          Step 2: Self-Compassion
          Many clients report being subjected to heavy doses of demanding, critical, or punitive
          messages during their childhood, and did not receive adequate levels of care, compassion, or
          kindness. These kinds of negative messages were delivered either verbally, were modelled, or
          were interpreted as such after traumatic or diﬃcult life events. Having not received much of
          it, these clients have diﬃculty experiencing kindness and diﬃculty showing kindness to
          themselves. Instead, they may have an overdeveloped ‘Critic’ voice.
               It is generally accepted that experiencing compassion stimulates systems in the brain
          that calm a person down [5, 6]. Therefore, as the therapy starts to reduce the dominance
          of the Critic mode(s), it is also important to help the client experience more compassionate
          thoughts and feelings. In practice, once a client has become aware of their own



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes   215



         schema-driven reactions, and then made initial contact with their Healthy Adult side, the
         next step is to induce some calming within the self by responding to emotions with
         compassion.
         Self-Compassion Involves the Following Four Processes:
         a. Recognising and naming the emotions evoked: ‘I feel sad/scared/angry . . .’
         b. Explicitly expressing why situational circumstances make this reaction understandable:
             ‘of course I feel sad, because this is a diﬃcult situation . . .’
         c. Explicitly expressing that old pain from past events makes these emotional reactions
             understandable: ‘of course I feel so sad, because after all I’ve been through, this really is
             a diﬃcult situation . . .’
         d. Paying attention to the soothing and calming felt sense that self-compassion evokes.

         Schema Therapy Intervention Approach to Building Healthy Self-Compassion:
         1. Mode/Schema Awareness. Clients low in self-compassion tend also to be dominated
            by critic modes and associated schemas (e.g., Punitiveness, Unrelenting Standards).
            Initially, through the case conceptualisation, education, and process of self-
            monitoring, clients need to be made aware of the negative inﬂuence of their Critic
            mode on their problems, and their ability to regulate emotion with self-
            compassion. The hope is to create some initial distance or defusion from the Critic
            and start to make this voice more ego-dystonic (and less ego-syntonic). It is also
            useful for clients to gain awareness of the historical antecedents that have led to
            these Critic messages; this starts the process of understanding and having
            compassion for these (vulnerable) experiences.
         2. Limited Reparenting. As clients start to become aware of this, the therapist uses the
            therapy relationship to directly meet their needs for acceptance, validation, compassion,
            and care. The therapist meets the client’s needs directly and models how to be caring.
         3. Cognitive Techniques. Cognitive techniques in this context have three aims: (i) to build
            a willingness in the client to let go of Critic messages and commit to the notion of self-
            compassion as an alternative (healthy) path to self-regulation (pros and cons technique
            can be useful here); (ii) challenge the adaptiveness of schemas that block self-compassion
            (e.g., standard cognitive techniques for Punitiveness or Unrelenting Standards); and (iii)
            help the client establish new, desired adaptive schemas (e.g., healthy self-care.) All three
            of these aims are important, but we have found the ﬁrst aim to be the foundation, and the
            one that is often neglected in treatments that target compassion.
         4. Experiential Techniques. Standard experiential techniques to build self-compassion
            tend to revolve around chair and imagery dialogues that (i) challenge any Critic
            activation or messages, and then (ii) convey care and compassion to the child (see
            Box 10.1 for a clinical example). For some clients, giving and receiving care and
            compassion can be overwhelming; thus, experiential techniques aiming to increase self-
            compassion should be applied according to the client’s window of tolerance. One
            exercise that evokes relatively low emotional arousal is the Little Boy or Girl on the Street
            Dialogue [2]. It is worth noting that many experiential techniques exist within the
            Compassion-Focused Therapy tradition that have been designed speciﬁcally with these
            goals in mind [7] and can quite readily be integrated into schema therapy.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          216           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          5. Behavioural Techniques. As the client starts to heal and develop some capacity to
             experience self-compassion, it is also important for them to change their
             behaviour. This often involves a reversal of some form of maladaptive coping, but
             should also include a commitment towards compassionate, kind, and caring
             behaviour towards oneself (e.g., committing time for relaxation). The client should
             start to adopt healthy and adaptive behaviours that reﬂect the attitude ‘I am worth
             it; I’m worthy of self-care and kindness.’ As clients develop more capacity to
             experience self-compassion, their capacity to turn this outward and show others
             compassion is also enhanced and can be threaded into Healthy Adult pattern-
             breaking (some clients in particular struggle with this).



              Box 10.1 Clinical Example of Self-Compassion Using Chair Dialogue
              with the Vulnerable Child Mode (Experiential Technique)

              In response to an argument that took place over the past week, a chair technique was
              introduced. A chair is placed between the therapist and the client, symbolising the little girl
              that the client once was. To intensify this image, a photo of the client as a little girl has been
              placed on the chair. Since the conceptualisation of the case and the ﬁrst phase of treatment, it’s
              been known that this girl has often been the victim of verbal and physical abuse by her father.
              The therapist now coaches the client in dealing with this emotional pain in a healthy manner.

              THERAPIST: I think we understand very clearly why she is so scared and sad, don’t we?
              CLIENT: Yes . . .
              THERAPIST: Can you say that out loud, that you do understand? Please ﬁnish this sentence:
                 [therapist turns towards the small child’s chair] ‘Of course you feel so sad because . . .’
                 [therapist turns back towards the client again] Please express why is it actually perfectly
                 logical that she feels so sad in this situation?
              CLIENT: . . . Well, there was that argument, of course . . .
              THERAPIST: Exactly, can you express loudly that understanding you felt, the understanding
                 that this situation was also very sad to her?
              CLIENT: [turns towards the small child’s chair] Well . . . Of course, you feel sad, because an
                 argument is never fun. Anyone would feel anxious and sad in that situation . . .
              THERAPIST: Excellent! You’re doing great! But I think that an argument is very diﬃcult for her
                 in particular, don’t you think? What with everything she’s been through . . .? Can you
                 also say something about that?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes . . . You’ve already experienced so many arguments; you’ve been shouted at
                 so often . . . even as a child, growing up. Of course, it makes complete sense that this
                 frightens you and also that it makes you sad . . . I get that . . .
              THERAPIST: You did great! . . . How do you feel when you voice that understanding of the
                 situation so loudly? Do you feel worse than before? Just as bad? Or a little better?
              CLIENT: I do feel calmer, yes . . .
              [Note: for some clients this part can trigger the critic mode, as a barrier to the experience of
              healthy compassion. The critic mode would then become a target for intervention within this
              session.]




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes   217




         Illustration 10.1 Healthy Adult (Nurturer) mode



         Step 3: Cognitive Restructuring and Accessing Healthy Cognitions
         The calming eﬀect of self-compassion is a prerequisite for being able to reﬂect realistically
         on the situation, the emotions evoked, and how to deal with them in an adaptive way.
         Negative self-evaluations from internalised Critic modes need to be contradicted and
         reﬂexive methods of self-protection stemming from coping modes need to be adjusted.
         Cognitive restructuring of these old assumptions is a key step in strengthening the Healthy
         Adult part of the client. In the beginning phases of therapy, the therapist presented the
         cognitive arguments needed to contradict the Critic mode messages and to make the client
         more aware of not just the advantages, but also the disadvantages of the old coping modes.
         In this middle phase, the client should increasingly make the cognitive arguments (that
         contradict old assumptions) on their own by voicing them and repeating them frequently.
             In this phase focused on the Healthy Adult, the goal is for the client to access healthier
         and more functional thoughts and attitudes (healthy self-talk) that reﬂect positive or
         adaptive schemas [8]. We have found that an important theme here is the notion of basic
         hope and optimism. Clients will often ‘borrow’ from our hope for them through the
         reparenting messages, but in the later phases of treatment they will need to be able to access
         this hope for themselves to eﬀectively regulate their schema-based reactions (e.g., ‘It’s going
         to be OK, even this will pass’). See Box 10.2 for an elaboration of the previous clinical
         example.

         Step 4: Behaviour Change
         The fourth and ﬁnal step in strengthening the healthy side of the client is to learn to respond
         to problems and emotions in a healthy way. However, each situation requires a diﬀerent
         kind of behavioural instruction as the speciﬁc factors of each situation tend to vary. In
         addition, there may also be a range of other basic needs, motivations, and values surround-
         ing problematic situations. The Healthy Adult mode is ultimately concerned with long-term
         need satisfaction [2]. Connecting the clients with their needs will tend to connect them to
         their Healthy Adult mode. When the client is triggered in session and reﬂects on some urge



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          218           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 10.2 Clinical Example of Cognitive Restructuring for Developing Healthy
              Cognitions

              After the client has been coached in expressing self-compassion, the negative self-evaluations
              that were triggered by the argument with her boyfriend are addressed.

              THERAPIST: When I hear what was going on in your head during and after the argument – that
                 it was all your fault and that you always ruin everything – who do we hear saying this?
                 What side of you?
              CLIENT: My Punitive side!
              THERAPIST: That deﬁnitely sounds like it . . . However, you have now made contact with that
                 Healthy Adult side of yourself, that captain of your own ship. In the meantime, you have
                 calmed down a bit by ﬁrst observing your reactions with a sense of compassion and
                 understanding, instead of criticising them as this ‘Punisher’ tends to do. Now let’s think
                 about why what the Punisher is saying isn’t true. Why it isn’t true that it is all your fault
                 and that you ruin everything?
              CLIENT: . . . But that’s what I think.
              THERAPIST: Who thinks that – you or that Punisher?
              CLIENT: I think I . . . hmm . . . I don’t know . . .
              THERAPIST: That’s why we really need to take some time now to think about that, not coming
                 from reﬂexes, but really coming from your Healthy Adult side. You know how the saying
                 goes: Where two people argue or ﬁght . . . it takes two to . . .?
              CLIENT: Tango?
              THERAPIST: Exactly . . . What do you think about that? Could that be the case?
              CLIENT: Yes, that seems about right . . . I guess it can’t be ALL my fault.
              THERAPIST: But if that is true for others, then why shouldn’t it be true for you now – and are
                 you really the only one who is to blame for all of this? Or is that just what the Punisher
                 would have you believe? Does that make any sense?
              CLIENT: I guess so, if you look at it that way.
              THERAPIST: So, this is an important point, one to remember and bear in mind. Can you say
                 that literally to the Punisher, that in an argument, there is never only one party at fault?
                 Like it takes two to tango!
              CLIENT: [speaking softly] . . . Well, where there are two people arguing, both are
                 responsible . . . so it’s not just my fault . . . There are two sides to the story.
              THERAPIST: Very good, say it again but now 20 per cent louder.
              CLIENT: [slightly louder] Where two people are arguing, both have to take some responsibil-
                 ity, so it’s not all my fault, because he was being really mean to me!


          to cope reﬂexively, ask them ‘what do you think you need in that situation?’ Consequently,
          in learning to regulate with the Healthy Adult mode, the client must learn to ﬁrst ask
          themselves what they need in problematic situations, and how that need can be validated or
          met in that speciﬁc situation. The complexity of diﬀerent problematic situations and the
          presence of other people who may have diﬀerent needs than them make it almost impossible
          to reach an ideal outcome in all situations. Dealing with problematic situations is therefore



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes   219



         a constant balancing act. A metaphor that can be used to convey this to the client is the
         Healthy Adult who, as captain of a ship, tries to stay on course even though that course
         sometimes faces strong currents, storms, and as such, is never sailing in a perfectly straight
         line. Initially the client starts to speculate, through their self-monitoring, on how to bring
         their needs into play in various situations. The therapist will then guide the client to
         elaborate and add to their initial observations.
         Connecting with the Healthy Adult Mode Using the ‘Healthy Adult Connection Form’.
         The Healthy Adult Connection Form (see Figure 10.1) can be used to help guide clients
         through the process of connecting with their Healthy Adult mode and build Healthy Adult
         capacities over time. Clients are often more able to complete the initial (basic) aspects of
         this form early in treatment. The form provides a structured method to build mode
         awareness: clients learn to become aware of aspects of a triggering situation, their own
         reactions, and their needs, and recognise their own mode activation. The monitoring form
         kind of ‘force feeds’ the Healthy Adult mode. Encouraging the client to step back and
         reﬂect on Healthy Adult questions induces the Healthy Adult. Over time, clients become
         better able to complete the form right through to the end, including forming a plan to
         respond in a healthy way. Don’t expect clients to achieve a healthy response independ-
         ently, early on in treatment; the ability to plan a healthy response follows a developmental
         process. By a later stage of treatment, the form can also be used to facilitate mode
         management; clients can use the form in diﬃcult situations to help access their Healthy
         Adult mode. Such a form, if used for homework, will provide a helpful focus for the
         sessions and priceless data on where the client struggles to regulate, and will suggest
         potential intervention targets.
         Connecting to the Healthy Adult Through Imagery. The client can learn to form a mental
         image of their Healthy Adult side. We have found it helpful for the client to practise
         accessing this healthy side in imagery, to feel vividly and realistically what might otherwise
         only be an abstract concept.
         1. Rationale. The therapist overviews the later phase of therapy in which the client must
         learn to handle any problematic situations and emotions in a healthy way. The Healthy
         Adult side is described as a mode, a side of the client, and, as was the case with other modes,
         attention is focused on the recognisable signals of this state of mind.
         2. The Therapist Gives a Personal Example of Their Own Healthy Adult Mode. The
         therapist also gives personal examples of what their own healthy side looks like in
         various situations. An example is given of a challenging, diﬃcult situation from the
         therapist’s everyday life where old patterns were activated but the therapist managed
         to handle these patterns and the situation itself, in a healthy way. The therapist
         might choose an example where they had to balance meeting their own needs with
         meeting the needs or demands of others. There are various reasons why the therapist
         gives a personal example. First, it illustrates that being a Healthy Adult does not
         ostensibly mean that everything is easy and problem free. The therapist has already
         made it clear that everyone, including the therapist, has schemas. It has also been
         explained that it is not the presence of these schemas that determines whether or not
         you are a Healthy Adult, but rather how you deal with these schemas and problematic
         situations. Nevertheless, experience has shown that clients still have unrealistic



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          220           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




                                             HEALTHY ADULT CONNECTION FORM


                                           The Specific Event or Moment That Upset me …




                 Underlying need/s
                                                        What is the healthy adult
                                                      perspective of this situation?
                                                                                            Physical awareness
                                                                                             What shows up in
                                                                                               your body?




             What part of my reaction                  Choices or actions to make
             was justified (Try to                        that meet this need
             express some healthy
             compassion for this                                                             Thoughts and/or
             reaction)?                                                                            images
                                                                                           ‘What’s running though
                                                                                           your mind at the time?’


                                                                 Action taken




                 What mode/s are
                                                      Result: Reflect – Was my need          Feelings/label
                    involved?
                                                       met? Any key takeaways?




                                                           What is my initial urge
                                                           to cope or respond?




          Figure 10.1 Healthy Adult connection form

          expectations when it comes to what it means to be a Healthy Adult. Citing a personal
          example reinforces an important message – namely, that therapy goals should be
          realistic goals.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes   221



             Box 10.3 Step-by-Step Plan for Learning to Visualise (Invoke) the Healthy Adult Mode
             1    Explain the rationale behind the imagery exercise.
             2    The therapist gives a personal example of their Healthy Adult.
             3    The client visualises their own Healthy Adult mode.
             4    Identifying the embodiment of Healthy Adult mode.
             5    Evaluation and homework.



             A second reason for citing a personal example is to provide the client with the
         opportunity to experience contact on a more equal footing. In preparation for the end
         part of therapy, the client needs to develop more autonomy and self-conﬁdence, which
         will be undermined if the therapist remains on a pedestal as someone who can eﬀortlessly
         handle all problems and is never plagued by concerns and feelings of fear, sadness, or
         anger. The middle phase of therapy can be likened to the puberty phase of children. In
         this phase, adolescents have to learn that their parents are not able to do everything in the
         way in which they had experienced as small children and are people with their own
         limitations and shortcomings. This process of ‘coming down from a pedestal’ oﬀers room
         for autonomy to grow.
         3. Client Visualises Their Own Healthy Adult Mode. The therapist invites the client to
         recall a visual image of their healthy side. The client is asked to think back to
         a situation that they found diﬃcult but that was ultimately handled well, and that the
         client looks back on with a sense of satisfaction or pride. In this imagining, the client is
         asked ﬁrst to focus on the diﬃcult part of the memory and to become aware of the
         emotions that are being evoked. Next, the client is asked to concentrate on the part of
         the memory where they handle these emotions and the situation well. The therapist
         explicitly labels these acts of competent emotional and situational management as the
         operation of the client’s Healthy Adult.
         4. Identifying the Embodiment of the Healthy Adult Mode. The therapist asks the client to
         become aware of the physical, sensory qualities of the Healthy Adult state of mind (associ-
         ated with the memory identiﬁed in step 3). What feelings are associated with this part of the
         memory? Where does the client experience these feelings in their own body? Which posture
         best suits this feeling? Can the client assume that posture now? What urges to act does the
         client experience? The client is also asked to take a mental photograph of themselves in this
         state of mind. Therapist Tip: The client can also be encouraged to make a basic artwork or
         drawing representing this ‘photograph’.
         5. Evaluation and Homework. In the follow-up discussion, both the memory itself
         (from step 3) and the embodied qualities are named as potential gateways to this
         Healthy Adult state of mind. The client can then consciously choose to use these cues
         to access their healthy side in future situations – for example, by assuming the same
         posture, recalling the image of themselves in that state, or focusing the attention on
         the part of their body where they felt that speciﬁc feeling. Homework involves the
         client practising this imagery exercise. A recording can be made during a session to
         guide the homework practice, if desired.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          222           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Developing and Expressing the Happy Child Mode
          In addition to the Healthy Adult mode, schema therapy recognises the Happy Child mode as
          a second functional mode to nurture. Theoretically, the Happy Child mode is intrinsic (like
          the Vulnerable Child or Angry Child modes). As humans, we all have a Happy Child mode:
          the capacity to be light-hearted, to experience fun and enjoyment. This mode can act in
          a dyad with the Healthy Adult mode to maximise well-being; the Healthy Adult allows for
          the activation of the Happy Child mode and helps meet its core needs of spontaneity and
          play when it is appropriate.
              The Happy Child mode is evident when the client describes a sense of joy, fun and
          playfulness. The Happy Child mode is thought to represent the ﬁrst kind of developmentally
          appropriate healthy mode for children. Much of what is learned about the world in
          childhood comes through this playful state. In Happy Child mode the client engages in
          more light-hearted behaviours and takes a less serious and more playful view of events
          around them. They engage in fun behaviours and interact with the world with an attitude of
          curiosity and enjoyment. It is important to note that the Happy Child mode does not
          function as a coping mode. For example, although the Self-Aggrandiser mode may use
          humour to jeer or tease others with the guise of being ‘playful’, its function is to gain
          superiority or take a position of power. Within Happy Child mode, the function of humour
          and play is not to avoid, hide, or mask emotional states but to experience positive aﬀect (e.g.,
          joy, happiness, curiosity).
              The suppression of the Happy Child mode typically occurs in developmental environ-
          ments where play, spontaneity, and fun are restricted, discouraged, or not valued. As
          a result, the child’s experience of positive aﬀect (e.g., happiness, joy, spontaneity, curiosity)
          is thwarted. For example, clients may have excessively structured routines, they may have
          had excessive pressure to achieve, and caregivers may have viewed fun and play as not being
          a priority compared to ‘accomplishments’. Adult clients whose Happy Child mode was
          neglected might struggle to describe childhood memories where caregivers played and had
          fun with them. In addition, in some caregiving environments, any display of emotion –
          positive or negative – was inhibited and the caregiver presented as being self-conscious or
          overly controlled in their emotional expression. Where emotional expression is inhibited,
          the experience of play for the child is restricted. Adults with a limited capacity to express
          their Happy Child mode may present as overly inhibited in their experience of positive
          emotions and related behavioural repertoires (e.g., play). Chronic disconnection from
          positive aﬀect experiences represents a vulnerability factor for psychopathology such as
          depression. The Happy Child mode can also be conceptualised as a healthy regulator of
          positive aﬀect. Positive aﬀect can buﬀer against more acute, grave, and aversive emotional
          states (negative aﬀect).
              In cases where the Happy Child mode is undeveloped and linked to clinical problems,
          the therapist may need to incorporate the Happy Child mode into case conceptualisations
          with a view to strengthening the mode and the dyad with the Healthy Adult mode. The
          client’s Healthy Adult mode allows for playfulness, permitting the client to ‘lighten up’ and
          go ‘oﬀ duty’. Clients experiencing high levels of the Unrelenting Standards schema may
          beneﬁt from developing and building the Happy Child mode. In such cases, the schema’s
          excessive focus on achievement or the compulsion to ‘get things right’ comes at the expense
          of engagement in fun or enjoyable activities. Such adult clients may feel guilty or stressed
          when engaging in Happy Child mode pursuits and require intervention. Alternatively,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes     223



         individuals with high Emotional Inhibition schemas may feel uncomfortable engaging in or
         displaying any positive emotions. They may present as being emotionally ‘uptight’ and
         unable to feel positive emotional experiences. If the Happy Child mode is conceptualised as
         ‘underdeveloped’ and linked to clinical problems (e.g., depression), then the development of
         the Happy Child mode would be a target for intervention.

         Methods to Strengthen the Happy Child Mode
         Intervention approaches that aim to develop and express the Happy Child mode involve
         some ﬂexible and creative combination of all four classes of intervention characteristic of
         schema therapy: limited reparenting and cognitive, experiential, and behavioural strategies.
         Limited Reparenting. The therapist models the use of the Happy Child mode to the client,
         demonstrating being ‘real’ and at times modelling a light-hearted approach. The therapist
         directly meets the need for spontaneity and play by aﬃrming to the client that it is ‘ok to
         have fun and feel light-hearted’ and framing the sessions more within this playful stance.
         Cognitive Techniques. The therapist encourages the client to challenge the belief that fun,
         playfulness, and spontaneity are redundant and unnecessary. Here, psychoeducation regard-
         ing play in childhood development can be helpful to validate the core emotional needs that
         underpin the mode. It is also likely that EMS (e.g., Unrelenting Standards, Punitiveness,
         Emotional Inhibition) or modes (Demanding Critic, Avoidant Protector) that directly thwart
         the expression of the Happy Child mode will need to be directly addressed. The therapist may
         also construct ﬂashcard recordings for the client to listen to as homework when they feel
         uncomfortable engaging in healthy, ‘Happy Child’ behaviours (see Box 10.4).
         Experiential Techniques. In imagery rescripting exercises, clients may access childhood
         images where the need for play was evident. The therapist can enter the image and play with
         the child and validate the need for playful interaction. It will often be necessary to ﬁrst
         address any caregivers in imagery that are actively inhibiting the expression of positive
         emotions. For example, the therapist may challenge the parent’s message that ‘play always
         comes second, what is important is to work hard’. The exercise can end with the therapist
         encouraging, supporting – and perhaps participating – in playful activities and experiences
         in the imagery (see Box 10.5).



             Box 10.4 Example Excerpt of Flashcard Recording for Connecting with Happy Child
             mode

             ‘Right now, you may be feeling uncomfortable, tense. This is the right time to start engaging in
             something fun, something you like to do, and would like to be able to enjoy. This is your
             Happy Child mode. You may be thinking that this is not a priority, that you should be doing
             something more ‘productive’. Your Happy Child mode is underdeveloped because your
             parents discouraged normal fun and enjoyment over their ﬁnancial goals and ‘hard work’.
             This has resulted in you now feeling stressed and “pressured” by your Demanding Critic
             whenever you try to have fun. So even though you want to go back to work or do something
             “productive”, it’s important to allow yourself to lighten the load and have some fun. It’s OK . . .
             you deserve this . . . it’s OK to just “have fun”.’




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          224           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 10.5 Example of Playful Imagery to Foster Happy Child Mode
              THERAPIST: Now that things are a bit more relaxed here, what does Little Johnny want to do
                 with all this free time?
              CLIENT: Play on the swing.
              THERAPIST: Let’s do that then . . . Can you imagine that . . . we are at the park, and I am
                 pushing you on the swing . . . How does that feel?




          Mode Work with the Happy Child mode. The therapist can ‘mode out’ (i.e., conceptualise)
          the prospect of engaging in Happy Child mode. This allows the therapist to understand the
          interplay of other modes that may stiﬂe spontaneous behaviour. Mode chair dialogues can
          be used to help challenge sentiments from the Demanding Critic mode or reason with the
          Perfectionistic Overcontroller mode. The therapist also aims to strengthen the dyad
          between the Happy Child and Healthy Adult modes. Late in treatment, the client’s
          Healthy Adult can take the lead on chairwork exercises and advocate for the importance
          of the Happy Child mode. A plethora of Happy Child imagery exercises have been devel-
          oped to directly encourage its expression, including ‘Ice-Cream Imagery’ [9] and ‘Toy Store
          Imagery’ [2].
          Behavioural Techniques. The therapist encourages the client to engage in behaviours that
          represent ‘lightening up’ and enjoyment. Therapists may construct a list of behaviours that
          might function to strengthen the Happy Child mode. For example, the therapist may
          encourage the client to bring something funny to share to session (e.g., a funny comedy
          sketch on YouTube), often as a way of starting sessions on a playful note. We have found
          that children tend to be a great conduit of the Happy Child mode. If the client is a parent,
          they may be encouraged to set aside time to play, engage, and follow the lead with their child
          to develop ‘playfulness’.

          Concluding Remarks
          When faced with the long problem lists, pervasive interpersonal diﬃculties, and
          frequent distress of chronic and severe clients, it is easy for therapists to become
          preoccupied with the negative qualities of the client’s life. Furthermore, psychological
          health is not simply the absence of painful emotions; most of our clients have well-
          developed coping modes that minimise their painful emotions but do not enhance
          their quality of life. Growing the client’s Healthy Adult mode is the ultimate aim of
          schema therapy, and cultivating their Happy Child mode is a critical component of
          that developmental process. All children are born with a capacity for joy, curiosity,
          and exploration, a basic need which western neoliberal economies arguably pay scant
          attention to. Schema therapy oﬀers continual opportunities and numerous methods to
          counterbalance early child-rearing and wider socialisation forces, to promote the
          importance of play and self-compassion for a more authentic, enriched model of
          psychological health.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    Building Connection to Healthy Modes             225




         References
         1. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                              oneself. Human Development. 2009;52
            therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                          (4):211–14.
            Press. 2003.                                                  7. Kolts R. CFT made simple: A clinician’s
         2. Roediger E, Stevens B, Brockman R.                               guide to practicing compassion-focused
            Contextual schema therapy: An integrative                        therapy. New Harbinger Publications;
            approach to personality disorders, emotional                     2016.
            dysregulation, and interpersonal functioning.                 8. Louis JP, Wood AM, Lockwood G,
            New Harbinger Publications; 2018.                                Ho MH, Ferguson E. Positive clinical
         3. Claassen A, Broersen J. Handleiding module                       psychology and Schema Therapy (ST):
            schematherapie en de Gezonde volwassene.                         The development of the Young Positive
            1st ed. Springer; 2019.                                          Schema Questionnaire (YPSQ) to
                                                                             complement the Young Schema
         4. Claassen A, Hulsbergen M. Schematherapie en                      Questionnaire 3 Short Form (YSQ-S3).
            de Gezonde Volwassene: Positievetechnieken uit                   Psychological Assessment. 2018; 30
            de praktijk. 1st ed. Springer; 2015.                             (9):1199.
         5. Gilbert P, Tirch D. Emotional memory,                         9. Farrell J, Reiss N, Shaw I. The schema
            mindfulness and compassion. In Zinn J.                           therapy clinician’s guide: A complete
            Clinical handbook of mindfulness. Springer;                      resource for building and delivering
            2009. pp. 99–110.                                                individual, group and integrated schema
         6. Neﬀ K. The role of self-compassion in                            mode treatment programs. John Wiley &
            development: A healthier way to relate to                        Sons; 2014.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping

                 11                  Modes to Support Change


          Introduction
          Coping modes embody the client’s most successful survival strategies from their most
          adverse earlier experiences. However, to the extent that their adult life no longer resembles
          the context in which their coping modes developed, these modes often become schema
          maintaining. To eﬀectively deal with coping modes, the therapist must deeply understand
          the roles those modes have served, the vulnerability they protect the client from, and the
          ways in which they now interfere with needs satisfaction. In this chapter, we describe how
          schema therapists negotiate with clients to lower their guard and allow the therapist to help
          them achieve deeper healing and growth, rather than continuing to settle for ‘coping’.

          The Function of Coping Modes
          Coping modes represent the ‘survival’ parts of the self that are currently active for an
          individual, which would have developed as a means of coping with unmet needs during
          childhood or adolescence. Coping modes function to avoid or escape schema activation and
          can be categorised within three overarching styles: avoidance, overcompensation (inver-
          sion), and surrender (resignation). In individuals with chronic interpersonal or psycho-
          logical diﬃculties, coping modes are not under adequate voluntary control. Maladaptive
          coping modes are often either rigidly maintained regardless of how well they work to meet
          the person’s needs in a situation (such as in Cluster C presentations, wherein the person
          becomes rigidly ‘stuck’ in one or more coping modes) or ﬂip chaotically between alternative
          coping modes with minimal stimulation (such as in Cluster B presentations). Coping modes
          may also become dissociated. The degree of dissociation operates along a spectrum, at the
          highest end of which is dissociative identity disorder (DID), wherein the modes operate as
          multiple independent ‘selves’ with minimal awareness of each other. By contrast, in
          a healthy person there is natural and ﬂexible control of coping modes as the individual
          maintains a consistent self-awareness across the ebb and ﬂow of diﬀerent modes assuming
          momentary prominence. The Healthy Adult mode encapsulates a stable sense of self as the
          ‘conductor’ of the ‘internal orchestra’. As a person becomes healthier, they become more
          consciously aware of the presence of their coping modes, have more control over their
          intensity (can ‘dial’ them up and down), and are less reliant on using them in extreme ways.
              Schema therapy is based on the premise that diﬀerentiation is integrative; it is by
          recognising the diﬀerent aspects of self that we become aware of them and begin the process
          of bringing them together into a coherent sense of self. Schema therapy interventions in the
          initial phase of therapy are aimed at diﬀerentiating the coping modes, labelling them, noting
          their character and felt sense, and acknowledging their functional intention. The goal is to
          226


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes   227



         help clients recognise that their coping modes make sense because they were adaptive in the
         childhood context in which they emerged. Later in therapy, the focus gradually shifts to
         exploring how problematic coping behaviours are no longer serving the client and often
         prevent them from getting their needs met or cause interpersonal problems. It is important
         to recognise that, in many cases, the coping modes are the closest that clients have to
         a Healthy Adult side. These states of mind helped the person to survive their childhood, to
         protect their Vulnerable Child self, to manage unmet needs, and to ‘make sense’ of an
         otherwise confusing or chaotic environment. They have provided inner coherence and, in
         some cases, a ‘surrogate identity’. Often, the coping modes have developed an ‘addictive’
         quality because the associated behaviour provides an experience that mimics partial need
         fulﬁlment, and dysfunctional behaviour has been reinforced by the pleasure or relief from
         frustration it provides. Thus, our goal is not to ‘remove’ or eliminate the coping modes, but
         to help the client gain more ﬂexible, context-dependent control over them. We teach clients
         to acknowledge and respect the mode-system in place, whilst negotiating for more access to
         the Vulnerable Child part, to enable healing to occur.
             In this chapter, several strategies for bypassing coping modes will be described in detail:
         labelling, interviewing coping modes, chairwork to bypass coping modes, and empathic
         confrontation. However, these dialogues between therapist and coping mode could equally
         well be carried via imagery work, whereby the client closes their eyes and is asked to ‘play the
         voice of the side that doesn’t want to do imagery rescripting’. In some cases, just asking the
         client to close their eyes and allow an image of their ‘little self’ to arise will automatically
         bypass coping modes, thereby eliminating any need for direct dialogue with the coping
         mode. In the example in Box 11.1, the therapist discovered the context in which Frank’s
         coping mode emerged. This information provided the foundation for the therapist to show
         a deep level of understanding when dialoguing with the coping mode through chairwork or
         empathic confrontation.


             Box 11.1 Clinical Example of Coping Mode and Its Development

             Frank described a childhood characterised by loneliness, disconnection, and lack of belong-
             ing. His parents worked long hours, and Frank’s needs often went ‘under the radar’, with
             minimal opportunities for family connection or expression of emotional needs (Emotional
             Deprivation, Emotional Inhibition schemas). His parents relied heavily on alcohol on week-
             nights as a means of unwinding from work. Frank recalled frequent parties on weekends,
             where the house would be full of adults intoxicated with alcohol. He never quite felt that he
             belonged, either within his family or within his peer group in his rural hometown (Social
             Isolation schema). Most of the boys in his peer group played football, and this was the focus
             for all community activities and most conversations. Frank, on the other hand, was a sensitive
             child. He had no interest in sport but was creative and aspired to become an artist or interior
             designer. He described feeling a lack of acceptance, value, and belonging, and craved
             approval and recognition for his achievements (Approval Seeking schema).
                Frank coped with his loneliness through distraction; he escaped into books, online gaming,
             and comfort eating (Detached Self-Soother/Self-Stimulator mode). Once he reached early
             adolescence, his gaming time gradually increased to the point where he often stayed up all
             night and spent entire weekends playing, barely leaving the house except to attend school.
             Frank became increasingly competitive, seeking the thrill of winning a game and enjoying the
             sense of achievement and admiration from peers. By the time he attended therapy in his




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          228           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              mid-twenties, he described a longstanding ‘addiction’ to gaming. He experienced relation-
              ships and life outside of the gaming world to be unsatisfying and ‘boring’. Further, he had
              become increasingly isolated from his ‘real-world’ peers, leading to social anxiety and loneli-
              ness when not gaming. Frank described feeling ambivalent about working on his addiction; it
              had become his sole source of connection with the world, and his only means of accessing
              recognition and acceptance. Frank’s Detached Self-Soother also blocked his capacity to
              attend therapy sessions regularly, and he frequently cancelled at the last minute due to
              feeling exhausted following all-night gaming sessions.




              In the example in Box 11.1, Frank’s Detached Self-Soother/Stimulator mode had
          become a source of both comfort and escape from his lonely childhood, and partially
          compensated for unmet needs of belonging and approval. Over time, it became an
          entrenched coping mode that was strongly reinforced by recognition from peers for
          his gaming prowess. Furthermore, the emotional ‘high’ of intermittently winning com-
          pensated for the lack of feelings of warmth and joy associated with unmet needs for
          connection, warmth, and care. The pleasure and relief oﬀered by this form of detached
          self-stimulation became increasingly intertwined and led to Frank relying on gambling as
          a safe means to access company while avoiding anxiety about being rejected or seen as
          ‘diﬀerent’ in a real-life setting.

          Labelling, Bypassing, and Interviewing Coping Modes
          via Chairwork
          During the early phase of schema therapy, coping modes often present as the ‘default’ mode
          in sessions, presenting a façade that largely keeps the child modes at a distance. It is easy to
          be blindsided by coping modes that mimic the Healthy Adult mode, such as by giving the
          appearance of being highly rational, logical, independent, and even successful. However,
          further investigation will reveal that if the client is inhabiting a coping mode, they do not
          access and share their more vulnerable thoughts and feelings, or show themselves compas-
          sion, as they would if they were inhabiting their Healthy Adult mode. It is the therapist’s job
          to recognise and negotiate with the ‘front stage’ coping modes to bypass them and to reach
          the Vulnerable Child mode which has been relegated to ‘back stage’ (i.e., outside of
          conscious awareness).
              After roughly three to six sessions, once the therapeutic alliance is strengthening, the
          therapist can begin to draw clients’ awareness to modes as they appear in session and invite
          the client to label them using their own vernacular. For example, labels such as ‘the Security
          Guard’, ‘the Wall’, or ‘the Smokescreen’ are common names the client might come up with
          for the Detached Protector mode. The ‘Alcoholic Haze’ or ‘Binge Trance’ are typical names
          for the Detached Self-Soother. Ideally, the function or the felt sense of the mode is captured
          in some way by the label. Next, key identifying features of the coping mode are explored,
          including its felt sense in the body, somatic signs, typical mental state, thoughts, feelings,
          and behavioural urges or action tendencies. These might be written on a whiteboard or
          handout. The client is invited to monitor their modes between sessions, such as through
          a schema-mode diary, self-monitoring circle, or mode-schema pie chart [1]. In session, the
          therapist can use a chair to represent the client’s coping mode, to set up a dialogue with it. By



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes   229




         Illustration 11.1 Detached Protector mode




         inviting the client to move back and forth between the Vulnerable Child and Coping Mode
         chair, they can begin the process of diﬀerentiating between these sides of self. Through
         inviting the client to physically move, we are making their implicit internal processes
         explicit. This enables them to begin to disidentify from the maladaptive messages of the
         coping mode, and to increasingly identify with their Vulnerable Child side. The case
         example in Box 11.2 provides an illustration of this process.
             In the exercise illustrated in Box 11.2, the therapist negotiates with the coping mode and
         addresses its main concerns. If the main concern is that they will be ﬂooded with emotions
         (in the case of a Detached Protector or Overcontroller mode driven by an Emotional
         Inhibition schema), the therapist can reassure the client that they can learn to experience
         emotions again gradually, whilst building new strategies for managing their intensity, such
         as safe/calm place imagery and positive imagery. Similarly, if the client fears that they will
         lose control of their behaviour (e.g., self-harm), then the therapist can reassure them that
         they will learn new healthier ways to contain the intensity of their emotions. If the client
         fears that the therapist will humiliate and shame them for showing their vulnerability (as in
         the case of a Paranoid Overcontroller mode driven by a Mistrust/Abuse schema), then the
         therapist must validate the existence of their concern (that it is understandable that they
         learned this from previous relationships) but also gently teach the client to question the
         validity of the fear in this situation. The therapist can ask the client whether they have
         noticed any indications that the therapist will humiliate or ridicule the client. The therapist
         must reassure the coping mode that they will not ever intentionally hurt the client, but also




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          230           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 11.2 Clinical Example of Bypassing the Coping Mode via Chairwork

              Over the course of her assessment, Marisa described several traumatic experiences through-
              out childhood, including emotional neglect, sexual abuse, and witnessing domestic violence
              between her parents, followed by being raped and a terminated pregnancy during adoles-
              cence. She described her current life as a ‘rollercoaster’, marked by chaotic and incontrollable
              changes in mood and episodes of impulsivity and parasuicidal behaviours. As she recalled
              these events during childhood, she appeared emotionally numb and unaﬀected by the
              traumatic events she described. Her tone of voice was ﬂat, with no obvious sign of distress,
              almost as though she were talking about someone else’s life. In session six, the therapist
              expanded on the concept of modes.

              THERAPIST: Marisa, I’d like to share with you something that I notice as you are telling me about
                 the troubles and emotional struggles that you have suﬀered. There seems to be a side of
                 you that appears to be slightly detached from your feelings as you are talking . . . like this
                 side is protecting you from feeling too much . . . almost as though its job is to carry on with
                 ‘business as usual’, even in the face of highly distressing situations. I wonder if this is
                 something you might have noticed at all?
              MARISA: What do you mean? . . . This is me. This is who I am.
              THERAPIST: Oh yes, it is you, but only one part of you. And just to reassure you, this is no criticism
                 at all . . . you might not realise, but as humans we are not just one-dimensional creatures.
                 We all have several diﬀerent parts that make up who we are. These parts all come to the
                 surface at diﬀerent times, depending on what is needed. And in this situation, as you are
                 telling me about diﬃcult parts of your life, I am noticing one part of you.
                      For example, I have a conﬁdent outgoing part of me that I can access when I am
                 teaching. And at other times, when I am with my partner or my family, I might be more in
                 touch with my spontaneous, fun side. Or, if I have had some upsetting news, but then need
                 to attend a meeting, I have a side that can ‘carry on’ and focus on what is important without
                 getting too caught up in my emotions. Does that ﬁt with your experience at all, where
                 diﬀerent parts are stronger at diﬀerent times? [Marisa nods.] At the moment, as you are
                 telling me about some really painful memories, it makes sense that the side of you that
                 detaches from feelings might get stronger, to protect you. But it can feel a little bit like
                 talking to you through an interpreter that doesn’t want me to get too close. I wonder if we
                 could try a chair exercise where we ﬁnd out more about that side . . . would that be okay?
              MARISA: I guess so, I don’t really see the point but . . . I’ll give it a go.
              THERAPIST: [smiling] Ok, thank you for indulging me with this strange technique! So, over
                 here we have a chair that is for your Detached side that doesn’t really want to talk about
                 or express feelings. If we gave that part a name, what would it be called? Like ‘the Wall’,
                 or ‘the Security Guard’, or something else?
              MARISA: Well . . . maybe the ‘Snow-Storm’? It’s like everything in my mind is in white-out, and
                I’m numb and don’t have to think about anything.
              THERAPIST: Perfect, that makes sense! Let’s call it the Snow-Storm mode. Can we put that side
                 on this chair here, and this other chair that you are on now will be the Vulnerable Child
                 chair . . . to represent the side of you that has the feelings. This is ‘Little Marisa’. Now,
                 I am going to ask the empty Snow-Storm chair some questions: ‘I know that you are here
                 to protect Marisa, and I completely respect that. I would like to ﬁnd out more about
                 Marisa’s feelings, so I can connect with her more and help her to learn some healthy
                 ways of managing emotions. I wonder if you might tell me what you are afraid will


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes          231




                 happen if you allow her to tell me about her emotions?’ [Therapist turns to Marisa.]
                 Marisa, could you go over to that chair to reply, trying your best to be that side that
                 doesn’t want to think or talk about it . . . what would it say?’
             MARISA: [reluctantly moves] I don’t know . . . I guess that the problem is that it will be like
               a can of worms. Once I start feeling, it will all come ﬂooding out. And I won’t ever be able
               to stop. And when my feelings get strong, that is when trouble happens, like when I self-
               harm and end up in hospital.
             THERAPIST: Ok, thank you, that makes sense. Can you move back to the Little Marisa chair
                now so that I can reply to this detached side? [Marisa returns to Vulnerable Child chair,
                next to the therapist.]
             THERAPIST: [addressing the empty chair] Snow-storm, I can see you are working hard to
                protect Marisa, and you have been a big help throughout her life. You have helped
                her to survive all sorts of traumas. I respect that, and I want to reassure you that I am not
                trying to get rid of you. You have an important role in her life. But I can also see that it’s
                a heavy job for you to be working so hard all the time, protecting her all on your own.
                And I can see that the painful feelings underneath are still there, as she has never had
                the chance to learn healthy ways of managing them. I wonder if it might be possible to
                allow me a little window of time with her, just a few minutes, so that I can start to help
                her with those painful emotions. Would that be possible?
                    [Therapist turns to Little Marisa’s chair] What is it like for you to hear me talk to that
                protector side from your Little Marisa side?
             MARISA: It feels kind of weird. And a little bit scary.
             THERAPIST: That is totally understandable. You’ve rarely had the opportunity to talk about
                your feelings, and from what you’ve told me, when you were a young child, there was
                no one there to support you with your feelings. So, you created this detached Snow-
                Storm part to protect you by shutting down the emotions. But I want to get to know this
                side of you, and to ﬁnd out more about what it was like for you to go through those
                experiences. There is a part of you that is suﬀering, and I am here by your side to help
                you with those feelings of sadness and hurt. We can just do it a tiny bit by bit, at your
                pace. And each session you can decide how much you want to say. Would that be okay?
             MARISA: I guess I could try.



         that they recognise that it will take time for the client to trust them. In short, the therapist
         must listen to and address the fears of the coping mode.
             To understand the coping mode better and build trust, the therapist can also ask
         questions and ask the client to reply from the coping mode chair. A coping mode can also
         be interviewed, to learn about its function, both in the past and the present, and to begin the
         process of getting to know it as an ‘old friend’ which made sense in the context of their
         childhood circumstances (see Box 11.3).
             It is important to make the links between coping mode avoidance and unmet childhood
         emotional needs explicit for clients. Our goal is to help them recognise that the role of
         coping modes is to prevent schema activation. For example, in the earlier example, Marisa’s
         Detached Protector mode is protecting her from a fear of being overwhelmed and all alone



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          232           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice




          Cartoon 11.1 Chairwork with the Detached Protector

          with her emotions. Our goal is to help Marisa understand that the reason her coping mode is
          working so hard to protect her from this fear is that her needs for nurturance, warmth, and
          attunement weren’t met in childhood so she continues to expect this will be the case within
          current adult relationships, including with the therapist. Once the client understands this
          link, it opens up opportunities to explore ways in which – in spite of its good intentions – the
          coping mode is, in practice, blocking the client’s capacity to get their needs met, thereby




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes           233




                                                          Cartoon 11.1 (cont.)


         Cartoon 11.1 (cont.)


             Box 11.3 Clinical Example of Interviewing the Coping Mode
             THERAPIST: Frank, I wonder if we could get to know this side of you a little more? Let’s bring in
                an extra chair, and on this chair [therapist points to empty chair] I can see the gaming side
                of you sitting there in my mind’s eye. I’d like to ask that side some questions to get to
                know it a bit better, if that’s okay with you? And if it’s okay with you, you could either tell
                me what it’s saying, or move over to the chair and reply from that side of you. Would
                that be okay?
             •    When did you come into Frank’s life?
             •    How did you help him in the past?
             •    Can you tell me how you protected him in the past? What kinds of things did you do to
                  provide protection?
             •    Did you help him to feel better about himself in any way?
             •    Was there anything diﬃcult going on that you were trying to distract him from?
             •    What were you trying to give him that he needed and wasn’t getting enough of back
                  then?
             •    And what about now that he is older . . . how are you helping him now?



         perpetuating the schema. The therapist can then help the client to explore ways of meeting
         these needs more eﬀectively in the here and now.
             The therapist can also check in regularly with the client’s coping modes to ‘show respect’
         for the role the Protector parts play in the client’s life. For example: ‘I’d like to suggest that
         we do some imagery or chairwork today, and I want to check in with you as to whether you
         have a preference, and also whether your Protector parts would be on board with us doing



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          234           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          that?’ The coping modes often feel less threatened if they feel heard and respected. On the
          other hand, the therapist must balance the need to slow the pace of work suﬃciently to allow
          the client to feel safe, while also pursuing the overarching goal of maximising access to the
          Vulnerable Child in therapy, to ensure healing exercises can occur. This ‘checking in’
          process is an example of the highly collaborative nature of schema therapy, which in turn
          is a robust transtheoretical predictor of client outcomes in therapy [2].
              Mode-bypassing exercises may need to be persistently repeated for many weeks or months
          until the therapist starts to build enough trust that the client can be more open and show their
          vulnerable side more willingly. Mode interviewing of the type described earlier can be carried
          out with any coping mode. Mode dialogues can also be conducted via imagery, whereby the
          client is asked to get an image of the side that doesn’t want to do the imagery work. The
          therapist asks the client to ‘be that side and tell me why that side thinks it’s a bad idea to do
          the imagery’. The goal is not to have a long conversation with the coping mode, but to have
          the client access their emotional responses. Once the client is feeling emotion, the therapist
          can proceed with limited reparenting, via any of the experiential techniques.

          Bypassing Coping Modes When the Client Believes They Don’t
          Have a Vulnerable Side
          In some cases, the coping modes are so eﬀective at keeping the Vulnerable Child mode
          outside of the client’s conscious awareness that the client can struggle to recognise the
          existence of this side of themselves. The client might talk about diﬃcult circumstances or
          situations, but in a detached manner. The therapist can begin to introduce the vulnerable
          side through the ‘Contamination of the Chair’ exercise, illustrated in Box 11.4.


              Box 11.4 Contamination of the Chair to Access Vulnerable Child Mode
              THERAPIST: [talks to client in Protector chair] I understand that there is this side of you that is
                 most comfortable being in the ‘Protector’ mode, but today I’d like to explore a way of
                 helping you in a completely diﬀerent way from just blocking the feelings. So, I have
                 brought in an empty chair. What I would like you to do is to stand up and leave this
                 ‘Protector’ chair and move over to this other chair. When you do, just notice if you can
                 leave the Protector side behind and come over here to sit next to me. [Client moves to
                 Vulnerable Child chair.]
              THERAPIST: [talks to client in Vulnerable Child chair, gesturing toward the Protector chair]
                 I understand that this side is just trying to protect you but I also hear it talking about
                 feeling lonely and struggling. So over on this chair where you are now, I want to hear
                 from the side that is feeling the loneliness and struggles.
              MARISA: No, it feels the same to me.
              THERAPIST: Can you maybe try to connect to the emotional side that feels lonely and upset?
                 What were you feeling upset about?
              MARISA: Nothing really, it doesn’t feel diﬀerent over in this chair.
              THERAPIST: That’s okay. I can hear that this Protector side is still here, so can you move back to
                 the Protector chair that blocks the feelings? And I will sit in the Vulnerable chair
                 [therapist moves]. In this chair, I will really try to keep connected to the ﬁve-year-old




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes          235




                 child that you showed me in the photographs. And that she is all alone and was often
                 alone. When others paid attention to her, it was with anger. It makes me so sad to think
                 of her. If I was that child, I would feel so lonely, like no one is there for me and the only
                 ones who give me attention get angry with me. I feel sad in my stomach. I want people
                 to be kind to me, warm to me.
                     Okay, now I will move back to my chair. And I wonder if you can move back to the
                 Vulnerable chair and sit next to me again? When you come back to this chair, can you
                 recall what I was talking about?
             MARISA: Well, it was about when I was small. And not being treated very well.
             THERAPIST: And when you focus on that time of your life, what comes up for you?
             MARISA: Well, it was hard, I felt sad a lot.
             THERAPIST: And can you remind me what was making you so sad?
             MARISA: No one was around to look after me.
             THERAPIST: Yes, that makes sense. And when I was on the chair, I also mentioned the sense
                that this child needed something diﬀerent. Can you remember that?
             MARISA: I wanted my family to take care of me.
             THERAPIST: When you say that now, what feelings come up for you?
             MARISA: Sadness.
             THERAPIST: Where do you notice it in your body?
             MARISA: Here [gestures toward heart].
             THERAPIST: It makes sense that you would feel that. You are such a kind and sensitive person,
                Marisa. This is normal that you need others to be kind and warm for you. I want to be
                here for you. Together, you and I can be here together with these feelings, rather than
                you being on your own with them. How does that feel for you . . . diﬀerent from being
                over in that [Protector] chair?



             Another version of chairwork that can be particularly useful when clients are unable to
         recognise the impact of their coping modes on their lives is when the therapist plays the role
         of the client’s Vulnerable Child mode. In this exercise, the therapist’s agenda is to express
         the emotional pain and longing that they sense is underneath the coping mode. The goal is
         for the client to begin to recognise and acknowledge that perhaps these ‘back stage’
         emotions and needs linked to their Vulnerable Child mode do exist. The expression of
         these needs by the therapist once again makes the implicit explicit and reinforces their
         validity. Through this chairwork exercise, the therapist implicitly gives the client ‘permis-
         sion’ to express needs and feelings which they previously denied. The therapist also aims to
         show the client’s Vulnerable Child side that, despite them remaining hidden, they are seen
         and heard by the therapist. This method can also be a useful way of highlighting the impact
         of compulsive and/or addictive behaviours in covering emotional suﬀering and needs, as is
         illustrated in the example in Box 11.5 with Frank.
             In the exercise in Box 11.5, the therapist draws on her knowledge (from earlier sessions)
         that Frank has been feeling lonely, depressed, and disconnected. Although Frank is cur-
         rently unable to articulate or acknowledge this in therapy, the therapist recognises that the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          236           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



              Box 11.5 Clinical Example of Therapist Playing the Vulnerable Child Mode
              THERAPIST: Frank, we talked last time about your plans to talk with your mum again. You
                 mentioned that you were anxious that it was going to be a diﬃcult conversation. I was
                 wondering how you got on with that?
              FRANK: It was ﬁne. I don’t really want to talk about it. I’ve barely had any sleep and I can’t
                 think straight. Maybe we could talk about something else today.
              THERAPIST: Okay, I respect that, and we can easily do that, but before we do, I wonder if we
                 can slow things down so that I can understand what is happening just now for you?
                 When you say you didn’t get much sleep, can you tell me more about that?
              FRANK: Well, I had some all-night gaming sessions, and, if I’m honest, I was also binge eating
                 quite a bit this week, and now it’s hard for me to concentrate on anything.
              THERAPIST: That sounds really diﬃcult for you, Frank, and I can totally see why it feels too hard to
                 talk about anything too triggering today. There is one side of me that just wants to let this go,
                 but there is another side of me that cares a great deal about Little Frank . . . the side of you
                 that really wanted to connect with your mum this week, and so I want to make sure that he
                 still gets some airtime.
              FRANK: No, honestly, I have been ﬁne, apart from the lack of sleep.
              THERAPIST: I’m not sure if I’m getting this right, but something that I noticed is that your
                 gaming and bingeing compulsions sometimes get stronger when there are diﬃcult
                 feelings that have been triggered. It’s almost as if they are working harder to keep the
                 feelings underground. Can you relate to that?
              FRANK: Not really.
              THERAPIST: I wonder if we could try a brief chairwork exercise where we explore that a bit
                 more – would that be okay with you? [Frank nods reluctantly.]
              [NB: Chairs arranged as in Figure 11.1]
              THERAPIST: Can I ask you to move to the coping mode chair and be that side that thinks the
                 gaming and bingeing is a good idea? I want you to do the best you can at representing that
                 side. I will move to sit in the Little Frank chair, and I will try to represent that side of you. Okay?
              THERAPIST: [as Little Frank] When you don’t let me talk about my feelings, I ﬁnd it hard. I’m
                 feeling really sad and lonely, but I have no one to talk to.
              FRANK: [a coping mode with therapist prompting] Yeah whatever, it’s not that bad. Just get
                 over it.
              THERAPIST: [as Little Frank] But when you keep gaming and bingeing, it makes me feel like
                 you are pushing me away, like you don’t care what I think. It makes me even more
                 lonely.
              FRANK: Oh, come on, it’s no big deal. I enjoy gaming. Why shouldn’t I have a good time?
                 There’s no harm in it.
              THERAPIST: [as Little Frank] To me it is a big deal. And when you say that, I feel sad – like I’m
                 not a big deal, like I don’t matter. I want to talk about what happened this week. I want
                 help to manage these feelings. I don’t want to keep feeling like this. I don’t want you to
                 keep pushing me away, just like so many others have done in my life.
                      [Therapist stands up to stand outside of the chair circle, and invites Frank to join her.]
                 Frank, just to step outside of this interaction for a minute, I’m just wondering what it’s
                 like for you to hear me speak from this little side of you?


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes          237




             FRANK: Well, this part of me doesn’t really want to hear it. It just wants to keep blocking it
                out. But it does make sense. I can sort of see what you mean. There is a part of me that
                didn’t feel great about this week.
             THERAPIST: Ok, I know it’s really hard to talk about it, but I also know that I don’t want Little
                Frank having to cope on his own with these diﬃcult feelings that come up when you
                talk to your mum. I wonder if you could move over to this [Little Frank] chair, so that this
                side of you could say a bit about what you’ve been feeling? Would that be okay? I’ll be
                right here with you.




                                     Therapist                                                   Client




                                Therapist playing
                                role of Vulnerable                                         Client playing role
                                Child (Little X)                                            of Coping mode



         Figure 11.1 Chair arrangement for therapist playing the vulnerable child




         ﬁrst step toward recovery and reconnection is that Frank will need to acknowledge the
         existence and suﬀering of his vulnerable side. When the therapist takes on this role from
         a vulnerable yet persistent stance, it can provide validation to the voice of the client’s ‘little’
         side which has, until now, remained hidden.

         Empathic Confrontation to Bypass Coping Modes
         Empathic confrontation can be a powerful method to bypass extreme coping modes that
         drive therapy-interfering behaviours. Such behaviours include frequently missing or arriv-
         ing late at therapy sessions, acting in contempt of the therapist’s rights and boundaries (e.g.,
         putting feet on the therapist’s table, taking phone calls during sessions), being overly
         compliant to please the therapist at the expense of describing authentic feelings, and
         avoiding experiential therapeutic work.
             Marisa’s Angry Protector mode became activated when the therapist gently nudged her
         toward chairwork: ‘I really don’t see the point in this stupid exercise, or any of this work for
         that matter. You keep talking about the past . . . what’s the point?! I’ve talked about it before
         and it doesn’t help. And nor does this crazy talking to chairs business!’ Typical fears that
         drive this type of hostile response include: fear of being rejected and/or abandoned; fear of
         being misunderstood; fear of revealing perceived weakness or ﬂaws; fear of loss of control or
         becoming overwhelmed and being unable to function; fear of being unable to satisfactorily



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          238           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          perform the exercise and therefore being a ‘failure’; fear of triggering feelings of guilt or
          punitive responses from others as a result of breaking loyalties, casting parents in a negative
          light, or confessing secrets; fear of being controlled, coerced and compelled to subjugate;
          and fear of losing respect, ‘one-up’ status, or perceived specialness [3]. The therapist’s role is
          to ask questions to identify the intention and function of the coping mode, as well as the
          current problems associated with staying in this mode. The more we can deepen our
          understanding, the more informed and prepared we will be to apply empathic confrontation
          as a method to reduce its negative impact.
              The implicit assumption technique, developed by Behary [3], is based on the premise that
          the compulsion of the coping mode to detach from emotionally triggering experiences is
          based on implicit learning experiences early in life (see Box 11.6). The power of this
          technique draws on the therapist’s capacity to make sense of these automatic coping
          mode reactions in the here and now, through ‘making the implicit explicit’. By making
          sense of the various reactions of the mode under a range of activating circumstances, the
          client is helped to link the coping mode with early experiences which have become over-
          learned to the point of operating automatically, outside of conscious awareness. Once the
          client understands the implicit learning that drives their reactions, the pathway becomes
          clear for the therapist to oﬀer reparenting messages that provide for healing of the


              Box 11.6 Implicit Assumption Technique
              THERAPIST: Something I am noticing, Marisa, is that while this ‘Snow-Storm’ side of you is
                 front stage just now, I can’t help but wonder whether Little Marisa is feeling afraid or
                 under threat. I feel the force of the ‘Storm’ – which won’t allow me to reach in to connect
                 with Little Marisa, and also forbids her from coming out of her solitary conﬁnement.
                 I sense that Little Marisa must be very scared, as I can sense that security guard is ﬁerce.
                 And that makes sense, when I think about what you have told me about your
                 background . . . that allowing anyone else to see your vulnerable side and trying
                 something new opens you up to being humiliated and put down . . . just like when
                 you were little and your dad and brothers would put you down or laugh at you when
                 you showed any emotion or spontaneity. So, I can imagine that the uncertainty of a new
                 exercise like this might make this Snow-Storm side feel you are in dangerous territory?
                     Marisa, I’d really like to speak to this Snow-Storm side that is putting so much energy
                 into guarding you.
                     [Therapist speaks directly to the empty chair assigned to the Snow-Storm mode]: Snow-
                 Storm, ﬁrstly, thank you for working so hard to protect Little Marisa. As a little girl, she
                 was powerless and so you showed her how to keep quiet about her feelings and needs,
                 so that she would feel safe from being humiliated by others. But many years have
                 passed; it is such a burden for her to carry around these old messages into her adult life –
                 such that she is still not permitted to express her needs and feelings, to express her
                 thoughts, desires, wishes, nor to stick up for herself when others overstep the mark by
                 hurting her feelings. I understand that she went through much suﬀering in the past, but
                 I’m concerned that she no longer needs to be carrying around this burden. You might
                 not realise it, but she is not powerless anymore, and she no longer has to tolerate her
                 father or anyone humiliating her as a means of elevating his own sense of power. I am
                 here now, and I want to be able to help her, but to do this I need to connect with her,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     Bypassing Maladaptive Coping Modes    239




                 because this way of protecting her is only making her feel more lonely, powerless, and
                 frustrated. She deserves to be heard, to say what she feels, without fear of being shut
                 down. She needs to have a voice, to say what’s on her mind without having to worry
                 about how others will react. She is perfect and lovable the way she is – and she is
                 allowed to be authentically herself without having to deal with judgements and
                 criticism. I am here to stand up for her – and she also has her own strong Healthy
                 Adult side who is more powerful than she knows – and set limits on others when she
                 needs to. I wonder . . . could you consider taking a rest from carrying around this old
                 burden for a short while so that Healthy Adult Marisa and I can connect with Little
                 Marisa . . . so that she doesn’t need to feel so lonely?




         underlying schemas, and build novel, healthy ways of relating to others, to maximise the
         possibility of getting their needs met [3].
              The power of empathic confrontation depends on the authenticity and compassion of the
         therapist as they attempt to connect with the client’s inner world. The therapist needs to be
         genuinely curious about how coping mode responses are the direct result of implicit learning
         during childhood and adolescence. The therapist should remember that when the client hears
         the therapist really understanding both what they went through in childhood and how that
         felt, the very experience of being heard and understood is itself healing and uplifting. When
         clients see that another human being can hear about their experiences and tell them that
         things ought to have been better for them and that others won’t necessarily neglect their needs
         the way their early caregivers did, it gives the client hope that perhaps they can get their needs
         met in the future. In Marisa’s case, negotiating with her Detached/Angry Protector mode was
         an entry point for her to let go of old patterns of self-protection which were keeping her
         locked in a world of loneliness and isolation, and her tendency to self-harm as a way of
         channelling her despair. By recognising, understanding, and bypassing her coping mode, she
         was able to begin actively working at a deeper level, nurturing her Vulnerable Child self,
         challenging her Inner Critic mode, and developing a Healthy Adult self-respect that involved
         trusting her inner signals and setting limits on others in assertive ways without hostility.
              In the initial stages of therapy, the therapist takes on the role of the Healthy Adult within
         mode dialogue work, and the client gradually learns to take on this role over the course of
         therapy by learning to recognise and work with their own parts. If the therapist does not
         consistently recognise and bypass the coping modes, it is easy to become stuck in ‘chatting’
         about the problems, rather than therapeutically working on the issues. This is more likely to
         occur if the therapist’s own coping modes are present and the therapist’s and client’s coping
         modes (e.g., Detached Protector modes) collude to avoid working on emotions. Therapists
         must consistently check in with clients to ensure that they are connecting with their
         vulnerable side, by regularly enquiring about their current emotional state throughout
         sessions, especially during experiential exercises. If the client is in a coping mode, the
         potential beneﬁts of techniques such as imagery rescripting and limited reparenting will
         be lost and the client will be unable to absorb the healing messages.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          240           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Concluding Remarks
          It is often stated in schema therapy training workshops that ‘a session in Detached Protector
          is a wasted session’. Although it is important to recognise that coping modes were needed as
          survival mechanisms earlier in the client’s life, we also help the client recognise that these
          ways of coping are the result of outdated implicit learning, which now keeps them isolated
          and trapped in a self-perpetuating loop. In the present, coping modes block the client’s
          capacity to emotionally connect with others and to achieve fulﬁlment of their needs. In
          schema therapy, experiential techniques are emphasised because information processing is
          enhanced in the presence of aﬀect. All the methods and techniques described in this book
          rely on the schema therapist empathically bypassing any coping modes that block the client
          from experiencing their Vulnerable Child mode. Schema therapy relies on the client
          inhabiting Vulnerable Child mode to receive limited reparenting and corrective emotional
          experiences and messages that counteract outdated schema-driven messages. As this pro-
          cess unfolds in the therapy room, there is potential for the client to open up to new and
          unexpected ways of developing a revitalised capacity to connect with others in their own
          lives.

          References
          1. Farrell J, Shaw I. Experiencing schema                             prospects for research. Frontiers in
             therapy from the inside out: A self-practice/                      Psychology. 2011;2:270.
             self-reﬂection workbook for therapists.                       3. Behary W. The art of empathic
             Guilford Press; 2018.                                            confrontation and limit-setting. In Heath G,
          2. Ardito R, Rabellino D. Therapeutic                               Startup H, eds. Creative methods in schema
             alliance and outcome of psychotherapy:                           therapy: Advances and innovation in clinical
             Historical excursus, measurements, and                           practice. Routledge; 2020. pp. 227–36.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
               Chapter
                                    Preparing for Termination and

              12                    the End Phase of Schema Therapy


         Introduction
         It is common that as the therapy approaches the ending phase, challenges emerge; as such, it
         can be easy for clients to fall back into their old schema-maintaining behavioural patterns.
         In these moments, clients may seem unable to continue independently without the support
         of therapy. This chapter discusses the way in which the end phase might be carried out, how
         the therapeutic stance of limited reparenting changes during this phase, and how the
         therapeutic strategies are implemented diﬀerently as compared to the earlier phases.
         Furthermore, we will review some common problems and challenging situations schema
         therapists might encounter in this end phase.

         Introducing the Reality That Therapy Will End
         As much as the schema therapist is an agent of limited reparenting, becoming a source of
         support for the client to help meet their needs, the reality is that the therapy will not last
         forever. The client will need to eventually learn to take care of their own needs and ﬁnd
         healthy ways of connecting with their needs in ‘real life’. The therapy plan created in the case
         conceptualisation phase clariﬁes to both therapist and client how important the ending
         phase is and when it might begin. Periodic evaluation or discussion of this plan is required,
         especially during the middle phase of treatment, so that the client remains aware of this
         reality. If no such timetable has been explicitly outlined, it is important that the therapist
         signals this ending phase well before the actual end of therapy occurs. The mention of the
         end of therapy can have a strong schema-activating eﬀect, with the client feeling over-
         whelmed by feelings of fear, abandonment, and possibly anger. Timely reminders about the
         eventual end of therapy, and the ending phase, gives the client the opportunity to get used to
         this idea whilst there is still enough time in therapy to work through any issues or feelings
         that arise. In this way, the client learns that the therapist is there for them to help meet their
         needs, but this relationship exists in the service of change and building their autonomy,
         rather than to foster an unhealthy dependence.
             The therapist will eventually have to make the reality of the ending of therapy deﬁnite,
         which will require answering many of the following questions:
         1.   How long will the therapy last before the ﬁnal session takes place?
         2.   How many more sessions will be planned?
         3.   What issues and topics will be discussed in the time available?
         4.   What happens when we say goodbye? Will the client still be able to get in touch after the
              therapy has ended?
                                                                                                       241


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          242           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          It is not necessary that all these questions be answered at once; rather, they are aspects of the
          ﬁnal phase that will likely arise and require careful attention. We recommend that, as a rule,
          the therapist sticks to any agreements regarding timeframes and does not drop them too
          quickly because of an impulse to calm the client’s activated schemas. After all, the goal of
          therapy is that the client must learn to handle their schemas in real life.

          Objectives of the Final Phase
          The objectives of the ﬁnal phase often involve breaking through negative behavioural
          patterns (see Chapter 9) to strengthen the Healthy Adult mode (see Chapter 10) and to
          anticipate and overcome future problems and obstacles. Breaking out of patterns of behav-
          iour means reducing old coping styles, such as avoidance, surrender, and overcompensa-
          tion. Without an actual change in behaviour, the chance of relapsing into old patterns is very
          high. Strengthening the Healthy Adult mode means that the client becomes better at
          maintaining this mode in situations that inevitably activate schemas. Preparing for future
          problem situations is, in a sense, the formulation of a relapse prevention plan that is
          practised in advance with the help of imagery exercises and role-plays. These goals of the
          ﬁnal phase of treatment have some implications for the therapeutic relationship, and the
          methods and techniques undergo a change in emphasis to meet these objectives.

          Implications for the Therapeutic Approach
          The role of the therapist in limited reparenting changes over the phases in the same way as
          the role of a parent changes as a child grows up and develops. In this comparison, the ﬁnal
          phase of therapy is analogous to early adolescence. It is during adolescence that children
          need to be encouraged to apply what they have learned in childhood. In the ﬁnal phase of
          treatment, the role of the therapist is more like a coach on the sidelines actively urging and
          ‘pushing’ for a change in behaviour whilst ultimately leaving responsibility for changes with
          the client. This change in attitude ﬁrst requires an awareness of the need for it – an
          awareness that autonomy and competence in this phase are strengthened not by
          a therapist who takes over and determines what happens, but by one who is instead oﬀering
          the client space to handle their own schemas or modes.
              In concrete terms, this change in the therapist’s attitude may manifest in them asking
          more open questions and respecting the client’s answers. Respect, however, does not mean
          uncritically accepting the client’s choices. Pushing for autonomy may mean that the
          therapist shows frustration or some mild irritation more openly when the client relapses
          into old patterns. Showing these emotions is a rather provocative tactic to encourage the
          client to fortify their eﬀorts to change old maladaptive habits. This can again be likened to
          the frustration and irritation a parent might feel as the natural consequences of times such
          as when an adolescent drops his coat on the ﬂoor again when entering the house. They serve
          as a natural stimulus to encourage the child to do as they have been taught.
              See Box 12.1 for an illustration of the therapist limited reparenting response as it may
          apply in the ending phase of treatment.

          Implications When Using Methods and Techniques
          In the ﬁnal phase of therapy, the same cognitive, experiential, and behavioural techniques
          are applied as in the earlier phases of treatment. However, the aim of these interventions is
          now to strengthen the Healthy Adult part of the client and to break through behavioural


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Preparing for Termination of Schema Therapy          243



             Box 12.1 Clinical Example of Therapist Limited Reparenting Response in Ending
             Phase of Schema Therapy

             The client talks about the past week and how she has been feeling anxious and sad. She talks
             about feeling that this will never change and that she is not making any progress.
             CLIENT: [angry, frustrated in talking about herself] I can’t do it, I just can’t! Whatever I do,
                I always fail, I’m really useless!
             THERAPIST: Okay, okay . . . who do I hear now?
             CLIENT: I don’t know!
             THERAPIST: Well, I think you may have an idea who we hear when you talk about yourself like
                that . . .?
             CLIENT: I don’t know! I really don’t know! I don’t know what you mean!
             [In the early stages of therapy, the therapist would not have let the tension get to this point and
             would have certainly stepped in and indicated that they thought the Punitive Critic mode was
             active. But realising that this is the ﬁnal phase of treatment, in combination with a felt frustration
             that the client again does not seem to recognise what has been discussed so many times before,
             the therapist chooses a more directive attitude.]
             THERAPIST: I’m sorry, but I can’t go along with that . . . Who would I say is talking now . . .
                which side of you? You know the answer to this . . . you’ve heard me say that so many
                times, you know those words . . .
             CLIENT: That it is the Punitive side?
             THERAPIST: Exactly! And why? How can you tell it’s the Punitive side?
             CLIENT: [pauses, thinking] . . .
             THERAPIST: That’s alright, take your time, it’s not an exam question but it is something to
                seriously think about . . .. and reﬂect on . . .


         patterns and teach new behaviour. The following sections present some examples of the way
         in which techniques are applied diﬀerently in the ﬁnal phase.

         Imagery Rescripting
         In the ﬁnal phase, imagery rescripting is used to prepare for future problem situations as
         discussed in Chapter 9. In an imagery exercise, future events can be ‘previewed’ in the same
         way that memories can be relived [1]. Future-oriented imagery can thereby lead to behav-
         ioural change [2]. Imagery rescripting (or, rather, in this context, future-confronting
         imagery) could therefore be an eﬀective way of allowing clients to prepare themselves for
         future events and to have them practise a healthy way of reacting [3]. Future-oriented
         imagery rescripting can be used to support behaviour change in the following ways:
         • to practise reconnecting to the Healthy Adult mode during schema activation
         • to practise compassion when schemas are activated
         • to learn to apply cognitive arguments against punitive self-evaluations or coping modes
         • to practise new behaviour
         • or a combination of these
             The exercise works best if the therapist and the client discuss beforehand which new
         behaviour will be visualised because there are so many diﬀerent possibilities. Also, if the


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          244           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          client is clear about what they will visualise beforehand, there tends to be less need for the
          therapist to actively adjust or coach them during the exercise. See Box 12.2 for an illustration
          of future pattern-breaking imagery as it may apply in the ending phase of treatment.

              Box 12.2 Clinical Example of Future Pattern-Breaking Imagery

              Sandra regularly goes into her Detached Protector mode in her relationship with her boy-
              friend, which means she does not speak up about the things she does not like, such as the fact
              that he often goes out with friends without her. The therapist has discussed with her how she
              can try to contact her Healthy Adult in such moments and then say that she does not like it
              when he does not ask her to come out too.

              THERAPIST: Good, now close your eyes and ﬁrst get an image of that Healthy Adult, that
                 captain on your ship. What do you see now?
              CLIENT: Then I see myself back at work, when my boss asked me to do something that really
                 wasn’t my job and I said so.
              THERAPIST: Fine, just see let it happen . . . just be that Big Sandra, the Sandra who says she
                 doesn’t want to do this job . . . how do you feel?
              CLIENT: . . . Strong . . . conﬁdent . . .
              THERAPIST: And where in your body is this feeling?
              CLIENT: . . . Here . . . [points to her chest].
              THERAPIST: Lovely . . . let this feeling ﬁll you, ﬂow through you . . . and maybe you can adopt
                 a posture that suits this strong, self-conﬁdent feeling . . .
              CLIENT: [sits up straight]
              THERAPIST: This is your Healthy Adult . . . Big Sandra . . . well, let this image fade away now . . .
                 let it drift away and let the image of you and your boyfriend return . . . your boyfriend
                 wanting to go out with his friends . . . it hasn’t happened yet, but just let this ﬁlm unfold
                 as you expect it to . . . what do you see now?
              CLIENT: I see him standing at the door, his jacket on and he says very casually that he will be
                 away for the night . . .
              THERAPIST: What do you feel when he says that?
              CLIENT: . . . Sad . . . but also angry . . .
              THERAPIST: Okay . . . and now I want to ask you to pause this image . . . at this moment . . . the
                 moment your pleasing side takes over and you don’t say what bothers you . . . I want
                 you to bring in that Big Sandra now . . . be that Big Sandra, that Healthy Adult . . . good.
                 Sit up straight . . . how do you feel?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes, a little better . . . a little stronger . . .
              THERAPIST: Good . . . so, what do you want to say?
              CLIENT: . . . That I don’t like him going out, without me . . .
              THERAPIST: Say it to him.
              CLIENT: . . . [softly] I don’t really like it . . .
              THERAPIST: How does this feel, does this feel like Big Sandra?
              CLIENT: . . . No . . . [with more force] I don’t like you going out without me!’
              THERAPIST: Wow . . . how does this feel?
              CLIENT: Yes, better . . .


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Preparing for Termination of Schema Therapy                   245



         Chairwork Dialogues
         Chairwork can be used to strengthen the Healthy Adult during this phase. The therapist can
         take a seat in the chair of the coping mode or stand next to the chair of the parenting mode,
         which represent old messages. The client then confronts these messages from within their
         Healthy Adult and practices resisting the old beliefs of the coping or ‘Critic’ modes (see
         Box 12.3 for an illustration).


             Box 12.3 Clinical Example of Chairwork to Strengthen Healthy Adult in Final Phase
             of Schema Therapy
             THERAPIST: We have eight sessions to go and we have agreed to use this time mainly to
                prepare you for those situations in which your Protector threatens to take over. Isn’t that
                right?
             CLIENT: Yes, that is correct.
             THERAPIST: And if you were to go back to the Pleasing side, what is your biggest concern,
                what could go wrong if you were to speak your mind?
             CLIENT: Yes, I know him, then he will get moody and that will spoil the atmosphere and
                I don’t want that.
             THERAPIST: Like, if I give my opinion, he will get angry?
             CLIENT: Yes . . .
             THERAPIST: Good, then I want to work on that today, prepare you for those situations and
                practise now what you can do or say at those moments, okay?
             CLIENT: Yes, that’s ﬁne . . .
             THERAPIST: I want to do this again with the chair exercise we did earlier . . . [takes a chair and
                places it opposite the client] . . . but this time a little diﬀerently . . . This is the pleasing side
                [points to the new chair] and I will be sitting in this chair . . .
             CLIENT: Oh?
             THERAPIST: Yes, I will be the Pleaser and I would like to ask you to be the Healthy Adult, Big Sandra,
                to oppose me . . . [sits down in the new chair] . . . so here, I am the Pleaser; I ﬁnd it very
                important to keep a peaceful atmosphere and I am willing to hold back my opinion [points to
                the client’s stomach]. But you [pointing to client’s face] are Big Sandra, that Healthy Adult.
                Maybe you can take a moment to step into that feeling . . . why not close your eyes for
                a moment . . .
                     Okay, and I, as your Pleasing Protector, say: ‘All right, you don’t like him going out with
                his friends again, but just let it go, otherwise he will be moody again and that is even more
                annoying.’ Be that Big Sandra; why is holding back what you feel not the best thing to do?
             CLIENT: . . . I don’t know, I really hate it when he’s moody, so I don’t think it would help.
             THERAPIST: [laughing] Now you’re getting onto my chair! You can’t do that, I’m there already.
                I could say what you said. Your job is to think about what Sandra really needs.
                Remember what she really needs?
             CLIENT: . . . That she can be herself . . . and be heard and seen . . .
             THERAPIST: Exactly, and is holding back her own opinion a good thing?
             CLIENT: . . . No, I don’t think so . . .
             THERAPIST: Why not? Can you tell me directly: ‘It’s not good for Sandra because . . .. ’



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          246           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          Cognitive Techniques
          Compared to the initial and middle phases, cognitive techniques used in the ﬁnal phase will
          increasingly resemble those used in regular cognitive therapy. Clients are required to ﬁll in
          diary forms by themselves in which they investigate problem situations. In this phase, the
          responsibility for investigating and formulating more realistic thoughts is increasingly
          transferred to the client. The diary forms and the ﬂashcards that are made can also begin
          to focus more on future problem situations.

          Behavioural Techniques
          Behaviour therapy is ideally designed to bring about behaviour change. Therefore, many
          methods and techniques from classical behaviour therapy can be applied in the ﬁnal phase
          of schema therapy speciﬁcally aimed at behaviour change. Problem-solving strategies,
          role-playing, social skills training, self-control procedures, communication training, and
          applied relaxation exercises are some of the types of interventions that can be used in this
          phase of treatment. In contrast to regular cognitive-behavioural therapy, these exercises
          are linked to the modes from the case conceptualisation and are intended to strengthen
          the Healthy Adult in the ending phase of the treatment (see Box 12.4 for an illustration).



              Box 12.4 Clinical Example of Behaviour Therapy Strategies Used in Final Phase
              of Schema Therapy
              THERAPIST: In this last phase of the therapy, I would like to strengthen your captain as much
                 as possible, so that in the future he will be able to handle all those crew members, that
                 Punitive Critic, that Protector, and take good care of the needs of [name client]. After all,
                 what is the most important thing in therapy – and also in life?
              CLIENT: Basic needs.
              THERAPIST: Exactly, basic needs, which you ﬁnd with that emotional part, Little [name client].
                 And then what are the steps you need to take as captain of your ship?
              CLIENT: First understanding, recognition, then standing up to that Punisher and Protector
                 and then . . . uh . . ..
              THERAPIST: Finally, you have to ﬁnd your way in diﬃcult practical situations. You really have
                 to plan your course, and that is not always easy because you cannot always get what
                 you need quickly. That is why it is called give and take . . . or compromising. In this
                 process, it is important for you to know what you can say or do in situations with others.
                 Because it is not easy to give your opinion when it is not exactly the same as that of
                 others, is it?
              CLIENT: . . . No . . .
              THERAPIST: And that is why I want us to practise today how you actually do that, give your
                 opinion when it clashes with that of others. Very practical; what do you say, how do you
                 say it? Shall we practise this?
              CLIENT: . . . Okay . . .
              THERAPIST: Is there a situation that you know is coming up, in which this will happen in some
                 way? That things will get so stressful that this Protector of yours might take over?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Preparing for Termination of Schema Therapy          247



         Saying Goodbye
         The ﬁnal phase concludes with saying an actual goodbye. Many clients do not have healthy
         experiences with saying goodbye – important attachment ﬁgures suddenly fell away, or
         contact was broken with a great deal of conﬂict or sadness and fear that was not attended to
         or cared for. Ending schema therapy therefore oﬀers the opportunity to give the client
         a corrective emotional experience in which a goodbye is carefully planned and carried out.
         A healthy way of saying goodbye means looking back (reﬂecting) at the therapy process on
         the one hand, and looking forward to the future on the other.

         Looking Back
         We help clients reﬂect on the key question: What have you learned? Explicit attention is given to
         the changes that have been made. Allowing some space for clients to reﬂect together on what has
         been learned and experienced in therapy helps to consolidate their learning and hopefully leads
         to the client internalising this information within their Healthy Adult mode. Therapists should
         therefore take the time, possibly across several sessions, to consolidate all the information learned
         in therapy. To aid this process, the client can be given various homework assignments, such as to
         write down what they have learned, to check this list regularly, and add to it.

         Looking Ahead
         How can clients remember what they have learned and take it with them into the future?
         A transitional object can help the client remember important corrective emotional experi-
         ences after the goodbye. One example of a helpful transitional object is a list of all the
         learning experiences that the therapist and client have put together in the preceding
         sessions. Another example could be an object that the therapist gives to the client which
         represents the most important learning experience in the therapy, or the most important
         need that the client should keep in mind (see Box 12.5 for an illustration).

             Box 12.5 Clinical Example of Using a Transitional Object when Saying Goodbye

             In the last session, the therapist gives the client a phantom crystal; a piece of quartz in which
             you can vaguely see the shapes of the crystal that it had when it was growing.

             THERAPIST: I would like to give you this. If you look closely, you can still vaguely see the
                shapes of the crystal when it was smaller. You’re actually looking at the earlier gener-
                ations of this crystal, the ﬂawless crystal with smooth surfaces that it was in the past. But
                at a certain point, under the right conditions, a new layer starts to form on those smooth
                surfaces. At that time, it’s a little rough; not as beautiful and shiny. But after some time,
                those shiny surfaces return; it is a beautiful crystal again, but bigger now, and more
                developed.
                     To me this is a symbol of your progress here: you came to me when things were a bit
                rough, and old forms – your old life – were all mixed up. That was a diﬃcult phase for
                you. But you have persevered and grown over the past couple of years, and now there is
                more peace, more shine in your life. That old phase is still visible; there are vague
                memories of that diﬃcult time. Whenever another intense period comes along, you will
                remember that growth may be a bit prickly and messy, but it also leads eventually to
                more shine.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          248           The Model of Schema Therapy into Practice



          What Will You Miss?
          A topic that is often overlooked is to answer the question ‘What will you miss?’ Saying
          goodbye is letting go and it is important that the therapist pays attention to this pain of loss.
          Many clients have not received any support in dealing with pain of loss in their past.
          Acknowledging this pain, combined with an explicit understanding of it, is a healing form
          of compassion that allows the client to feel connected, understood, and seen. Within the
          professional framework of care, the therapist may indicate what they will remember best
          about the client.

          Possible Problems and Challenges
          In previous parts of this book, schema therapy has been referred to as a healing process in
          which stunted emotional development is released into motion, leading to a stronger,
          Healthy Adult part of the client who is capable of handling their various modes. The
          implicit expectation is that the client will develop with increasing stability into a Healthy
          Adult for whom a goodbye is prepared through mutual support.
              The therapist should be prepared for the fact that clinical reality is often diﬀerent. In the
          ﬁnal phase, clients may appear irritated by the schema therapy model, the therapist, and the
          language of modes and basic needs. The contact with the client may therefore be diﬃcult
          and it may seem as if the client is falling back into old patterns and making behavioural
          choices that seem unhealthy. A client may, for example, resume contact with an ex-
          boyfriend while many sessions in therapy have been spent trying to break free from this
          unhealthy relationship.
              Such repetition of patterns that have taken so long to break through can easily evoke
          feelings of anxiety, frustration, and despondency in the therapist. The therapist must ﬁrst of
          all be compassionate and understanding in recognising such feelings. Of course, it is
          frustrating or unsettling when contact with someone you care about seems to fall down
          again, and it is saddening when, for the umpteenth time, someone seems to be making
          choices that seem clearly unhealthy. Perhaps such feelings are better understood from the
          therapist’s personal history and the schemas that developed from it and interact with it.
          Next, the therapist’s thoughts of uncertainty, anger, or despondency need to be critically
          evaluated. This begins by recognising any modes within the therapist that may be inﬂuen-
          cing their reactions. Perhaps feelings of despondency arise from a critical, demanding side
          of the therapist believing that they should be able to take away all the client’s problems. It is
          important for the demanding side of the therapist to recognise that with the client’s
          increasing independence comes the client’s right to make their own choices – even
          ‘wrong’ choices – just as adolescents who leave home make not-so-healthy choices while
          continuing to grow into healthy adults. Therapist supervision and self-reﬂective practice is
          especially important in evaluating these therapist reactions (see Chapter 18: Schema
          Therapy for the Schema Therapist).
              When faced with clients who seem to be relapsing, it is tempting for therapists to
          abandon their plan to discharge the client and prolong therapy. This (understandable)
          urge should be resisted. Prolonging therapy does not guarantee that the client will resume
          making ‘pleasing’ life decisions. At this stage, it is usually best for the therapist to simply
          express their concern about the client’s plans but leave responsibility for the choice with the
          client. At this stage of therapy – just as a parent might do with a young adult – the therapist
          supports the client’s autonomy. The therapist can prompt the client to check whether their



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                           Preparing for Termination of Schema Therapy                 249



         decisions are being generated by their Healthy Adult mode, something the client should be
         encouraged to continue to do when faced with decisions throughout their lives after therapy
         ends.

         Concluding Remarks
         The ﬁnal phase of schema therapy rarely goes smoothly. The appropriate timing of
         when the end of therapy is announced and how this phase is handled makes a big
         diﬀerence in how successfully therapy is completed. The goals of the ﬁnal phase are to
         strengthen the Healthy Adult mode, break through problematic behaviour patterns,
         and prepare the client for future problematic situations. The style of the therapist
         shifts more to coaching from the sidelines and pushing for actual behaviour change.
         Methods and techniques – often from traditional behaviour therapy – are used to
         strengthen the Healthy Adult mode and change schema-driven behaviour patterns.
         Imagery scripting can be applied to anticipated problematic situations in the future.
         Chairwork aims to strengthen the Healthy Adult mode via the therapist playing the
         role of parent and coping modes so that the client can practise their opposing
         arguments. The process of termination and working through a ‘goodbye’ means, on
         the one hand, giving attention to what has been learned and to what will be missed
         and, on the other hand, looking ahead to future problem situations. Transitional
         objects may be used to help remember insights and experiences.

         References
         1. Schacter D, Addis D, Buckner R.                                    polls. Psychological Science. 2007;18
            Remembering the past to imagine the future:                        (3):199–203.
            The prospective brain. Nature Reviews                         3. Van der Winjgaart, R. Imagery rescripting:
            Neuroscience. 2007;8(9):657–61.                                  Theory and practice. Pavilion Publishing &
         2. Libby L, Shaeﬀer E, Eibach R,                                    Media; 2021.
            Slemmer J. Picture yourself at the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Part III             Applications and Adaptations for Mental Health Presentations
               Chapter
                                     Schema Therapy for Chronic

               13                    Depression and Anxiety Disorders


         Introduction
         In this chapter, we outline a schema therapy approach to mood and anxiety disorders
         wherein schema therapy may be considered a second-line treatment option for those cases
         in which (a) there is an inadequate response to ﬁrst-line treatment (e.g., CBT) and/or (b)
         signiﬁcant symptoms of personality disorder are assessed to be maintaining the severity or
         chronicity of illness, including treatment engagement and responsiveness. In most cases,
         schema therapy for depression and anxiety disorders is largely just schema therapy ‘as
         usual’; however, there are several issues worth considering when applying the model to these
         problems and related disorders. We describe how schema therapy might be applied to the
         treatment of chronic depressive and anxiety disorders, either as a course of complete schema
         therapy or as a source of adjunctive components for a ﬁrst-line approach.

         When a Schema Therapy Approach to Anxiety and Depressive
         Disorders is Warranted
         Due to its extensive research base, cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is rightly con-
         sidered a ﬁrst-line psychological treatment for a plethora of psychological disorders. As
         discussed in Chapter 2, the evidence for schema therapy as a ﬁrst-line treatment is strongest
         for personality disorders. With other high-prevalence disorders, once known as ‘axis 1
         disorders’ (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder), evidence is now emerging for schema therapy
         as a second-line treatment in its own right [1, 2]. Proponents of schema therapy note that
         ﬁrst-line treatments such as CBT for mood and anxiety disorders can have limited eﬃcacy,
         especially among chronic suﬀerers [3]. Comorbidity and dropout is commonplace in
         everyday practice. Comorbid personality disorders and symptoms are also common [4]
         and predict treatment non-response [5, 6]. In his seminal book, Young noted that as many
         as 50–60% of clients treated with ﬁrst-line cognitive therapy either do not respond satisfac-
         torily to treatment or relapse within one year [3]. Meta-analytic studies have since shown
         that the eﬃcacy of CBT for depression, for example, has been steadily decreasing over the
         three decades since Aaron Beck’s seminal studies [7].
             From a schema therapy perspective, treatments that focus only on presenting ‘axis 1’
         problems often overlook patterns of avoidance and rigidity characteristic of underlying
         personality disorder pathology that can drive treatment non-response. This was – in no
         small way – part of the original motivation for the development of schema therapy: to
         address chronic treatment-resistant ‘axis 1 problems’ [3].
             The application of schema therapy to mood and anxiety disorders can be approached in
         one of two ways. The ﬁrst is to use schema therapy as a second-line treatment. Here,
                                                                                                    251


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Part III            Applications and Adaptations for Mental Health Presentations
               Chapter
                                    Schema Therapy for Chronic

               13                   Depression and Anxiety Disorders


         Introduction
         In this chapter, we outline a schema therapy approach to mood and anxiety disorders
         wherein schema therapy may be considered a second-line treatment option for those cases
         in which (a) there is an inadequate response to ﬁrst-line treatment (e.g., CBT) and/or (b)
         signiﬁcant symptoms of personality disorder are assessed to be maintaining the severity or
         chronicity of illness, including treatment engagement and responsiveness. In most cases,
         schema therapy for depression and anxiety disorders is largely just schema therapy ‘as
         usual’; however, there are several issues worth considering when applying the model to these
         problems and related disorders. We describe how schema therapy might be applied to the
         treatment of chronic depressive and anxiety disorders, either as a course of complete schema
         therapy or as a source of adjunctive components for a ﬁrst-line approach.

         When a Schema Therapy Approach to Anxiety and Depressive
         Disorders is Warranted
         Due to its extensive research base, cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is rightly con-
         sidered a ﬁrst-line psychological treatment for a plethora of psychological disorders. As
         discussed in Chapter 2, the evidence for schema therapy as a ﬁrst-line treatment is strongest
         for personality disorders. With other high-prevalence disorders, once known as ‘axis 1
         disorders’ (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder), evidence is now emerging for schema therapy
         as a second-line treatment in its own right [1, 2]. Proponents of schema therapy note that
         ﬁrst-line treatments such as CBT for mood and anxiety disorders can have limited eﬃcacy,
         especially among chronic suﬀerers [3]. Comorbidity and dropout is commonplace in
         everyday practice. Comorbid personality disorders and symptoms are also common [4]
         and predict treatment non-response [5, 6]. In his seminal book, Young noted that as many
         as 50–60% of clients treated with ﬁrst-line cognitive therapy either do not respond satisfac-
         torily to treatment or relapse within one year [3]. Meta-analytic studies have since shown
         that the eﬃcacy of CBT for depression, for example, has been steadily decreasing over the
         three decades since Aaron Beck’s seminal studies [7].
             From a schema therapy perspective, treatments that focus only on presenting ‘axis 1’
         problems often overlook patterns of avoidance and rigidity characteristic of underlying
         personality disorder pathology that can drive treatment non-response. This was – in no
         small way – part of the original motivation for the development of schema therapy: to
         address chronic treatment-resistant ‘axis 1 problems’ [3].
             The application of schema therapy to mood and anxiety disorders can be approached in
         one of two ways. The ﬁrst is to use schema therapy as a second-line treatment. Here,
                                                                                                   251


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          252           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          a complete schema therapy protocol is applied to a depressive or anxiety disorder; the
          disorder is conceptualised in terms of schemas and modes, the therapeutic relationship is
          characterised by limited reparenting, and the full range of schema therapy interventions is
          employed. For these situations, we refer to the rest of the book as an example of how to apply
          the model.
              Alternatively, components of schema therapy can be used as adjuncts to ﬁrst-line
          treatments to enhance their eﬃcacy. For example, imagery rescripting targeting negative
          childhood memories has been proposed as a useful addition to the CBT treatment of social
          anxiety disorder [8]. Other CBT authors have also recognised the utility and promise of
          integrating chairwork dialogues into CBT [9]. In this case, the therapy remains a (relatively)
          short-term complaint-targeted treatment in which some of the language, concepts, and
          treatment techniques of schema therapy might be integrated without adopting a full schema
          mode conceptualisation or entering into an attachment (limited reparenting) relationship.

          Schema Therapy Case Conceptualisation of Chronic Depression
          and Anxiety Disorders
          As always, case conceptualisation is paramount to the idiosyncratic understanding and
          treatment of presenting concerns. In the following sections, we address conceptualising
          cases of depressive and anxiety disorders.

          Depression and Related Syndromes
          The types of psychological disturbance referred to as ‘depression’ or ‘depressive disorder’
          share some core features (e.g., depressed mood); however, there is considerable heterogen-
          eity between presentations. Some suﬀerers present as depressed alongside a seemingly
          intractable guilt, others with a sense of worthlessness or hopelessness. For some, there is
          strong suicidal ideation, while for others there is not. Another common experience is
          disconnection from positive aﬀect such as interest, and low motivation. Some of these
          clients experience a loss of appetite, while others will overeat. Rarely will suﬀerers display all
          of the syndrome’s criteria.
              From a schema therapy perspective, the development and maintenance of depressive
          symptoms diﬀers widely among clients. In one person, depression may be the result of being
          chronically overworked, whereas in another client the depression might have developed in
          the context of withdrawal from valued relationships and activities. We have seen other cases
          where some kind of grief reaction – long suppressed – is implicated in these set of
          symptoms. Therefore, there is no generic mode model that can be used with every depressed
          client. Clients who present as depressed will almost always present with their own combin-
          ation of maladaptive modes. Case conceptualisation and mode mapping of depression is
          therefore idiosyncratic.
              There is usually a unique combination of modes that interact as a causal mode pathway
          implicated in the development and maintenance of what we think of as depression. From
          this point of view, many of the modes described thus far in this book can be viewed as
          depressogenic risk factors. Consequently, we generally see little value in referring to
          depression as a separate mode – for example, ‘your depressed side’ – because it is unclear
          which mode or set of modes is being referred to. The critical maintaining factor in one
          client’s depression could be the Punitive or Demanding Critic mode, whereas in another




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety                   253



             Table 13.1 Common key modes and symptom/problem areas implicated in depression

             Depression-Related Problem/Experience                           Possible Mode(s)

             Sadness, grief, loneliness, or isolation                        Vulnerable Child
             Mood irritability or anger                                      Angry Child, Angry Protector
             Pathological guilt                                              Guilt-Inducing Critic
             Self-criticism, worthlessness                                   Punitive Critic
             Sense of ‘pressure’ or stress                                   Demanding Critic
             Relationship problem – assertiveness                            Compliant Surrenderer
             Overworking                                                     Overcontroller, Self-Soother
             Avoidance and withdrawal                                        Avoidant Protector
             Worry and rumination                                            Overcontroller (Over-analyser type)
             Anhedonia, disconnect from positive aﬀect,                      Detached Protector
             interest and motivation
             Helplessness and hopelessness                                   Helpless Surrender, Avoidant Protector
             Stress/pressure/burnout                                         Perfectionistic Overcontroller mode,
                                                                             Demanding (Parent) Critic
             Binge drinking (or other compulsive or                          Detached Self-Soother, Impulsive Child
             addictive behaviour)
             Suicidal ideation                                               Avoidant Protector



         client it may be a strong Detached Protector. From the mode model, we also know that each
         mode requires diﬀering treatment strategies, rendering the ‘the Depressed side’ mode less
         informative about what should be proposed in treatment. So, this is the heart of the schema
         therapy model of depression: depression can be understood as a toxic combination of
         modes. Schema therapists must work to map the unique set of modes, and their antecedents
         (e.g., developmental origins), as a part of case conceptualisation. Table 13.1 gives examples
         of links between speciﬁc modes and depression-related symptoms and problems.

         Early Maladaptive Schemas in Chronic Depression
         Speciﬁc schemas appear to be more common in presentations of depression [10, 11, 12].
         Schemas hailing from the Disconnection and Rejection and Impaired Autonomy and
         Performance domains have been reported to correlate with depression severity [13]. The
         Emotional Deprivation, Self-Sacriﬁce, and Social Isolation schemas have been reported to
         mediate the relationship between physical abuse in the past and symptoms of depression in
         the present [14]. As a result of these schemas, the Vulnerable Child mode in depression will
         tend to present as lonely and isolated.
             Depressed clients also commonly present to therapy in a very strong coping mode (e.g.,
         Detached Protector, Helpless Surrenderer), and consequently it can be diﬃcult for the
         therapist to make contact with the client’s underlying needs and feelings (e.g., vulnerability).
         In this respect, there are similarities between depression and Cluster C personality dis-
         orders, which are also characterised by strong, rigid coping modes which sustain the



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          254           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          pathology. In fact, many clients who present with chronic experiences of depression will be
          later assessed to have Cluster C (or other) comorbidity. The schema therapy approach to
          chronic depression thus mirrors that of Cluster C personality disorders. The therapist works
          within a pre-agreed treatment timeframe. In this way, having an explicit ending phase can
          provide additional motivation for the client to let go of their rigid coping modes and address
          their issues in therapy (see Chapter 12: Preparing for Termination and the End Phase of
          Schema Therapy for an overview).

          Understanding and Conceptualising Elevated Mood States
          Clients with depression and related problems will sometimes present with more elevated
          mood states characteristic of hypomania or outright mania – states that far exceed a mood
          improvement in response to treatment or recovery. Some clients will meet criteria for
          a bipolar disorder while others will not. Clients with severe mood elevation and bipolar
          disorder may require psychiatric evaluation as a ﬁrst-line treatment and could be unsuitable
          for schema therapy. There is currently no evidence from randomised controlled trials
          demonstrating the safety or eﬃcacy of schema therapy for clients with bipolar disorder.
          Yet, many clients with depression – and even personality disorders – will present with
          features of elevated mood states that do not feel full criteria for a manic or hypomanic
          episode. Beck, in his theory of modes, saw elevated mood states as somewhat the opposite of
          depression, which he called ‘The Expansive mode’ [15, 16]. In schema therapy, we often
          conceptualise such elevated mood states in the mode model as a kind overcompensation
          reaction to schemas typically responsible for depression (e.g., Failure, Defectiveness,
          Emotional Deprivation). Beliefs such as ‘I am hopeless . . . I should give up’ are over-
          shadowed by overcompensatory beliefs such as ‘I am superior . . . I can do anything’.
          A mode characterised by grandiosity or superiority beliefs might be labelled as an
          ‘Invincible Overcontroller mode’ or a ‘Superhuman mode’ in a mode conceptualisation.
          Clients in this kind of mode might display expansive speech and over-productivity and
          present as overconﬁdent and full of energy. This conceptualisation is consistent with studies
          reporting elevated EMS in bipolar disorder [11, 17] and risk for bipolar disorder [11],
          although, to date, a speciﬁc mode conceptualisation of bipolar disorder has not been
          empirically tested.

          Anxiety Disorders
          It is also possible to conceptualise anxiety disorders as a combination of modes, as we have
          demonstrated with depression. Anxiety disorders are characterised by both an overesti-
          mation of the risk of danger and an underestimation of one’s capability to withstand or cope
          with danger [18]. Anxiety is often associated with the Vulnerability to Harm and Illness
          EMS, characterised by beliefs such as ‘the world is a physically dangerous place, and I am
          particularly vulnerable to that danger’ and the Mistrust/Abuse EMS (e.g., ‘Others are out to
          harm, exploit or humiliate me’). Felt anxiety often presents as a Vulnerable Child mode.
          Beliefs associated with Unrelenting Standards, Failure, Defectiveness/Shame, and
          Dependence/Incompetence are also common and are often expressed as a Critic mode of
          one kind or another. The overestimation of danger can sometimes be conceptualised as
          a ‘Warning or Alert coping mode’, a subtype of the Overcontroller coping mode in which
          the client is alert to (or scanning) for disorder-related signs of danger in the environment.
          The client typically experiences the physiological signs of anxiety from the Vulnerable Child



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety     255



         mode, which might also be more aptly labelled a Fearful or Anxious Child mode. Overt
         avoidance behaviour, characteristic of anxiety disorders, is conceptualised as an Avoidant
         Protector.
             In obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), overestimation of the risk of danger and the
         severity of that danger can also be framed as a Warning mode: a coping mode which
         functions to control risk, thereby protecting the Vulnerable Child against activation of the
         Critic. An overestimation of the personal responsibility (conceptualised as a Critic mode)
         for preventing danger is typical of this disorder, causing these clients to have developed
         extensive rituals to ensure that the speciﬁc risk has been controlled (the Warning mode).
         Box 13.1 lists examples of the overestimation of responsibility.
             Feelings of guilt in OCD could result from the activation of a Guilt-Inducing Critic
         mode wherein the client takes a look at themselves in a problematic situation and blames
         themselves for potentially harmful outcomes. Themes of guilt and personal responsibility
         are of course common in OCD presentations [19]. An example of a complete OCD case
         conceptualisation is provided in Box 13.2.



             Box 13.1 Examples of Overestimation of Personal Responsibility in OCD

             ‘If I don’t [description of compulsive behaviour], then:
             • . . . it will be my fault that my girlfriend becomes infected with AIDS/Coronavirus/[insert
                   illness].’
             • . . . it will be my fault that there is a break in.’
             • . . . I might act on my aggressive or suicidal thoughts.’




             Box 13.2 Example of OCD Case Conceptualisation

             Child Mode:
             •    Scared of danger and the severity of the danger
             •    Scared of the guilt/responsibility

             Guilt-Inducing, Punitive Parent Mode:
             •    Overestimation of personal responsibility

             Control-Maintaining (Warning) Coping Mode:
             •    Overestimation of risk/severity of danger
             •    Scanning/hypervigilance behaviour for signs of danger or threat
             •    Ritualistic behaviour with the function of avoiding or reducing the perceived danger or
                  the perceived responsibility.

             Avoidant Protector:
             •    Avoids situations likely to trigger intrusive thoughts.
             •    Engages in distraction and thought suppression.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          256           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              In social anxiety disorder, the suﬀerer is certain that they are defective because others
          ﬁnd them strange. The belief ‘I’m strange’ can be conceptualised as having developed due to
          an (Other-Directed) Punitive Critic mode – which interprets other people’s behaviour
          negatively – generating repetitive automatic thoughts such as ‘they think you’re weird’.
          These Critic-driven messages can then activate or maintain fear or shame, which becomes
          part of the network of the Child mode. When anxiety or fear is experienced or expressed by
          the client, this may in turn be judged negatively by the Critic mode, generating more fear or
          shame, and so forth. It is common for the Critic and Child modes to be stuck in a cycle of
          dysregulation that eventually ends in some form of maladaptive coping. Those with
          a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder will commonly employ an Avoidant Protector as
          a primary coping mode, perhaps alongside an Overanalysing Overcontroller mode (charac-
          terised by worry and post-event rumination).

          The use of Mode Language and the Mode Model in Treating
          Depression and Anxiety Disorders
          Use of mode language and creating mode awareness through identifying and naming modes is
          important for helping clients defuse from Critic mode activation and overwhelming child states.
          The rationale for using the language of modes is to help the client shift from viewing their
          thoughts as facts (e.g., ‘I am stupid and worthless’) to an observing perspective (e.g., ‘I am
          suﬀering from that punitive voice telling me that I’m stupid and worthless’). Often the client’s
          experience of anxiety or mood disturbance becomes their identity (i.e., ‘I’m anxious’). Relabelling
          anxious thoughts and feelings as modes (which are, by deﬁnition, only a subset or component of,
          rather than the totality of, the person) helps clients reduce the dominance of these experiences
          and begins to build a sense of the self apart from those experiences. The mode model is – in
          a sense – a model of defusion. Symptom-related experiences are tagged, categorised, and sorted
          into their relevant ‘modes’, all of which aids in mode awareness. The client learns to inhibit or
          delay automatic patterns of responding and just notice or label aspects of their experience.
          Becoming aware of and learning to look at an experience ﬁrst instead of simply undergoing that
          experience seems to be a necessary condition for a change process. In schema therapy, this is the
          ﬁrst step towards building the Healthy Adult mode (see Chapter 10 for an overview).

          The Importance of Conceptualising and Bypassing Repetitive
          Negative Thinking (Rumination, Worry, and Obsessive Thinking)
          We have often spoken in this chapter in terms of ‘disorders’ as a way of clinical shorthand;
          however, schema therapy should be considered a transdiagnostic framework. The trans-
          diagnostic approach of the mode model is very useful in conceptualising and intervening
          with comorbidity. One mode with central importance to the conceptualisation and treat-
          ment of chronic depression and an anxiety disorders is the Overanalysing Overcontroller.
          This is a truly transdiagnostic mode, responsible for symptom dimensions across depres-
          sion and anxiety, including worry, rumination, and obsessive thinking. This mode, in its
          more extreme forms and when presenting as the primary coping mode, is implicated in
          generalised anxiety disorder [20]. This is an important mode to recognise and manage in the
          treatment of anxiety disorders in particular; therapists will struggle to apply schema therapy
          to depression and anxiety disorders where this mode predominates because it blocks access




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety            257



         to the ‘backstage’ emotions (e.g., Critic, Anger, Vulnerability). Our deﬁnition of this mode
         taken from Chapter 1 is below for reference.
             Overanalysing Overcontroller (OACM): characterised by the predominance of verbal-
             linguistic processing of past- and/or future-oriented material (e.g., rumination, worry, or
             obsessive thinking), at the expense of attending to the contextual and emotional qualities of
             present-moment experience.


         Chair Techniques for Depression and Anxiety Disorders
         Chapter 8 explains that the use of chairwork supports the process of distancing oneself from
         unwanted psychological experiences. By placing a mode on a chair while the client literally
         occupies a distinct physical space from that chair, the mode can be viewed with a greater
         sense of emotional distance. For example, consider a case of a person with OCD who has
         rigid symptom-related beliefs about the risk of infection with AIDS/Coronavirus which
         block the cognitive examination of those beliefs. The Alert/Warning Protector mode could
         be placed on a chair and the client could interview the mode about those beliefs from the
         chair representing their Healthy Adult mode (see Box 13.3 for an illustration).


             Box 13.3 Clinical Example of Using Chairwork Mode Dialogues in OCD: Healthy Adult
             Mode and Warning Protector Mode
             THERAPIST: OK, so we are busy investigating the realistic possibility of you becoming infected
                with AIDS by touching the door handle, and we are at the point where we have mapped
                out that disaster scenario, the necessary conditions for potentially infecting your
                girlfriend with AIDS. First and foremost, for that to even be able to happen there has
                to be someone with AIDS who has touched that same door handle, and that must have
                happened on the same day as you are touching the door handle now. Then . . . [the
                therapist goes through all the individual steps of the disaster scenario].
                     So, now we know what actually has to happen, yet we still need to ﬁnd out how
                likely it is that all of that will happen, but we would like to ﬁnd that out so that we can
                see whether your precautionary measures, those compulsive actions, are also necessary
                in actual practice. In order to determine that, we ﬁrst need to investigate the likelihood
                of each of these individual steps. Should we brieﬂy examine that ﬁrst?
                [Client nods]
                     Good, so if we now step away for a moment and take a good look, what is the
                realistic chance of someone with AIDS having touched that same door handle on that
                same day?
             CLIENT: Yes, it could happen.
             THERAPIST: So the possibility of that happening, as you see it, is then . . .
             CLIENT: Well, deﬁnitely, yes, so 100 per cent.
             THERAPIST: And what makes you so certain of that then?
             CLIENT: Well, just, just that it could happen. There are lots and lots of people with AIDS, so
                yes, that door handle could deﬁnitely be infected with it.
             THERAPIST: . . . Let me just think about that out loud for a moment, because you may have
                noticed that I have gone a bit quiet. I wonder who I am listening to when you say that it
                is 100 per cent because that’s just the way it is. Am I listening to that Healthy Adult side
                which I invited to conduct this investigation [therapist points to the client]? Or am

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          258           Applications for Mental Health Presentations




                  I actually listening to that Alert/Warning Protector of yours, who actually always shouts
                  that there is a danger and is convinced of it too? [In the case of the latter, the therapist
                  gestures to a spot next to the client.]
              CLIENT: . . . [pauses]
              THERAPIST: What do you think?
              CLIENT: I don’t know, that’s just what I think.
              THERAPIST: Yes, I understand that, but the question now is, if you say that you are certain of
                 that, is it then that Healthy Adult [therapist gestures towards the client] or that Warning
                 Protector [therapist gestures once again to a spot next to the client]?
              CLIENT: Yes, maybe it’s that Protector then.
              THERAPIST: OK, but if he is still present, please take a seat in this chair [therapist places chair in
                 the spot that was gestured towards when the Protector was named].
                 Go and sit in that chair.
              [Client goes and sits down on the Protector’s chair.]
              THERAPIST: Just be that Protector here. OK, Protector, I think that you’re convinced that that
                 entire situation with the door handle is dangerous, right?
              CLIENT: Yes, it just is, and I don’t want to be blamed for my girlfriend suddenly getting infected.
              THERAPIST: I understand that, but that’s why together with [name of the client and pointing at
                 the original chair], I would like to examine the realistic possibility of that actually
                 happening. And if you keep yelling the whole time that it’s ‘just 100 per cent’, we
                 won’t be able to examine that properly. Only then could I accept that you really think
                 that, but then it’s also certain that he [pointing to the original chair] will continue to be
                 troubled by all the consequences of your compulsive actions. Couldn’t you give us the
                 opportunity to gain a bit of clarity, some certainty ﬁrst?
              CLIENT: . . . OK.
              THERAPIST: Great! But then we also really need to be given the opportunity to do so, so
                 I would like to ask you to just suppress your automatic reﬂex of saying ‘100 per cent’ to
                 everything just a little so that he [pointing to original chair] and I can explore this, OK?
              CLIENT : . . . OK, that’s ﬁne.
              THERAPIST: Great, now can you come and sit next to me again? But now that you’re getting
                  up, just remember for a moment that there [pointing to the Protector’s chair], you can say
                  that everything is 100 per cent unsafe, but leave that conviction behind for a moment
                  when you come and sit next to me here.
              [Client comes and sits next to the therapist again in the original chair.]
              THERAPIST: Good, he [pointing to the Protector’s chair] will declare that everything deﬁnitely poses
                 a danger, but you and I must ﬁrst of all carefully consider, investigate, whether that is actually
                 true. And when it comes to the question of how likely it is that an AIDS client has touched
                 that same door handle that same day, how likely do we think that is?
              CLIENT: . . . I don’t know.
              THERAPIST: I do know what that person there [pointing to the Protector’s chair] would say, but
                 what do we think? Is it really a certainty? How many AIDS clients are there actually?
              CLIENT: . . . I don’t know.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety                          259



             Table 13.2 Core fears in anxiety disorders with corresponding examples of target imagery and possible
             intervention

             Disorder: core fear               Trauma memory/image                         Possible intervention/
                                                                                           message

             Panic disorder: ‘My               Image of little Jenny as a 14-              ‘It’s OK that you are anxious, this
             bodily symptoms are               year-old in a panicked state                will pass. It is normal for your
             an indication that I will         after taking THC: ‘I’m going                body to react this way to these
             go crazy.’                        to die.’                                    kinds of substances.’
             OCD: ‘My sexual                   Image of Little Johnny, aged 13,            ‘A thought is just a thought . . .
             thoughts are a sign               on his bed struggling with                  you are thirteen and going
             that I am bad and will            intrusive sexual thoughts about             through puberty. It is normal to
             go to hell.’                      his mother.                                 have sexual thoughts, even
                                                                                           strange ones! They do not mean
                                                                                           anything. You get to choose how
                                                                                           you act. Thoughts are just
                                                                                           thoughts.’
             Social anxiety disorder:          Image of little Freddy, 9 years             Confront teacher and send
             ‘I will be humiliated’            old, being shamed by a teacher              them away: ‘What is wrong
                                               in front of the whole class.                with you, treating a child that
                                                                                           way?!’ Address the child after.
             Health anxiety: ‘I will           Image of little Lee, 6 years old,           ‘I’m here with you. I promise you
             get sick and die’; ‘I am          getting heart surgery, all alone            that you will be OK. I will stay
             physically vulnerable’            in surgery without her parents.             with you until this is all over.
                                                                                           Your parents can come in too!’



         Imagery Rescripting for Depression and Anxiety Disorders
         The use of imagery rescripting in the context of depressive and anxiety disorders is, in
         a sense, ‘business as usual’ for the schema therapist. Imagery targets in the case of depression
         tend to involve themes of disconnection and isolation. Imagery targets for anxiety disorders
         tend to involve themes of vulnerability to harm, trust, and abuse. Of course, many cases will
         have all of these themes. In all cases, imagery rescripting can be used to process important
         events in the past that form the basis for experiencing the presenting problem. In the case of
         anxiety disorders, target images of the past often represent aspects of a core fear [18].
         Table 13.2 provides some examples of core fears as seen across various anxiety disorders,
         and how imagery rescripting might address them, and Box 13.4 provides a clinical example
         of imagery rescripting with social anxiety disorder.

         Behavioural Pattern Breaking for Depression: Learning
         to Identify and Connect with Core Emotional Needs
         The aim of the initial phase of therapy is to make the client more aware of the modes and
         basic needs, while at the same time oﬀering corrective emotional experiences. Depressed
         clients, however, tend to have a great deal of diﬃculty making contact with their feelings and
         needs. In the initial phase of the treatment, becoming aware of these needs must therefore be
         practised speciﬁcally. In addition, during this initial phase, behavioural change is also



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          260           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              Box 13.4 Clinical Example of Imagery Rescripting With Social Anxiety Disorder

              The client reports that she has felt very anxious in the company of a few colleagues. The
              therapist suggested an imagery exercise to gain a better understanding of what made the
              client so anxious and to moderate that anxiety with the help of this exercise. The client has her
              eyes shut and has just described the situation with colleagues as she currently sees it.

              THERAPIST: So, they are standing there next to you and you can see them laughing . . . how do
                 you feel now?
              CLIENT: Nervous, tense . . . they must be laughing at me because I am blushing . . .
              THERAPIST: So, that’s what you’re scared of now?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes . . .
              THERAPIST: And where do you feel that anxiety, where do you mainly feel tension in your
                 body?
              CLIENT: [Points to her abdomen.]
              THERAPIST: OK, now concentrate on that feeling, that anxiety that they are laughing at you
                 because you are blushing . . . concentrate on this and allow the image to fade away . . . If
                 you concentrate on this feeling, what images from your past appear to you then?
              CLIENT: A particular situation at primary school, in the school playground and them bully-
                 ing me . . .
              THERAPIST: What do you see now?
              CLIENT: Those boys, with that big kid in front calling me names and making fun of me . . .
              THERAPIST: OK, OK, let’s just pause that image for a moment, just press that pause button to
                 make everything come to a standstill . . . I want to join in, because what is happening
                 here isn’t good. I want to help you . . . can you see me?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes . . .
              THERAPIST: Where can you see me? I would prefer to be standing next to you now.
              CLIENT: Yes, next to me, to the left of me . . . [gestures to the left].
              THERAPIST: Then listen to me when I speak to those bullies . . . [therapist turns his head away from
                 the client so that, to the client, it sounds as if the therapist is actually speaking to someone else].
                 ‘Oi! Stop that now! Stop being so mean to [name of client]! You wouldn’t like it if someone
                 did that to you, would you?’ [To the client] Well, what do they say to that?’’
              CLIENT: . . . Yes, no . . . yes, that they understand it, yes . . .
              THERAPIST: Exactly! How do they look?
              CLIENT: A bit uncomfortable.
              THERAPIST: How does it feel for you to see them feeling uncomfortable now instead of you?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes, good . . .



          encouraged with the aim of validating these needs. This kind of pattern-breaking closely
          resembles the behavioural activation phase in CBT for depression. The aims of behavioural
          activation are to instigate an initial reduction in some of the symptoms of depression and to
          gain access to the underlying modes. Thus, the encouragement of behavioural change
          happens earlier in the treatment of depression compared to schema therapy for personality



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety   261



         disorders. Another issue that therapists often encounter in this context is that clients may be
         very detached from any sense of their needs. For these clients, the ‘What do I want or need
         right now?’ question and exercise can be used to give clients some gradual experiential
         contact with their needs.

         Exercise: Activating and Reinforcing Needs ‘In the Moment’
         With the ‘What Do I Want or Need Right Now’? Question
         This intervention consists of the following steps:
         • Rationale
         • Identifying needs
         • Validating those needs
         • Realising the healing power of attending to needs
         • Homework

         Rationale. The rationale clariﬁes why the client must practise asking themselves the
         question: ‘What do I want/need NOW?’ The emphasis in that question is on ‘I’ and
         ‘NOW’. The emphasis on ‘I’ is designed to draw attention to one’s own needs, because
         clients who are depressed often primarily pay attention to the wishes and expectations of
         others or society, or are just disconnected from their needs.
             The emphasis on ‘now’ is primarily to learn to focus their attention on smaller feelings
         which can be validated relatively easily this way. The question ‘What do I need/want NOW?’
         is introduced as a behavioural ‘medicine’ against depression, which they must take regu-
         larly, several times a day.
         Identifying Needs. After explaining the rationale, the client practises asking the question in
         the session right away. The therapist can help with this exercise, which many clients initially
         ﬁnd very diﬃcult. The therapist lets the client ask the question out loud, with the emphasis
         on the words ‘I’ and ‘now’, and then asks what the answer to this question is for the client at
         that very moment.
             The most common answer given by depressed clients is that they don’t know. The
         therapist stresses that there are always needs, but that the client is obviously struggling
         to make contact with them. The therapist can always help by making suggestions, as
         well as giving mainly small, practical examples, such as the need simply to take a look
         outside, to stretch or to relax and enjoy a cup of coﬀee. Thanks to this perseverance,
         often something is eventually mentioned, and although those needs are not always
         immediately practical or important, the client can nevertheless be praised for ﬁnding
         an answer to the question.
         Validating the Identiﬁed Need. The next step is that action actually takes place in response
         to the identiﬁed need. The purpose of the exercise is to reach a form of counterconditioning:
         ‘You’ve always had the experience that your needs did not matter and were brushed aside.
         Now you have identiﬁed your needs and we’re going to take them seriously!’ Here, the
         advantage of small, concrete examples such as ‘look outside’ or ‘drink something’ become
         apparent, because these needs are easy to validate during the session. The therapist pulls up
         the blinds or grabs a cup of coﬀee or talks for a moment about something completely
         diﬀerent to what the client says that they need.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          262           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              Box 13.5 Example of the ‘What do I Want or Need Right Now?’ Exercise
              THERAPIST: How do you feel now, since you felt like simply looking outside and you are
                 actually doing that now?
              CLIENT: Normal, the same.
              THERAPIST: Does it feel worse to do what you want, exactly the same, or does it feel a bit
                 better to be doing what you want to be doing?
               [The therapist moves her or his thumb slightly down then up as a kind of indicator, whereby
              making small subtle changes turns something negative into something positive.]
              CLIENT: Well . . . yes . . . a bit better perhaps, but not much!
              THERAPIST: I understand that. It is just a small diﬀerence compared to before, but it is a more
                 positive feeling than what you previously had. Even though it’s really small, it’s still
                 a very important diﬀerence all the same! That means that you feel a bit better if you
                 listen to your needs . . . not much, perhaps, but it is just like digging for gold; it might be
                 diﬃcult and take a great deal of eﬀort to ﬁnd a speck of gold, but if you spend a while
                 doing that, in the end you will end up with a little stack which is literally worth its weight
                 in gold.




          Becoming Aware of the Healing Power of Connecting With Needs. During the validation
          of the expressed need, the therapist pays attention to signs of any changes in mood. These
          signs can be subtle in severely depressed clients, which is why we recommend being extra
          alert to them: the beginning of a smile, a lighter tone of voice, a somewhat lighter mood in
          the conversation, or the client being slightly more physically active could all be potential
          signs of the healing power of the validation of identiﬁed needs. The therapist also draws the
          client’s attention to any change in mood they might be experiencing by speciﬁcally asking
          about their mood and drawing the client’s attention to the signiﬁcance of that feeling. This
          exercise is illustrated in Box 13.5.
          Homework. The homework consists of repeatedly practising ‘The Question’. The rationale
          behind this is just like with a lot of medication: it only starts to work when it’s taken
          regularly. Over time, this exercise can be linked to full behavioural pattern breaking
          explicitly connected to the client’s stated needs domains (see Chapter 9 for an overview).

          Conceptualisation with Cases of Adjustment Disorder
          Mood and anxiety problems also commonly present for therapy in the context of an
          adjustment disorder. In these cases, mood and anxiety problems have developed in response
          to an identiﬁable stressor or diﬃcult life event (e.g., relationship problems, work stressors).
          Schema therapy has an interesting perspective on the possible schema and mode processes
          underlying problematic adjustment reactions. In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic,
          Brockman [21] described three pathways that might contribute to the onset and mainten-
          ance of adjustment problems. While these pathways are presented separately, in practice,
          clients tend to present with a combination of the three. These pathways are described in
          depth as follows:



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety   263



         1. The Stressor Triggers Schema-Driven Distress. Most often the stressor or diﬃcult life
            event experienced directly triggers one or more relevant EMS, resulting in heightened
            activation of relevant schemas and core emotional ‘back stage’ modes (e.g., Vulnerable
            Child, Angry Child, Critic modes). For example, in a situation such as a pandemic, the
            inherent health crisis and surrounding media attention might trigger a Vulnerability to
            Harm EMS in combination with an Abandonment EMS (e.g., a fear that a family
            member might die), producing anxiety or fear in the form of a Vulnerable or Fearful
            Child mode. For individuals prone to taking excessive personal responsibility for
            negative events, if a family member becomes sick this might result in the activation of
            a blaming or Guilt-Inducing Critic mode generating repeated negative automatic
            thoughts (e.g., ‘I should have done more to care for my loved ones’). The ongoing and
            uncertain nature of some diﬃcult life events and stressors can prolong EMS and
            maladaptive mode activation. Conversely, resolution of stressors (e.g., improvement of
            a relationship) tends to reduce EMS and mode activation.
         2. The Stressor Overwhelms the Client’s Usual (Primary) Coping Mode(s). It is very
            common in cases of adjustment disorder to ﬁnd that the client self-managed
            reasonably well before the onset of the stressor. They will often present as having
            previously been quite well adjusted, and successfully compensated (or
            overcompensated without causing any major problems) for any core EMS held
            over from childhood. For this group of clients, the stressor directly threatens the
            eﬃcacy and workability of long-trusted coping modes. Picture the overworking
            ‘perfectionist’ who has overcompensated for unwanted emotions through work and
            perfection for thirty years but is suddenly retrenched. Clients exposed to such
            stressors often ﬁnd themselves ‘without a coping strategy’ or ‘de-compensating’.
            Such situations deprive the client of the ability to follow the if–then rules they
            developed to cope with their core EMS (e.g., ‘If I am perfect then I am loved and
            “good enough”’). The client is then prone to being ﬂooded by emotions associated
            with previously dormant schemas (e.g., Defectiveness, Abandonment) and modes
            (e.g., Vulnerable Child mode, Punitive Critic). These clients often present –
            understandably – with very high levels of distress (Vulnerable Child mode),
            blaming ‘the situation’ (Angry Child mode), and wanting therapy to ‘ﬁx’ the
            situation or assist them to regain a sense of control. Because they are so ‘in touch’
            with their distressing feelings, these clients often present as quite motivated to
            work on their issues, at least at the beginning of therapy. However, motivation can
            wane as therapy progresses and clients feel more ‘in control’ again. Therefore,
            therapists should take advantage of stressful ‘crises’ to build the client’s mode
            awareness and motivate the client to redirect their focus away from their past
            overcompensatory habits and towards healing their schemas to pursue meeting
            their needs from this point on in their lives.
         3. The Stressor Activates Secondary or Historic Coping Modes. Another relatively
            common adjustment reaction is that clients will inevitably pivot to some (secondary)
            form of coping. For example, a ‘perfectionist’ that is retrenched might resort to
            withdrawal and avoidance (Avoidant Protector), placing them at further risk of low
            mood and anxiety. A similar pattern might see clients resort to – or relapse into –
            historic coping modes (including any former addictive coping behaviours, e.g., binge
            drinking) to cope.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          264           Applications for Mental Health Presentations




          Illustration 13.1 Perfectionistic Overcontroller mode



          Concluding Remarks
          In this chapter we have provided more detail on how schema therapy might be adapted and
          applied to a range of presentations that fall into the category of ‘high-prevalence disorders’
          such as depression and anxiety. While this chapter conﬁned itself to a description of schema
          therapy for depressive and anxiety disorders, it provides a template for the transdiagnostic
          treatment of other high-prevalence ‘axis 1’ problems.

          References
          1. Renner F, Arntz A, Peeters F, Lobbestael J,                   4. Friborg O, Martinsen E, Martinussen M,
             Huibers M. Schema therapy for chronic                            et al. Comorbidity of personality disorders
             depression: Results of a multiple single case                    in mood disorders: A meta-analytic review
             series. Journal of Behavior Therapy and                          of 122 studies from 1988 to 2010. Journal of
             Experimental Psychiatry. 2016;51:66–73.                          Aﬀective Disorders. 2014;(152):1–11.
          2. Renner F, DeRubeis R, Arntz A, et al.                         5. Newton-Howes G, Tyrer P, Johnson T, et al.
             Exploring mechanisms of change in schema                         Inﬂuence of personality on the outcome of
             therapy for chronic depression. Journal of                       treatment in depression: Systematic review
             Behavior Therapy and Experimental                                and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality
             Psychiatry. 2018;58:97–105.                                      Disorders. 2014;28(4):577–93.
          3. Young J, Klosko J, Weishaar M. Schema                         6. Reich J, Schatzberg A, Delucchi K. Empirical
             therapy: A practitioner’s guide. Guilford                        evidence of the eﬀect of personality pathology
             Press; 2003.                                                     on the outcome of panic disorder.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  Schema Therapy for Chronic Depression and Anxiety                   265



               Journal of Psychiatric Research.                                 schema therapy. Clinical Psychology:
               2018;107:42–7.                                                   Science and Practice. 2013;20(2):166–80.
           7. Johnsen T, Friborg O. The eﬀects of                         14. Lumley M, Harkness K. Childhood
              cognitive behavioral therapy as an                              maltreatment and depressotypic cognitive
              anti-depressive treatment is falling: A                         organization. Cognitive Therapy and
              meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin.                          Research. 2009;33(5):511–22.
              2015;141(4):747–68.                                         15. Beck A, Haigh E. Advances in cognitive
           8. Wild J, Clark D. Imagery rescripting of                         theory and therapy: The generic cognitive
              early traumatic memories in social phobia.                      model. Annual Review of Clinical
              Cognitive and Behavioral Practice. 2011                         Psychology. 2014;10(1):1–24.
              Nov 1;18(4):433–43.                                         16. Beck A. Beyond belief: A theory of
           9. Pugh M. Chairwork in cognitive                                  modes, personality, and
              behavioural therapy: A narrative review.                        psychopathology. In Salkovskis P, ed.
              Cognitive Therapy and Research. 2017;41                         Frontiers of cognitive psychology.
              (1):16–30.                                                      Guilford Press; 1996. pp. 1–25.
         10. Halvorsen M, Wang C, Richter J, et al.                       17. Granger S, Pavlis A, Collett J,
             Early maladaptive schemas, temperament                           Hallam KT. Revisiting the ‘manic
             and character traits in clinically depressed                     defence hypothesis’: Assessing explicit
             and previously depressed subjects. Clinical                      and implicit cognitive biases in euthymic
             Psychology & Psychotherapy: An                                   bipolar disorder. Clinical Psychologist.
             International Journal of Theory & Practice.                      2021;25(2):212–22.
             2009;16(5):394–407.                                          18. Beck A, Emery G, Greenberg R. Anxiety
         11. Hawke L, Provencher M. Early                                     disorders and phobias. Basic Books;
             Maladaptive Schemas among clients                                2005.
             diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Journal of                  19. Stewart S, Shapiro L. Pathological guilt:
             Aﬀective Disorders. 2012 Feb 1;136                               A persistent yet overlooked treatment
             (3):803–11.                                                      factor in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
         12. Petrocelli J, Glaser B, Calhoun G,                               Annals of Clinical Psychiatry. 2011;23
             Campbell L. Cognitive schemas as                                 (1):63–70.
             mediating variables of the relationship                      20. Stavropoulos A, Haire M, Brockman R,
             between the self-defeating personality and                       Meade T. A schema mode model of
             depression. Journal of Psychopathology                           repetitive negative thinking. Clinical
             and Behavioral Assessment. 2001;23                               Psychologist. 2020;24(2):99–113.
             (3):183–91.
                                                                          21. Brockman R. Schema Therapy in the Age
         13. Renner F, Arntz A, Leeuw I, Huibers M.                           of COVID-19. Webinar published 2020;
             Treatment for chronic depression using                           schematherapytrainingonline.com.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Working with Complex Trauma

                14                   and Dissociation in Schema
                                     Therapy

          Introduction
          In this chapter, we present a schema therapy conceptualisation of complex trauma and
          dissociation. Because the prospect of confronting historical trauma can be anxiety provok-
          ing for clients and therapists alike, the task can easily remain hidden or be avoided.
          Although a schema therapy approach to complex trauma follows the core principles of
          the standard model, several additional aspects of client presentations warrant consideration.
          Here, we present adaptations and alternatives for providing schema therapy interventions
          to this population.

          The Schema Therapy Approach to Trauma: Balancing Trauma
          Focus with Meeting Core Emotional Needs
          The experience of prolonged and repeated trauma in early child development (such as
          sexual or physical abuse) can have a broad and varied range of consequences [1]. In some
          cases, clients may present with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as described in DSM-
          5. Other clients may present with the increasingly recognised complex post-traumatic stress
          (CPTSD) [2, 3]. CPTSD includes diﬃculties in aﬀect regulation, severe (stable) negative self-
          concept and interpersonal problems (where relationships are seen as problematic and to be
          avoided), and the core symptom clusters observed in PTSD: avoidance, re-experiencing, and
          hypervigilance/arousal [4]. Schema therapy is a model designed to address the impact of
          adverse childhood experiences and is well suited as a treatment framework for CPTSD cases.
              Trauma-focused treatment approaches have historically been placed in two categories.
          The ﬁrst views trauma processing as the focal ingredient of change [5]. Here, reducing
          trauma symptoms is the primary goal and suﬃcient to produce increased stability and
          change. The second category is phase-oriented trauma treatment [5], wherein the therapist
          aims to provide stability initially (in an extended ‘Stabilisation Phase’) before moving into
          trauma processing. There has been substantial debate as to which approach is the most
          useful for CPTSD [5, 6]. Trauma processing–focused supporters argue that an extended
          focus on stabilisation often prevents the client from processing trauma because the therapist
          usually manages extraneous factors that aﬀect stability for very long periods [6].
          Consequently, there is concern that some clients never achieve suﬃcient stability to process
          their trauma or that much time, energy, and (limited) therapeutic resources are taken up
          during this phase. In contrast, phased-oriented proponents argue that clients cannot
          successfully process trauma-related material while emotionally unstable and therefore
          require a careful and sometimes extensive phase of stabilisation [5].

          266


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation   267



             Schema therapy can provide a middle path between trauma-focused and phase-
         based approaches. Rather than focusing on stability before moving to trauma process-
         ing (primarily via imagery rescripting), the focus is on the client’s emotional needs.
         Schema therapy does not primarily focus on stability as a core treatment process.
         Instead, schema therapy encourages the early commencement of processing trauma-
         related imagery and other experiential exercises. Exercises focus on creating corrective
         emotional experiences of the client getting their needs (e.g., for safety or validation)
         met. A critical aspect that is diﬀerent from phase- and trauma-focused approaches is
         the speciﬁc use of limited reparenting in schema therapy. The therapeutic relationship
         itself is considered to be a crucial contributor to change, in which the therapist seeks
         to directly meet needs for care, validation, limit setting, guidance, and encouragement.
         Schema therapists argue that it is the establishment of a limited reparenting relation-
         ship that provides the safety and containment required for the client to have an early
         focus on experiential work.
             Diﬀerences in trauma therapies can be likened to diﬀerent approaches to teaching
         a child to ride a bicycle. If the caregiver were to wait for the child to be emotionally
         resourced and stable before proceeding, the child may not ever learn to ride the bike.
         In turn, if the caregiver were to compel the anxious child to commence riding without
         managing the potential underlying needs of safety and encouragement, it may result in
         the child harming themselves and resisting further invitations to learn to ride.
         A schema therapy–informed caregiver aims to give the child cyclist a helmet, knee
         pads, and training wheels and runs alongside the child, ready to steady them if they
         should fall. In processing work, limited reparenting can be interwoven throughout the
         treatment or done in a block of work; however, this depends on the speciﬁc core
         emotional needs centred around trauma. The therapist may guide and encourage the
         client to do trauma-focused work (possibly in a block of sessions with a trauma focus).
         To do so, they may need to overcome modes that block change and model a Healthy
         Adult willingness via reparenting. There are two main ways to conceptualise schema
         therapy for complex PTSD: (1) As a ready-made approach that incorporates imagery
         rescripting as the primary trauma-focused treatment; and (2) a broader integrative
         approach, where a range of trauma-focused interventions (e.g., EMDR) can be embed-
         ded within a schema therapy case conceptualisation.

         Therapist Conﬁdence and Approach
         Traumatic material can be complex for therapists to navigate with the client; some
         therapists feel anxious about re-traumatisation or getting techniques ‘wrong’ or apply-
         ing them imperfectly. It is also typical for disclosures of childhood trauma among
         survivors to be delayed until well into adulthood [7]. Whether or not the client
         discloses traumatic experiences will be partially inﬂuenced by their assessment of
         how the helping professional will react to such content [8]. Therapists should project
         conﬁdence that they can manage the disclosure of trauma experiences and trauma
         reactions and that clients will be believed and validated by the therapist [9]. This will
         provide the ‘safe space’ necessary for clients to discuss traumatic experiences. In
         addition, the therapist needs to display conﬁdence in their conceptualisation of the
         client’s diﬃculties, and in the delivery of techniques, to provide a sense of safety in the
         treatment itself [10].



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          268           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          Assessment and Trauma Work
          Clients present to treatment for many reasons. In some cases, clients speciﬁcally seek help
          with traumatic events and related clinical symptoms. However, in many cases, individuals
          with historical trauma (particularly childhood sexual abuse) present for various reasons
          (e.g., relationship problems, work stress) that may initially appear unrelated to trauma [2].
          Regardless of whether clients raise the subject, therapists need to assess whether the client
          has experienced signiﬁcant childhood trauma. Often clients attend with an ‘if they don’t ask,
          I won’t tell’ mindset. It is essential for therapists to ‘give permission’ for this material to be
          shared by asking about the potential impact of any relevant traumatic events. Frequently,
          clients are not inclined to mention distressing childhood trauma in the initial assessment
          phase because they are ashamed of those experiences and/or present in strong coping
          modes. Therapists can utilise several screening tools to detect the possible experience of
          trauma. For example, the Life Events Check List [11] has items such as ‘experienced . . .
          other unwanted or uncomfortable sexual experience’ with a range of responses such as
          ‘happened to me’, ‘witnessed it’, and ‘doesn’t apply’. At the screening stage, the therapist can
          aﬃrm that they don’t yet need to know the details of conﬁrmed responses. It is essential to
          highlight that the client has control over if, when, and how much they disclose.
          Nevertheless, therapists should identify whether the client has a history of trauma early
          on, with the view to possible exploration later in treatment.
              See Box 14.1 for details of themes in childhood trauma and aspects of schema healing.


              Box 14.1 Themes in Childhood Trauma and Aspects of Schema Healing


              Manipulation, Silence and Shame
              Clients have often been silenced to keep neglect and abuse secret. As children, the child may
              have been encouraged to ‘keep secrets’ from supportive adult caregivers. Those abusing the
              child may have sought to undermine the child’s conﬁdence in speaking out, highlighting that
              ‘no one will believe them’. This experience further disrupts the child’s need for autonomy and
              control, thus compounding the eﬀects of any initial trauma. Furthermore, as the child grows
              older, they may become increasingly aware of what it means to have been sexually abused.
              They will eventually develop an awareness that society views sexual acts with children as
              a shameful wrongdoing. The child may then incorrectly infer that they must have done
              something wrong for being involved, resulting in a profound sense of shame. This experience
              is linked to the core emotional need for unconditional acceptance and validation. In schema
              healing, the therapist aims to assist the client to increase their self-compassion, acceptance,
              and understanding of the context of maltreatment. Here, the therapist seeks to have the client
              rightfully attribute their abuse to the perpetrators rather than themself as an adult survivor.

              The Inﬂuence and Reactions of Caregivers
              The reactions of those caregivers not directly involved with abuse can also be pivotal. Failing
              to protect the child, denying abuse, or criticising or maligning a child for seeking safety and
              security may result in profound and long-term adverse outcomes. Such responses can
              signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the meaning of abuse. In some cases, these acts can be as damaging
              as the abusive acts themselves, considerably impacting the legacy of the abuse in the
              adult’s life.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation        269




             Power, Coercion, and Control
             Clients with childhood trauma often have diﬃculty being appropriately assertive and setting
             limits. They often harbour deep feelings of disempowerment and helplessness and can easily
             feel controlled or manipulated by others. Clients often did not have their basic need for
             autonomy met during childhood; they could not state their needs and preferences – typically,
             out of fear of consequences or reprisals. In schema therapy, it is essential to empower the
             survivor of abuse and increase their autonomy and agency. The therapeutic aims are to enable
             the client to overcome fear and mistrust and increase their capacity to set limits, be assertive,
             and hold their views and opinions.

             Lack of Trust in Self
             Clients may deeply feel that they are ill-equipped to protect themselves, ‘make things
             safe’, or stand up for themselves. Clients may simultaneously overestimate their threat of
             harm and underestimate their capacity to keep themselves safe. In schema mode terms,
             the Vulnerable Child mode is hypervigilant for the next episode of violence and
             continues to scan for danger into adulthood. The child then develops coping strategies
             that have manifested as coping modes into adulthood. The resultant coping modes
             (such as avoidant coping modes or Detached Protector) can undermine conﬁdence in
             managing the threat of danger in adulthood. The mode interplay could be seen as
             follows:
               Vulnerable Child mode: ‘I’m afraid. I can’t assert myself. I can’t stick up for myself.’
                Detached Protector mode: ‘Saying what you need will overwhelm you, it’s easier if we put
                it oﬀ.’
                Healthy Adult mode: ‘You have got this! You can do what you want now. It’s not like it was
                when you were growing up.’
             Schema therapy aims to strengthen the Healthy Adult and encourage the client’s
             Vulnerable Child mode to trust their developing Healthy Adult to manage stressors
             and challenges.

             Relationships: Re-Victimisation in Adulthood
             Frequently, clients who experienced childhood abuse experience re-victimisation in
             their adult life [12]. Ongoing adult abuse may be related to the operation of coping
             styles.
               Surrendering: taking a position of resignation and surrendering to others. The client
             perceives that ‘this is how life is’, and the best way to cope with it is to give in to others and
             give up on change.
               Avoiding/Detaching: Avoiding ‘rocking the boat’ reduces the potential for distress and
             ramiﬁcations. Also, further abuse may act as a trigger for dissociation and numbing (which is
             comforting).
               Overcompensation: ‘If the abuse is going to occur, then it’s on my terms, under my control.’
               The therapeutic aim in schema therapy is to enable healthy, satisfying relationships where
             needs are met and there is an ending to further abuse and experiences reinforcing schemas
             and modes.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          270           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          Case Conceptualisation: Key Modes and Schemas
          As in all schema mode conceptualisations, the therapist working with complex PTSD is
          encouraged to consider the function and origin of the client’s modes. The following sections
          provide a selection of commonly observed modes in complex trauma cases and how the
          schema therapist responds to them.

          Abused/Vulnerable Child Mode
          This mode typically ‘holds’ memories, emotions, and beliefs linked to trauma. In cases of
          PTSD, this is the mode that is most often responsible for holding the (unprocessed) trauma
          memories. When these memories and images are activated, it is as though the client is stuck
          in the child’s experience, re-experiencing those events from the perspective of the (abused)
          child. Such clients also often present with deep feelings of shame, mistrust, humiliation, and
          betrayal related to abuse. Some trauma survivors experience child-like feelings of attach-
          ment allegiance and loyalty with abusive ﬁgures. As a result, the client may feel conﬂicted
          and confused towards the perpetrators of their abuse. This likely reﬂects a core conundrum
          the client has been experiencing since childhood: that the perpetrator (often a parent) both
          satisﬁes some needs (perhaps, for example, generally meeting needs for care) and at other
          times is abusive. This can lead to situations where the client may ﬂip into a Vulnerable Child
          mode and attempt to retract statements about the abuse they received from caregivers; they
          may present feeling fearful, guilty, and undeserving. In the therapy relationship, the
          Vulnerable Child mode also fears further abuse, humiliation, and invalidation from the
          therapist. This is where Limited Reparenting is central; the therapist should consider and
          attune to the client’s perception of potential threat and provide safety, stability, and
          unconditional acceptance and validation.

          Detached Protector Subtypes
          The Detached Protector mode often presents in a prototypical way: emotionally withdrawn,
          numb, detached, and ‘disconnected’ from aﬀect. However, we have observed several speciﬁc
          subtypes of this mode that are worth consideration. In a Spacey/Dissociative Protector
          mode, the client experiences depersonalisation, derealisation, feeling ‘foggy’, ‘spaced out’, or
          ‘numb’ towards aﬀect. Psychological denial and the slow accommodation of abusive behav-
          iour may also drive the process of detachment. Knipe [13] highlights the fundamental
          attachment conﬂict that a child has towards abusive caregivers. He notes that children may
          develop ways to accommodate abusive acts to mitigate against distress and powerlessness
          from the relationship, such as blaming themselves for the abuse rather than face the
          overwhelming dilemma of what to do about a toxic home environment in which their
          caregivers can’t be trusted. A therapist might encapsulate for the adult client how their child
          self may have rationalised the abuse they endured: ‘Some children may take the view that
          “it’s better to be a bad kid in a good family than a good kid in a bad family”’. The child’s
          reframe can serve to deny or minimise the impact of the abuse, thereby preserving their
          fundamental attachment to the caregiver and seemingly securing their short-term or overall
          survival. The changes in emotion and thinking to accommodate an abusive relationship
          may often be the seeds of the Detached Protector mode or other coping modes (e.g.,
          Compliant Surrenderer).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation   271



         Angry Protector Mode
         The Angry Protector mode serves to keep others away from vulnerability. The function of
         the mode is to push others (including the therapist) away. The tone can be deﬁant and
         hostile (‘Didn’t you hear me; I don’t want to talk about it’). Non-verbal language can also act
         to provide a ‘stay away from me’ message to the therapist [14]. Clients ordinarily use
         avoidant coping modes and ﬂip into this overcompensation mode when ‘pushed into
         a corner’. This reaction may result from probing questions from the therapist or when the
         avoidant coping fails to prevent access to the Vulnerable Child mode.

         Punitive Critic Mode
         A conceptualisation of the Punitive Critic mode centres around introjection. The client may
         have been exposed directly to punitive caregiving and internalised this way of relating to the
         self. At some point, The Punitive Critic mode may have served an adaptive purpose for the
         child. For example, in the past the client may have been harsh and blamed themselves in an
         attempt to mitigate further abuse or blame (‘Get a grip, stupid, or dad will go crazy’).
         However, schema therapists assume that typically the current form of the mode (in an adult
         client) no longer serves a function; it is an obsolete legacy of a traumatic childhood. The
         client needs to take an understanding but determined and ﬁrm position. Therapists can
         acknowledge the prior value of the mode (as helping in the past) but note that the impact of
         the mode is now damaging and wrong – for example (to the Punitive Critic): ‘I don’t agree
         with the rules you make for her, you may have once helped her; but now you are damaging,
         wrong, and you will stop.’

         Healthy Adult
         The therapist aims to strengthen and enhance the client’s Healthy Adult mode. A critical
         sub-goal is to strengthen this existing mode enough to undertake speciﬁc trauma-focused
         interventions. Throughout treatment, therapists aim to help empower clients and provide
         them with a sense of mastery. Experiential exercises, rather than being delayed, can be used
         gently and titrated, building on increasing emotional capacities. Psychological ‘resource
         development’ [15] typically used in EMDR treatments can also be applied to enhance and
         strengthen such resources directly (e.g., speciﬁc skills and adaptive emotional capacities
         such as self-compassion).

         Schemas
         Therapists should also attune to speciﬁc schemas evident in the case conceptualisation and
         relate them to trauma-based memories. Key schemas typically observed in complex trauma
         can be seen in Table 14.1.

         Complex Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Versus Borderline
         Personality Disorder
         CPTSD clients can share similar symptoms to BPD, particularly concerning aﬀect dysre-
         gulation, negative view of self, and diﬃculties maintaining a relationship [16]. In our
         opinion, a deﬁning diﬀerence is that clients with CPTSD lack a pervasive Abandonment
         schema. CPTSD clients frequently do not exhibit distress related to ‘endings’ (e.g.,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          272           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              Table 14.1 Common schema themes observed in PTSD trauma memories

              Schema                  Emotional themes                                     Key trauma cognitions

              Defectiveness           Feeling of being at fault for abuse; feeling         ‘I’m to blame for what
              & Shame                 unacceptable as a result of abuse                    happened’
              Subjugation             Feeling controlled; coercion applied in              ‘I’m powerless’; ‘I can’t stop
                                      abuse context; lack of power and                     this from happening’
                                      autonomy
              Emotional               Feeling caregivers are not attuned to basic          ‘No one is there for me’; ‘No
              Deprivation             needs or can’t empathise or provide                  one cares about what
                                      safety/guidance                                      happens to me’
              Mistrust/               Unable to trust other’s intention;                   ‘I can’t trust anyone’;
              Abuse                   assumption that the world is unsafe, and             ‘Nowhere is safe for me’
                                      others will exploit and be harmful


          a therapist leaving for holidays or a session’s ending) and do not interpret relationships
          ending as meaning they will be abandoned, which is typically very prominent in BPD.

          Dissociation
          Dissociative symptoms include depersonalisation (being detached from the body), dereal-
          isation (not feeling the world is ‘real’), amnesia, identity confusion, and identity alteration
          [17]. Schema therapy considers dissociation to be the expression of extreme variants of
          modes and rapid changes in schema modes (‘ﬂipping’ from one mode to another) [18, 19].
          Clients typically have a dominant avoidant coping mode developed to manage extreme fear,
          shame, and distress, but occasionally ﬂip into acute variants of Child and Critic modes when
          triggered.
              Some clients (in childhood and adulthood) may have a propensity to dissociate [20];
          however, typically a child will develop a sequence of survival responses to extreme threat. As
          a child, the client may not have been able to escape, avoid, or ﬁght oﬀ repeated abusive acts.
          Instead, they implemented dissociation to cope with the ongoing abuse or lack of safety.
          Schauer and Elbert [21] note two major classes of dissociative states: Type 1, the ‘Uproar’,
          which is akin to Vulnerable and Angry Child activation, resulting in feelings of dizziness,
          palpations, unreality, and muscle tension; and Type 2, ‘The Shutdown’, which is associated
          with a drop in arousal, cognitive failure, immobility, and numbing of all emotion. ‘The
          Shutdown’ can be conceptualised as an extreme type of avoidant coping mode, usually some
          form of Detached Protector. It is activated by implicit or explicit reminders of traumatic
          experiences coupled with activation of the Punitive Critic mode, resulting in a cascade of
          distress which the avoidant coping mode serves to terminate.
              Box 14.2 presents examples of methods that may be employed to manage dissociation in
          session.

          Modes, Alters, and Identities in Complex Dissociative Cases
          Treatments for complex dissociative disorders (e.g., dissociative identity disorder [DID])
          have historically used models that describe ‘structural dissociation’ of the personality or
          dissociated ‘ego states’ [24, 25] to describe rapid ﬂuctuations in states frequently observed



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation          273



             Box 14.2 Methods to Manage Dissociation in Session

             It is not helpful for the client to remain in a dissociated state during a therapy session. The
             therapist should intervene to help the client reorient to the present moment. The ‘window of
             tolerance’ [22, 23] model can be a helpful idea to guide the therapist’s assessment of the
             client’s emotional experience. There is an optimal level of emotional arousal in which to
             participate in psychotherapeutic activities. This ‘window’ lies between hypoarousal (insuﬃ-
             cient emotional experience) and hyperarousal (excessive or overwhelming emotional experi-
             ence). The following suggestions can assist the client to manage the intensity of their
             emotional arousal.

             Use of a shawl/blanket: The therapist can use a shawl or rug and ask the client to hold one end
             and the therapist the other. The therapist may tug on their end of the rug to gently capture
             the client’s attention when they become too detached.
             Grounding of senses: Clients can be encouraged to perceive their surroundings, engaging their
             senses within the room: ‘What are ﬁve things you can see?’; ‘What ﬁve sounds can you hear in
             the room?’; ‘What are ﬁve things you can physically feel?’ This sequence can be then counted
             down 5–1 using the same format.
             Use of balls/pillows and playing catch: A small ball or pillow can be thrown between the therapist
             and the client. This ‘playing catch’ can be a method to orient the client to the present
             moment.
             Use of smell: The therapist can use pleasant smelling scents, such as scented oils, mints, or
             coﬀee beans, to engage the sense of smell and orientate to the present moment.
             Intense temperatures: Frozen cooler packs, oranges (or other frozen objects), drinking a glass of
             cold water.


         in complex trauma. In such models, the therapist can separate trauma memories and
         related experiences into diﬀerent components of the self. Furthermore, clients with
         complex presentations may present with many ‘identities’ or ‘alters’ of the self.
         Huntjens and colleagues [18], describing the model of schema therapy for DID clients,
         argue against the notion of separate ‘identities’ and compartmentalised identity states that
         operate as wholly dissociated aspects of the self. Instead, they suggest that clients with
         severe dissociation (and DID) may hold positive metacognitive beliefs about having
         ‘identities’ and keeping experiences separate. For example, ‘If I keep these elements
         separate, then I can deal with the trauma that I’ve experienced’. Instead, they suggest
         utilising the mode model and encouraging a move from an ‘identities’ framework to one
         based on modes. This change is quite subtle but perhaps also profound. Rather than
         reinforce the notion of a family of personalities, the schema therapist uses mode language
         to introduce the idea that these are all ‘parts’ of one’s self. In this way, the schema therapist
         simultaneously validates the client’s experience of dissociation while slowly helping the
         client gain awareness of an overarching ‘self’, thus promoting integration over time.
         Therapists can collapse multiple compartmentalised identities into a mode that serves
         a common function within the conceptualisation. For example, several child-like parts
         could be collapsed into the Vulnerable Child mode and worked with in such a fashion. The
         primary aim is to provide a coherent, clear case conceptualisation and reduce the com-
         plexity of the presentation for the client and therapist.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          274           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              Box 14.3 Key Treatment Themes

              •    Increase self-compassion to self and the client’s history.
              •    Reattribute blame for the experience of trauma, manage Punitive Critic mode.
              •    Increase control and sense of autonomy and power towards others.
              •    Increase belief in self to ‘make things safe’.



              Our experience is that the dissociative processes in session – such as the client ‘zoning
          out’, being unresponsive, or being ﬂooded with distress – are often linked to activation of
          the Punitive Critic mode. Often clients privately ﬂip into a Punitive Critic mode that may
          activate intense feelings of shame and fear. If extreme emotional reactions occur in session,
          it may be helpful for the therapist to inquire whether such activation has just occurred.
          Mode work can then be used to manage the impact of the Punitive mode. Helping the client
          manage and ultimately reduce the activation of the Critic can be a crucial step in establishing
          enough safety to begin any trauma processing. This process also introduces the client to
          working on many themes that will come up later in memory-focused processing work
          (imagery rescripting). Box 14.3 summarises the key themes in treatment.

          Preparation for Trauma-Focused Work
          Trauma-focused interventions speciﬁcally for processing traumatic memories are seen to be
          more eﬀective than approaches that do not focus on trauma but instead focus on increasing
          coping techniques, such as aﬀect regulation and anxiety management [26]. Clients receiving
          childhood trauma treatment also recognise the importance of focusing on trauma memories
          [10]. Trauma processing interventions ﬁt within the broader schema therapy model, which
          acts as a helpful framework. In our perspective, if the client is willing (i.e., they are open to
          doing trauma-focused work) and able (i.e., they have some capacity to tolerate trauma-
          linked emotion), the therapist should seek to proceed with trauma processing-based inter-
          ventions. Boterhoven De Hann and colleagues [27] demonstrated that both imagery
          rescripting and EMDR were very eﬀective in treating PTSD due to childhood trauma.
          Such treatment consisted of a block of twelve sessions that included trauma processing in
          each session. It may be helpful for the therapist to suggest a block of trauma-focused work
          for the client, thus creating an expectancy of the content of sessions and assisting with the
          management of avoidance of trauma material.
              If the client is unwilling, the therapist should focus on mode work typically observed in
          non-complex trauma personations. Here, the therapist seeks to understand what modes are
          preventing the therapist from accessing trauma content. The conceptualisation of the
          avoidance in mode terms can be developed and should be communicated to the client
          (e.g., see Table 14.2). The therapist can then work with the client towards overcoming the
          block via cognitive, experiential, and limited reparenting techniques.
              If the client cannot tolerate their emotions, the therapist is encouraged to slow their
          approach and titrate the intensity of emotion evoked during experiential techniques (again,
          keeping in mind the ‘window of tolerance’). The therapist may wish to initially guide the
          client to complete imagery rescripting with neutral or positive imagery. For example, the
          client may access an image of them sweeping the ﬂoor up as a child (as a neutral image).



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation                    275



             Table 14.2 Overcoming avoidance of trauma processing: Mode work and trauma

             Mode                        Potential sentiments towards trauma material

             Vulnerable/                 ‘I’m afraid of these memories and these feelings. I feel ashamed that this all
             Abused Child                happened, scared that others will do it again.’
             Angry Child                 ‘I’m sick and tired of this! Why do I have to go through it all? It’s all painful
                                         and no one understands how bad it is for me!’
             Detached                    ‘She can’t handle these memories. It’s better to forget all this and move on.
             Protector                   This is too much for her.’
             Angry Protector             ‘How many times do I have to say it! I don’t want to talk about it! Why do
                                         you keep asking! I told you there is no vulnerable side.’
             Punitive Critic             ‘She doesn’t deserve to feel better’; ‘She shouldn’t be speaking about this
                                         childhood stuﬀ; she’s a bad daughter, a traitor.’
             Healthy Adult               ‘These memories cause me pain, and It might be diﬃcult to manage at
                                         times, but I can trust myself and can trust the therapist.’



         They can initially learn to tolerate the therapist entering the image to help with the sweeping
         (or with the therapist bringing in a new vacuum cleaner). In separate subsequent exercises,
         the therapist may also seek to have the client join this neutral image and assist the child as an
         adult. Imagery can be adapted later to include marginally distressing images, such as a child
         feeling sad, with the therapist providing care and safety, without any negative antagonist
         present. In this way, the therapist can scaﬀold trauma-focused work (indeed, all therapeutic
         work) in ways that help the client ‘get within the therapeutic window’.
             The therapist can also utilise a mode conceptualisation to understand the mode inter-
         play causing the client distress about trauma processing. For example, perhaps the Punitive
         Critic mode becomes activated when discussing traumatic experiences. Alternatively, the
         client may not feel they can trust themselves to manage the aﬀect evoked by the traumatic
         memories and associated ideas. In this case, the Vulnerable Child and Detached Protector
         modes may work together to undermine the client’s conﬁdence that they can cope with their
         emotions associated with the trauma.
             Box 14.4 presents a pseudonynmous case study (‘Katie’) utilising various modes to
         address trauma.

         Processing Trauma Memories
         Clients presenting with complex trauma may have had many toxic experiences that con-
         tributed to their PTSD or that resulted in EMS. Lee and Boterhoven De Hann [27]
         recommend undertaking a process of ‘trauma mapping’, in which the therapist and client
         link trauma-related memories to corresponding EMS. The client and therapist can identify
         a distressing aspect of the trauma memory (e.g., sexual abuse from stepfather). The therapist
         then breaks the trauma memory into three main components: (a) the sensory component
         (someone coming into my room), (b) the aﬀective/physiological component (feeling tense
         in my chest, feeling anxious), and (c) the meaning of the event (I’m powerless, I can’t stop
         this: i.e., Subjugation schema). Following identiﬁcation of the meaning (typically linked to
         an EMS), the therapist can explore other memories and images related to this schema




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          276           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



              Box 14.4 Case Example: Katie

              Katie would typically prefer to ‘talk’ about her recent triggers and seek general support and
              validation. When the therapist suggested the idea of doing some speciﬁc work on processing
              trauma memories using imagery, she initially appeared open to the process. However, the
              therapist had concerns about Katie’s ability to tolerate the fear and shame central to the abuse
              she suﬀered growing up. She would become tearful and overwhelmed when talking about
              her childhood, and reported some self-harming after a session where she listed some of the
              trauma memories she wanted to process. In subsequent sessions, the therapist conceptual-
              ised the self-harm and pattern of dysregulation via modes. It became apparent that the
              disclosure of events and the possibility of change activated her Punitive Critic mode. The
              Punitive Critic mode deemed her discussion of childhood abuse an act of betrayal toward her
              family (particularly her stepfather). Furthermore, her Vulnerable Child mode was fearful of
              rocking the boat (key schema: Subjugation) and was overwhelmed with fear. Her typical
              coping mode, the ‘Blocker mode’, also doubted her ability to cope and generally advised her
              to ‘just forget about this childhood stuﬀ’.
                 Over several sessions, the therapist used mode dialogues (between the therapist and the
              Punitive Critic) to contain and mitigate the eﬀect of the Punitive Critic and the view that Katie was
              ‘betraying her family’. Later, the therapist utilised chairwork where the stepfather was placed in
              the empty chair to help the therapist provide protection and safety. Later, Katie used an empty
              chair dialogue with her stepfather to announce she was ‘ﬁnished being afraid of him’, resulting in
              empowerment and a greater sense of conﬁdence. After several months, Katie was increasingly
              able to use a phase of imagery rescripting focusing on childhood trauma memories.



          theme. Images related to these events can then also be used as ‘targets’ for imagery
          rescripting.

          Imagery Rescripting
          Readers can read detailed procedures for imagery rescripting in Chapter 8. Here, we
          reiterate some critical points about its speciﬁc application to childhood trauma.
          Therapists have attributed adherence to imagery rescripting protocols for enhancing their
          conﬁdence and assisting them to stay ‘on task’ [26].
              A typical imagery rescripting protocol consists of two phases of processing [26, 28]. In
          the ﬁrst phase, an upsetting trauma event is identiﬁed, and the therapist enters the image,
          providing safety, validation, and care. In many childhood abuse and neglect cases, the adult
          has poor examples of care. Therefore, the therapist aims in the initial stage to model how the
          client can rescript the scene and reduce disabling feelings of anxiety and shame. During
          the second phase, the therapist encourages the client (as an adult) to enter the image and
          manage the abusive antagonist and situation. It is vital to highlight the rationale for this
          practice to clients: it is an essential step for them to take to increase their experience of
          empowerment, autonomy, and mastery.
              The number of sessions within phases 1 and 2 can depend on case severity and the
          eﬀectiveness of the imagery. In our view, after 6–10 sessions of imagery rescripting within
          phase 1, it may be helpful to ask the client if they feel prepared to stand up for their child self.
          For example, ‘On a rating between zero (“no way”) to ten (“let me in there”), where do you
          feel you stand regarding rescripting the image?’ If a client states a level of three or above, it




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        Working with Complex Trauma and Dissociation                 277



         may be time for the therapist to encourage the client to rescript the image. Our view is that
         successful processing ultimately requires the client to rescript the memory and independ-
         ently care for their younger selves. Also, imagery rescripting may be more successful if the
         client comes to the session expecting to work on imagery rescripting (or another form of
         trauma processing) rather than introducing imagery rescripting exercises periodically or
         spontaneously. A ‘block’ of work can signiﬁcantly help with avoidance, bring greater
         momentum and increasing the focus on changing legacies derived from traumatic events.

         Concluding Remarks
         Schema therapy is well suited to assist in the treatment of CPTSD. The model is a ﬂexible
         framework for conceptualising complex client problems and behaviour patterns. The model
         can help the client be ‘willing and able’ to complete trauma processing work. Speciﬁcally,
         a schema therapy approach to CPTSD aims to strengthen the Healthy Adult mode to allow
         the client to participate in speciﬁc trauma processing interventions. While imagery rescript-
         ing is a natural tool for trauma processing (particularly concerning childhood trauma), the
         model can complement other trauma processing approaches (e.g., EMDR). Schema ther-
         apy’s focus on the therapy relationship and oﬀering the experience of limited reparenting is
         a crucial factor that sets it apart from other approaches and can signiﬁcantly enhance
         therapeutic outcomes for the client.

         References
           1. Felitti V, Anda R, Nordenberg D, et al.                           Depression and Anxiety. 2016;33
              Relationship of childhood abuse and                               (5):359–69.
              household dysfunction to many of the                         7. Royal Commission into Invitational
              leading causes of death in adults: The                          Responses to Childhood Sexual Abuse
              Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE)                             [Internet], Canberra. Final report. 2017.
              Study. American Journal of Preventive                           www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/
              Medicine. 1998;14(4):245–58.                                    ﬁnal-report.
           2. Herman J. Complex PTSD: A syndrome in                        8. Ullman S, Brecklin L. Sexual assault history
              survivors of prolonged and repeated                             and health-related outcomes in a national
              trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress.                            sample of women. Psychology of Women
              1992;5(3):377–91.                                               Quarterly. 2003;27(1):46–57.
           3. Cloitre M. Complex PTSD: assessment and                      9. Ahrens C, Stansell J, Jennings A. To tell or
              treatment. European Journal of                                  not to tell: The impact of disclosure on
              Psychotraumatology. 2021; 12:1866423.                           sexual assault survivors’ recovery. Violence
           4. World Health Organization. International                        and Victims. 2010;25(5):631–48.
              statistical classiﬁcation of diseases and                   10. Boterhoven de Haan K, Lee CW,
              related health problems (11th ed.) [Online].                    Correia H, et al. clients and therapist
              2019 (cited July 2021). https://icd.who.int/.                   perspectives on treatment for adults with
           5. Cloitre M, Courtois C, Ford J, et al. The                       PTSD from childhood trauma. Journal of
              ISTSS expert consensus treatment guidelines                     Clinical Medicine. 2021;10(5):954.
              for complex PTSD in adults. 2012. www                       11. Weathers F, Blake D, Schnurr P, et al. The
              .istss.org/treating-trauma/istss-complex-                       life events checklist for DSM-5 (LEC-5)
              ptsd-treatment-guidelines.aspx.                                 PTSD. National Center for PTSD; 2013.
           6. De Jongh A, Resick P, Zoellner L, et al.                    12. Barnes J, Noll J, Putnam F, Trickett P.
              Critical analysis of the current treatment                      Sexual and physical revictimization
              guidelines for complex PTSD in adults.                          among victims of severe childhood sexual




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          278           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



                 abuse. Child Abuse & Neglect. 2009;33                           Psychologie/Journal of Psychology. 2010;218
                 (7):412–20.                                                     (2):109–27.
          13. Knipe J. EMDR toolbox: Theory and                            21. Siegel D. Developing mind: How
              treatment of complex PTSD and                                    relationships and the brain interact to shape
              dissociation. Springer Publishing                                who we are, 3rd ed. Guilford Press; 2020.
              Company; 2018.                                               22. Ogden P. Modulation, mindfulness, and
          14. Bernstein D, van den Broek E. Schema                             movement in the treatment of trauma-
              Mode Observer Rating Scale (SMORS).                              related depression. In: Kernan M, ed.
              Unpublished manuscript, Department of                            Clinical pearls of wisdom: Twenty one
              Psychology, Maastricht University, The                           leading therapists oﬀer their key insights.
              Netherlands; 2006.                                               Norton & Company; 2010. pp. 1–13.
          15. Korn D, Leeds A. Preliminary evidence of                     23. Leutner S, Piedfort-Marin O. The concept
              eﬃcacy for EMDR resource development                             of ego state: From historical background to
              and installation in the stabilization phase of                   future perspectives. European Journal of
              treatment of complex posttraumatic stress                        Trauma & Dissociation. 2021;5(4):100184.
              disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology.                    24. Nijenhuis E, van der Hart O, Steele K.
              2002;58(12):1465–87.                                             Trauma-related structural dissociation of
          16. Phoenix Australia Australian guidelines for                      the personality. Activitas Nervosa Superior.
              the Prevention and treatment of Acute                            2010;52(1):1–23.
              Stress Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress                        25. Ehring T, Welboren R, Morina N, et al.
              Disorder and Complex PTSD. 2021. www                             Meta-analysis of psychological treatments
              .phoenixaustralia.org/wp-content/uploads/                        for post-traumatic stress disorder in adult
              2020/07/Chapter-7.-CPTSD.pdf.                                    survivors of childhood abuse. Clinical
          17. Cloitre M, Courtois C, Ford J, et al. The                        Psychology Review. 2014;34(8):645–57.
              ISTSS expert consensus treatment                             26. De Haan K, Lee C, Fassbinder E, et al.
              guidelines for complex PTSD in adults.                           Imagery rescripting and eye movement
              2012. www.istss.org/treating-trauma/istss-                       desensitisation and reprocessing as
              complex-ptsd-treatment-guidelines.aspx.                          treatment for adults with post-traumatic
          18. Huntjens RJ, Rijkeboer MM, Arntz A.                              stress disorder from childhood trauma:
              Schema therapy for dissociative identity                         Randomised clinical trial. The British
              disorder (DID): Rationale and study                              Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;217(5):609–15.
              protocol. European Journal of                                27. Lee C, Boterhoven de Haan K. Working
              Psychotraumatology. 2019;10                                      with trauma memories and complex post-
              (1):1571377.                                                     traumatic stress disorder. In Heath G,
          19. Lynn S, Maxwell R, Merckelbach H, et al.                         Startup H, ed. Creative methods in schema
              Dissociation and its disorders: Competing                        therapy: Advances and innovation in
              models, future directions, and a way                             clinical practice. Routledge; 2020.
              forward. Clinical Psychology Review.                         28. Arntz A, Weertman A. Treatment of
              2019;73:101755.                                                  childhood memories: Theory and practice.
          20. Schauer M, Elbert T. Dissociation                                Behaviour Research and Therapy. 1999;37
              following traumatic stress. Zeitschrift für                      (8):715–40.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
               Chapter
                                    Schema Therapy for Eating

               15                   Disorders


         Introduction
         In this chapter, we illustrate a schema therapy approach to working with eating disorders via
         a detailed case study of a young woman with anorexia nervosa. The case exempliﬁes
         problems that commonly accompany eating disorders, including post-traumatic stress
         disorder and borderline personality disorder. The case also highlights how to manage
         providing schema therapy in the face of serious medical issues, the schema therapy concep-
         tualisation of eating disorders, and the integration of coping modes into the client’s Healthy
         Adult mode.

         Challenges in Treating Eating Disorders
         There are several factors that create particular challenges in treating eating disorders. First,
         eating disorders are often experienced as ego-syntonic (e.g., ‘I don’t know who I would be
         without my anorexia’) and are characterised by ambivalence about changing eating disorder
         behaviours. Second, the physiological eﬀects of eating disorders can hinder treatment
         attendance and engagement. Third, although eating disorders may cause high levels of
         distress, they also function as a ‘solution’ to underlying diﬃculties and suﬀering by provid-
         ing a sense of coherence, achievement, mastery, control, identity, emotional regulation,
         comfort, safety, and connection to signiﬁcant others. Encouragingly, though, due to an
         established track record in the eﬀective treatment of entrenched diﬃculties, rigid personal-
         ity traits, and complex trauma, schema therapy appears well placed to work with eating
         disorders which have not responded to ﬁrst-line treatments.
             Eating disorders are characterised by high levels of avoidance and/or overcompensation,
         so under-reporting of schemas, modes, and unmet needs is common. Eating disorders can
         provide a ‘cocoon’, which functions to protect and disconnect the person from awareness of
         deeper emotional suﬀering. Clients frequently present citing the eating disorder as the
         primary issue, without awareness that it has developed to protect them from underlying
         distress and low self-esteem associated with EMS.
             In the assessment phase, the more obvious precipitants to the development of eating
         disorders and associated EMS, such as sexual, physical, and emotional abuse, are usually
         easier to identify than those areas where unmet needs represent a ‘lack’ of emotional
         ‘ingredients’ such as empathy and attunement. Furthermore, many clients, especially
         those with avoidant personality traits, struggle to recognise and describe the more subtle
         ways in which their basic emotional needs were not met. It is common for those with eating
         disorders to experience high levels of shame and guilt and to be fearful of blaming
         caregivers for their diﬃculties. Therefore, identiﬁcation of unmet needs in this population
                                                                                                     279


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          280           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          often requires a great deal of detective work, using hypothetical questioning (for further
          details, see Chapter 3) and asking for concrete examples. In particular, clinicians should be
          alert to any mismatch between the client’s temperament and the parenting style and/or
          childhood atmosphere they were exposed to as children: for example, a child with a highly
          perfectionistic temperament matched with a highly demanding parenting style or pressur-
          ised schooling environment; or a sensitive, anxious temperament with a chaotic and stressed
          family environment. It is also important to reassure the client that even though there may
          have been unmet emotional needs such as empathy and attunement, this does not negate
          any positive events, love, and aﬀection that were experienced during childhood. From this
          perspective, it can be helpful to begin by assessing the best aspects of childhood and which
          needs were met, before investigating missing ingredients. The following case example shows
          how schema therapy can be applied to work transdiagnostically with even the most severe
          eating disorders, alongside other complex psychiatric comorbidities (e.g., BPD). For more
          detail about a schema therapy approach to eating disorders, readers are directed to work by
          Simpson and Smith [1].

          Assessment and Conceptualisation: Case Example of ‘Amanda’
          Presenting Issues
          Amanda was a 21-year-old woman meeting diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa
          (restrictive), PTSD, panic disorder, and comorbid borderline personality disorder. She
          presented for treatment with low weight (body mass index of 15), suicidal urges, and
          a pattern of self-harm through cutting. Eating behaviours included severe dietary restriction
          and ritualised laxative abuse leading to episodes of stomach pain lasting 3–4 hours over-
          night, followed by further severe restriction. At intake she also described poor concentration
          and memory, ﬂashbacks, and nightmares associated with sexual abuse that had taken place
          from the age of seven. At the time of intake, she was still living at home with her parents.

          Mental State
          At intake, Amanda presented as detached and unaware of her emotions. She seemed
          concerned about how her eating disorder aﬀected her family, but indiﬀerent to her own
          struggle. She described feeling undeserving of treatment and believed she should ‘stop being
          so selﬁsh and sort [her]self out’.

          Predisposing Factors
          Amanda was a shy, anxious child. She and her brother spent most of their childhood alone
          with their mother as their father worked long hours. Amanda’s parents struggled to cope
          with their own emotional diﬃculties, and their capacity to provide emotional support,
          nurturance, empathy, and protection was limited. Her father was rule-bound and viewed
          relationships and the world in black-and-white terms (i.e., ‘there is a “right” and “wrong”
          way to do everything’). Her mother was passive, compliant, and often overwhelmed with
          anxiety; she struggled to assert her own needs and set limits on others. From an early age,
          Amanda took on the role as intermediary between her parents, attempting to anticipate and
          reduce her father’s criticism of her mother whilst acting as a conﬁdante and providing
          emotional support for them both. In contrast, Amanda attempted to reduce any potential




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy for Eating Disorders   281



         strain on her parents by minimising her own emotional and physical needs whilst striving to
         meet their needs and expectations.
             Due to her parents’ own unresolved schemas, their love was expressed in a manner
         which was, unwittingly, conditional on her meeting their emotional needs. On the one hand,
         she was praised for being self-suﬃcient and the ‘good girl’ by helping with parenting and
         providing emotional support for her mother when required, whilst at other times sensing
         that her mother needed Amanda to need her. This resulted in a confusing paradox whereby
         she learned to read the cues that signalled her mother’s needs to ascertain whether her
         ‘Hyperautonomous Good Girl mode’ (Overcontroller), ‘Enmeshed Nurturer’ (Compliant
         Surrenderer), or her ‘Rescue Me’ (Helpless Surrenderer) mode would be the best ﬁt.
         Amanda learned from an early age that she was praised and appreciated when prioritising
         her parents’ needs (and thereby her need to stay attached to them) over the need for
         authenticity (i.e., to be and express her true self) by blocking emotions and needs which
         may inconvenience others.
             The home atmosphere was grim and austere, with minimal opportunity for play and fun.
         Amanda’s attempts at individuation, such as trying to arrange activities with her friends or
         to plan for future studies, were met with disapproval and the feeling that she was in some
         way hurting her parents by making choices that were ‘wrong’.
             Amanda was sexually abused by her grandfather between the ages of seven and nine. Her
         eventual disclosure to her parents resulted in further isolation. Her mother became highly
         emotional, leading to Amanda feeling signiﬁcant guilt and responsibility for her mother’s
         distress. Her father reacted angrily, dismissing the grandfather, but never mentioned the
         issue again. This experience further reinforced Amanda’s Helpless Surrenderer mode: she
         was helpless to prevent both the abuse itself and her parents’ responses. Further, there was
         no opportunity to process her own distress and anger in relation to the trauma.
             Amanda’s EMS and modes were assessed through a combination of interview, the
         Young Parenting Inventory, and the Schema Mode Inventory for Eating Disorders (SMI-
         ED). Her most prominent modes and the dynamics between them are displayed in
         Figure 15.1.

         Highest Scoring Schemas
            Emotional Deprivation – Others can never understand me or meet my needs (because my
            needs are ‘too much’).
            Defectiveness – I am undeserving, worthless, ‘wrong’.
            Emotional Inhibition – My needs and feelings are a burden/threat to others. I must keep
            them to myself.
            Enmeshment – I only exist and have worth when in the presence of signiﬁcant others.
            Self-Sacriﬁce – I am responsible for ‘ﬁxing’ the suﬀering of others.
            Punitiveness – I deserve to be punished when I make a mistake or get things wrong.
            Mistrust/Abuse – Others will hurt and use me.

         Origins of Modes Linked to Onset of Eating Disorder
         Prioritising the family’s well-being required self-denial – and anorexia provided the solu-
         tion. It was hypothesised that Amanda’s Overcontroller coping mode drove her dietary
         restriction and low weight, enabling her to ignore her physiological (interoceptive) signals



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          282           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



                                                                 Overcontrollers              Healthy Adult: You
                                                            • Perfectionistic: Pride-         exist, you matter,
                                                               based over-ride of needs       you are deserving
                                                               /emotions. Weight loss as
                                                               solution, calorie counting.
                                                               Restriction

                   Inner Critic                             • Self-Flagellating: Rule-        Little Amanda
                (Punishing) Mode                               driven ritualised laxative     Guilty, scared,
                                                               use, self-harm, cutting        ashamed, sad,
            • Your feelings are bad;                        • Suspicious: I don’t trust you   lonely,
              a burden on others                                                              powerless,
                                                                 Enmeshed Nurturer            frozen,
            • You’re wrong,                                    (Compliant Surrenderer)        traumatised
              undeserving                                      Compliant, self-sacrificing,
                                                                       rescuer

            • You’re fat, repulsive,
                                                                 Detached Protector                Angry
              you take up too much
                                                                Acting normal, ‘I’m fine’,         Child
              space
                                                                    detached, numb               Internalised
                                                                                                   towards
            • You don’t need it                                                                   body: self-
                                                                 Helpless Surrenderer             harm, self-
                                                                Please take care of me,           deprivation
                                                               rescue me. How sick do I
                                                              need to be to deserve care?



          Figure 15.1 Example: Amanda’s mode map


          and emotions, thereby protecting herself from frightening trauma symptoms, loneliness,
          and shame. Amanda’s Overcontroller (Perfectionistic, Invincible) mode was intermittently
          reinforced by a sense of achievement and invincibility by restricting her eating and the
          associated weight loss. She was later able to associate the onset of this coping mode to her
          experiences at age seven, when she felt overwhelming fear and helplessness in the face of
          sexual abuse. The Overcontroller mode generated the urge to engage in cleaning rituals, and
          later in dietary restriction, as a means of overcompensating for the feelings of powerlessness.
          It was hypothesised that early in childhood, after recognising her parents’ extreme discom-
          fort with anger, her (dissociated) Angry-Rebellious child mode was controlled and re-
          directed inward through a (Self-Flagellating) Overcontroller mode, manifested by laxative
          abuse and self-cutting. In this way, Amanda’s Overcontroller also fulﬁlled a ‘self-ﬂagellating’
          role. Amanda described an evening ritual of taking large quantities of laxatives. This
          partially fulﬁlled a ‘cleansing’ function, which brought temporary relief from her inner
          sense of ‘badness’, but also led to painful stomach cramps, which she described as a type of
          ritualistic practice of self-inﬂicting pain as a means of increasing tolerance and sense of
          mastery over when and how she experienced pain. Self-harm through cutting fulﬁlled
          a similar function. Through the overcompensatory coping process of turning herself into
          the ‘powerful one’ who could control and inﬂict pain on her own body, she could tempor-
          arily eliminate the inner vulnerable, powerless, needy child whom she blamed for the
          rejection, loss, and abuse. By exerting control over her eating and weight and focusing on



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy for Eating Disorders   283



         the sensations of emptiness in her body, Amanda described a temporary ‘high’, a rush of
         omnipotence associated with overcoming her basic human needs, and ‘pleasure’ associated
         with self-deprivation and punishment. Further, thinking of herself as the ‘bad guy’ provided
         a fantasy of control whereby through eliminating the bad aspects of herself, she could retain
         hope that she could someday be deserving of love.

         Precipitants
         Amanda’s eating diﬃculties developed from age 12. As she reached puberty and gained
         weight and her body changed shape, she experienced a sense of being ‘out of control’ and
         ‘exposed’. Her sense of herself as ‘dirty’, defective, and shameful became increasingly
         ‘embodied’. She began restricting her diet and lost 10 kg over 8 months. Laxative abuse
         began at age 16. Each day became structured around episodes of taking laxatives and
         obsessional cleaning. Her regular admissions to the local inpatient facility always resulted
         in her discharging herself after 2–3 days due to high anxiety regarding weight gain. When
         she gained weight, her PTSD symptoms increased, leading to an increased urge to restrict
         and engage in laxative abuse.

         Maintaining Factors: Vicious Mode Cycles
         Primary messages associated with emotional neglect and abuse were internalised in the
         form of the Inner Critic. In childhood, this led to feelings of loneliness and powerlessness
         (Vulnerable Child), as well as a sense of unfairness and anger (Angry Child). The anger was
         repressed so as not to further threaten attachments with key caregivers. Amanda’s eating
         behaviours and low weight provided an anaesthetising eﬀect whilst she was engaged in these
         rituals (Overcontroller, Detached Protector), but afterwards she was overcome with
         a growing sense of shame and powerlessness (Inner Critic ‘You stupid girl!’ → Little
         Amanda [Shame]). Breakthrough ﬂashbacks and nightmares continued to occur (Little
         [Abused] Amanda) and were largely controlled and numbed through laxative abuse and
         self-harm (Detached Protector; Overcontroller). Retaining the same level of numbness and
         the powerful ‘high’ required increasing levels of dietary restriction and self-inﬂicted ritual-
         ised pain via laxatives and self-harm (Overcontroller). Due to the time and energy required
         to focus on these rituals, Amanda became increasingly socially isolated (Little [Lonely]
         Amanda). Although her coping modes provided relief from emotional distress and avoid-
         ance of schema activation short term, over time the eating disorder itself increasingly
         became a source of secondary distress and shame (Inner Critic message: ‘You’re disgusting,
         unlovable’).
             By avoiding contact with others (Detached/Avoidant Protector), Amanda became
         increasingly reliant on her eating disorder as her only source of comfort, reinforcing her
         belief that she was inherently defective (Inner Critic ‘You’re so unlovable!’ → Little Amanda
         [Shame]). On the one hand, her illness and low weight led to an increase in attention and
         concern by her parents (Helpless Surrenderer) but, on the other hand, they frequently
         remarked on the toll of her anorexia on them, reinforcing her sense that she was a burden on
         others (Inner Critic ‘You’re too much!’ → Little Amanda [Guilt, Shame] ‘I’m too needy, my
         needs are too much’).
             A ﬂow diagram demonstrating the self-perpetuating pathways between these modes is
         presented in Figure 15.2.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          284           Applications for Mental Health Presentations




                                                                Vulnerable (Lonely) Child: Core
                                                             loneliness, emptiness, powerlessness,                    Detached/Avoidant
                         Inner Critic
                                                                  shame due to misattunement.                              Protector:
             Primary Messages: your needs are too                Flashbacks, nightmares, anxiety
             much. You are overwhelming to others.                                                                   Better stay away from
             You are the problem. You’re too needy.                                                                  others, to avoid being
                                                             Repressed Angry Child: Turns anger                             rejected
                   The abuse was your fault
                                                              inward. Feels irritation but unable to
                                                                      pinpoint reasons why




                      Overcontroller Self-Flagellating               Overcontroller Perfectionistic
                                                                            Dietary restriction,
                         By externalizing & ritualizing &              Externalises internal pain &
                    governing the pain through laxatives &                                                            Vulnerable (Lonely)
                                                                      chaos. Focus on controlling &
                        self harm, the internal pain feels                                                                   Child
                                                                      fixing the child/body provides
                    tolerable & manageable. Omnipotence                  temporary omnipotence,                      Becomes increasingly
                      through illusion of levitating above                 distanced from pain,                       isolated & ashamed
                     body & eliminating needs & perceived                 suffering. Low weight =
                             bodily weakness (VCh).                        anaesthetising effect




                                                                                                            Helpness Surrenderer:
                    Inner Critic Secondary Attack:             Vulnerable Child:                     The only way I can remotely deserve
                   You’re pathetic, no wonder others           Secondary layer of                  care is through being ill. Idealises others:
                    don’t like you, you’re too much!                shame,                          others hold the power & love. I need to
                     What is wrong with you? You              powerlessness, failure               be unwell to deserve their care & to stop
                                stupid girl!                                                               them from abandoning me

          Figure 15.2 Self-perpetuating schema mode sequence



          Treatment
          Amanda attended 50 sessions over 18 months. Intermittent hospital admissions, fatigue due
          to insomnia associated with laxative abuse, and a very low BMI initially interfered with
          engagement and attendance. The treatment plan ﬁrst prioritised reducing eating disorder
          symptoms, whilst addressing her schema-driven fears around connection and attachment to
          others, and, ﬁnally, resolving trauma symptoms.

          Sequence of Therapy
          ◦ Bonding: Developing trust, understanding and engagement, with an emphasis on limited
            reparenting as an antidote to childhood experiences.
          ◦ Weight gain and stabilisation: Due to Amanda’s low weight and inability to get any
            traction with weight gain in the community, treatment started with a 3-month admission
            to an inpatient unit to work on weight gain. It was explained that more than one
            admission may be needed, and she would be encouraged to work on weight gain in a step-
            wise fashion (increase weight, followed by consolidation, followed by further weight
            gain). In reality, this process is rarely linear, and setbacks in terms of weight loss are
            common. During this period, psychoeducation and stabilisation focused on identifying
            and interviewing the modes to discover how they were driving speciﬁc eating behaviours,
            body-image distortion, and self-harm. The therapist and the dietitian worked closely with



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy for Eating Disorders   285



             Amanda to manage high levels of anxiety and distress associated with preliminary weight
             gain. A mode map was developed collaboratively (see Figure 15.1).
         ◦   Stabilisation continued after hospital discharge: The therapist sought to activate and
             interact with the coping modes linked to laxative abuse and non-attendance. Through
             chairwork and imagery exercises, the therapist spent time getting to know these modes,
             validating their original intention and function, and gently reassuring them that the
             therapist was not trying to eliminate them, but rather work with them to care for and
             protect Little Amanda (Vulnerable Child).
         ◦   Experiential mode work for increasing awareness: Given Amanda’s minimal awareness
             of her Vulnerable Child mode, experiential techniques initially focused on engaging with
             Little Amanda to increase her awareness of the underlying suﬀering driving her eating
             disorder. Chairwork was used to ‘contaminate the chair’ (for details, see Chapter 8).
         ◦   Interviewing the modes: Through a combination of chairwork and imagery, all modes
             were interviewed about their intention or function, as well as their hopes and fears about
             recovery. This was especially important because some coping modes were sabotaging her
             attendance at therapy sessions through: (a) interfering with sleep (due to laxative abuse);
             and (b) zoning out and telling her ‘You don’t need therapy’. Interviewing the coping
             modes revealed fears of getting in touch with diﬃcult emotions, of being unsafe or at risk
             of further abuse and abandonment, and of being overcome by powerlessness and
             hopelessness. Her Inner Critic further sabotaged progress by telling her ‘Treatment is
             a waste of time, you’re not worth it’.
         ◦   Empathic confrontation: The ﬁrst step to improving attendance was through gentle
             empathic confrontation with the modes via chairwork. Amanda was encouraged to
             change her routine so that laxative use did not take place at a time that interfered with
             attendance at sessions.
         ◦   Getting to know the internal mode-family: Imagery was used to set up ‘mode
             meetings’. Amanda was guided to imagine a calm (safe) place where she could invite
             the modes that were driving her eating-disordered behaviours to meet. This was
             aimed at increasing co-consciousness: awareness of both the ‘front stage’ modes that
             she was already overidentiﬁed or ‘fused’ with, such as the Overcontroller modes, as
             well as the ‘back stage’ modes which had become rejected or dissociated, such as
             Vulnerable/Abused Child, Angry Child, and Impulsive Child. In the mode meetings,
             Amanda was asked to describe the appearance of each of the modes, and her feelings
             and reactions towards them from the perspective of her ‘Adult self’. Through a series
             of meetings, it became apparent that there were alliances (e.g., Flagellating and
             Perfectionistic Overcontroller) and antagonism between some of the modes (e.g.,
             Overcontroller [Flagellating, Suspicious] and Angry Child/Impulsive Child modes).
         ◦   Increasing integration of modes by identifying common goals: By having the modes meet
             and interact, common underlying goals and functions of coping modes could be
             identiﬁed, speciﬁcally to reduce suﬀering and increase safety, thereby beginning the
             process of gently encouraging them to work together. This is with the goal of eventually
             becoming a Healthy Adult team which retained all the positive traits and characteristics of
             even the most self-destructive coping modes (e.g., determination, conscientiousness,
             sensitivity, honesty). All modes except the Inner Critic were welcomed and engaged with.
         ◦   Strengthening Healthy Adult mode: Amanda’s Future Wise Self was engaged as the part
             to take responsibility for attendance at sessions, holding hope that life could be diﬀerent,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          286           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



            and eventually coordinating the diﬀerent modes that made up her ‘self’. This part’s role
            was to lead the Healthy Adult team (and move towards greater integration through
            resolving inner conﬂicts in the future).
          ◦ Reducing Dysfunctional Parent mode: The origins of the Inner Critic were explored in
            terms of messages from the abuser, parents/family, and culture/media. Chairwork and
            imagery rescripting were frequently utilised to challenge this mode.

          Experiential Mode Work for Healing Schemas and Increasing Internal Integration
          ◦ Chairwork to bypass coping modes: Chairwork was used to highlight the role of
            Amanda’s Inner Critic and coping modes in blocking connection with Little (Abused)
            Amanda. In one version of chairwork, the therapist played the role of the Vulnerable
            Child, whilst Amanda was invited to play the role of her Overcontroller mode, to promote
            emotion awareness. The therapist aimed to represent her suﬀering as authentically as
            possible, drawing on the client’s previously reported (or ‘hinted at’) experiences of
            suﬀering and loneliness, in the hope that the Vulnerable Child part of her would resonate
            with this and feel ‘seen’ and heard. These exercises aimed to further increase schema and
            mode awareness through recognition that the diﬀerent aspects of Amanda’s ‘self’ and her
            eating disorder could be understood as ‘modes’ that were linked to EMS and unmet
            needs. Defusing from default coping modes and beginning the process of reconnecting
            with child modes was encouraged via chairwork. In Amanda’s case, this internal
            awareness work allowed her to become aware of parts of the self that had become highly
            dissociated as a result of early traumatic experiences.
          ◦ Empathic confrontation: When Amanda’s coping modes felt threatened, such as when
            experiential techniques were suggested, they often attempted to block the work through
            debating, giving long detailed narratives, getting involved in power struggles, or
            protesting that it would be damaging and lead to self-harm. Empathic confrontation was
            used to validate their intention, whilst ﬁrmly reminding them that the goal of therapy was
            to heal Little Amanda, and that this would only be possible if they could allow access.
          ◦ Imagery rescripting: Reparenting within imagery rescripting took place on a regular
            (at least fortnightly) basis, whereby Amanda’s Wise (Healthy) Adult self and the
            therapist began to connect with Little Amanda to validate her needs and feelings. As
            she began to gradually increase her tolerance of revealing her vulnerability and
            getting her emotional needs met, the focus of this reparenting expanded to meeting
            a range of (previously unmet) needs related to her schemas, including emotional
            warmth, empathy, encouragement, guidance, play, and protection. Imagery
            rescripting was focused on challenging messages from childhood that invalidated
            Amanda’s needs and emotions, whilst encouraging her to relinquish responsibility
            for her parent’s emotional well-being (e.g., ‘It’s not your job to take care of the
            grown-ups. You’re just a little girl’). Following 4–5 months of imagery rescripting
            sessions focused on early childhood experiences, Amanda’s Wise Adult self was
            strengthened suﬃciently to switch the focus of imagery rescripting to processing
            memories of sexual abuse, as well as the subsequent parental invalidation she
            experienced. When coping modes interrupted trauma-focused imagery rescripting –
            either directly through avoidance within sessions, or indirectly through increasing
            eating disorder and other risky behaviours outside of sessions – the focus switched
            to chair dialogues to reduce their interference through empathic confrontation.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy for Eating Disorders   287



         ◦ Transitioning Healthy Adult role to client: Through imagery rescripting and chairwork,
            Amanda was encouraged to increasingly practise listening and talking to Little Amanda
            and her Angry Child (which were previously dissociated from conscious awareness) and
            to express distress and irritation at the schema-related messages.
         ◦ Imaginal mode meetings: Through regular imagery and chairwork, the Overcontroller,
            Helpless Surrenderer, and other modes were gradually integrated via several ‘mode
            meetings’ in imagery, whereby Amanda’s Healthy Adult side learned to acknowledge the
            messages, fears, and agendas of all the other modes, and to provide leadership, limit
            setting, and nurturance to her inner system. For example, the therapist might say
            ‘Keeping your eyes closed, from your Wise Side, can you invite in the mode that is afraid
            to stop taking the laxatives? Which mode is it? Can you ask her what she is afraid of?
            What does that side need from you, as Wise Adult, to feel conﬁdent that she will be safe to
            take this step? Can you give her that?’
             Between sessions, she was asked to notice which modes were underlying the thoughts
         and urges associated with her eating disorder, and to engage with Little Amanda (and/or
         other child modes) through imagery, enquire about her needs, and try to meet these in some
         way rather than ‘acting them out’ through disordered eating behaviours (see Chapter 11 for
         further details on working with coping modes).

         Cognitive and Behavioural Interventions
         Cognitive and behavioural work focused on defying schema messages and prioritising play,
         fun, and joy. Amanda was encouraged to ‘rebel’ against her Inner Critic and to set
         boundaries with others in her present-day life. Most importantly, goals were set to prioritise
         her nutritional needs and to learn to develop her proprioceptive and interoceptive aware-
         ness. She was encouraged to tolerate ‘taking up more space’, by both allowing herself to
         reach a normal weight and learning to openly ask for her needs to be met, and to reconnect
         with the felt sense of being in her body. This took place alongside experiential exercises to
         develop a stronger sense of an embodied (as opposed to intellectualised) self. This was
         developed through playful positive-reparenting imagery focusing on sensory experiences
         (e.g., ‘feel the grass under your toes’) and prescribed somatic mindfulness practices.

         Final Phase
         In the ﬁnal phase of therapy, further integration was pursued via ‘mode meetings’, with the
         modes being encouraged to work together to fulﬁl their roles as a ‘Healthy Adult team’ to meet
         the needs of Little Amanda. As Amanda learned to express herself in more direct ways, the urge
         to communicate her needs through the Helpless Surrenderer mode (i.e., helplessness, being
         ‘ill’), and to self-regulate through the Detached Protector and Overcontroller modes, lessened.

         Concluding Remarks
         This chapter illustrates the complex functions that eating disorder behaviour can take,
         including self-punishment, emotional avoidance, empowerment, mastery, self-regulation,
         and appeasement of others. The schema therapy approach encourages disaggregating these
         functions, personifying them, understanding them, and directing dialogues between them.
         A case study illustrates the way in which the schema mode model can be applied to work
         with eating disorder symptoms alongside complex trauma. A suﬃcient level of medical and
         nutritional stability (as indicated by blood tests and weight) must be reached to provide



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          288           Applications for Mental Health Presentations



          suﬃcient safety for therapy to proceed. A key component of schema therapy is to under-
          stand the unmet needs and schemas that have led to the development of an eating disorder.
          The mode map should be developed collaboratively to elucidate the client’s internal world,
          with particular emphasis on increasing awareness of dissociated modes. The client gradually
          learns to reconnect with her/his inner child states and needs through extensive experiential
          work. Coping modes are not just bypassed, but, through imagery and chairwork, are actively
          acknowledged and integrated with the Healthy Adult, to form a Healthy Adult ‘team’ that
          works to prioritise the inner child modes and ultimately meet the client’s nutritional,
          physiological, and emotional needs.

          References
          1. Simpson S, Smith E. Schema therapy for                             individual and group settings. Routledge;
             eating disorders: Theory and practice for                          2019.

          Further Reading
          Edwards D. An interpretative                                     disorders. Clinical Psychology Review. 2015;
          phenomenological analysis of schema modes in                     39:30–41.
          a single case of anorexia nervosa: Part 1.                       Simpson S. Schema therapy for eating disorders:
          Background, method, and child and parent                         A case study illustration of the mode approach.
          Modes. Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology.                     In van Vreekswijk M, Broersen J, Nadort M, eds.
          2017;17(1):1–13.                                                 The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of schema
          Edwards DJ. An interpretative                                    therapy. Wiley-Blackwell 2012, pp. 43–71.
          phenomenological analysis of schema modes                        Simpson SG, Morrow E, Reid C. Group schema
          in a single case of anorexia nervosa: Part 2.                    therapy for eating disorders: a pilot study.
          Coping modes, healthy adult mode,                                Frontiers in Psychology. 2010;1:182.
          superordinate themes, and implications for
          research and practice. Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of                    Simpson SG, Slowey L. Video therapy for
          Phenomenology. 2017;17(1):1–12.                                  atypical eating disorder and obesity: A case
                                                                           study. Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in
          McIntosh VV, Jordan J, Carter JD, et al.                         Mental Health. 2011;7:38–43.
          Psychotherapy for transdiagnostic binge eating:
                                                                           Waller G, Kennerley H, Ohanian V. Schema-
          A randomized controlled trial of
                                                                           focused cognitive-behavioural therapy for eating
          cognitive-behavioural therapy, appetite-focused
                                                                           disorders. In Rodin J, du Toit PL, Stein DJ,
          cognitive-behavioural therapy, and schema
                                                                           Young JE, eds. Cognitive schemas and core beliefs
          therapy. Psychiatry Research. 2016;240:412–20.
                                                                           in psychological problems: A scientist-practitioner
          Pugh M. A narrative review of schemas and                        guide. American Psychological Association;
          schema therapy outcomes in the eating                            2007.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Part IV              Application of Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations and in Diﬀerent Settings

               Chapter
                                     Schema Therapy for Forensic

               16                    Populations


         Introduction
         As an approach devised to better treat people with personality disorders, schema therapy
         oﬀers a promising framework for addressing the psychiatric needs of forensic populations.
         In the past ﬁfteen years, considerable progress has been made in conceptualising the
         personalities of those involved with violence and crime within the schema mode model
         [1, 2]. This has led to the identiﬁcation of distinct modes and adaptations to treatment. In
         this chapter, we elaborate on the description and identiﬁcation of schema modes charac-
         teristically seen in forensic populations and the adaptations needed to improve response to
         therapy.

         Schema Mode Proﬁles of Forensic Populations
         Research has shown a high prevalence of cluster B personality disorders (e.g., BPD, NPD,
         ASPD) in forensic populations [3], and a relationship between personality disorders and
         relevant schemas and modes [4]. Many, if not most, violent oﬀenders are themselves the
         victims of childhood trauma or various other forms of maltreatment [5]. Coping modes
         such as Detached Self-Soother, Detached Protector, and Self-Aggrandiser were prevalent
         among these populations, but could not fully explain a wider range of forensic risk behav-
         iour seen among oﬀenders in the forensic system. This led to an expanded set of recognised
         schema modes to include the following, commonly seen among oﬀenders: Bully and Attack
         mode, Paranoid Overcontroller mode, Conning Manipulator mode, and Predator mode [2].
             The most striking commonality among schema modes found in forensic clients is the
         use of overcompensation as a coping style. Overcompensator modes occur when the person
         attempts to ‘turn the tables’ on others or ‘take the upper hand’. Forensic clients often view
         the world in terms of victims and aggressors: ‘top dog’ and ‘bottom dog’. The best strategy to
         avoid becoming a victim is to get on the oﬀensive: dominate others, so they can’t dominate
         you (Self-Aggrandiser mode); anticipate threats, so that you can attack before being
         attacked (Paranoid Overcontroller mode); manipulate others, so that won’t take advantage
         of you (Conning Manipulator mode); bully and threaten others who might aggress against
         you (Bully and Attack mode); and use cold, calculated aggression to eliminate those who
         stand in your way (Predator mode). All of these modes employ overcompensatory coping
         for self-protection.
             Early case studies demonstrated the relevance of the schema therapy model to under-
         standing violent oﬀenders, including psychopathic clients [6]. Interestingly, these studies
         conﬁrmed that oﬀenders may indeed present with Vulnerable Child feelings that could be
         reached and helped by a schema therapy. Recently, a large-scale randomised controlled trial
                                                                                                                      289


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Part IV             Application of Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations and in Diﬀerent Settings

               Chapter
                                    Schema Therapy for Forensic

               16                   Populations


         Introduction
         As an approach devised to better treat people with personality disorders, schema therapy
         oﬀers a promising framework for addressing the psychiatric needs of forensic populations.
         In the past ﬁfteen years, considerable progress has been made in conceptualising the
         personalities of those involved with violence and crime within the schema mode model
         [1, 2]. This has led to the identiﬁcation of distinct modes and adaptations to treatment. In
         this chapter, we elaborate on the description and identiﬁcation of schema modes charac-
         teristically seen in forensic populations and the adaptations needed to improve response to
         therapy.

         Schema Mode Proﬁles of Forensic Populations
         Research has shown a high prevalence of cluster B personality disorders (e.g., BPD, NPD,
         ASPD) in forensic populations [3], and a relationship between personality disorders and
         relevant schemas and modes [4]. Many, if not most, violent oﬀenders are themselves the
         victims of childhood trauma or various other forms of maltreatment [5]. Coping modes
         such as Detached Self-Soother, Detached Protector, and Self-Aggrandiser were prevalent
         among these populations, but could not fully explain a wider range of forensic risk behav-
         iour seen among oﬀenders in the forensic system. This led to an expanded set of recognised
         schema modes to include the following, commonly seen among oﬀenders: Bully and Attack
         mode, Paranoid Overcontroller mode, Conning Manipulator mode, and Predator mode [2].
             The most striking commonality among schema modes found in forensic clients is the
         use of overcompensation as a coping style. Overcompensator modes occur when the person
         attempts to ‘turn the tables’ on others or ‘take the upper hand’. Forensic clients often view
         the world in terms of victims and aggressors: ‘top dog’ and ‘bottom dog’. The best strategy to
         avoid becoming a victim is to get on the oﬀensive: dominate others, so they can’t dominate
         you (Self-Aggrandiser mode); anticipate threats, so that you can attack before being
         attacked (Paranoid Overcontroller mode); manipulate others, so that won’t take advantage
         of you (Conning Manipulator mode); bully and threaten others who might aggress against
         you (Bully and Attack mode); and use cold, calculated aggression to eliminate those who
         stand in your way (Predator mode). All of these modes employ overcompensatory coping
         for self-protection.
             Early case studies demonstrated the relevance of the schema therapy model to under-
         standing violent oﬀenders, including psychopathic clients [6]. Interestingly, these studies
         conﬁrmed that oﬀenders may indeed present with Vulnerable Child feelings that could be
         reached and helped by a schema therapy. Recently, a large-scale randomised controlled trial
                                                                                                                     289


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          290           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          was completed demonstrating the eﬃcacy of schema therapy for violent oﬀenders with
          personality disorders [7] (see Chapter 2 for an overview).

          Schema Therapy Model of Forensic Risk Behaviour
          The central tenet of the forensic schema therapy model is that criminal and violent
          behaviour (and the risk thereof) can be understood as an ‘unfolding sequence of schema
          mode activation’ [8]. The circumstances preceding criminal behaviour often involve the
          triggering of overwhelming child modes and related underlying schemas (e.g.,
          Abandonment, Defectiveness, Mistrust/Abuse) that invariably lead to the activation of
          one or more coping modes that represent forensic risk behaviour (e.g., Bully and Attack,
          Self-Soother). The dominant question guiding forensic schema therapy assessment is: What
          mode, or sequence of modes, is activated during an oﬀender’s acts of crime?
              The forensic schema therapy model (see Figure 16.1) provides a framework for under-
          standing and treating forensic risk behaviour. Schema modes represent distinct ‘pathways
          to oﬀending’ – internal vulnerability risk factors for oﬀending behaviour [8]. Healthy
          schema modes (especially the Healthy Adult mode) are considered internal protective
          factors which decrease the likelihood of oﬀending behaviour. While other developmental
          (e.g., history of trauma), situational (e.g., being incarcerated with antisocial peers), genetic,
          and temperamental factors will inﬂuence risk of oﬀending, the likelihood of forensic risk
          behaviour at a given moment is determined by the relative activation of maladaptive and
          healthy modes for an individual [8].



               Early Maladaptive                                  External
                 Schemas and               –                         risk
              Maladaptive coping                                    factors




                   Childhood                              Healthy           Maladaptive                       Antisocial
                                                                                           – OR +
                   risk factors                            Modes              Modes                          behaviour




                                           +
                   Childhood                                      External
                   protective                                     protective
                     factors                                        factors


          Figure 16.1 Schema therapy conceptual model of forensic risk behaviour
          Adapted from Bernstein et al. (2019) [8]. Note: + increases forensic risk behaviour, – decreases forensic risk behaviour.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Schema Therapy for Forensic Populations   291



             When forensic clients commit crimes or acts of violence, it is usually possible to
         reconstruct these events as an unfolding sequence of modes, with one state triggering
         another, culminating in criminal or aggressive behaviour. Research indicates that the events
         preceding crimes are often initiated by emotional triggers such as feelings of abandonment,
         loneliness, worthlessness, humiliation, mistrust, fear, anger, and frustration. Thus, child
         modes such as the Vulnerable Child, Lonely Child, Impulsive/Undisciplined Child, and
         Angry/Enraged Child, and associated EMS appear to play key roles in triggering a sequence
         of events that result in antisocial and violent behaviour. As events progress, the client’s
         emotional vulnerability often becomes less evident, but their anger and impulsivity often
         escalate. Substance abuse often plays a major facilitating role in these events, as the client
         uses drugs or alcohol to quell any inner pain (Detached Self-Soother mode), further
         disinhibiting and emboldening them to carry out antisocial acts. During the crime itself,
         and the events immediately preceding it, the oﬀender’s overcompensatory modes tend to
         take centre stage. Here, the oﬀender’s use of dominance (Self-Aggrandiser mode), deceit
         and manipulation (Conning Manipulator mode), threats and aggression (Bully and Attack
         mode), hyper-alertness to threat (Paranoid Overcontroller mode), and cold, ruthless
         aggression (Predator mode) are evident.
             It is not always the case that crimes are triggered by vulnerable emotions. In some cases,
         for example, crimes stem from entitlement, callousness, or impulsiveness; that is, some crimes
         arise from an insistence that one is entitled to get what one wants, with callous disregard for
         the rights or needs of others (Self-Aggrandiser mode), or a need for immediate gratiﬁcation
         that overrides any inhibitions (Impulsive Child mode). Whichever way the crime is instigated,
         the therapist speciﬁes the links between modes and crimes, giving them and the client clear
         and measurable targets, with the goal of reducing the client’s risk of recidivism.
             As with schema therapy for any population, the quality of case conceptualisation is
         critical to working with oﬀenders. Schema therapy is indicated when speciﬁc modes are
         associated with particular criminal behaviours. Oﬀence analysis involves understanding the
         mode sequence (e.g., Vulnerable Child → Punitive Critic → Bully & Attack mode) that
         propels the individual towards oﬀending, as well as moments wherein healthy modes (e.g.,
         Healthy Adult mode) have ascendance and oﬀer opportunities for the individual to disen-
         gage from violent or other criminal impulses. Patterns of oﬀending that do not ﬁt well with
         a schema mode conceptualisation (e.g., violence driven by ﬂorid psychosis) are unlikely to
         be well suited to schema therapy. The internal risk factors for antisocial behaviour, their
         corresponding schema modes, the clinical manifestations of the modes, and the goals of
         schema therapy interventions are summarised in Table 16.1.

         Forensic Schema Therapy: Considerations and Adaptations
         The basic treatment approach is consistent with schema therapy generally as described in
         this book; however, a key objective for the treatment is to reduce the recidivism risk of
         oﬀenders. Treatment ultimately aims to (1) help clients experience more satisfaction of
         basic needs, (2) heal underlying painful schemas, (3) reverse maladaptive coping behaviour,
         and (4) build the Healthy Adult mode. Schema therapy works across the central vulnerabil-
         ity factors for forensic risk behaviour (internal and external), while developing the Healthy
         Adult mode as a protective factor. Notwithstanding this, schema therapy with forensic
         clients also requires several considerations and potential adaptations from general clinical
         work [9], as discussed herein.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Table 16.1 Internal risk factors for antisocial behaviour, schema mode manifestations, and typical schema therapy intervention focus

                                                                                           Relevant Dynamic                     Schema mode                          Clinical manifestation (Cognitions,                 Goals of Interventions
                                                                                           Internal Risk Factor                                                      Emotions and Behaviours)

                                                                                           Early maladaptive schemas            Vulnerable Child                     Feels rejected, inferior, humiliated,               Healing painful emotions and
                                                                                           involving disconnection/             Lonely Child                         anxious, isolated, excessive self-                  underlying maladaptive schema
                                                                                           rejection and abuse                  Punitive Critic                      punishing, and self-critical                        Enhancing capacity for positive
                                                                                                                                Demanding Critic                                                                         emotional states and healthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         attachments to other people
                                                                                           Excessive anger, anger               Angry/Enraged Child                  Easily triggered to anger and rage;                 Experience degrees of anger;
                                                                                           dysregulation                                                             misperceives situations as threatening or           making realistic appraisals of
                                                                                                                                                                     unfair; rigid; ‘all-or-nothing’ control over        situations; expressing anger in
                                                                                                                                                                     anger                                               modulated, constructive ways
                                                                                           Behavioural disinhibition;           Impulsive Child                      Acts quickly on impulses without thinking           Increase frustration tolerance;
                                                                                           low frustration tolerance                                                 or planning; can’t tolerate limits or delays        stopping and thinking before
                                                                                                                                                                     in gratiﬁcation                                     acting




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Addictive behaviours                 Detached Protector,                  Uses drugs to self-regulate emotions,               Improve emotional self-regulation;
                                                                                                                                Detached Self-Soother/               engages in addictive thrill-seeking                 diminishing addictive behaviour;
                                                                                                                                Self-Stimulator                      behaviour                                           developing relapse prevention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         skills
                                                                                           Avoidant behaviours                  Detached/Avoidant/Angry              Excessive, inﬂexible avoidance of people            Increasing ability to experience
                                                                                                                                Protector                            and emotions                                        and express feelings; make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         genuine emotional contact with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         other people; coping eﬀectively
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         with people and situations
                                                                                           Domination and           Self-Aggrandiser, Conning/   Arrogant, condescending towards others;       Approaching others as equals, and
                                                                                           exploitation of others   Manipulator mode             exploitative, uses other people; deceives     relationships as reciprocal;
                                                                                                                                                 and manipulates others                        behaving honestly towards others,
                                                                                                                                                                                               connecting with others
                                                                                           Threats and aggression   Paranoid Overcontroller,     Hypervigilant to (perceived) threats; ‘hot’   Developing balanced, realistic
                                                                                           towards others           Bully and Attack, Predator   reactive aggression in response to threats;   appraisals of the intentions of
                                                                                                                    mode                         uses intimidation, aggression to achieve      other people; developing empathy
                                                                                                                                                 goals; uses cold, ruthless aggression to      for victims and remorse for
                                                                                                                                                 eliminate threats, obstacles, or rivals       previous oﬀences; recognising and
                                                                                                                                                                                               avoiding triggers for aggression;




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                                               using healthy, non-aggressive
                                                                                                                                                                                               methods of resolving conﬂicts and
                                                                                                                                                                                               pursuing goals
          294           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          The Forensic Treatment Context Is Considerably Diﬀerent
          First, schema therapy in forensic settings tends to involve clients who have been
          mandated to work on their risk of reoﬀending. Such clients will often be engaged for
          therapy while incarcerated or with considerable monitoring and oversight from some
          form of parole or supervision ‘system’. This is important for at least two reasons. First,
          mandated clients tend to present as decidedly unmotivated for treatment. They present
          for treatment because they are obligated by the system in one way or another. This
          treatment context, and the loss of autonomy that it represents, will often result in clients
          presenting to therapy in very strong coping modes of one form or another. This
          contrasts from much general clinical work, where it is the client’s Healthy Adult side
          that generally motivates them to initiate therapy. The mandated treatment context needs
          to be acknowledged and worked through in the initial stages of the therapy, where the
          therapist works to build safety and rapport and bypass the client’s strong coping modes.
          While building rapport, the schema therapist works hard to build trust by being reliable
          and consistent, and following through on any agreements.
               Second, the primary treatment goal in forensic settings is predetermined by the system:
          to reduce the risk of reoﬀending behaviour. While the schema therapist will, as in general
          schema therapy, be focused on healing the client’s painful schemas and modes and apply
          a ‘trauma lens’, the oﬀence analysis of risk and the client’s oﬀending behaviour must be on
          the agenda and be a primary treatment goal. Use of the emerging mode conceptualisation
          and mode map for the purpose of oﬀence analysis is a distinctive feature of forensic schema
          therapy. Many forensic clients would be reluctant to engage in such analysis of their crimes
          and would employ coping modes to avoid or distract from this task. Some may come willing
          to work on their schemas, traumas, and ‘pain’ but would avoid anything that involves mode
          awareness of their oﬀences. This is because reﬂecting and sharing details regarding one’s
          pattern of oﬀending can be very activating for oﬀenders (e.g., shame, trust issues). Schema
          therapists need to be clients during this process, building up enough trust and rapport so
          that clients eventually feel safe to discuss and reﬂect on their oﬀending pattern – but it
          cannot be avoided. The schema therapist works with the clients to understand their modes,
          and how they represent an oﬀending risk pathway.

          The Vulnerable Child Mode Can Be Hard to Reach in Oﬀending
          Populations
          Part of this is because forensic clients present in strong coping modes. These will need to be
          navigated and ultimately bypassed in the therapy relationship, as is usual in schema therapy.
          Another reason is that many forensic clients are not connected to this vulnerable mode and
          are not accustomed to expressing their needs through vulnerability. This is to be expected.
          Many such clients have come from backgrounds of abuse and neglect, wherein the expres-
          sion of needs and vulnerability might have been punished or viewed as weakness. Schema
          therapists will be clients to bypass coping modes over time and look for opportunities to
          attune to and connect to any emerging vulnerable feelings.
              At the same time, it is important not to push too much for vulnerability when other
          emotions are present to attune to. Many forensic clients are much more in touch with their
          Angry Child mode, or with feelings related to the activation of their Critic mode. It is worth
          remembering that both of these modes provide opportunity for attunement and corrective




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Schema Therapy for Forensic Populations   295



         emotional experiences. One does not, for example, necessarily need to connect to the
         Vulnerable Child to do an aﬀect bridge (imagery ﬂoat back) exercise. Recent episodes
         involving the Angry Child mode provide a suitable experience from which to use an aﬀect
         bridge and engage in imagery rescripting. Sometimes clients will retrieve memories involv-
         ing themselves as a child in a state of frustration and anger, but on many occasions these
         memories will eventually link back to some feelings of vulnerability experienced as a child.
         When aiming to activate emotions in the client, it is more important to ‘go with where the
         action is’ (e.g., anger) rather than pushing too directly for vulnerability. In other words, the
         Angry Child mode, and indeed Critic modes, present as suitable initial targets for limited
         reparenting and experiential work.

         Getting Comfortable Working With High Levels of Anger and a Larger
         Focus on Empathic Confrontation and Limit Setting
         As already discussed, forensic clients tend to be much more able to express their needs
         through their anger than through vulnerability. Schema therapists thus need to get com-
         fortable working with high levels of expressed anger. While schema therapists will seek to
         attune to, express, and validate Angry Child feelings in the therapy relationship, expressions
         of aggressive or destructive behaviour – often reﬂective of coping modes (e.g., Bully and
         Attack, Self-Aggrandiser) – should signal the therapist to instil more boundaries. Schema
         therapists working therapeutically with forensic clients thus become very good at providing
         empathic confrontation and limit setting and rely much more on these techniques than in
         general clinical work. Forensic clients are much more adept at pushing boundaries in the
         therapy relationship, perhaps reﬂective of some of their central problems. In the schema
         therapy model, boundary violations in the therapy relationship are seen as important
         opportunities for intervention, especially to heal schemas within the Impaired Limits
         domain. Bernstein and colleagues [8] describe this as limited reparenting with a ‘here and
         now’ focus. For some clients, therapeutic interactions may be one of a handful of times
         someone has tried to set a boundary and ‘stick it out’ in a caring and empathic way.
         Boundary violations in the therapy relationship thus reﬂect important opportunities for
         healing.

         Working With the Conning Manipulator
         Therapists not accustomed to forensic work are unlikely to have wide-reaching experience
         of being in a therapeutic relationship with someone with a strong Conning Manipulator
         mode. There can be a danger that therapists will fail to recognise this mode, with the result
         that the oﬀender does not engage earnestly in therapy. Conversely, therapists who are too
         cynical about the possibility of change for oﬀenders will struggle to provide a level of basic
         optimism in therapy. Forensic schema therapists are realistic about the high prevalence of
         Conning Manipulator among oﬀenders, working directly with clients to build awareness of
         this mode when it is part of the case conceptualisation. For many clients, it is only natural
         that the Conning Manipulator mode presents itself at some stage during the therapy,
         especially at times of high distress or activation, or during impasses in the therapeutic
         relationship. Like with any coping mode, schema therapists seek to work directly with the
         coping mode, empathising with its adaptive value, but ultimately confronting and setting
         limits on this mode as it interferes with the client attaining their long-term needs




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          296           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations




          Illustration 16.1 Conning/Manipulation mode



          (e.g., relationships) and increases their risk of reoﬀending. It can be disconcerting for
          therapists to work with modes that appear to have limited capacity for empathy for others;
          schema therapists need to be able to oﬀer an alternative pathway to (operating in) this mode
          to enable connection to basic core needs (e.g., attachment and connectedness to others).

          The Importance of Supervision and Self-Reﬂection
          Having adequate supervisory support and reﬂective capacities are pivotal to working with
          oﬀending client groups. Such client groups, with high prevalence of personality disorder
          traits, anger, aggressive behaviour, and impulsivity, can be very triggering for the therapist’s
          own schemas. Transference issues are common and can be more intense in these settings
          (see Chapter 18).

          The Need to Be Hopeful but Realistic About Change
          Schema therapy oﬀers a credible and evidence-based route to healing and reducing
          risk of reoﬀending, but it is not a panacea. The model suggests various factors within
          and outside of the person that are responsible for maintaining schemas and modes



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Schema Therapy for Forensic Populations           297



         that present risks of oﬀending behaviour. Several internal (e.g., motivation) and
         external (e.g., peer context) variables need to align to achieve optimal results and
         reduce risk of oﬀending. A lot will also hinge on whether the therapist can engage the
         client in a limited reparenting relationship. Schema therapists will work hard to
         provide a therapeutic context for change, but remain realistic also about the challenges
         that lie ahead.

         Working With Violent (Bully and Attack Mode) Urges in Imagery
         Rescripting Work
         With aggressive antisocial clients, it is relatively common for violent urges to present
         themselves during imagery rescripting. In such imagery scenarios, clients may express
         the urge to be violent towards their antagonists and perpetrators, consistent with their
         Bully and Attack coping mode. Schema therapists need to be able to remain in control
         of the image and empathically decline the expression of such urges in imagery. Rather,
         the therapist seeks to ﬁnd ways to meet the underlying childhood needs evident within
         the memory or image (e.g., safety) in a non-violent, but assertive (Healthy Adult)
         manner (see Box 16.1).

         Working With the Impulsive and Undisciplined Child Modes
         The Impulsive and Undisciplined Child modes are more common in oﬀending populations
         and can represent a signiﬁcant challenge for schema therapists who are not accustomed to
         regularly working with these modes. Intervening with these modes often involves working
         with underlying EMS in the Impaired Limits domain (e.g., Entitlement, Insuﬃcient Self-
         Control) that can feel quite diﬀerent for therapists in terms of the sentiment of any
         rescripting or reparenting interventions. The key here is that the care and limited reparent-
         ing oﬀered in the treatment strategies with these schemas and modes involve the provision
         of limits and boundaries. These diﬀerences are exempliﬁed in the script presented in
         Box 16.2 on Imagery Rescripting for the Impulsive and Undisciplined Child modes
         (ICM/UCM).




             Box 16.1 Example of Violent Urges Within Imagery Rescripting with Forensic Clients
             THERAPIST: What do you think Little Johnny needs right now in the image?
             CLIENT: He needs someone to kill him (his father) . . . to smash his face in . . .
             THERAPIST: Of course, you might feel that way . . . that is understandable given how he has
                been treating Little Johnny, and of course that is how you have learned to survive this..
                But there is another way . . . another way to make it safe that does not involve being
                violent . . . let me show you. I will deal with dad now . . . Let’s just have Little Johnny stay
                behind me I will protect him now.
             CLIENT: . . . OK . . .
             THERAPIST: (Takes care of the situation in an assertive manner consistent with a Healthy Adult)




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          298           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



              Box 16.2 Therapist Instructions for Imagery Rescripting for the Impulsive
              and Undisciplined Child Modes


              A. Select a Recent Episode and Tune in
              Start with a discussion that involves a recent problematic episode when the Impulsive or
              Undisciplined Child mode (ICM/UCM) was being triggered. Spend some time attuning to this
              experience for the ‘client’ (e.g., scroll through speciﬁc triggers, feelings/bodily sensations,
              meanings/schema themes, and needs in that moment). It often presents as excitement or
              maybe frustration in being blocked in some way from acting according to their ICM/UCM.
              Once you and your client have a solid, shared understanding of the recent episode, invite the
              client to do some ‘imagery work’ on this recent trigger/feeling.

              B. Connect to the Recent Episode in Imagery
              Ask the client to . . .

                  Close your eyes and get an image of yourself in this recent diﬃcult situation. When you
                  have the image tell me what you see . . . feel . . . also in the body.

              Check for the meaning (i.e., slow things down again and help the client to ‘tune in’ to the image,
              with eyes closed). The goal is to put them ‘in touch’ with the feeling of this mode.

              C. Invite the Aﬀect Bridge/Imagery Floatback
                  Now hold onto that feeling . . . the feeling of being xxxxxxx [for example, being
                  frustrated . . .that you should be able to do what you want] . . . now take that feeling
                  back as far as you can go . . . . . . [pause] . . . . . . even as far back as being a little boy/girl . . .
                  [pause] . . . what’s the ﬁrst image that comes up for you connected to this feeling?

              D. Tune in to the Child Experience in the Image
                  When you have a childhood image tell me what you see as if you’re there right now.
                  Where are they? How old are they? What’s happening in the image? What is Little [client
                  name] feeling? What do they need or want?

              Here we are trying to get an image of the child in the IC/UC state. Ensure the client
              stays in present tense.
                 If the client just goes to an image of the Vulnerable Child, just do a Vulnerable Child rescript
              as usual. This is relatively common. Underneath the ICM/UCM may be unmet Vulnerable Child
              mode needs such as neglect. However, if the client goes into an image of an ICM/UCM
              scenario then you will need to be ready to rescript those speciﬁc needs with some kind of
              boundary setting. So, tuning in here and understanding the child’s needs here is crucial.

              E. Therapist Enters the Image
                  Can you bring me into the image with Little (IC/UC) [client name]?

              When the client has you in the image, again ask what’s going on for them, what are
              they feeling, thinking, etc. Your goal here is to keep the connection to the child
              feeling strong and build a solid understanding of the situation so that you can form
              an idea of what is needed for the child in this situation. What would a healthy
              parent do or have done in this kind of situation?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Schema Therapy for Forensic Populations        299




             F. Therapist Rescripts. Step 1: Confront the Caregiver and Model Healthy Behaviour
             Confront the caregiver with the need for limits, boundaries, and discipline:

                 You think it’s easier to let little [client name] do whatever they want, but it’s not easier for
                 them . . . when they grow up and you haven’t given them the skills to control themselves
                 and/or have the discipline they need.

             Remember, you will need to meet the needs of the child in this moment so you must be
             attuned to their particular need(s). This may be a mixture of needs including boundaries,
             involvement, guidance, or stability. Continue until you ‘win the exchange’.

             G. Therapist Rescripts. Step 2 Child-Nurturing Image
                 Turn to the Child. Ask Little [client name] ‘How are you feeling now?’ and ‘Is there
                 anything else you need from me to feel better [or the feeling that’s most relevant to
                 them, e.g. safe, content, peaceful]?’

             If there are some residual needs, continue until the needs are met. If the client is now in their
             Vulnerable Child mode this will look more like child-compassion imagery. If the client is in
             their ICM/UCM, this will look more like empathic confrontation, as you would with a child who
             ‘wants something’ they can’t have: ‘I know it’s frustrating for you when . . . but you can’t have
             everything that you want.’

             H. Finish the Image with Some Positive Activity/Involvement (If Possible)
             When Little [client name] expresses feeling better, ask what they would like to do now. Engage
             in the imaginary activity for a few moments designed to help them feel your attention and
             connection. For example, you might take them to the park, read a book to them, or play catch.
             Note: It is likely this involvement/connection was missing, along with the limits.

             I. Bring Back to the Present Moment and Prompt Some Reﬂection on the Process
             Then say:

                 When you’re ready, slowly open your eyes and orient yourself to the room.

             Ask them what it was like and what was most helpful in the image. Explain the concept of the
             relevant child modes (in which the primary feelings arising from unmet needs are felt) using
             the name, ‘Little [client name]’. Suggest/discuss how they could bring what was helpful from
             the reparenting of Little [client name] in the imagery into the current situation when Little
             [client name] is triggered – i.e., how might Healthy [client name] take care of the needs in
             these kinds of situations? Tip: This might lead to a mode ﬂashcard.

             Additional Therapist Notes
             1. In these ICM/UCM cases you are likely to land on an image of them getting what
                they ‘want’ or with a lack of boundaries/involvement or guidance. There can also
                be a signiﬁcant Vulnerable Child mode element too in some cases. It is important
                to attune to, understand, and reparent both needs if they are present – a balance
                between warmth and limits. In some cases, you might decide to split the child
                feelings into its two parts – a Vulnerable Child mode and an ICM/UCM – and then
                address both parts.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          300           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations




              2. In these cases, when addressing the parents, the classic scenario is that they will be
                 under-involved or over-permissive. On occasion, you will encounter some more classic
                 abusive, demanding, or controlling parents too, so be ready to provide safety and
                 validation (or whatever else is needed) as with standard imagery rescripting protocols.
              3. Sometimes there will be no parent involved in the childhood image at all. In these cases,
                 just go straight to the child-nurturing image and provide a mix of care and attunement
                 but also limits and boundaries, as required.
              4. Remember: the chances of the child accepting your limits and boundaries in the image
                 very much depend on the therapeutic relationship.




          Illustration 16.2 Predator mode



          Concluding Remarks
          The schema mode model oﬀers a nuanced understanding of oﬀender behaviour that can
          promote deeper compassion for forensic clients. At the same time, the greater risks of harm
          to the client and others are real, so the forensic schema therapist, perhaps more than other
          schema therapists, must balance their nurturing abilities with their abilities to empathically
          confront and set limits. This is specialist work which we do not recommend undertaking in
          isolation, but, rather, with the supervision and support of forensic schema therapist
          colleagues.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Schema Therapy for Forensic Populations               301




         References
         1. Giesen-Bloo J, van Dyck R, Spinhoven P,                            oﬀenders. Psychological Trauma: Theory,
            et al. Outpatient psychotherapy for                                Research, Practice, and Policy. 2015;7
            borderline personality disorder.                                   (4):340–7.
            Archives of General Psychiatry. 2006;63                       6. Chakhssi F, Kersten T, de Ruiter C,
            (6):649.                                                         Bernstein DP. Treating the untreatable:
         2. Bernstein D, Arntz A, Vos M. Schema                              A single case study of a psychopathic
            focused therapy in forensic settings:                            inpatient treated with Schema Therapy.
            Theoretical model and recommendations                            Psychotherapy. 2014;51(3):447.
            for best clinical practice. International                     7. Bernstein DP, Keulen-de Vos M, Clercx M,
            Journal of Forensic Mental Health. 2007;6                        et al. Schema therapy for violent PD
            (2):169–83.                                                      oﬀenders: a randomized clinical trial.
         3. Blackburn R, Logan C, Donnelly J,                                Psychological Medicine. 2021;1–15.
            Renwick S. Personality disorders,                             8. Bernstein D, Clercx M, Keulen-De Vos M.
            psychopathy and other mental disorders:                          Schema therapy in a forensic setting. In
            Co-morbidity among clients at English and                        Polaschek D, Day A, Hollin C, eds. The
            Scottish high-security hospitals. The Journal                    Wiley international handbook of correctional
            of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology. 2003;14                     psychology. John Wiley & Sons; 2019. pp.
            (1):111–37.                                                      654–68.
         4. Keulen-de Vos ME, Bernstein DP,                               9. Madsen, L. Schema Therapy Crime Channel:
            Vanstipelen S, et al. Schema modes in                            Forensic schema therapy – Staring into the
            criminal and violent behaviour of forensic                       abyss [What’s the Schemata: A Schema
            cluster B PD clients: A retrospective and                        Therapist Podcast with Chris Hayes & Rob
            prospective study. Legal and Criminological                      Brockman]. Perth, Australia. 24 July, 2021.
            Psychology. 2016;21(1):56–76.                                    www.schematherapytraining.com/podcast-
         5. Schimmenti A, Di Carlo G, Passanisi A,                           whats-the-schemata/2021/7/23/schema-
            Caretti V. Abuse in childhood and                                crime-channel-forensic-schema-therapy-
            psychopathic traits in a sample of violent                       staring-into-the-abyss.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Group Schema Therapy

                17
          Introduction
          Group schema therapy has grown exponentially since the seminal 2009 paper by Farrell,
          Shaw, and Webber [1] demonstrating large eﬀect sizes and low dropout rates in the
          treatment of BPD (see Chapter 2 for more details about research on group schema therapy).
          Given the current ﬁnancial restraints on both public- and insurance-funded health services
          around the world, there is high demand for more eﬃcient schema therapy protocols such as
          group-only schema therapy or group–individual hybrid models. Group schema therapy
          provides a wide range of corrective emotional experiences and greater opportunities for
          authentic rehearsal of new Healthy Adult mode behaviour than individual therapy can oﬀer.
          In this chapter, a brief and general overview of group schema therapy is provided, empha-
          sising the adaptations from individual schema therapy and drawing on foundational work
          by Farrell and Shaw [1] and van Vreeswijk and Broersen [2, 3, 4].

          Adapting Schema Therapy to Group Delivery
          Schema therapy groups usually consist of 8–10 members with two therapists leading. Some
          key aspects of the role of group therapists, particularly in the early phase of therapy, are
          summarised in Box 17.1.
              In selecting group participants, therapists should ensure some homogeneity of EMS
          whilst allowing a mix of interpersonal coping styles. It is important that each member has
          some EMS and coping behaviours in common with other group participants to maximise
          opportunities for connection and minimise the sense of feeling ‘diﬀerent’ from others in the
          group. Selecting a mix of ages and genders where possible can simulate a family environ-
          ment which is thought to facilitate therapy.
              At the start of the programme, therapists should set out preliminary expectations and
          shared limits, and they may wish to have members formalise their agreement through
          signing a group contract. A key commitment is to stay in the group (or at least the building)
          even when feeling triggered. However, even with an agreement in place, it is not uncommon
          for participants to become triggered and leave the group. In these instances, one group
          leader should attempt to reconnect with them to help identify the activated modes and bring
          the member back to the group. It can be helpful to emphasise to participants that their
          attendance is important not only for their own recovery but also for that of other partici-
          pants. Absences can be discussed with the whole group in terms of schema-triggering and
          impact on the group ‘family’. This facilitates learning about the importance of members’
          presence to others, challenging the notion that the therapists are the sole therapeutic
          ingredient of their recovery and highlighting their own value in others’ recovery [5].
          302


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy   303



             Box 17.1 Role of Group Schema Therapists
             •    Group schema therapists should be well-trained and access regular supervision.
             •    The two therapists model the role of ‘parents’ for the group as ‘family’.
             •    Just as in a healthy parent team, group leaders must work together, alternating the role
                  of leading the exercise and staying connected with the whole group.
             •    Therapists combine providing a source of fun and playfulness with setting limits and
                  containment (i.e., an emotionally attuned safe space).
             •    Group leaders must develop ways of balancing the needs of individuals with the
                  collective needs of the entire group.
             •    Some participants have schemas (e.g., Social Isolation) that leave them sensitive to
                  feeling left out. Thus, while one therapist takes the lead on any given exercise, the co-
                  therapist should attend to the rest of the group and look for opportunities to involve
                  everyone.
             •    The co-therapist can highlight points of commonality between group members and
                  challenging the tendency for speciﬁc individuals to self-exclude.
             •    Group leaders should model healthy expression of emotions, vulnerability, and needs,
                  drawing on their own experiences when helpful.
             •    It can be helpful for group leaders to demonstrate healthy management of conﬂict as
                  issues arise between them. Participants’ attention can be drawn to these incidents, and
                  they can be invited to reﬂect and comment on these from their own perspectives
                  (drawing on how their schemas would have them interpret these situations). For
                  example:
             THERAPIST: Did anyone notice that Mary and I just had a little disagreement? I’m aware that
                sometimes this type of thing can trigger schemas, so I wonder what that was like for you
                to watch this mini-conﬂict? Did anyone notice any tension, or anxiety, or other reac-
                tions? Can you think about which schemas might have been triggered and how this
                might link with your own childhood experiences of conﬂict? From a healthy perspective,
                it is natural for relationships to have moments of conﬂict. One of the goals of this group
                will be for everyone to experiment with expressing annoyance or irritation in healthy
                ways, and learning when and how to set boundaries.
             NB: Group work can activate therapists’ own schemas, leading to conﬂict and/or competition
             between group leaders, burnout, and diﬃculty setting limits or taking a clear stance with
             overcompensatory aggressive coping modes or Angry Child modes. This area is expanded
             further in Chapter 18. Therapists’ capacity to recognise and overcome their own schema
             ‘clashes’ provides a solid foundation that allows them to work together to manage diﬃcult
             interactions within the group, provide containment and set limits as necessary, and provide
             a safe space for participants to fully express themselves.
                As the group progresses, therapists should hand over increasing responsibility to group
             members to raise awareness of schemas and modes in each other, and to empathically
             confront and compassionately reparent each other.


             Within the programme content there is a strong focus on helping participants learn to
         manage both their own and others’ expressions of emotions and needs. Participants who are
         reticent about connecting to their Vulnerable Child mode are often encouraged by watching
         others, which can give them the courage to take risks and show this side of themselves to
         others. Group leaders must be prepared to set limits on outspoken modes, such as Angry



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          304           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          Child, Bully and Attack, or Punitive Inner Critic, which may cause harm to themselves or
          others. Depending on the level of threat this poses to other group members, the therapist
          may need to stand nearer to the client (between the client and others) and even hold up
          a hand to signal that a pause is needed. For example, a therapist might say ‘Tony, I know that
          you are annoyed, but I need you to pause, take a few deep breaths, and take a step back until
          the feelings subside just enough for you to tell us what is going on just now for you. It’s not
          okay to shout at others like that.’ This facilitates conﬁdence within the group that the
          therapists will keep them safe. Furthermore, even in the face of inappropriate expressions of
          emotion (such as may occur in Angry Child mode or Impulsive Child mode), the therapist
          must ﬁnd ways to reassure the client that although we are setting limits on their behaviour,
          they continue to belong and be cared about by the group. For example, a therapist might say,
          ‘I know this might feel a bit overwhelming for you just now, Tony, but sometimes when this
          angry side gets triggered, it’s hard to hear what you really need. This side makes us all want
          to run for cover. In this group we will help you to ﬁnd ways of expressing your needs in ways
          that others can hear you because that’s what you need and deserve, just like everyone.’ When
          one member is engaging in angry venting, other participants who are emotionally triggered
          can be oﬀered the option of taking refuge behind a protective shield of cushions or
          pillows [6].

          Stages of Group Therapy
          Although the format and speciﬁc content of group schema therapy varies across settings and
          client groups [6, 7, 4], the stages of therapy remain largely consistent and similar to
          individual therapy. The ﬁrst phase focuses on bonding and stabilisation. The middle
          phase is when the most concrete eﬀorts to change client schemas occur, via a range of
          cognitive, experiential, interpersonal, and behavioural techniques. In this phase, therapists
          encourage participants to help each other to bypass their coping modes to reach their
          Vulnerable Child modes. Ultimately, as the group progresses, participants are encouraged
          to learn to compassionately reparent each other and themselves and to learn to overtly ask
          for their needs to be met. The ﬁnal phase of therapy is based on consolidating gains, with
          exercises focused on embodying the Healthy Adult mode, making behavioural changes
          which heal rather than perpetuate their schemas. Sessions and homework tasks are focused
          on processing loss and endings, and, in particular, on preparing for schema triggers with
          cognitive strategies (e.g., ﬂashcards, schema diaries, pie charts, reality testing) and experi-
          ential exercises (e.g., self-reparenting imagery, chairwork).

          Bonding and Stabilisation Phase
          The early phase of the group is focused on building and strengthening connections between
          group members and group leaders. Psychoeducation is provided about childhood needs,
          schemas, and modes and learning to recognise schema activation within and outside the
          group. Mode guessing games can be introduced whereby group leaders and/or participants
          can act out modes, with participants trying to identify them. This can lead to discussions
          about how the speciﬁc modes manifest across group members, including language, posture,
          function, and triggers. The Healthy Adult concept is also introduced, and psychoeducation
          is provided about ways of distinguishing it from coping modes. Participants can be
          encouraged to monitor these modes during and between sessions using simple mode diaries
          or monitoring forms. Group exercises at this stage are focused on establishing a group sense



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy   305



         of belonging and emotional safety. Preliminary imagery work involves generating a group
         ‘safe place’ image, enhanced with individual elements to suit individual participants’ needs.
         Participants are guided to focus on all of the sensory aspects of experiencing that place from
         their mind’s eye.
             Tangible representations of group connections can be provided through playful exercises
         such as throwing a ball of wool and/or holding onto scarves to create a visceral connection
         between group members [6]. At later stages of the group (especially BPD-speciﬁc groups),
         scarves can also be used as a mechanism for stimulating internalisation of object permanence,
         whereby the client uses transitional objects to facilitate capacity to generate a soothing mental
         image and sense of connection, even in the absence of key attachment ﬁgures. When the co-
         therapist notices a group member becoming detached or distressed, the scarf can provide
         a mechanism for drawing that person back to connect with the person who is holding on to
         the other end and, crucially, to the group. This also provides a gentle, de-shaming mechanism
         by which participants can learn to reconnect even in the face of coping mode activations that
         would normally drive disconnection. Exercises which enhance the Happy Child side are
         introduced early on in therapy, as this is often underdeveloped in participants, and such
         exercises provide an ideal opportunity for group bonding and breaking up the heaviness of
         working on schemas and diﬃcult issues. Early groupwork also focuses on emotional famil-
         iarisation, through learning to identify bodily sensations and identify their accompanying
         speciﬁc emotion. Any method (including colours, facial emojis, and emotion-based apps) can
         be used to increase emotional awareness [6].

         Mode Modiﬁcation and Healing Phase of Therapy: Strategies for Change
         The initial focus of mode modiﬁcation sessions is to address schema modes shared by group
         members that are likely to sabotage progress. In the early phase of therapy, the Inner Critic
         tends to be ego-syntonic (i.e., participants believe its message to be true and ﬁnd it almost
         impossible to challenge). By addressing the Inner Critic as a whole group, participants
         generally ﬁnd it easier to challenge, especially when it is attacking fellow participants. This
         gradually empowers participants to begin to recognise and challenge their own Critic mode.
             Changes takes place via a range of cognitive, experiential, and interpersonal strategies,
         including psychoeducation about universal needs, ﬂashcards, schema diaries, schema
         monitoring forms, and exploring the pros and cons of modes. Schema healing takes place
         through limited reparenting of all participants’ Vulnerable Child selves. Limited reparent-
         ing is provided within the context of a range of experiential techniques, including chairwork
         dialogues, imagery rescripting, empathic confrontation, and historical role-play/psycho-
         drama, in which all participants play a role. More detailed descriptions are available to
         provide guidance on working with speciﬁc modes [6, 7]. Some examples of speciﬁc tech-
         niques adapted to group therapy are described in the following sections.
         Chairwork to Bypass Coping Modes. In the early phases of group therapy, it is important to
         address coping mode behaviours that block connection within the group and prevent
         participants from getting their needs met. An introductory exercise that illustrates the
         interpersonal consequences of coping modes involves one participant either placing
         a piece of paper in front of their face or turning their chair around to face outside the
         group, whilst the group continues to discuss a relevant issue. The participant is instructed to
         initially ignore attempts to draw them back into the discussion. After a few minutes, the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          306           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          designated participant returns to the group and is invited to reﬂect on what it felt like to be
          the one who was disconnected from others in the group. The remaining participants are
          invited to reﬂect on what it was like for them to try to connect and be ignored. This can be
          a useful psychoeducational exercise which is generally only carried out as a one-oﬀ, when
          ﬁrst introducing the concept of the Detached Protector and helping participants to consider
          its impact on relationships.
               Group members are encouraged to consider the ways in which their main coping modes
          (especially Detached Protector and Detached Self-Soother) may interfere with their capacity
          to get their needs met in the group and in other relationships through dissociation, addictive
          behaviours, self-harm, and so on. Group participants are encouraged to problem-solve ways
          in which the group can reconnect when any member is clearly in a coping mode.
          Furthermore, group members can be encouraged to become more aware of their own
          Detached Protector mode, such as by drawing it, monitoring physical and emotional signals
          as homework, and noticing how it aﬀects their relationships and capacity to connect with
          others. In group work, a chair can be brought in to represent the whole group’s Detached
          Protector, with another chair behind them which is covered in photographs of all partici-
          pants as children (Vulnerable Child chair). The group’s Detached Protector represents that
          part in each participant who wants to turn away, to block emotions, to disconnect from
          others in the face of suﬀering and distress. This exercise helps participants to learn that this
          is a common way of coping. The group Detached Protector represents a shared object onto
          which individuals project their individual protector modes. The group can then be encour-
          aged to address this mode by showing appreciation for all of the ways in which it has helped
          them (from each individual’s perspective). The group can then go on to remind the group
          Detached Protector that it is necessary to reach their Vulnerable Child mode to allow
          healing work to take place within the group. Participants can respond by moving to the
          Detached Protector chair and voicing any concerns or fears that their Detached Protector
          mode has. Group participants can then move to the Healthy Adult chair (i.e., all participants
          stand behind the chair) and oﬀer healthy responses based on what they know their own (or
          others’) Vulnerable Child part needs. Participants are encouraged to notice the sensations of
          the Detached Protector as it ﬂuctuates in their life outside of sessions to develop conscious
          awareness and control of the mode. Members are encouraged to connect with their
          Vulnerable Child mode in group sessions and to allow themselves to hear the caring
          reparenting messages of the group. This exercise can be adapted and repeated when any
          speciﬁc group participant manifests a strong coping mode in group sessions.
          Chairwork to Fight the Inner Critic. Fighting critic modes takes place via both chairwork
          and imagery rescripting. Instructions for group chairwork to ﬁght the Critic are described in
          Box 17.2. All participants are encouraged to project their own Inner Critics onto the
          designated Inner Critic chair. In parallel, they are encouraged to observe as others describe
          their own Inner Critic messages. This process often triggers a natural sense of anger or
          irritation as they witness other participants being criticised by their own Critic, thereby
          facilitating the process of ﬁghting back and setting limits on this side.
          Imagery Rescripting. Mode-based imagery rescripting can be used to familiarise partici-
          pants with the concept of reparenting their Vulnerable Child mode. In the ﬁrst instance,
          participants are invited to close their eyes, visit their safe place, then connect with an image
          of their Vulnerable Child self for a few minutes (this time can be extended as the group




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy   307



             Box 17.2 Fighting the Group Inner Critic Through Chairwork
             •    Invite participants to reﬂect on the past week and share experiences of when their Inner
                  Critic was active. Explore these incidents, reﬂecting on the impact on their inner child
                  modes and their ability to make progress with their goals.
             •    Use the opportunity to draw parallels between similar experiences across participants.
             •    Group participants are invited to depict the tone of the Inner Critic via drawing on a large
                  sheet of cardboard or cloth eﬃgy.
             •    Identify one participant who is willing to allow the group to focus on their Inner Critic as
                  a way of addressing all of the Inner Critics in the group.
             •    Chairs are allocated to the Inner Critic, the Vulnerable Child, and the Healthy Adult
                  modes. The eﬃgy is placed on the Inner Critic chair. Drawings or photographs of
                  participants as children are placed on the back of the relevant chair.
             •    The chosen participant is invited to sit on the Inner Critic chair and voice the words of
                  that mode, directed at the empty Vulnerable Child chair.
             •    The same participant is then invited to move to the Vulnerable Child chair and asked to
                  reﬂect on how their child self feels when they receive this message. The co-therapist
                  draws in the rest of the group to ask how they would receive this same message from
                  their vulnerable side. Although participants usually note feelings of sadness and hurt,
                  they may also remark that the critical voice feels ‘right’. Therapists can explain that as
                  these messages have been repeated over many years, they have become ‘normal’ and
                  maybe even comfortable (in that the world makes more ‘sense’).
             •    Use a whiteboard to list alternative Healthy Adult mode messages generated by the
                  group to ﬁght these messages, with the goal of defending the Vulnerable Child mode.
                  The confrontational tone is adjusted to the severity of the Inner Critic. For example, to
                  a Punitive Critic, strong limits are required as if dealing with a bully, whereas with
                  a Demanding or Guilt-Inducing mode, participants are helped to generate messages
                  that unpick the logic and focus on unmet emotional needs.
             •    All participants are invited to stand behind the Healthy Adult mode chair and take turns
                  to make one statement from their Healthy Adult mode, to set limits on the group Inner
                  Critic.
             •    For homework, participants can be asked to reﬂect on the range of explicit and implicit
                  messages they have internalised across childhood and adolescence from a range of
                  sources: family members, teachers, peers, and siblings, as well as cultural/media
                  messages. Participants are invited to note that often the Inner Critic messages are
                  unwittingly passed down through the generations without being questioned. Clients
                  who struggle with guilt when ﬁghting the Critic can be reassured that we are not
                  identifying the schema ‘carrier’ as a bad person; it is their destructive messages that we
                  are targeting.




         proceeds). Participants are instructed to focus on any image or memory (except trauma or
         abuse memories, which should be reserved for individual sessions). Participants are then
         invited to open their eyes and discuss their experiences as a group, drawing parallels
         between common experiences among participants. The co-therapist keeps an eye on any
         participants who need support with expressing their own experience of connecting to their
         little self. If any participants have been triggered, they can be invited to re-enter the image
         and identify their need, whilst the whole group generates creative solutions to meet these



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          308           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          needs through imagery (see detailed instruction in Box 17.3). Over several weeks, all
          participants can take turns at being the focus of these rescripts, thereby facilitating ongoing
          reparenting experiences for the whole group. Participants are gradually encouraged to bring
          their own Healthy Adult side into the images to reparent themselves. Homework tasks can
          also be set to draw pictures of their Healthy Adult providing what is needed for their
          Vulnerable Child self. Furthermore, participants can be encouraged to notice triggers for
          these schemas within the group context (e.g., feeling left out when group therapists pay
          attention to others (Emotional Deprivation), or feeling unlovable when the group are
          nurturing towards another participant (Defectiveness/Shame) as a focus for diary entries,
          homework activities, and future-in-group session exercises. This can lead to further exer-
          cises focused on challenging those schemas and learning to get their needs met more
          directly.
              Whole group imagery rescripting can be a powerful technique for ﬁghting the Inner
          Critic, whilst also providing a valuable opportunity for reparenting. Ideally, every partici-
          pant should have at least one opportunity to work through an early memory via imagery
          rescripting. One participant is invited to share a memory in which they received a critical
          message or didn’t get their needs adequately met in some way. For an example of imagery
          rescripting in group schema therapy, see Box 17.3.


              Box 17.3 Group Imagery Rescripting Illustration

              Sally told the group that she had always kept others at a distance due to a longstanding sense
              that she wasn’t good enough, and that once others saw the ‘real me’, they would not want
              anything to do with her. Over the course of her childhood, her parents were often busy and
              stressed with high work demands, and Sally’s emotional needs for warmth and connection
              were largely unmet. Her sister was highly passive and compliant and was often praised for this.
              In contrast, Sally developed a sense that she was the ‘problem child’, as her expressions of
              distress and anger were interpreted as being ‘over the top’ and attention-seeking. Sally
              volunteered to be the focus of a group imagery rescripting, to work on a memory based on
              a recurring theme of rejection and emotional neglect.

              Safe Place Imagery
              The whole group was invited to close their eyes and guided to enter their safe place,
              imagining every detail, including image, sounds, smells, tastes textures, and felt sense. After
              2–3 minutes, participants were encouraged to open their eyes.

              Imagery Rescripting
              1) Identify core image: Sally was encouraged to close her eyes and describe the image to
                 the rest of the group, identifying feelings, thoughts, and unmet needs. She described
                 herself as a 4-year-old who on her birthday had been in childcare all day and wanted to
                 play with her parents but was told to go upstairs and quietly read in her bedroom. When
                 she protested, her mother ﬁercely told her she was being naughty and to stop being so
                 demanding. She identiﬁed her feelings as sad, empty, ashamed, and lonely; her thoughts
                 as: ‘nobody cares about me. I’m all alone. I’m a burden’; and her needs as a cuddle,
                 someone to listen to me, and to matter.
              2) Group generates ideas for rescript: Sally was invited to open her eyes and the whole
                 group brainstormed constructive rescripting endings, which included a range of ideas




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy   309




                such as bringing her grandmother into the image to talk to her parents and provide
                comfort, arranging a birthday party with friends, and going to a trampoline park. The
                solution that resonated best for Sally was a combination of the ideas suggested by the
                group.
             3) Rescripting the ending: Sally was invited to close her eyes again and the therapists
                guided her through this new ending to her memory, asking her to imagine that the
                therapists were there in the image, explaining to her parents that children need love and
                nurturance, and that like all little children, Sally needed to be cherished and celebrated,
                especially on her birthday:
             THERAPIST: You’re so lucky to have such a beautiful little girl. She is trying so hard to get your
                attention and it’s not naughty to want to connect and play. All children need this.
                Although I know you are tired and stressed, you still need to ﬁnd a way to be better
                parents to show your love and aﬀection more openly. It’s not good for young children to
                be left on their own for so long. Sally needs you to be present for her.
                 Group participants were invited to contribute to the Healthy Adult messages and to
                 stand up for Little Sally.
             4) Group ending: After further discussion and limit setting with the parents, the therapists
                invited Sally and all of her new friends to a trampoline party, with fun games, tasty food,
                and space to make lots of noise. The Vulnerable Child selves of group participants were
                invited to enter the image as ‘friends’ for the Vulnerable Child. All participants were
                guided to close their eyes and take in the reparenting messages that are directed toward
                the ‘Vulnerable Children’ of the whole group (i.e., ‘Little Sally and all of the little children
                here, you are all precious and lovable. All children need care, love, and it’s good to ask for
                what you need. We are here to take care of you and make sure that you get everything
                you need from each other and from us’). In the image, group members told Little Sally
                that they wanted to play with her. Furthermore, they imagined a group hug, with all of
                the children joining together to make Little Sally feel a sense of belonging.
             5) Debrief. Group participants opened their eyes and debriefed. Sally was invited to reﬂect
                on how she could help Little Sally to get her needs met in the present, both through self-
                attunement and by learning to ask for her needs to be met more openly.




         Empathic Confrontation. Empathic confrontation in group format is a powerful method
         for bringing attention to modes that block interpersonal connection with others and
         capacity to get emotional needs met. This begins with a gentle prompt by group leaders.
         For example, the therapist might say, ‘Mary, something I noticed is that you have a natural
         inclination to want to help others, but that sometimes you get so drawn into trying to rescue
         others that your own little self doesn’t get any airtime. This is no criticism at all, but
         I wondered if that might be an old schema pattern for you, taking care of others whilst
         neglecting your own needs?’
             As the group progresses, participants are encouraged to gently confront each other to
         help overcome barriers to connection. Empathic confrontation can target any behaviours
         that prevent participants from getting needs met both in the context of the group and in
         what they report about their lives between sessions, including risky behaviours, non-
         attendance, and extreme attachment/clinging or overcompensation. Empathic confronta-
         tion is appropriate when group boundaries are violated (e.g., repeatedly verbally attacking



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          310           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          other group members, or sending abusive emails to group leaders in Angry Child mode or
          Bully and Attack mode). Empathic confrontation includes suggestions that provide guid-
          ance on learning to self-regulate and switch modes to allow them to be ‘heard’ by fellow
          participants. On rare occasions when empathic confrontation is ineﬀective, this is followed
          by limit setting with natural consequences (e.g., losing email privileges).
              We encourage group members to actively work on expressing vulnerability and asking
          for their needs to be met within the group rather than acting these out in a coping mode. It
          is of utmost importance that empathic confrontation is delivered skilfully; it should be made
          clear that the observation is not intended as a criticism, but a means of encouraging
          participants to learn more eﬀective mechanisms for expressing their emotions and needs.
          A six-step process for empathically confronting behaviours within groups is described by
          Farrell and Shaw [8] (see Box 17.4), and an example of its application is presented in
          Box 17.5.


              Box 17.4 Six-Step Process for Empathically Confronting Behaviours Within Schema
              Therapy Groups
              1. Establish connection with the participant by making eye contact, leaning towards them,
                 and using a warm, empathic tone. Reassure the participant that this is not intended as
                 criticism, pointing out your concern that there is an issue that you want to highlight due
                 to a concern that you have noticed a mode-/schema-driven behaviour that may interfere
                 with them getting needs met in session.
              2. Describe the interfering behaviour linked to schemas and modes.
              THERAPIST: I am worried that when this side of you gets caught up with describing situations
                 in such detail, it can feel a bit like our connection with you starts to waver, as we focus
                 more on the facts and lose touch with your needs and feelings. While there is a side of
                 me that gets it and is happy to go with the ﬂow, there is another part of me that is
                 concerned about the vulnerable part of you that needs emotional connection.
              3. Point out that this coping behaviour probably emerged as a survival response in
                 childhood, when there were limited options, but that life is diﬀerent now and as a group
                 we want to help them to get their needs met.
              THERAPIST: I fully recognise that in the past, it must have been so confusing for you – you were
                 criticised and given the message that whatever you said or did, it wasn’t quite right or
                 good enough. And I wonder if this side evolved as a way of trying to get things ‘right’. The
                 down-side is that when the details take centre stage, we lose sight of Little Peter and what
                 he needs from us – even though it makes perfect sense as to why you learned to cope
                 that way.
              4. Oﬀer an alternative that might show the participant how they could adjust to a healthier
                 coping mechanism to get needs met in the present.
              THERAPIST: I know that as a child, it wouldn’t have been possible for you to show this
                 vulnerable part of you, as you would have felt too exposed to the bombardment of
                 criticism – you would have been put down for that. But it’s diﬀerent here . . . we want
                 to understand how you really feel. So, if you could maybe try a diﬀerent way, by telling
                 us a little bit about how you are feeling, that will help us to see that little part of you
                 that has been neglected and to understand what you really need. This is really the
                 most important goal of schema therapy – to take the risk of showing your vulnerability
                 to others who care about you.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy   311




             5. Consider options for change: help the participant to weigh up the pros and cons of the
                 schema-driven behaviour and explore other possible ways to behave.
             THERAPIST: I wonder if this mode might also have an impact on some of your other
                relationships, and whether it aﬀects others’ capacity to understand what you need?
                Although it has been a way of getting by in childhood, how might it be to experiment
                with reducing it for a short time?
             6. Oﬀer support with making changes: ‘This old way of coping is totally understandable – but
                we are here for you and want to support you to get what you need in your life now.’




             Box 17.5 Example of Empathic Confrontation in Group Schema Therapy

             Merrin’s Angry Protector mode would become triggered when she noticed other group
             members getting the group leader’s attention. She would express this by withdrawing in
             a hostile manner, avoiding eye contact with others and responding to questions in an irritable
             manner.
             THERAPIST: Merrin, I know that it might be diﬃcult to talk about this just now, but I can see you are
                feeling hurt, and I think it’s important that we try to understand what is happening just now.
                The tricky thing is that when this ‘back oﬀ’ part of you kicks in and you withdraw, we lose
                connection to you. It’s diﬃcult for us knowing that you are struggling, but it’s hard to make
                contact with the vulnerable part of you when this part is so strong – it feels like this side is
                pushing us away. It’s totally understandable that you have learned to cope this way, to
                protect yourself – in the past there were good reasons for that. One thing that many people
                ﬁnd triggering in group context is seeing others getting the care that they crave. I know that
                this side kicks in and gives the message that it’s better not to need others, that they don’t
                care about your needs – this is what you learned as a child. But it’s diﬀerent here – we want to
                hear from you about your feelings. You’re allowed to connect and to ask for what you need.
                Can anyone else in the group relate to this diﬃculty saying what they feel or need in direct
                ways when triggered . . . if so, could you share this with the group?



             Empathic confrontation can also be used via chairwork dialogues to challenge coping
         modes common across the whole group. A chair can be brought in to represent the main
         coping modes within the group, with one chair as the child mode. Group participants can
         work in small groups to identify ways that the coping modes have helped them (past) but
         that also prevented them from getting their needs met and connecting with others (present).
         Therapists guide participants to present these perspectives to the coping modes as if they are
         talking to an old friend who needs to be updated about their role in their life. They are then
         guided to direct messages to the Vulnerable Child chair, ﬁnding words to represent what
         they now know that they needed but didn’t get in the past.

         Final Phase of Group Schema Therapy
         In the ﬁnal phase of the group – mirroring individual schema therapy – participants are
         encouraged to continue to work on consolidating behavioural changes that enable them to



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          312           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          get their needs met and increase interpersonal connection in their lives. They actively
          practise self-nurturing and compassion as they crystallise Healthy Adult skills for self-
          care. This phase of therapy parallels the later stages of childhood: developing a sense of
          identity, individuation, and sense of autonomy. Group members are encouraged to connect
          to their own Vulnerable Child/Adolescent self to learn about their own needs, values, likes,
          dislikes, and wants. The group format provides a sense of belonging and acceptance within
          a peer group, a key healing ingredient often missing from their actual adolescence, which
          promotes identity development. In this phase, there is a focus on diﬀerentiating healthy
          from more ‘addictive’ or self-sabotaging mechanisms for getting needs met and learning
          ways of telling these apart.
              Mode work becomes focused on looking forward to manage needs and anticipate
          diﬃcult triggers that might lie ahead in the client’s life outside the realm of the group.
          The focus is on ﬁrmly internalising the experience of the group as an ‘alternate’ childhood,
          whereby they have managed to get their needs met and can now take these forwards as an
          integrated Healthy Adult self that is capable of managing and meeting their own needs.

          Concluding Remarks
          Group schema therapy is well established as an eﬀective format for the provision of schema-
          mode work. The group format appears to catalyse the eﬀects of schema therapy through the
          context of a group ‘family’. This microcosm of the outside world provides a foundational
          healing environment that imparts a sense of belonging and opportunities for vicarious
          learning. Participants learn to develop ways of getting their own needs met by internalising
          reparenting messages from the group and eventually through the evolution of their own
          Healthy Adult selves. Schema challenging thereby becomes more potent within a group
          context through the collective strength of the emerging group Healthy Adult, which can
          challenge out-of-date schema messages and provide the compassion, warmth, and connect-
          ivity that is needed for healing to take place.

          References
          1. Farrell J, Shaw IA Webber MA, A                               3. Broersen J, van Vreeswijk M. Brief schema
             schema-focused approach to group                                 therapy workbook: CBT techniques (3rd ed.).
             psychotherapy for outpatients with                               (In Press).
             borderline personality disorder:                              4. Simpson S, Skewes S, van Vreeswijk M,
             A randomized controlled trial. Journal of                        Samson R. Commentary: Short-term group
             Behavior Therapy and Experimental                                schema therapy for mixed personality
             Psychiatry. 2009;40(2):317–28.                                   disorders: An introduction to the treatment
          2. Broersen J, van Vreeswijk M. Brief schema                        protocol. Frontiers in Psychology. 2015;6
             therapy workbook: Experiential strategies for                    (609): 1–3.
             group and individual psychotherapy.                           5. Simpson S, Smith E. Schema therapy for eating
             Available at: www.mfvanvreeswijk.com/                            disorders: Theory and practice for individual
             downloads/brief-schema-therapy-workbook-                         and group settings. Routledge; 2019.
             experiential-strategies-for-group-and-
             individual-psychotherapy. Original Dutch                      6. Farrell J, Shaw I. Group schema therapy for
             edition: Werkboek kortdurende                                    borderline personality disorder: A step-by-
             schematherapie; experiëntiële technieken/                        step treatment manual with patient
             copyright © 2017 Bohn Staﬂeu van Loghum,                         workbook. Wiley & Sons; 2012.
             onderdeel van Springer media. ISBN:                           7. Farrell J, Shaw I, Reiss N. Group schema
             9789082853902                                                    therapy for borderline personality disorder



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Group Schema Therapy    313



              patients: Catalyzing schema and mode                             Empathic confrontation. Beltz; 2013. www
              change. In van Vreekswijk M, Broersen J,                         .researchgate.net/proﬁle/Joan-
              Nadort M, eds. The Wiley-Blackwell                               Farrell/publication/281108601_Empathic_
              handbook of schema therapy. Wiley-                               Confrontation_in_Group_Schema_Therapy/l
              Blackwell 2012, pp. 341–58.                                      inks/55d5e0cc08aed6a199a2a7aa/Empathic-
         8. Farrell J, Shaw I. Empathic confrontation in                       Confrontation-in-Group-Schema-
            group schema therapy. In R. Vogel (ed).                            Therapy.pdf.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                Chapter
                                     Schema Therapy for

                18                   the Schema Therapist
                                     Improving Therapist Well-Being and
                                     Enhancing Client Outcomes Through the
                                     Awareness and Healing of Therapist
                                     Schemas
          Introduction
          Therapists are not immune to the eﬀects of their own temperament and early child-rearing
          and socialisation experiences. Therapist schemas interact somewhat with client schemas
          such that certain client–therapist combinations make it harder for therapists to recognise
          problematic patterns or intervene to alter them early enough. Therapist schemas can have
          several other potentially pernicious eﬀects, including propensity to burnout and boundary
          violations. Therefore, schema therapists are called to cultivate awareness of their own
          schemas. This chapter outlines some of the complications that arise for speciﬁc therapist
          EMS and provides guidance for managing their impact.

          Early Maladaptive Schemas in Therapists
          Since the beginnings of psychotherapy, therapists have had an inherent curiosity about their
          internal worlds and the factors that impede or enhance their own well-being. Indeed,
          therapists’ own personal and family histories are likely to be motivational factors that
          draw them into psychotherapy as a profession [1, 2]. Research suggests that a substantial
          proportion of psychologists [3, 4, 5, 6], psychiatrists [7, 8, 9], and other mental health
          clinicians/psychotherapists [10] have experienced adverse childhood experiences. Whilst
          a prior experience of adverse experiences may increase our potential to understand and
          empathise with our clients, it may also increase the risk of schema-driven psychological
          diﬃculties, including burnout [3, 11]. Indeed, workplace demands can generate the ‘perfect
          storm’ by activating the very EMS that drew us into the profession in the ﬁrst place [12, 10].
          In this way, therapists’ own schemas can simultaneously represent our superpower, driving
          empathy and understanding, but also our kryptonite, representing our blind spots and those
          aspects of the work that threaten outcomes as well as our own well-being [13]. There is also
          a core assumption within the schema therapy model that the therapist is the ‘almost perfect’
          model of Healthy Adult attitudes, schemas, and behaviours. In other words, therapy
          proceeds as if the schema therapist has enough ‘Healthy Adult’ strength across all eighteen
          schema domains to be able to model this for clients. This, of course, is a problematic
          assumption. Although therapists usually experience less schema activation than clients, it is
          our observation – backed by research – that therapists are human beings too, and so come
          314


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist   315



         with all of the biases, struggles, childhood histories, schemas, and blind spots that can
         impact the therapy process. If those blind spots are not obvious in daily life, clinical work
         will often highlight them. And so, if we all have schemas and we accept that they can aﬀect
         our work, it is important for the schema therapist to become aware of them and take steps to
         heal or manage their own schemas, to prevent them from becoming ‘blind spots’ in therapy.

         Matches and Mismatches Between Therapist and Client
         Schemas and Modes
         Therapists’ own EMS can interact with those of their clients, commonly leading to blind
         spots and/or overidentiﬁcation. For example, if both therapist and client have a Failure
         EMS, the therapist may not suﬃciently actively encourage or challenge the client to reach
         their potential. On the other hand, if the therapist and client have opposite EMS (such as
         Failure and Unrelenting Standards), or the same EMS, with opposing coping styles (such as
         Defectiveness with a Self-Aggrandiser mode versus Defectiveness with a Compliant
         Surrenderer coping mode), the therapist might have diﬃculty identifying EMS-driven
         patterns because these seem ‘normal’. When both therapist and client are in a Detached
         Protector mode, the therapeutic process can easily devolve into a ‘chat-fest’, whereby they
         merely talk about problematic issues without actively working on them or using experiential
         techniques for change. If both therapist and client are in Overcontroller mode, the thera-
         peutic process can become stuck, whereby both are working through lists and agenda items
         in an attempt to be productive, whilst neglecting possibilities for emotional connection.
             A particularly common and problematic therapist–client interaction can occur when the
         therapist has a strong Compliant Surrenderer mode and becomes too acquiescent in the face
         of their clients’ overcompensatory modes; the therapist’s EMS are likely to be activated by an
         Overcontroller or Self-Aggrandiser mode in the client. In this dynamic, the therapist may
         avoid addressing the client’s unmet needs for boundaries and limits due to typical fears,
         such as being rejected or criticised (Defectiveness), conﬂict or anger (Subjugation), loss of
         approval (Approval Seeking), or being punished (Punitiveness). The client is therefore
         denied the opportunity to learn reciprocity and compromise within relationships.
         Although overcompensatory modes commonly trigger feelings of irritation and/or anxiety
         in the therapist, it is important to remain cognizant of the client’s underlying fears that are
         linked to childhood experiences (e.g., ‘showing my vulnerability will lead to humiliation’)
         and to remain persistent in eﬀorts to gain access to the Vulnerable Child that is hidden ‘back
         stage’, behind the coping mode. Keeping a photograph of the client as a small child in sight
         can help increase both therapist empathy and resolve to communicate with the client’s
         vulnerable side. Therapists with EMS in the Disconnection and Rejection domain may be
         particularly prone to being blindsided by the charms of a Self-Aggrandiser mode in the early
         stages of therapy. For example, the client might ﬂatter the therapist: ‘I chose you as my
         therapist, as I heard you were the best in the practice . . . I really admire your achievements
         and knew this would be a good match for me.’ If the therapist does not recognise this as an
         overcompensatory strategy and slips into their own narcissistic coping mode, they become
         diverted from their primary goal of reaching the client’s vulnerable side. When an over-
         compensatory mode is present, the therapist’s attempts to engage in experiential exercises
         and make contact with the client’s Vulnerable Child part may be met with cynicism,
         sarcasm, or claims that these methods are not appropriate for their problems. The therapist
         can thus unwittingly ﬁnd themselves drawn into a relationship of ‘friendly chat’ or



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          316           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          intellectualising, without providing the corrective emotional experience the client needs.
          Regular supervision and practice of empathic confrontation skills are essential, especially
          when working with clients with domineering coping modes.

          Common Schemas Amongst Psychotherapists
          Recent research has identiﬁed Self-Sacriﬁce and Unrelenting Standards as the two most
          common EMS amongst psychologists and psychotherapists, with Detached Protector and
          Detached Self-Soother as the most common coping modes [14, 11]. The strong drive
          amongst most therapists to sacriﬁce their own needs to meet the needs of their clients,
          and to set high standards for themselves, may enhance therapists’ capacity to engage in the
          positive aspects of the reparenting approach (e.g., provide attunement, warmth, and
          empathy), but also reduce their willingness to engage in setting boundaries through
          empathic confrontation due to a fear of causing further distress for their clients. Other
          therapist EMS that may contribute to avoidance of the more confrontational schema
          therapist strategies include Subjugation (fears that the client will become angry),
          Defectiveness (fears that they will be rejected or criticised by the client), Emotional
          Deprivation (fears that they will be misunderstood), or Abandonment (fears that the client
          will leave).
              The Self-Sacriﬁce and Unrelenting Standards schemas may also underlie the tendency
          amongst therapists to become overidentiﬁed with a ‘rescuer’ or ‘Perfectionistic Nurturer’
          role. These roles blend Compliant Surrenderer, Overcontroller, and/or Self-Aggrandiser
          modes. The therapist gains a sense of self-esteem through being the one to ﬁnd solutions for
          others’ diﬃculties, which enables them to consistently avoid awareness of their own
          vulnerability and unmet needs. This may be particularly problematic when working with
          clients who have a strong Dependence/Incompetence schema (Dependent, Abandoned
          Child, Helpless Surrenderer modes); the therapist and client get locked in a cycle of
          triggering each other’s EMS, with each remaining in their preferred coping mode, rather
          than addressing the client’s underlying unmet needs. The therapist’s ‘Perfectionistic
          Nurturer’ mode is gratiﬁed by being needed and designated as the ‘chosen’ therapist who
          is taking care of the client, whilst the client’s Helpless Surrenderer mode (overcompensa-
          tion for Abandonment EMS) is gratiﬁed by being rescued or ‘saved’ (see Box 18.1 for
          a clinical example). However, this ‘dance of the coping modes’ eﬀectively prevents the
          client’s underlying Abandoned/Dependent child from being authentically seen and healed,
          and the therapist’s own Healthy Adult and Vulnerable Child remain out of the picture.
              Furthermore, when clients have a strong Dependence/Incompetence or Abandonment/
          Instability schema, there is a high risk of therapy being stretched signiﬁcantly beyond what
          would normally be considered an appropriate length, as the therapist unwittingly reinforces
          the client’s fear of endings. As a result, the development of the client’s Healthy Adult self
          becomes stalled. If the therapist pushes for autonomy, the Helpless Surrenderer coping
          mode (driven by Abandoned/Dependent Child) uses protest behaviours (e.g., pleas to be
          rescued through statements of helplessness and increased reporting of suicidal urges or
          illness behaviour) and guilt-inducing statements (thereby triggering the therapist’s Self-
          Sacriﬁce schema) as a means of drawing the therapist back into the rescuer role. It is not
          uncommon to become stuck within this ‘rescuer–victim’ dynamic, creating an environment
          whereby the client has little opportunity (or incentive) for change. Alternatively, the
          therapist may become frustrated by feeling trapped within this dynamic, and ﬂip into



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist       317



             Box 18.1 Therapist–Client Schema Chemistry: The Case of Franca

             Franca (client) grew up in an environment where her basic needs for love, stability, and
             consistent care were not met. Her parents were mostly emotionally absent. Her mother
             frequently passed out on the sofa after alcohol binges and would also go missing for days
             at a time. Furthermore, she would threaten to leave if Franca did not behave perfectly. Her
             sister was treated better, and Franca learned that she had to work hard to earn ‘crumbs’ of
             aﬀection. Although she was closer to her father, he was often away with work. Franca’s
             upbringing was a key factor in the development of severe Emotional Deprivation,
             Abandonment and Dependency EMS.
                When she ﬁrst attended therapy, she presented with a primary presenting problem of
             obsessive compulsive disorder. Her predominant coping modes provided a means of attempt-
             ing to deny the existence of her emotional needs through detachment and distraction
             (Detached Protector), and using rituals, perfectionism, and achievement as a means of gaining
             a sense of control and self-suﬃciency (Overcontroller). In the initial sessions of therapy, Franca
             remained emotionally detached and avoidant. However, over time, as she allowed herself to
             become attached to her therapist, she began to ‘thaw out’ and express her needs and
             emotions more openly.
                Her therapist Maria’s main EMS were Emotional Deprivation, Unrelenting Standards,
             Subjugation, and Self-Sacriﬁce. In line with the schema model, Maria worked to meet
             Franca’s unmet emotional needs through providing consistent emotional care, nurturance,
             and warmth. Although Franca appeared to beneﬁt from this, she began demanding increas-
             ing amounts of care on weekends and evenings. It was hypothesised that this was
             a manifestation of Franca’s Abandoned/Dependent Child mode, with an overcompensatory
             coping style. Maria found herself stuck in a cycle of feeling that whatever she gave, it was not
             enough. She sacriﬁced increasingly greater amounts of her personal time to provide on-
             demand care for Franca, sometimes leading to email conversations late at night, arranging
             extra sessions, and additional telephone calls. When she went away on holidays, this would be
             met with angry and demanding email messages, accusing Maria of abandoning her. Maria
             then increased her eﬀorts to provide the ‘perfect care’. Attempts to take a break led to feelings
             of guilt (Self-Sacriﬁce) and fear of being punished (Subjugation), alongside pressure to get the
             therapy ‘right’ and provide the perfect care (Unrelenting Standards). This pattern, alongside
             Maria’s tendency to override her own emotional needs (Emotional Deprivation), led to
             increasing feelings of emotional and physical exhaustion.
                Franca and Maria found themselves locked into a schema-perpetuating dynamic, wherein
             Maria found herself feeling increasingly burned out and frustrated by trying to provide the
             perfect care, and Franca became increasingly dependent and clingy, reluctant to take on
             a Healthy Adult role in her own recovery. Maria’s own EMS prevented her from setting realistic
             limits in terms of the level of care that she was able to provide, with the result that Franca
             could continue to avoid emotionally processing the pain and grief associated with her EMS.
                With supervision and personal therapy, Maria was able to recognise these EMS-driven processes
             and ﬁnd a balance of providing nurturing care alongside healthy limit setting. Limits on the
             frequency and length of emails were introduced as a ﬁrst step, and when these were overridden
             by Franca, natural consequences were introduced (i.e., emails would not be read by the therapist
             for the following week). Franca was also strongly encouraged to form relationships with peers that
             involved a healthy balance of learning to respect and support others’ needs, whilst also learning to
             show healthy vulnerability to get her own needs met. Although the limit setting was met with
             a strong Angry Child response, thereby triggering Maria’s Subjugation EMS, her resolve to create
             a healthier therapeutic environment gradually provided Franca with both opportunities to get her
             needs met and moments of frustration that began to stimulate growth of her own resilient Healthy
             Adult self, capable of meeting her own needs and forming healthy relationships with others.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          318           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          a punitive-critical (Bully-Attack mode) or passive-aggressive (ﬂipping between Compliant
          Surrenderer and Angry Protector mode) stance, thereby reinforcing the client’s EMS and
          being drawn into a re-enactment of their early childhood relationship dynamics. In this way,
          the mode-ﬂipping resembles Karpman’s Drama Triangle, whereby participants move
          between the three roles of Perpetrator, Rescuer, and Victim [15]. This pattern is further
          reinforced by medical-model mental health systems which reinforce the notion of the client
          as a passive recipient of treatment that is ‘administered’ by the therapist. Schema therapists
          must work towards overcoming their own EMS that increase the risk of being drawn into
          this pattern, to allow them to bypass the client’s coping modes and reach the Vulnerable
          Child mode, whilst also stimulating growth of their clients’ Healthy Adult selves. For further
          reading on the Drama Triangle and links to the schema therapy model, see Edwards [16].

          Schemas Associated with Therapist Burnout
          Concerningly, research indicates that between 21% and 67% of mental health clinicians
          report high emotional exhaustion [17, 18]. More than 49% of clinical and counselling
          psychologists in a recent study reported moderate–to-high levels of burnout [19].
          Burnout, driven by the underlying EMS and coping modes, may be characterised either
          by excessive involvement (e.g., Overcontroller mode) or disengagement (e.g., Detached
          Protector, Detached Self-Soother modes), or alternation between some combination of
          these [20, 21, 11]. Although all EMS and dysfunctional modes appear to be correlated
          with burnout, those schemas and modes identiﬁed as the strongest predictors are Emotional
          Deprivation [12], Abandonment, Emotional Inhibition, Mistrust/Abuse, and the Detached
          Protector mode [19].
              In the case of Emotional Deprivation, therapists may overcompensate for their own
          lack of childhood nurturance through providing ‘ideal’ care for their clients whilst
          continuing to neglect themselves. This lack of awareness of their own needs may
          increase the risk of emotional exhaustion and reduce the opportunity for their clients
          to develop skills in dealing with minor frustrations (i.e., of not having all their needs
          met all the time). Indeed, therapists risk ‘killing with kindness’ by solely focusing on
          meeting clients’ needs for understanding, safety, and nurturance at the expense of
          supporting them meeting their need for autonomy. As noted earlier, if the therapist
          has a Self-Sacriﬁce EMS, this can further exacerbate the pattern because the therapist
          is reluctant to set limits out of a fear of causing distress, reducing opportunities
          for the client to gradually strengthen their own resilient Healthy Adult self.
          Overidentiﬁcation with clients’ Mistrust/Abuse and Abandonment schemas risks redu-
          cing opportunities for schema challenging and healing. When both therapists and
          clients have unhealed Mistrust schemas, they may become mutually suspicious, redu-
          cing opportunities for corrective emotional experiences of honesty and connection.
          When both therapist and client have unhealed Abandonment schemas, they are at risk
          of clinging to each other (surrender), mutually keeping their distance (avoidance), or
          engaging in some combination of these, reducing opportunities for corrective experi-
          ences of stability within relationships. For therapists with an Emotional Inhibition
          schema, there is a propensity to quash emotional expression due to fears of rejection,
          disapproval, or loss of control. For the therapist, this may lead to increased risk for
          burnout due to reduced opportunity for mutual sharing of diﬃculties with colleagues
          and friends, thereby increasing emotional isolation.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist   319



         Impact of Therapist Schemas on Capacity for Empathy
         and Schema Healing
         Research indicates that emotional detachment (i.e., Detached Protector coping mode) appears
         to both operate as a risk factor for, and a consequence of, burnout, thereby functioning as
         a negative feedback loop, reducing job satisfaction and ultimately capacity for empathy [22].
         Perhaps more than in many other ‘manualised’ treatment models, schema therapy requires the
         therapist to make a substantial emotional investment in the therapeutic process. It is common
         in schema therapy to be working with clients who describe harrowing life stories, including
         signiﬁcant abuse and trauma. The limited reparenting approach requires a high level of
         attunement and empathy, with an emphasis on ‘being with’ rather than ‘doing to’. Given that
         diﬀerent authors frequently give contradictory deﬁnitions and distinctions to the terms
         empathy, sympathy, and pity, we’ll leave these terms aside and describe the quality of attention
         and experiencing that good schema therapists adopt: therapists pay attention to their own
         Vulnerable Child mode, recognising the feeling that the client is describing, and share the
         client’s emotional experience as much as possible. This is distinct from simply adopting
         a cognitive understanding in which the therapist protects themselves from their own vulner-
         ability through creating emotional distance [23]. Therapists might avoid sharing client emo-
         tional experiences via a Detached Protector (e.g., ‘I’m so sorry you feel that way. Shall we think
         of some distraction strategies together?’), Self-Aggrandiser (‘I feel sorry for you’), or
         Overcontroller (‘Let’s see if we can help you ﬁnd a solution for these feelings’) coping mode.
             More so than achieving empathy or sympathy, schema therapists strive to feel compas-
         sion towards clients. In a study where people were trained to respond to an image of
         a suﬀering person either through empathy or compassion, both groups experienced high
         levels of emotion in relation to seeing another person suﬀering, but those with empathy
         training more acutely experienced emotional pain (activating the anterior cingulate cortex).
         In contrast, those who received compassion training experienced a positive sense of reward
         from being able to help (activating the medial orbitofrontal cortex and ventral striatum).
         Whereas empathy involves one task – focusing on the other person’s suﬀering – compassion
         involves an additional step, through connecting with their own and their clients’ inner
         healing resources. In this study, those in the empathy group described the task of watching
         another person’s suﬀering as emotionally uncomfortable, whereas those in the compassion
         training described greater motivation to be present and to help, which enabled them to
         tolerate the empathic-emotional pain. In schema therapy terms, empathy that is reﬂexive
         and unconscious can easily become entangled with EMS. Entangled empathy may be driven
         by EMS that drive overinvolvement (e.g., Enmeshment, Subjugation, Self-Sacriﬁce, lack of
         coherent self). In these cases, there is a lack of diﬀerentiation between self and other, and the
         therapist is at increased risk of emotional exhaustion. For example, in the case of the Self-
         Sacriﬁce EMS, the therapist can become overidentiﬁed with the client’s emotional pain,
         taking responsibility for it, leading to a merging of self and other and increased risk of
         compassion fatigue. Research supports this notion, such that feelings of depression and
         lowered motivation are linked to this type of entangled empathy [24]. Furthermore, with
         entangled empathy we can feel weighed down by the suﬀering of the other but be less able to
         actually provide attuned support in the way that the other person requires. In contrast,
         Healthy Adult compassion involves a healthier version of empathy: ‘feeling with’ another,
         whilst retaining a diﬀerentiated, coherent self. Feelings of empathy are followed by
         a ‘turning outwards’, generating motivation to provide help in constructive ways.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          320           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          Whereas the entangled empathy is emotionally exhausting, healthy compassion is restora-
          tive [25]. These ﬁndings lead us to consider ways in which therapists can address their own
          EMS and child-self needs, to best meet the needs of their clients.

          Impact of Therapist Schemas on Boundary Crossing
          The deep level of attunement and emphasis on emotional connection in schema therapy can
          create a greater level of emotional intimacy than many clients have ever experienced. As
          previously mentioned, clients with strong Abandonment/Instability and Dependence/
          Incompetence schemas may be more prone to misinterpreting the meaning of this thera-
          peutic intimacy, and may entertain fantasies of being rescued or even ‘falling in love’ with
          the therapist. The schema therapist must be alert to these possibilities, and address them
          directly and empathically whilst acknowledging the unmet needs that the client is trying to
          satisfy through these fantasies. By using boundary transgressions as an opportunity to
          explore the role of EMS and unmet needs, the schema therapist’s role is to maintain healthy
          boundaries whilst helping their clients to translate these into healthy relationship dynamics
          within their ‘outside’ lives. An example of healthy limit setting in the context of a client
          idealising or romanticising the therapeutic relationship is provided in Box 18.2.
              The therapist’s role is to validate the unmet needs associated with the client’s history, to
          normalise the transference or ‘schema chemistry’ being played out within the therapeutic
          relationship, whilst sticking to their methods and holding the therapeutic boundaries. In the
          case of the example in Box 18.2, the therapist could follow this discussion with a chairwork
          exercise where the ‘longing’ or ‘romanticising’ part is interviewed, to ﬁnd out how old it is, what
          memories are associated with it, and, in the case of a coping mode, what its function is.
          Furthermore, feelings and somatic sensations that arise in the client towards the therapist can
          be investigated through an aﬀect bridge, whereby the client is encouraged to ‘Focus on those
          sensations and feelings until they are as intense as possible, then let your mind drift back to an
          early memory when you experienced the same or similar sensations and feelings. Just allow your
          body (not your brain) to make any connections with anything at all that comes up for you.’ The
          purpose here is to clarify exactly what the client’s feelings and needs are. The feelings may
          represent developmentally appropriate healthy emotions that are emerging as healing occurs in
          other aspects of the client’s life. On the other hand, the client may be mis-labelling or mis-
          identifying emotions that reﬂect child-like needs that the client hasn’t been able to properly
          identify. Imaginal assessment and mode mapping can help the client better understand their
          experience.
              It is worth noting that a client’s tendency to sexualise the therapeutic relationship can
          often be traced to confusion caused by a history of childhood sexual abuse. For example,
          a child who was ignored by a parent except in the context of sexual abuse may have learned
          that the only way of being seen and valued is through being sexually attractive or provocative.
          The therapist’s role is to be transparent in facilitating an authentic connection with the client,
          whereby they can learn that they are worthy of love for who they are as a person. The therapist
          needs to make space for the client to grieve for the losses of their childhood; it is typical for
          clients to realise what they have missed out on after some exposure to getting needs met in
          schema therapy. The therapist must also help the client update the information on which their
          old ways of coping and connecting were founded; even though it may have been necessary for
          them to play a prematurely sexualised role as a child to survive, as an adult they can now set
          clear, healthy boundaries to protect themselves from being ‘used’ or manipulated by others.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist            321



             Box 18.2 Clinical Example of Limit Setting When the Client Romanticises
             the Therapeutic Relationship

             Kerrie (client) had been attending regular therapy sessions with Sam (therapist) for ﬁve
             months, when Sam became aware of signs that Kerrie may be romanticising the
             relationship. She increasingly asked questions about how he would be spending week-
             ends and what he was doing in his free time. She brought small gifts, but when Sam
             tried to explore the meaning of this behaviour, she dismissed it as ‘Oh, I just wanted to
             show my appreciation for all you have done for me’. Sam sensed that there were several
             times that she was gazing at him for too long, suggesting that she was longing for
             a more romantic connection with him.
             THERAPIST: Kerrie, I know that we have been meeting for a while now, and I want you to know
                 that I’m really proud of what you’ve accomplished over that time. You’re working so
                 hard, and I’m noticing real shifts in the way you have been coping and relating to others
                 in your relationships. One thing that I’d like to explore with you is that sometimes the
                 various ages and unmet needs associated with diﬀerent modes can lead people to have
                 confusing feelings about their therapist. I wondered whether that is something that you
                 might have noticed at all?
             CLIENT: [awkwardly] I don’t know what you mean . . ..ok, well maybe . . . this is hard to talk
                about . . . maybe I do have some unexpected feelings.
             THERAPIST: Well, I want you to know that it’s perfectly normal to experience confusing
                feelings in the context of therapy, and I really want you to feel comfortable to be
                able to tell me about what you have noticed, if anything in that regard. For
                example, it’s very common to have fantasies of the therapist, such as an ideal
                parent or romantic partner. I don’t know if I’m perceiving this correctly, but some
                of the things you have mentioned have made me wonder if there might be a side
                of you that maybe wishes or imagines our therapeutic relationship could go
                beyond that of therapy?
             CLIENT: Well . . . I don’t know. Maybe. It’s hard to talk about. I feel a bit embarrassed, but I do
                sometimes wonder what it would be like to live with you. I know that sounds crazy, but
                I feel so cared for when I am with you, that sometimes I do wish it was more . . .
             THERAPIST: The last thing I want you to feel is embarrassed. In fact, I think it’s great that
                you have the courage to talk about this stuﬀ. Therapy can be very confusing to
                the diﬀerent modes . . . the diﬀerent sides of you who are looking for opportun-
                ities to be cared for and to get your needs met. As a little child, you didn’t get the
                care or the nurturance that you needed. You were dismissed and cast aside. And
                in therapy, for the ﬁrst time in your life, we have been talking about very personal
                and intimate details of your life. There is a little child part who is lonely and
                longing to be loved . . . that’s Little Kerrie. And then there is an adult part of you
                who is emerging, and perhaps more interested in adult version of love . . .
                I wonder if we might explore the thoughts and feelings of these diﬀerent
                modes? I want you to know that it’s safe here to explore these feelings – as
                your therapist, I can help you to make sense of these diﬀerent modes, and the
                unmet needs behind these longings and desires. How would you feel about that?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          322           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



              Whereas clients with other-directed EMS, such as Self-Sacriﬁce, Enmeshment, and
          Approval Seeking, may have unmet needs for attuned care, they will also need more
          encouragement to enable them to develop a separate sense of identity, and greater auton-
          omy. The therapeutic relationship provides a template for the client to learn how to function
          as a diﬀerentiated and authentic self, to make their own decisions and choices and to
          prioritise and balance their own needs alongside those of others to attain a healthy state
          of interdependence. Therapists with EMS in this domain may also be prone to boundary
          violations such as excessive self-disclosure, sharing of personal anecdotes, or answering
          emails/messages during their personal time as a means of gaining clients’ acceptance or
          approval. Therapists are advised to explore and recognise their own personal boundaries
          alongside their professional boundaries, to ensure that they do not oﬀer more than they can
          realistically manage. This may include availability outside of normal working hours, fre-
          quency of sessions, arrangements for crisis contact, and so on.
              It is healthier to set realistic expectations from the outset rather than oﬀering more than
          is manageable, thereby leading to resentment and later withdrawal of contact. For clients
          with an Abandonment schema, this pattern is likely to be particularly damaging, reinforcing
          previous relationship patterns whereby others have withdrawn contact with them, thus
          conveying the message that they are ‘too needy’.
              Clearly, the interaction of therapist and client EMS has the potential to raise ethical
          issues which can threaten the integrity of the therapeutic work. For further exploration of
          this issue in a schema therapy context, the following resources are recommended: Roediger
          and Archonti [26]; Simionato, Simpson, and Reid [27]; and van Vreeswijk and Zedlitz [28].

          Addressing Therapist Schemas in Schema Therapy
          The importance of therapists addressing their own EMS has been integral within schema
          therapy training since the inception of the model, with a proportion of supervision sessions
          within the certiﬁcation programme allocated to this work. Furthermore, schema therapists
          are actively encouraged to seek out their own personal therapy to gain greater insight into
          their own unmet needs and EMS, and the ways in which these may play out in the context of
          both work and personal circumstances. Schema healing work is likely to reduce the inci-
          dence of schema therapists inadvertently making therapeutic decisions or reacting to meet
          their own needs rather than the needs of their clients [27].
              Schema training and supervision already provides a key opportunity for schema therap-
          ists to reﬂect on their own EMS and well-being. We propose a range of strategies that
          enhance self-care amongst schema therapists, thereby enhancing their capacity to be
          authentically present and available for their clients (See Figure 18.1).
          • Continuing professional development By taking advantage of regular professional
              trainings, schema therapists can prepare themselves for working with more complex
              clients; this will help them improve and maintain healthy boundaries in the face of their
              EMS triggers. When therapists are aware of their own vulnerabilities and strengths, they
              will have greater capacity to focus on the areas of practice that provide the most joy and
              sense of mastery, whilst improving their competence and practising self-reﬂection on
              the inﬂuence of their own EMS.
          • Seek support and connection: One of the most important protective factors against
              burnout is social support. Schema therapists can enhance their connection with peers
              and mentors through involvement in peer supervision groups, ISST special interest



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist   323




                                                         Professional nourishment
                                                            •Attend continuing
                                                                professional
                                                               development
                                                                  •Join ST
                                                             committees/SIGs

                                                                Self-therapy
                                                             •Personal therapy
                                                             •Self-practice/self-
                                                                 reflection
                                                            •Imagery/chairwork
                                                                Supervision
                                                              •Individual/peer
                                                          supervision with focus on
                                                                therapist EMS

                                                             Self-care based on
                                                                 core needs
                                                            •Seek support from
                                                             friends, colleagues
                                                           •Mindfulness, self-
                                                          compassion practices
                                                              •Movement,
                                                              breathwork
                                                          •Connect with nature



         Figure 18.1 Model for the enhancement of schema therapist well-being


              groups, and committees. These activities also create space and opportunities to connect
              socially.
         •    Personal therapy: Personal therapy provides an ideal opportunity for schema therapists
              to work speciﬁcally on their own EMS that manifest both at work and in their private
              lives. Well-being is enhanced as schema therapists learn to bypass their coping modes
              and to focus on their own Vulnerable Child modes, whilst learning to direct their
              energies towards getting their own emotional needs met. There is a culture of acceptance
              and encouragement among schema therapists that personal therapy can be immensely
              helpful.
         •    Self-Practice/Self-Reﬂection (SP/SR): The concept of ‘self-therapy’ has expanded
              exponentially over recent years and has been recognised as key to the eﬀective practice of
              schema therapy. The SP/SR programme by Farrell and Shaw [29] is both a workbook
              and an experiential group learning programme for therapists to ‘look at their own stuﬀ’.
              It has been taught, practised, and evaluated extensively over recent years, and is
              currently being researched in terms of outcomes for therapists.
         •    Schema techniques for exploring therapist-client chemistry: Chairwork methods for
              working on therapist EMS both in the context of supervision and within live therapy
              sessions have been previously described [26]. Indeed, chairwork can provide powerful
              methods for challenging the therapist’s Inner Critic mode and nurturing their own
              Vulnerable Child self.
         •    Supervision: Supervision is a valuable process for identifying and working through the
              interactions, or schema chemistry, between therapist–client EMS [26]. Schema therapy
              supervision provides multiple functions that contribute to therapist competence and
              well-being [30]. These include teaching and skills coaching, providing mentorship, and
              allowing thinking space when schemas have been triggered within sessions. Further, in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          324           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



               schema therapy supervision, the supervisor can also fulﬁl the role as a reparenting agent
               by identifying unmet needs linked to EMS activations, and providing unmet needs
               through imagery rescripting, chairwork, and role-plays.
          •    Mindfulness and self-compassion training: In order to supercharge our capacity for
               compassionate empathy and reduce the risk of compassion fatigue, mindfulness and
               self-compassion training may be of particular beneﬁt for schema therapists [28, 31, 32].
               Further research is needed to explore ways in which compassion-based practices can be
               integrated within the schema therapy model, and to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of these in
               strengthening therapists’ Healthy Adult mode and capacity for compassionate empathy.
          •    Get moving! Integrated Healthy Adult well-being amongst schema therapists requires
               not just our heads, but, just as importantly, connection with our own bodies. Working
               for long periods of time, sitting at our desks, without moving and standing can lead to
               increased disconnection from the felt sense of our Vulnerable Child self that resides in
               the body. Body awareness and movement [33] and breath control [34] have clear links to
               health and well-being, providing a clear pathway to strengthening our own embodied
               Healthy Adult selves. Further, our bodies are a clear pathway to providing a joyful
               environment for our own Contented Child modes, through music, dance, running,
               climbing, or any movement that connects us with our life force.
          •    Connection with nature: Connecting with nature has been described a basic human
               need and has been shown to be a major predictor of well-being, vitality, and life
               satisfaction [35]. In fact, studies indicate that connection to nature may predict
               happiness over and above connection with family and friends [36]. Spending time
               outdoors and actively practising engagement with nature (ﬂora and fauna) is arguably
               a missing piece in the puzzle of enhancing well-being both in ourselves and our clients.

          Concluding Remarks
          Schema therapy is built on the assumption that we all have schemas. Just as our clients are
          caught in self-perpetuating lifetraps that prevent them from getting their emotional needs
          met, so too are we as schema therapists. Within the context of our therapeutic work, our
          schemas can function as blindspots, potentially leading to reduced empathy and misattune-
          ment in our therapy sessions, as well as putting ourselves at risk for suﬀering from
          emotional diﬃculties, including burnout. Over the past twenty years, as the schema therapy
          model has expanded, so have opportunities for us to explore and work on our own schemas
          and access both professional and emotional nourishment. In this chapter, opportunities for
          building therapist well-being are explored through professional opportunities for aware-
          ness, growth and connection, personal and self-therapy, supervision, and self-care practices.

          References
          1. Bamber M. CBT for occupational stress in                           a schema-focused approach. Routledge;
             health professionals: Introducing a schema-                        2006. pp. 149–161.
             focused approach. Routledge; 2006.                            3. Barnett J, Baker E, Elman N, Schoener G.
          2. Bamber M, Price J. A schema focused                              In pursuit of wellness: The
             model of occupational stress. In                                 self-care imperative. Professional
             Bamber M, ed. CBT for occupational stress                        Psychology: Research and Practice.
             in health professionals: Introducing                             2007;38:603–12.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Schema Therapy for the Schema Therapist                325



           4. Elliott D, Guy J. Mental health                                   Conference presentation: Schema Therapy
              professionals versus non-mental-health                            at The Coalface; 20 Feb. 2019; Sydney.
              professionals: Childhood trauma and adult                   14. Kaeding A, Sougleris C, Reid C, et al.
              functioning. Professional Psychology:                           Professional burnout, early maladaptive
              Research and Practice. 1993;24(1): 83–90.                       schemas and the eﬀect on physical health in
           5. Pope K, Feldman-Summers S. National                             clinical and counseling trainees. Journal of
              survey of psychologists’ sexual and physical                    Clinical Psychology. 2017;73(12):1782–96.
              abuse history and their evaluation of                       15. Karpman S. Fairy tales and script drama
              training and competence in these areas.                         analysis. Transactional Analysis Bulletin.
              Professional Psychology: Research and                           1968;7(26):39–43.
              Practice. 1992;23(5):353–61.
                                                                          16. Edwards D. Self pity/victim: A surrender
           6. Wise E, Hersh M, Gibson C. Ethics,                              schema mode. Schema Therapy Bulletin.
              self-care and well-being for psychologists:                     2015;1(1):1–6.
              Reenvisioning the stress-distress
              continuum. Professional Psychology                          17. Morse G., Salyers MP, Rollins AL, Monroe-
              Research and Practice. 2012;43(5):487.                          DeVita M, Pfahler C. Burnout in mental
                                                                              health services: A review of the problem
           7. Firth-Cozens J. Emotional distress in                           and its remediation. Administration and
              junior house oﬃcers. British Medical                            Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health
              Journal (Clinical Research Ed.). 1987;295                       Services Research. 2012;39(5):341–52.
              (6597):533–6.
                                                                          18. McCormack HM, MacIntyre TE, O’Shea D,
           8. Paris J, Frank H. Psychological                                 Herring MP, Campbell MJ. The prevalence
              determinants of a medical career.                               and cause(s) of burnout among applied
              Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 1983;28                         psychologists: A systematic review.
              (5): 354–57.                                                    Frontiers in Psychology. 2018;16(9):1897.
           9. Rajagopal S, Rehill K, Godfrey E.                           19. Simpson S, Simionato G, Smout M, et al.
              Psychiatry as a career choice compared                          Burnout amongst clinical and counselling
              with other specialties: A survey of medical                     psychologists: The role of early
              students. Psychiatric Bulletin. 2004;                           maladaptive schemas and coping modes as
              28:444–6.                                                       vulnerability factors. Clinical Psychology &
         10. Galvin J, Smith AP. Stress in UK mental                          Psychotherapy. 2019;26(1):637.
             health training: A multi-dimensional                         20. Leiter M, Maslach C. Areas of worklife:
             comparison study. British Journal of                             A structured approach to organizational
             Education, Society & Behavioural Science.                        predictors of job burnout. In Perrewe P,
             2015;9:161–75.                                                   Ganster D, eds. Research in occupational
         11. Simpson S, Simionato G, Smout M, et al.                          stress and well-being. 3rd ed. Elsevier; 2004.
             Burnout amongst clinical and counselling                         pp. 91–134.
             psychologists: The role of early                             21. Schaufeli WB, De Witte H. Work
             maladaptive schemas and coping modes as                          engagement: Real or redundant? Burnout
             vulnerability factors. Clinical Psychology &                     Research. 2017;5(C):1–2.
             Psychotherapy. 2019;26(1):35–46.
                                                                          22. Wilkinson H, Whittington R, Perry L,
         12. Bamber M, McMahon R. Danger – Early                              Eames C. Examining the relationship
             maladaptive schemas at work! The role                            between burnout and empathy in
             of early maladaptive schemas in career                           healthcare professionals:
             choice and the development of                                    A systematic review. Burnout Research.
             occupational stress in health workers.                           2017;6:18–29.
             Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy.
             2008;15:96–112.                                              23. Brown B. Daring greatly: How the
                                                                              courage to be vulnerable transforms the
         13. Phipps A. Self-sacriﬁce in schema                                way we live, love, parent, and lead.
             therapists: ‘Superpower or kryptonite?’                          Penguin; 2012.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          326           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          24. Tullett AM, Harmon-Jones E, Inzlicht M.                            skills development. International Society
              Right frontal cortical asymmetry predicts                          for Schema Therapy; 2019.
              empathic reactions: Support for a link                       31. Finlay-Jones AL, Rees CS, Kane RT. Self-
              between withdrawal motivation and                                compassion, emotion regulation and stress
              empathy. Psychophysiology. 2012;49                               among Australian psychologists: Testing an
              (8):1145–53.                                                     emotion regulation model of self-
          25. Singer T, Klimecki OM. Empathy and                               compassion using structural equation
              compassion. Current Biology. 2014;24                             modeling. PloS one. 2015;10(7).
              (18):875–8.                                                  32. Zarbock G, Lynch S, Ammann A,
          26. Roediger E, Archonti C. Transference and                         Ringer S. Mindfulness for therapists:
              therapist–client schema chemistry in the                         Understanding mindfulness for
              treatment of eating disorders. In Simpson S,                     professional eﬀectiveness and personal
              Smith E, eds., Schema therapy for eating                         well-being. Wiley; 2014.
              disorders: Theory and practice for individual                33. Zubala A, MacGillivray S, Frost H, et al.
              and group settings. Routledge; 2019, pp.                         Promotion of physical activity
              221–241.                                                         interventions for community dwelling
          27. Simionato G, Simpson S, Reid C. Burnout                          older adults: A systematic review
              as an Ethical Issue in Psychotherapy.                            of reviews. PloS One. 2017;12(7):e0180902.
              Psychotherapy. 2019;56(4):470–482.                           34. Zaccaro A, Piarulli A, Laurino M, et al.
          28. van Vreeswijk MF, Zedlitz A. Schema                              How breath-control can change your life:
              therapy for eating disorders: Therapist                          A systematic review on
              self-care. In Simpson S, Smith E,                                psycho-physiological correlates of slow
              Schema therapy for eating disorders:                             breathing. Frontiers in Human
              Theory and practice for individual and                           Neuroscience. 2018;12:353.
              group settings. Routledge; 2019,                             35. Capaldi CA, Dopko RL, Zelenski JM. The
              pp. 242–251.                                                     relationship between nature connectedness
          29. Farrell JM, Shaw IA. Experiencing schema                         and happiness: A meta-analysis. Frontiers
              therapy from the inside out: A self-practice/                    in Psychology. 2014;5:976.
              self-reﬂection workbook for therapists.
                                                                           36. Zelenski JM, Nisbet EK. Happiness and
              Guilford Publications; 2018.
                                                                               feeling connected: The distinct role of
          30. Supervisory Skills Development                                   nature relatedness. Environment and
              Committee. Schema therapy supervision                            Behavior. 2014;46(1):3–23.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
               Chapter
                                    Supervision and the Supervisory

              19                    Relationship in Schema Therapy


         Introduction
         Supervision is essential to developing competence in schema therapy. Supervision to gain
         accreditation in schema therapy is a signiﬁcant undertaking; it requires considerable time,
         money, cognitive eﬀort, and emotional openness. In this chapter, we describe the style and
         activities of schema therapy supervision. We present common challenges that arise for
         supervisors and supervisees and how these may be overcome. In doing so, we hope to
         encourage more therapists to undertake supervision and go on to become schema therapy
         supervisors.

         An Overview of Schema Therapy Supervision
         Schema therapy supervision is an essential ingredient in the journey towards conﬁdently
         and competently working with the schema therapy model. The primary aims of schema
         therapy supervision include providing good treatment adherence, as with all treatment
         models but in practice, supervision can oﬀer so much more to the schema therapist. Schema
         therapy supervision supports the clinician to understand nuances in the model and its
         practical application that are diﬃcult to convey in training contexts. Supervision also assists
         clinicians in understanding and formulating a wide range of presentations. Clients will
         invariably present with a range of complexities and backgrounds. Here, expertise is required
         in supporting the clinician to formulate an accurate case conceptualisation and develop the
         relevant treatment objectives. Supervisors also share and model how the treatment might
         unfold ﬂexibly across time, including any decision points that come up in the process. It is
         hoped that there is a kind of knowledge transfer, with the supervisee internalising any useful
         information and attitudes conveyed. In this way, there is a bit of cultural transmission too;
         the supervisee acquires a ‘feel for schema therapy’ as it is practised. Schema therapy
         supervision is where the therapist learns the ‘process’ aspect of the model. It is here that
         they gain the contextual knowledge that enables them to ‘join up’ the diﬀerent skills and
         aspects of the model in a coherent manner, as opposed to treating them as a ‘set of tools’ to
         be used in a rigidly prescribed manner.
             In many ways, schema therapy supervision can mirror the therapeutic process; supervi-
         sion will invariably help the supervisee develop professional as well as more personal
         capacities. Clients will inevitably present to treatment with modes and schemas that
         challenge the supervisee, which can symbolise central aspects of the client’s presenting
         issues. Supportive supervision also aims at helping therapists gain awareness of any trans-
         ference issues in their therapy relationships and understand their own schema activation
         with clients. In supervision, therapists are encouraged to engage with and develop their
                                                                                                     327


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          328           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          ‘Healthy Therapist’ mode, developing skills in managing areas of the therapy relationship
          that are challenging. Thus, schema therapy supervision takes a developmental view, just as
          in the therapy, supporting the development of conﬁdence and skills that may typically lie
          out of the therapist’s comfort zone.
              The International Society of Schema Therapy (ISST) has led the way in developing the
          schema therapy supervision model that provides guidelines to those providing and engaging
          in schema therapy supervision. The ISST now requires suitably trained and certiﬁed schema
          therapists to attend speciﬁc training in this model to become schema therapy supervisors
          (enabling them to provide supervision for the purposes of accreditation or certiﬁcation).
          The model and style of supervision deﬁned by the ISST will be the foci of this chapter and
          are based on the latest ISST model and training materials [1].

          The Supervisory Relationship and Three Roles of the Schema
          Therapy Supervisor
          The general supervisory style of the schema therapy supervisor is largely consistent with the
          schema therapy therapeutic approach; the supervisory relationship is seen as an agent of
          change and development. Speciﬁcally, limited reparenting approaches evident in schema
          therapy are seen as an important aspect of training and supervision. Aspects of the schema
          therapy approach such as being authentic, genuine, and ‘real’ are central to the overarching
          style of the supervisor relationship. Despite often being in a position of inﬂuence, the
          supervisor, in our view, should present as a regular fallible clinician with appropriate self-
          disclosure (e.g., modelling the existence of their schemas and modes).
              The schema therapy supervisor holds three speciﬁc roles within the supervisory rela-
          tionship depending on the supervision needs at any given point:
          1. Supervisor as Educator/Coach. The schema model can be complex, and clients can, of
              course, present with complex problems. In this role, the supervisor takes on a teacher or
              educator role, educating the supervisee to deepen their knowledge of the model and its
              application. The supervisor typically centres learning around a handful of clients and
              initially assists the supervisee to develop a thorough schema therapy case
              conceptualisation for these clients. In this role, the supervisor guides discriminating
              between various schemas and modes, allowing for more accurate assessment and
              conceptualisation of modes and schemas. In this role, the supervisor seeks to give
              feedback on the supervisee’s skills. The Schema Therapy Competency Rating Scale
              (STCRS) is used by the supervisor to rate and give feedback on videotaped examples of
              the therapist’s sessions. The Schema Therapy Case Conceptualisation Rating Scale
              (STCCRS) is similarly used to provide clear feedback on the therapist’s case
              conceptualisation work. Based on this feedback process, skills competencies may be
              enhanced in supervision through the use of skills role-plays or demonstrations. While
              the other roles to be discussed are also important, in practice, the role of the supervisor
              as educator and coach is conceptual as the central role, charged with conveying the
              complexity of the model and building the requisite skills.
          2. Supervisor as Mentor/Role Model. The schema therapy supervisor is aware of their role
              as a role model and mentor in the schema therapy model and their role as a therapist.
              Instead of appearing as an expert or an authority, the supervisor conveys a more
              egalitarian stance, modelling a level of warmth and openness about the inherent




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                            Supervision and the Supervisory Relationship   329



            struggles we all face as therapists. The focus in this role is on establishing a culture of
            openness, authenticity, and feedback within the supervisory relationship. This provides
            the safety for a focus on identifying and dealing with schema and mode activation in
            both the supervisee–client and supervisee–supervisor relationships. This includes the
            use of self-disclosure by supervisors of related challenges they have encountered in life
            and in clinical work. The aim here is to provide a supervisory space that is empathic and
            validating of the inherent struggles faced by therapists, and to show how therapists can
            approach common struggles with a level of openness and ﬂexibility. It is hoped that this
            provides the supervisee with a working model of the stance of a ‘Healthy Therapist
            Mode’ that can be conceptualised and adopted into their own work.
         3. Supervisor as (Limited) Therapist and Agent of Limited Reparenting. As we have
            discussed thus far, the tasks and general relationship style of schema therapy
            supervisors often mirrors that of the schema therapist. This is exempliﬁed in the
            limited role schema therapy supervisors play for supervisees as a therapist and agent of
            limited reparenting. If schema therapists engage in limited reparenting approximating
            a parental role in therapy, schema therapy supervisors will at times employ a limited
            therapeutic role, including the provision of appropriate reparenting. It is important for
            schema therapists to develop a robust Healthy Adult/Therapist mode; schema therapy
            supervisors are charged with providing some limited opportunity to schema therapists
            to gain awareness of and heal schemas and modes that may otherwise be a hindrance to
            their work with clients. The aim here is to help therapists to become aware of and
            overcome their own internal obstacles (schemas, modes) to eﬀective schema therapy.
            The schema therapy supervisor will thus employ some limited focus on providing
            a level of care, attunement, and guidance and, at other times, boundaries and limits as
            might be appropriate. At times, supervisors and their supervisees will become aware
            that these obstacles are of a nature and strength that will require some limited
            therapeutic focus. In these circumstances, schema therapy supervisors can oﬀer some
            limited therapeutic focus, including conceptualisation, working to lessen the intensity
            of maladaptive modes at play (e.g., Critic, Surrenderer), reassure the Vulnerable Child,
            and ultimately strengthen the Healthy Adult mode. This limited focus on the therapy
            role should be oﬀered collaboratively and as optional within the supervision
            relationship, and is most relevant when the problems the therapist identiﬁes have clear
            relevance to their clinical work (e.g., therapist putting high unrelenting standards/
            pressure on the client). Such a focus should not generally be undertaken for more than
            six supervision sessions within the advanced certiﬁcation programme (or three in the
            context of standard certiﬁcation) or for problems that are more relevant to the
            personal context than the supervisee’s work context as a therapist (e.g., relationship
            problems/breakdown in the therapists personal life) [1]. If problems are identiﬁed that
            are of a severity or intensity beyond the limited scope of what should be provided
            within a supervision context, disproportionately distract from other tasks of
            supervision (e.g., conceptualisation and skills building), or that represent bona ﬁde
            psychopathology (e.g., borderline personality disorder, clinical depression),
            supervisors will strongly encourage referral for personal therapy. Even outside this
            context, accessing personal therapy is encouraged for all schema therapists, as an
            opportunity for developing personal insight and awareness, healing schemas, and
            strengthening healthy modes.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          330           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          Common Supervisory Issues
          Just as clients often present to therapy with commonly seen schema-based patterns (e.g.,
          depression related to Avoidant Protector and Punitive Critic), we have found several
          frequently observed patterns among supervisees that represent a risk to the development
          of conﬁdence and competence in the model. Such patterns can and should be understood
          with regards to their underpinning schema and mode patterns and will become a central
          focus within supervision.

          Therapists Avoiding Experiential Work
          Experiential exercises within schema therapy can be anxiety-provoking for those learning
          the model. Therapists are typically concerned about making mistakes, or that clients will
          either experience an adverse reaction or will become defensive or rejecting of the therapist’s
          work. Therapists may avoid experiential work and focus on themes or interventions (e.g.,
          cognitive work) where they feel more conﬁdent. As a result, sessions can become overly
          cognitive or drift into supportive psychotherapy that from time to time ‘mentions’ schemas
          and modes without necessarily engaging them experientially for change. Experiential work
          is a central element of schema therapy. Supervisors should encourage supervisees to work
          outside of their immediate comfort zone, nurturing their skills while acknowledging and
          validating the challenges. Supervisors will assess the degree to which the avoidance is due to
          deﬁcits in supervisees’ knowledge and experience with the technique (requiring increased
          knowledge and skills coaching) or might be due to the therapist’s own schema or mode
          activation (perhaps requiring a switch into the roles of supervisor as mentor or agent of
          some limited therapy focus). A common culprit here is the therapist’s Unrelenting
          Standards schema: the therapist holds the belief that a new technique (e.g., chairwork)
          should only be attempted once it has been (perfectly) mastered. Here, the supervisor is likely
          to work closely with the therapist’s Demanding Critic mode and related Unrelenting
          Standards schema.

          Therapist Avoids Recordings of Clinical Work
          Many clinicians have not been in the position of receiving direct feedback on their clinical
          skills, either by peers or supervisors, for quite some time (if ever). For therapists, providing
          examples of their therapeutic work for the purpose of evaluation is generally quite trigger-
          ing. Notwithstanding this, setting the expectations early in the process of supervision that
          video-recorded sessions will need to be submitted for feedback is helpful. The supervisor
          will take a supportive and validating/normalising stance that sessions are never ‘perfect’.
          Normalising feelings of insecurity can enhance a sense of safety and trust in the supervisory
          relationship. The core issue for these therapists is that without feedback on video record-
          ings, they are missing out on important information relevant to their performance.
          Sometimes this is painful for the therapist, such as hearing that some aspects of their
          work can be ‘improved’. Such negative aspects should be normalised as a part of the journey,
          and advice given on how to improve these aspects. In fact, to counter this, clinicians
          undertaking the certiﬁcation process can be speciﬁcally invited to submit recordings
          which represent some kind of diﬃculty or ‘stuckness’ in the therapeutic process in prefer-
          ence to sessions which demonstrate their competence. Submitting these ‘less perfect’
          recordings will often provide greater opportunity for the supervisor to oﬀer clinically useful




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                            Supervision and the Supervisory Relationship   331



         feedback regarding the treatment of speciﬁc clinical issues, thereby serving a dual purpose:
         (1) to provide feedback on the clinician’s competence in speciﬁc aspects of the application of
         schema therapy and (2) to provide ideas and guidance regarding the treatment of speciﬁc
         clients and/or clinical presentations based on seeing their schemas and modes ‘in action’.
         More often than not, therapists who lack conﬁdence and who systematically avoid record-
         ings tend to signiﬁcantly underestimate their session performance because of schema-
         related biases (e.g., Failure schema). Accurate feedback based on video recordings for
         these therapists, handled supportively, can thus increase their conﬁdence by providing
         some objective (and experiential) feedback on the positive aspects of their performance
         too. Video-recording feedback is therefore a characteristic feature of schema therapy
         supervision.

         Supervisor’s Unrelenting Standards Schema Impacting
         on Therapist’s Conﬁdence
         Supervisors need to be aware of their own schemas in the supervision domain too,
         particularly regarding how these might impact on the supervisees’ learning. In our
         experience, it is common for a supervisor’s Unrelenting Standards schema to have
         a detrimental impact on the conﬁdence of the developing clinician. Whilst it is
         important to meet a minimum level of competency and knowledge, it is important
         for the supervisor to adopt an encouraging and supportive approach rather than appear
         critical or demanding. Supervisors that have very strong Unrelenting Standards gener-
         ally need to remain aware that supervisees generally have their own Demanding Critic
         modes, and thus tend not to beneﬁt from that kind of modelling of unrelenting
         standards. Rather, in these cases the schema therapy model suggests quite the opposite:
         supervisors need to approach such supervisees with capacity from the Therapist as
         Agent of Limited Reparenting role and aim to engender a sense of relenting standards
         and healthy self-care.

         The Aggrandising and/or Overcompensating Therapist
         By way of their education, training, and work ethic, many if not most therapists
         might be considered ‘high achievers’. A subset of therapists learning the model may
         indeed have a long list of achievements as therapists and in other areas of practice,
         making the role of ‘supervisee’ novel and, in some circumstances, uncomfortable.
         Some of these therapists may adopt some form of overcompensation or aggrandising
         in navigating the supervisory relationship to manage or regulate underlying feelings
         of discomfort. Therapists learning the model and engaging in supervision from
         the position of an Aggrandiser mode are in danger of overestimating their compe-
         tency with the schema therapy model. In these cases, as in therapy, supervisors will
         work hard to build awareness of this mode and when it can be a hindrance to
         therapy and learning the model. This will perhaps be aided at times by the use of
         some form of empathic confrontation and limit setting. Video-recording feedback in
         this context is also very important in providing an objective method for the super-
         visor to rely on to provide accurate feedback. The goal here is to help supervisees
         engage in a more accurate reﬂection of their performance, from which they may be
         able to beneﬁt.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          332           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          Concluding Remarks
          In this chapter we have introduced some of the latest ideas in the theory and practice of
          schema therapy supervision. Schema therapy supervision in many ways parallels much of
          the processes encountered in the therapy context. Accordingly, the interpersonal style and
          demeanour of the supervisor often reﬂects the supportive limited reparenting relationship
          seen in schema therapy. Notwithstanding this, the goals of supervision are diﬀerent to those
          of therapy: supervision is ultimately focused on development of both the professional
          knowledge and skills and the personal capacities of the ‘Healthy Adult Therapist’. This
          involves the supervisor becoming adept at switching between the three roles of a schema
          therapy supervisor. Following certiﬁcation, schema therapists are encouraged to continue to
          seek expert and/or peer supervision in more focused ways that enable them to apply the
          approach in speciﬁc contexts (e.g., group, couples, individual), with speciﬁc populations
          (e.g., adults, older adults, children), and across a range of clinical presentations.

          References
          1. Supervisory Skills Development Committee.                          Development Document. International
             Schema Therapy Supervision Skills                                  Society for Schema Therapy; 2019.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
               Chapter
                                    Schema Therapy in

             20                     the Online World


         Introduction
         There was a growing demand for therapy services to be delivered remotely online prior to
         COVID-19, which has increased exponentially since. Speciﬁc guidance on fundamental
         skills for adapting therapy and developing and enhancing the therapeutic bond via video-
         conferencing is available from other publications [1, 2]. In this chapter, we will explore
         speciﬁc ways in which technologies can be adapted for delivering schema therapy, with
         a particular focus on videoconferencing.

         Technology Available for Remote Schema Therapy Delivery
         and Its Advantages
         There is increasing demand to provide therapeutic services remotely via a range of tech-
         nologies. Online modalities such as videotherapy, telephone, email, synchronous/asyn-
         chronous chat, online forums, and coaching sites have accumulated a substantial evidence
         base over recent years and have demonstrated equivalence to in-person therapy in terms of
         both clinical outcomes and therapeutic alliance [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. As new possibilities for
         working creatively with technology are embraced in schema therapy, opportunities for
         intimacy, play, and spontaneity can be greatly enhanced [8].
             Hindrances to accessing services – such as geographical remoteness, disabilities/mobil-
         ity problems, incarceration, or illness/pandemics – can be overcome as online therapies
         become increasingly available. Online therapies provide a range of advantages, including
         reduced travel time and expenses, reduced disruption to work and childcare duties, greater
         access to specialist expertise or language/culture appropriate care, and greater continuity of
         care when either therapist or clients relocate. For schema therapists, the exponential growth
         of psycho-technologies provides signiﬁcant opportunities for engaging new clients, as well
         as for extending our services beyond what was previously possible through combining
         technologies to match client need [8, 9, 10]. Due to the nature of some clinical presentations,
         technology-based treatment modalities may be preferable and the therapeutic bond may in
         fact be enhanced. For example, many clients experience video therapy as less confronting
         and distressing than in-person contact, so video delivery facilitates the expression of their
         needs and emotions [11, 5]. For some, online therapies can provide a level of perceived
         privacy and conﬁdentiality beyond that experienced in in-person settings. Online modal-
         ities frequently lead to greater disinhibition and openness, resulting from a heightened sense
         of safety and a more neutral power balance [12, 13]. Clients who indicate a preference for
         video therapy describe feeling less self-conscious and less ‘scrutinised’, and having a greater

                                                                                                     333


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          334           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          sense of personal control, which may be particularly important when dealing with shame-
          related issues (e.g., sexual abuse, eating disorders, body-image disorders) [11, 5].
              Schema therapists across the world have begun to ﬁnd ways to draw on the strengths of
          online therapies to enhance the core therapeutic processes. Recent innovative developments
          in schema therapy that have harnessed technological advances include Secure Nest, a unique
          technology-enhanced framework for schema therapists [14]. This platform provides
          a ‘meeting place’ which allows therapists to provide rich opportunities for psychoeducation,
          connection, and emotional containment, thereby enhancing the limited reparenting experi-
          ence without requirement for additional (costly) therapeutic sessions. Other innovations
          include a social media-based treatment programme for binge eating disorder [15], as well as
          videoconferencing-based individual [9, 10] and group schema therapy [16].

          Adapting Schema Therapy Delivered Online
          Strategies for Enhancing Limited Reparenting in Online Settings
          The limited physical presence in online settings reduces opportunities for visceral connec-
          tion, such as by touching a client on the arm when distressed or handing them tissues.
          Technical disruptions can potentially trigger a range of schemas, such as Failure/
          Incompetence (‘If I wasn’t so stupid, I could ﬁgure this out’), Subjugation (‘My therapist’s
          voice keeps fading in and out but I had better not say anything’), Entitlement (‘There’s no
          way I am putting up with losing part of my session – I’m not paying for that!’), Approval
          Seeking (‘I need to monitor my own picture closely to ensure I portray myself in my best
          light), or Emotional Deprivation (‘My therapist isn’t looking directly at me, she thinks I’m
          too much’). With an accurate case conceptualisation, these activations can become ‘grist to
          the mill’, whereby therapists can use these opportunities to provide real-time corrective
          emotional experiences via experiential exercises and limited reparenting [17]. Schema
          therapists need to be mindful of the full range of limited reparenting tasks within the online
          environment. Whilst providing a nurturing, warm, and secure therapeutic space is the
          priority, therapists must also maintain professional ‘Healthy Adult’ boundaries, by being
          clear about conﬁdentiality, time, and ﬁnancial requirements, maintaining a professional
          therapeutic tone and manner when communicating via video or text-based messages, and
          maintaining consistency in time and location of sessions where possible.
              The active ingredients of limited reparenting, including emotional presence and attune-
          ment, can be adapted to maximise connection through a range of strategies, some of which
          are described in Box 20.1.

          Adapting Experiential Techniques in Online Settings
          In our experience, imagery rescripting, chairwork, and even historical role-play can be
          highly eﬀective within online settings with the help of minor adaptations. In this section we
          will explore some of the ways in which experiential techniques can be applied and creatively
          adapted within an online environment.
          Imagery Rescripting and Historical Role-play. Imagery rescripting is ideally suited to the
          online environment. Clinical experience suggests that many clients prefer the experience of
          imagery in online settings due to the enhanced privacy of being in their own homes. In some
          cases, especially in instances of trauma processing, therapists may be advised to begin by



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy in the Online World      335



             Box 20.1 Adaptations to Get the Most from Video-Delivered Schema Therapy
             •    Explain the technical aspects of videotherapy in advance to build conﬁdence, adjusting
                  the level of explanation to the needs and experience of the client. Explain contingency
                  plans for when the technology fails, such as back-up videoconferencing platforms and/
                  or telephone contact. Explain the security limitations of technologies and provide
                  opportunities for any questions clients may have in relation to this. Brief information
                  sheets can be used to summarise these details.
             •    Use a quality web-camera that adequately conveys facial expressions and maximises eye
                  contact.
             •    Eye contact is key to providing synchronised mirroring and attunement. Position the
                  picture of the client on full-screen and make the picture-in-picture box as small and close
                  to the webcam as possible. You can also stick a small photograph of the client above the
                  webcam which can have the dual eﬀect of drawing the therapist’s eyes toward the
                  webcam, heightening the experience of eye contact, whilst literally keeping the client’s
                  Vulnerable Child mode within the therapeutic focus.
             •    Provide verbal feedback in terms of positioning and remind clients that they can switch
                  oﬀ their own picture-in-picture self-view if desired. Clients can be encouraged to
                  experiment with distance and closeness to the screen and to notice the level of intimacy
                  they feel most comfortable with. Those with schemas from the Other - Directedness
                  domain can also beneﬁt from being encouraged to experiment with taking control of
                  their experience, such as by adjusting the size of images on their screen, the volume, and
                  the distance of therapist and client from the screen. This can also be a useful way of
                  experimenting with recognising their own interoceptive signals linked to boundaries
                  and intimacy. For example:

             THERAPIST: Just notice if anything changes in terms of your bodily felt sense when you
                move closer or further from the screen . . . what comes up for you, if anything? As we
                talk, just notice any sensations, or urges. Notice whether there is any discomfort when
                we have eye contact. Notice if it feels forced or easy.

                  These explorations can help to unpack the body-based experiences associated with
                  attachment disruption linked to core EMS. These can be more easily explored in the
                  context of the close-up facial view oﬀered by videoconferencing and the nuances of
                  communicating at a distance via a screen.
             •    Clients working from home could be encouraged to separate their therapeutic space
                  from their work environment. For those who access their sessions within a work
                  environment, ensuring a private, bookable space where they will not be interrupted is
                  essential. Ideally, their sessions should take place at the end of a work shift to allow space
                  for emotions to emerge.
             •    Take clients on a virtual tour of your oﬃce space to enable them to visualise the
                  therapist’s surroundings. If clients are willing, they may also provide a virtual tour for the
                  therapist, which can enhance the therapist’s understanding of the idiosyncratic
                  challenges faced by the client and provide valuable information about cues for coping
                  behaviours (e.g., obsessional checking rituals, binge eating/drinking). For clients with
                  a Mistrust/Abuse schema, taking this step can also help to provide additional trust and
                  security, and allay any fears that others might be listening or watching the session.
             •    Virtual backgrounds and headphones are useful, especially when either party requires
                  additional privacy, such as when sessions take place in private settings such as the
                  bedroom.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          336           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations




              •    Invite clients to collate their own therapeutic resources to be available during sessions,
                   such as a box of tissues, a soft ﬂeece or blanket, a cosy (and sound-proof) therapeutic
                   space. This can be particularly beneﬁcial for clients with Emotional Deprivation and
                   Abandonment schemas who feel deprived by the physical distance of online therapy.
                   For clients whose Abandonment and Emotional Deprivation schemas get activated by
                   the ending of sessions, these items can also be used as transitional objects, thus
                   facilitating the development of object permanence.
              •    When audio recording sessions (e.g., to allow clients to listen to the session again for
                   homework), ensure that ﬁles are stored conﬁdentially (not within unprotected cloud
                   ﬁles).
              •    Clients’ pets can provide an additional soothing presence, enhancing feelings of security
                   and connection.
              •    Risk Management: Ensure the client is in a safe location that facilitates their capacity to
                   concentrate and communicate openly. Collaboratively develop a written risk
                   management plan that details the steps required to ensure client safety. For clients with
                   conditions that involve a high level of medical or psychiatric risk, ensure that they have
                   access to local in-person contact with medical/psychiatric professionals who can provide
                   additional support and hospitalisation if required (e.g., severe anorexia nervosa,
                   addictions, acute suicidality).
              Therapist Self-Care
              •    To allay potential ‘zoom-fatigue’ – the additional cognitive impact of extended periods
                   of working via screens – therapists need to build in regular breaks and prioritise
                   opportunities for connecting with nature and the outdoor environment each day, to
                   prevent burnout.
              •    Prior to switching on the computer each day, stand, breathe, and shift your focus to your
                   body, feeling the connection of your feet with the earth, and inviting yourself to notice
                   this feeling of being ‘in’ the body. Take a few moments to move your ﬁngers, toes, ankles,
                   wrists, knees, hips, shoulders, and head clockwise and anticlockwise [18].
              •    Draw on your ‘active’ schema therapy skills, and use your body to stand, sit, and move
                   about within the scope of the camera view, as you would in an in-person setting, to
                   address the Inner Critic, reparent the Vulnerable Child, and so on [18].
              •    Schema therapists can increase their capacity to be fully present for clients through
                   initially being present for and with themselves. Check in regularly with your own body
                   and internal sensory experiences. What are you feeling, thinking? What images do you
                   see? Notice the space around you, with your skin as the boundary that separates you
                   from the world around you. Notice your position in the room, the building, the wider
                   world. Notice yourself being ‘held’ by Mother Earth. Therapists can also talk clients
                   through this grounding process early in the session, modelling a healthy process of
                   reconnecting to the embodied Healthy Adult self [18].



          pacing the work more slowly, and to titrate processing of traumatic memories with soothing
          calm/safe place imagery work. As in an in-person setting, to build a sense of conﬁdence and
          reduce any anxiety regarding imagery work, the therapist can begin with simple reparenting
          imagery, meeting some of the client’s needs from childhood. These can usually be audio
          recorded via the videoconferencing platform (e.g., Zoom) so that the client can listen to
          these between sessions, providing further experiences of getting their needs met. Imagery



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy in the Online World   337



         exercises can also be used to begin strengthening the client’s Healthy Adult self, even before
         beginning any processing of traumatic memories. Preparatory practice of grounding tech-
         niques, including focusing on visual and physical sensory experiences and breathwork, can
         provide additional stability before undertaking trauma-based imagery rescripting. A simple
         orienting strategy for responding to a client who is activated is to suggest that they gently
         scan their room (away from the screen) and allow the gaze to rest wherever it naturally
         lands. Then invite them to close their eyes and turn their attention inward to notice the
         feelings associated with ‘being’ in the body. Both client and therapist take a deeper breath
         and notice the sensations of settling into the body. Moving through this process together
         facilitates a parallel process of co-regulation whilst providing an opportunity for the client
         to learn to manage their own schema-driven activations as they manifest in the body [18].
             Enlisting the active involvement of the client’s Healthy Adult self, a part which can take
         a self-observer stance and take responsibility for actively engaging in therapy, appears to be
         even more important in online settings than in in-person sessions, and is essential for
         eﬀective processing. Schema therapists are advised to advance slowly with experiential
         work, ensuring that clients are grounded and embodied (i.e., have a felt sense of being in
         touch with sensations in the body) before moving into trauma work [17, 18].
             Once the therapist is conﬁdent with the technology, they can draw on a range of creative
         adaptations. Puppets or peg-dolls and drawings can be used to represent the characters to re-
         enact the early memories associated with schema development. Incorporating innovative
         technologies such as avatar-based virtual worlds which can be shared and viewed simultan-
         eously can also provide opportunities for experiential growth. Avatars can represent both the
         client’s internal mode dynamics and important external relationships with others in their
         lives. This provides unique possibilities to explore how they currently interact, whilst learning
         new ways of operating in Healthy Adult mode and meeting the needs of their own Vulnerable
         Child. Online virtual platforms such as Pro Real (www.proreal.co.uk/) allow the client to
         explore ways in which they can rescript old memories, with signiﬁcant characters represented
         by avatars and the range of mental states, emotions, choices, and dilemmas represented by
         a range of landscapes (e.g., cliﬀs, waterfalls, castles, pathways, crossroads) and symbols (e.g.,
         mirrors, clocks, bridges, boulders, barriers). Such technologies can introduce a playfulness
         and fantasy that can enhance experiential techniques, allowing the client to experiment with
         previously unimagined options and ways of coping. They can also provide new possibilities,
         as clients begin to construct novel ways of envisaging their lives and future goals [8].
         Chairwork Online. Online therapy makes it more diﬃcult to use techniques involving
         physical movement and the use of physical objects such as chairs. However, the chair
         technique actually lends itself to online therapy too [19, 20]. It is highly preferable that
         the client has a laptop or tablet when this technique is being used online so that movements
         can be followed more easily by the client taking the laptop or tablet with him or her when
         making those movements in the physical space.
            There are three versions of use of the online chair technique:
         1. The therapist asks the client to move in front of the camera from one side of the screen to
            the other to adopt the position of a mode.
         2. The chairs in the therapist’s room are used. This form of online chair technique is
            particularly suitable for adapting work with parent modes during the initial phase of
            therapy.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          338           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



          3. Diﬀerent chairs are used in the room where the client is located. This form of online
             chair technique is particularly suitable in working with coping modes or when working
             with parent modes. In the latter case, however, this occurs at the end of the therapy.
             The three versions are explained in further detail:
          1. Moving in Front of the Camera. In this version, diﬀerent chairs are not literally being
             used, but rather diﬀerent positions in relation to the camera. While naming the active
             modes, the therapist may gesture to a speciﬁc side of the screen before asking the client
             to move to the side indicated. That speciﬁc position in relation to the camera then
             becomes the place of the active mode. Therapists should not describe this movement
             across the screen in terms of left or right, because the image is sometimes a mirror image,
             which can cause confusion as to which side is being referred to.
                Box 20.2 illustrates the use of video screen positions to simulate physical chairwork. In
             this example, the negotiation with the coping modes results in the client being asked to
             move to the other side of the screen. In this position, the therapist tries to make contact with
             the client’s emotional side. Use of the camera here can provide opportunities to intensify
             contact by moving closer to the camera, for example, and looking directly into the camera
             whilst the therapist speaks directly to the client’s emotional side using a gentle voice.
          2. Use of the Chairs in the Therapist’s Room. This version of the online chair technique is
             particularly helpful in addressing Critic modes during the initial phase of the therapy. In
             this initial phase of therapy, the healthy part of the client is either absent or barely
             present. The presence of a chair in the client’s room which symbolises punitive messages
             from the past might therefore be diﬃcult for the client to bear. It might be even more
             diﬃcult for the client to put away this punitive side now that there isn’t a Healthy Adult
             present and the therapist can only help through the screen. By using a chair in the
             therapist’s room, the therapist can still symbolise a healthy parent ﬁghting the punitive
             messages and putting the chair away.


              Box 20.2 Clinical Example of Moving in Front of Camera to Simulate Physical Chairwork
              THERAPIST: In the state you’re in right now [gestures to the right-hand side of the screen as well
                 as looking at that spot next to the screen], you seem not to be feeling very much. I know
                 that you [gesturing to the camera] can feel an awful lot, but in the state you’re in right
                 now [gestures once again to the right-hand side of the screen], this is not the case and you
                 seem to be feeling rather ﬂat. I believe there is a reason for this. Shall we do a quick
                 exercise to ﬁnd out why that is?
                 [Client nods]
              THERAPIST: I now want to ask you to move to that side [gestures to the right-hand side of the
                 screen].
                 [Client moves to the side indicated]

              THERAPIST: [looks directly into the camera] In this position, I want you to be that non-feeling
                 [name of client]. Just be the non-feeler here. I believe that for you [gestures towards the
                 camera], the non-feeler, this is more comfortable than if the emotional [name of the
                 client while simultaneously gesturing to the left-hand side of the screen] were to be there,
                 is that correct? How would they [gesturing to the left-hand side of the screen] feel if you
                 [gesturing to the camera] were not there?


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy in the Online World               339



             Box 20.3 Clinical Example: Using Chairs Within the Therapist’s Room in Video Schema
             Therapy
             THERAPIST: How have you felt over the past week?
             CLIENT: Bad, stupid, I am doing everything wrong and I am a total failure . . .
             THERAPIST: OK, I’ll just interrupt you here for a moment.
               The therapist identiﬁes the punitive experience and asks the client to move in front of the
             camera to express this criticism about themselves from the right-hand side of the screen,
             making this position the location of the punitive side. The therapist then asks the client to
             move back to their original position and to explain from their emotional part how it feels to
             hear all that criticism about themselves.

             THERAPIST: If I listen to all that criticism coming from that corner [gestures to the right-hand side of
                the screen], it is just as if someone is sitting there pouring out all that criticism about you.
                At this moment, the therapist turns the camera a little to the right so that an empty chair
             becomes visible next to the therapist. This is the moment that the punitive voice from the
             client’s room is moved to the chair in the therapist’s room. However, this is not so much
             discussed explicitly as suggested by the movement and the obvious nature by which the
             therapist indicates the punisher in the chair.

             THERAPIST: I am therefore wondering who is actually sitting there? Who do all those punitive
                messages come from?
             CLIENT: [softly] My father . . .
             THERAPIST: I was thinking of him too. So, it is actually your father sitting there [pointing to the
                empty chair which is still visible in view], raging at you like that. But I don’t want you to
                have all that anger poured out over you, so I want to say something to him. [The therapist
                turns towards the empty chair and challenges the imaginary father with a decisive voice].
                Fighting these punitive messages may result in the therapist removing the empty chair
             from the room. During this intervention, the therapist grips the laptop against their upper arm
             or shoulder with one hand and removes the chair from the room using their other hand. This
             way, the client is looking over the therapist’s shoulder, so to speak.


                 In this version of online chair technique, the punitive side is moved out of the client’s
              room into the therapist’s room. It is recommended that this movement is not explicitly or
              expressly discussed during the exercise so that the exercise itself remains an emotional
              experience rather than expecting the client will develop a rational, explicit understanding
              of its purpose. Box 20.3 illustrates the use of chairs in video schema therapy.
         3. Use of the Chairs in the Client’s Room. During the ﬁnal phase of the therapy, the client
            can learn to ﬁght the punitive messages themselves by using chairs in their own room.
            After identifying the punitive side, the therapist asks the client to choose a chair or other
            object in the client’s room which can symbolise these punitive messages. In this exercise,
            the therapist coaches the client in ﬁghting that punisher. It is also important that the
            therapist continues to keep a close eye on what is going on in the client’s room and must
            therefore give clear instructions as to where the camera is pointed.
              Box 20.4 presents an example of chair use in the client’s room during video chairwork,
            and Box 20.5 gives some tips for online chair technique.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          340           Schema Therapy in Diﬀerent Populations



              Box 20.4 Clinical Example: Fighting Parent Modes via Chairs in the Client’s Room
              During Video Chairwork
              THERAPIST: What side can we recognise when you speak so negatively about yourself?
              CLIENT: . . . Yes, that Punisher again . . .
              THERAPIST: Exactly! Very good that you are able to recognise that so clearly. Are you now able
                 to see an object or a chair in your room which can symbolise this punisher? And let me
                 take a little look into your room too by turning your laptop around a bit.
              CLIENT: [grabs the laptop and turns the camera so that the therapist can see an empty chair]
                 That chair there, I think . . .
              THERAPIST: Very good! Now place that chair so close, or so far away from you, that it matches
                 how strong you feel the punisher is. If that chair is very close by, then it is as if that
                 punisher is criticising your every move. Is that how it feels? Or was it not as strong and is
                 that chair ﬁne as it is, at this distance?
              CLIENT: [Stands up and moves the chair a little closer]) ‘Well, here then I think, because I did
                 feel it strongly, that feeling as if I wasn’t worth anything . . .’
              THERAPIST: Very good. Now I want you to stand up to that Punisher, to tell him why he isn’t
                 right. But that means that you have to get into that Healthy Adult part of you ﬁrst. So,
                 close your eyes and try to visualise that image of that Healthy Adult again, that captain
                 of your ship . . . What can you see now?
                This is how the therapist coaches the client: make contact with the healthy side ﬁrst, and
              then, like those healthy adults, challenge the crime and remove the chair from the room if
              necessary.



              Box 20.5 Tips for Online Chair Technique
              •    Use a laptop or tablet (both therapist and client)
              •    Avoid talking about ‘left’/’right’ and use gestures to indicate the direction
              •    Look straight into the camera when speaking with the mode
              •    Ensure short distance to the camera when making contact with the client’s emotional
                   part, a little further away for coping and parent modes




          Concluding Remarks
          As clients increasingly choose to access schema therapy remotely, it is essential for schema
          therapists to become digitally competent. Online settings provide multifarious opportun-
          ities for therapists to adapt schema therapy techniques in innovative and creative ways. In
          this chapter, a range of adaptations are described which can be utilised across a wide range
          of technologies. We encourage schema therapists to tap into their own creativity as they
          learn to adapt to online settings.

          References
          1. Simpson S, Smith E. Schema therapy for                             individual and group settings. Routledge;
             eating disorders: Theory and practice for                          2019.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                       Schema Therapy in the Online World            341



           2. Simpson S, Richardson L, Reid C.                            11. Simpson S, Bell L, Knox J, Mitchell D.
              Therapeutic alliance in videoconferencing                       Therapy via videoconferencing: A route to
              based psychotherapy. In Goss S,                                 client empowerment? Clinical Psychology
              Anthony K, Nagel D, Sykes-Stretch L, eds.,                      & Psychotherapy. 2005;12(2):156–65.
              Technology in mental health: Applications                   12. Fletcher-Tomenious L, Vossler A. Trust in
              for practice, supervision and training.                         online therapeutic relationships: The
              Charles C. Thomas; 2016. pp. 99–116.                            therapist’s experience. Counselling
           3. Simpson S, Richardson L, Pietrabissa G,                         Psychology Review, 2009;24(2):24–34.
              Castelnuovo G, Reid C. Videotherapy and                     13. Roy H, Gillett T. E-mail: A new technique
              therapeutic alliance in the age of COVID-                       for forming a therapeutic alliance with
              19. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy.                        high-risk young people failing to engage
              2021;28(2):409–21.                                              with mental health services? A case study.
           4. Backhaus A, Agha Z, Maglione ML, et al.                         Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry.
              Videoconferencing psychotherapy:                                2008;13(1):95–103.
              A systematic review. Psychological Services.                14. Skewes S, van Vreeswijk M. How online
              2012;9(2):111.                                                  tools can enhance schema therapy beyond
           5. Simpson SG, Reid CL. Therapeutic alliance                       the therapy room. Schema Therapy
              in videoconferencing psychotherapy: A                           Bulletin. 2020;17:19–25.
              review. Australian Journal of Rural Health.                 15. Skryabina M, Borisova M, Kudrjasova N.
              2014;22(6):280–99.                                              The eﬃciency of schema therapy
           6. Varker T, Brand RM, Ward J, Terhaag S,                          interventions for binge eating disorder
              Phelps A. Eﬃcacy of synchronous                                 using social media platforms. Schema
              telepsychology interventions for people                         Therapy Bulletin. 2020;17:3–5.
              with anxiety, depression, posttraumatic
                                                                          16. van Dijk SD, Bouman R, Folmer EH,
              stress disorder, and adjustment disorder:
                                                                              et al. (Vi)-rushed into online group
              A rapid evidence assessment. Psychological
                                                                              schema therapy based day-treatment for
              Services, 2019;16(4):621–35.
                                                                              older adults by the COVID-19 outbreak
           7. Batastini AB, Paprzycki P, Jones AC,                            in the Netherlands. The American
              MacLean N. Are videoconferenced mental                          Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2020;28
              and behavioral health services just as good                     (9):983–8.
              as in-person? A meta-analysis of a
              fast-growing practice. Clinical Psychology                  17. Feldman H, Liu X. Schema anywhere: The
              Review. 2020;83:1–22.                                           opportunities and pitfalls of delivering
                                                                              schema therapy online. Schema Therapy
           8. Simpson S, Francesco V. Technology as an                        Bulletin. 2020;17:6–9.
              invitation to intimacy and creativity in the
              therapy connection. Schema Therapy                          18. Guiﬀra M. Strategies to mindfully
              Bulletin. 2020;17:14–18.                                        integrate the missing element in online
                                                                              therapy. Schema Therapy Bulletin. 2020;
           9. Simpson S, Morrow E. The use of                                 17:26–9.
              alternative technology for conducting
              a therapeutic relationship on                               19. Pugh M, Bell T, Dixon A. Delivering
              videoconferencing. In The use of technology                     tele-chairwork: A qualitative survey of
              in mental health: Applications, ethics and                      expert therapists. Psychotherapy Research.
              practice. Charles C. Thomas Publisher, Ltd;                     2020;31(3): 843–58.
              2010, pp. 94–103.                                           20. Pugh M, Bell T. Process-based chairwork:
         10. Simpson SG, Slowey L. Video therapy for                          Applications and innovations in the time of
             atypical eating disorder and obesity: A case                     COVID-19. European Journal of
             study. Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in                     Counselling Theory, Research and Practice.
             Mental Health: CP & EMH. 2011;7:38–43.                           2020;4(3):2020.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     Epilogue
                                     Continuing the Journey


          The recent surge in research evidence supporting the eﬃcacy of schema therapy has led to
          exponential interest in this model by therapists across the globe. Schema therapy is becom-
          ing increasingly applied to a wide range of clinical populations, including adults, children,
          and families with personality-related diﬃculties, chronic mood disorders, complex trauma,
          addictions, eating disorders, forensic settings, and relationship diﬃculties. Randomised
          controlled trials have supported its eﬀectiveness with borderline and Cluster
          C personality disorders, forensic populations, and eating disorders, in individual and
          group settings.
              The International Society of Schema Therapy (ISST) was founded in 2008, and now has
          over 2,500 members from more than sixty countries worldwide. Further, more than 100
          schema therapy training programmes are now operating, increasing accessibility and
          applicability to a wide range of global cultures and languages. Training guidelines for
          ISST certiﬁcation at standard, advanced, and auxiliary levels have been published for
          schema therapy, as applied to individual and group therapy settings. Separate certiﬁcation
          pathways are available for those working with individuals, groups, children/families, and
          couples: see www.schematherapysociety.org/Certiﬁcation.
              A range of online schema therapy training options have become available over the past
          two years, prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic. This has resulted in increased accessibil-
          ity and aﬀordability of training and has been especially beneﬁcial to those in geographical
          areas without access to local training programmes. In parallel with these changes, innovative
          adaptations to the way in which skills and techniques are practised in online settings have
          developed, leading to increased ﬂexibility and creativity in practice.
              Schema therapy training assumes that professionals are already qualiﬁed either as
          psychotherapists and/or allied health professionals, and have a foundational training in
          another approach, such as cognitive-behavioural, person-centred, or psychodynamic ther-
          apy. Following certiﬁcation, further training is available to enable schema therapists to
          become ISST certiﬁed trainer-supervisors. Members are also encouraged to familiarise
          themselves with and become involved in the numerous ISST committees (https://schema
          therapysociety.org/ISST-Committee-Structure) and special interest groups (i.e., couples,
          online settings, clinical sports psychology, trauma, OCD, organisational development).
          Specialist training and supervision is also becoming increasingly available for a wide
          range of clinical presentations and diﬃculties and is ideal for those who have already
          completed the certiﬁcation training.
              We hope that you have enjoyed reading this book as much as we enjoyed writing it. It is
          truly a representation of teamwork and collaboration. Our mission has been to provide
          a roadmap for those new to schema therapy, as well as expert guidance for those who are
          342


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                           Epilogue: Continuing the Journey   343



         already experienced in the model and are seeking new angles and creative adaptations. In
         our view, one of the most wonderful aspects of schema therapy is that it is forever evolving
         and integrating new material and understandings from developmental, neurobiological,
         and attachment-based research and literature. Schema therapy is based on the notion that,
         as humans, we all have schemas, modes, and unmet needs. The more we are in touch with
         our own Inner Child feelings and Healthy Adult selves, the more genuine and authentic we
         become as therapists and human beings. We therefore wholeheartedly encourage you to
         embark on your own lifelong journey of nurturing your own inner Vulnerable Child, and
         strengthening your Healthy Adult self, in parallel with your evolution as a schema therapist.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     Afterword from Jeﬀrey Young,
                                     PhD, Founder of Schema Therapy


          Recent times have seen the schema therapy approach exponentially expand in recognition
          and acceptance. It is now a gold-standard treatment that is recommended by national and
          international treatment guidelines and is evolving and ﬂourishing throughout the world.
          The schema therapy model has been richly developed, allowing the approach to be utilised
          for a wide-ranging array of clinical problems and diﬃculties. Most importantly, it has
          dramatically assisted the lives of many individuals who were struggling with emotional
          challenges that therapists previously found diﬃcult to address in therapy.
              I’m very excited to see Rob Brockman, Susan Simpson, Christopher Hayes, Remco Van
          Der Wijngaart, and Matthew Smout collaborate to create a new comprehensive resource to
          assist those learning the schema therapy model. These authors are longstanding members of
          the schema therapy global community and have been at the forefront of treatment, training,
          and research.
              At the core of the schema therapy model are unmet emotional needs. The treatment
          aims to help clients get their needs met and to develop healthy adaptive coping patterns. The
          authors have extrapolated the needs model to consider the learning requirements of the
          practitioner. The schema therapy trainee has speciﬁc educational and training needs, both
          in terms of understanding the key elements of the model and in learning how to put them
          together in a coherent way. This book aims to meet those needs. The authors have a unique
          understanding of the questions, concerns, and typical challenges facing the practitioner.
              The book is a thorough resource for the practitioner learning the rich nuances of the
          schema therapy approach. The material has been carefully designed to assist in learning and
          understanding the model, and to provide practical guidance to bypass typical roadblocks
          and ‘what do I do now?’ therapeutic moments.
              This text is an essential resource for those learning and developing skills for understand-
          ing and applying schema therapy, as well as for those advanced practitioners who are
          interested in innovative developments in the model in recent years. I am conﬁdent that
          readers will beneﬁt from learning and practising this treatment approach. Furthermore,
          I wish all trainees and clinicians success in eﬀectively assisting their clients with challenging
          emotional problems.




          344


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press
         Appendix Interview Questions/Guidance
                  for the Assessment Process
                  (Chapter 3)
         Opening General Questions for Exploring Unmet Needs
         •    Invite client to describe their relationship with both parents and other signiﬁcant
              caregivers throughout childhood. Identify diﬀerences in relationships with each parent
              (linked to possible unmet needs). Did the relationship change at any point? For example,
              as a result of divorce, parents re-partnering, parents moving away, death, or, in the case
              of a narcissistic parent, choosing a sibling to take on the role of the favoured or ‘golden
              child’.
              Can you tell me about your mother?
              How would you describe her as you were growing up, compared with now?
              If she was a character in a book, how would she be described?
              If you had a basket right here, and I invited you to throw in some random words to
              describe your mum, what words would come to mind to include all of her diﬀerent
              traits, positive and negative?
         •    Ask clients to describe their parents’ personalities and to consider the ways that they are
              similar/diﬀerent to each of their parents.
              How are you similar to your mum?
              And in what ways are you diﬀerent?
              And how are you similar and diﬀerent to your dad?
              Who do you think that you are more similar to: your mum or your dad?
         •    It is essential for therapists to maintain an empathic stance, recognising that often our
              clients’ parent’s intentions were good and that reduced capacity for interpersonal
              closeness and connection are largely a result of intergenerational trauma and neglect. In
              particular, reduced parental emotional presence and capacity for attunement is likely to
              be a legacy of intergenerational emotional neglect. It can be helpful to think of this as an
              emotional ‘ingredient’ that has dropped out of the family recipe at some point in the
              past.
         •    When asking about childhood experiences, it can also be helpful to explore
              possible links between these and adult patterns. It is important to explore any
              patterns within intimate relationships that have developed during and since
              childhood. Clients often recall having a ‘crush’ during childhood and may have
              been involved in intimate relationships in some capacity since adolescence. How
              long have these relationships generally lasted? Who ended the relationships, why,
              and how? How did the client cope at the time? If possible, ask enough questions
              about relationships across the client’s life to understand the type of person they are
                                                                                                      345


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          346           Appendix



               attracted to, and recurring relationship dynamics which may be linked to EMS and
               coping modes.
          •    Over the course of the assessment, at a macro-level the clinician can explore the client’s
               capacity for self-reﬂection: do they recognise any association between their relationship
               patterns in adulthood and their relationships with caregivers during childhood? Can
               they identify any missing emotional ingredients in their early relationships? Are they
               able to describe ways in which they would have liked their parents to be diﬀerent and/or
               ways that they might consider parenting their own children diﬀerently, either currently
               or in the future (i.e., are there any aspects of their own childhood that they would do
               diﬀerently for their own child)?

          Questions to Explore Need for Safe and Secure Attachment
          •    Enquire about signiﬁcant disruptions to attachment during childhood, including loss of
               signiﬁcant caregivers due to divorce, death, mental or physical illness (including
               personality disorders, and narcissistic traits), addictions, parents working away for long
               periods, being cared for by multiple (sequential) nannies, being fostered, or being
               adopted. Explore the client’s understanding of how these events unfolded, how they
               aﬀected them in the past (and now), and whether they believe that they hold any sense of
               responsibility or shame in regard to these events. Enquire about this at a cognitive and
               emotional level:
               THERAPIST: Sometimes when people have experienced something like this (i.e., adoption,
               fostering, losing a parent), they might know in their minds that they weren’t to blame,
               and yet another part of them still carries a sense of responsibility or self-blame, as
               though things might have turned out diﬀerently, if only you had been better or diﬀerent
               in certain ways – is this something you have ever noticed?
          •    Enquire about the level of attunement the client received from caregivers: did parents
               spend time listening, showing an interest, emotionally connecting? How much explicit
               aﬀection/nurturance was expressed, including aﬀectionate physical touch? What
               ‘language’ did parents use to communicate love and aﬀection (if at all): was it through
               overt aﬀection or other external mechanisms (e.g., preparing food, expensive gifts,
               working long hours to put me into an expensive school, doing my washing/ironing)? Did
               parents have the capacity for emotional attunement and nurturance, and was this direct
               and developmentally appropriate, or indirect (e.g., through general reassurance,
               comfort eating).
               Were your parents and other family members able to express love in an open, expressive
               way (e.g., hugs, telling you they loved you)?
               How was love expressed in your family?
               Did this change at diﬀerent stages when you were growing up (e.g., baby, toddler,
               teenager)?
               Did your parents suﬀer from any diﬃculties that might have interfered with their
               capacity to show aﬀection in the way they would have wanted to (e.g., high anxiety levels,
               obsessive compulsive disorder, depression, eating disorder, addiction)?
               Did your parents express love in diﬀerent ways, or were they similar in the ways they
               showed aﬀection? If diﬀerent, how?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Appendix   347



              Did you do things together, and spend time connecting, such as through playing
              together and spending time together?
              When you were together, to what extent were your parents able to shift their focus from
              their own duties and priorities to really listen to you and be available to you?
              Did you feel like anyone really ‘got’ you and understood you? What were you going
              through then?
              Did you ever feel like you were under the radar, as though no one really had time to pay
              attention to you because of how busy they were (with work responsibilities, etc.)?
              Who would you have sought help from if you were upset (e.g., about being criticised at
              school, losing a good friend, your cat dying)? How would they have responded? (if the
              answer is ‘no one’, then ask ‘Why not? What would you have been afraid would happen
              if you had told your mother/father about your anxieties? Just close your eyes and
              imagine yourself telling them and that fear coming true . . . what happens next?’)
              How did your parents ﬁnd comfort for themselves? Did they comfort each other, and
              themselves, through aﬀection, or were they more likely to ﬁnd a way to shut down their
              needs and feelings?
         •    Use hypothetical questions to identify patterns of emotional neglect or conditional
              expressions of love.
              What would have happened if you were distressed about something upsetting that
              happened at school? Who would you have gone to for support?
              Who would you have approached if you needed a hug?
              What would your parents have felt if you had openly asked them for aﬀection (e.g.,
              a hug)? Would it have come naturally, or felt awkward in any way?
              Did you ever feel that you would have been more lovable if you had been diﬀerent in
              some way?
              Did you ever feel that you were missing important character traits that would have made
              you more lovable in your parents’ eyes? Which traits do you feel were missing?
              Looking back, if there was one thing that you could have done to change yourself as
              a child to make yourself more acceptable/lovable, what would it have been?
         •    Did the client experience any traumas/threats to their sense of safety during childhood,
              including domestic violence or aggression, death of signiﬁcant others, and natural
              catastrophes due to war, famine, etc.?
         •    Explore indications of physical/sexual/emotional abuse.
              When you think about your parents’ relationship, in your opinion, to what degree were
              they able to communicate in a loving, caring way?
              To what extent were they considerate of each other’s and their children’s emotional
              needs?
              Was one parent more dominant or demanding than the other? How did that play out?
              Can you give me a couple of examples so that I can understand this better?
              Did you ever feel sorry for one or both of your parents?
              Did you ever feel as if it was your responsibility to take care of/parent them?
              What consequences were used for discipline or punishment in your family?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          348           Appendix



               Did either of your parents lash out physically or verbally when upset, angry, or
               intoxicated? Who was this mostly directed at? How did you feel? How did you cope?
               When you think back over your life, has anyone ever touched you or looked at you in an
               inappropriate way or which made you feel uncomfortable?
          •    Enquire about experiences of explicit or implicit rejection or criticism during childhood
               (family of origin, peers/friendship groups)
          •    Enquire about family illnesses during childhood (either the client, their friends, or
               family members). How was this responded to by family members? How families respond
               to illness is a rich source of information about EMS or coping modes the child might
               have formed. For example, parents’ inability to respond and provide support to the child
               models helplessness in the face of adversity which might lead to the child developing
               a Vulnerability to Harm schema. If parents appeared to provide nurturance and support
               (e.g., from family, healthcare services) when the child was ill but were relatively distant
               when the child was healthy, the child might learn to behave sick and helpless as a coping
               strategy to get their needs for nurturance met.
               Were physical illnesses taken more seriously than emotional struggles/diﬃculties in
               your family?
          •    Enquire about any signiﬁcant losses or separations from a parent/family member/friend
               through divorce or death in childhood or adolescence. How did the child cope at the
               time? How much emotional support was available?
          •    Enquire about whether all siblings were treated equally or whether one of the siblings
               was given higher status? Were particular features/traits valued over others? For example,
               in some families there may have been one child who behaved and achieved according to
               parental expectations, whereas the child who was more extroverted, impulsive, or
               boisterous may have attracted disapproval.
          •    Did any of the siblings have disabilities or special needs that required signiﬁcant parental
               attention? Alternatively, did any of the siblings develop physical or mental health
               problems that required a disproportionate amount of parental attention (e.g., cancer,
               drug and alcohol problems, anorexia nervosa)? How capable were the parents of setting
               limits on sibling behaviours that impacted other family members, or of seeking external
               help and support when required?
          •    Enquire about ‘buﬀer’ (protective) relationships; if relationships at home were strained,
               was there anyone else in the client’s life on whom they could rely on for comfort,
               guidance, and support during childhood?
          •    Explore the extent to which the client and their family experienced a sense of belonging
               and community. How sociable did they perceive their parents to be (did they have
               ‘family friendships’, did the family belong to any local groups/communities, or were they
               relatively socially isolated)?
          •    Enquire about peer relationships and groupings. Did the client experience any close
               friendships during childhood and adolescence? If so, were these generally long lasting or
               short lived? Was the client able to maintain relationships outside school hours, or were
               social opportunities restricted? How much were these relationships based on emotional
               closeness (explore the nature of these relationships: was there a sense of emotional
               connection or were they relatively superﬁcial in quality)? Did the client undergo any
               social exclusion, bullying, or teasing by siblings or peers?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Appendix   349



         •    To what extent was the client inﬂuenced by cultural emphases based on individualistic
              values such as materialism, status, and ﬁnancial success at the expense of health,
              happiness, and interconnection? What qualities did the parents value most during
              childhood? To what extent do they feel that they have those qualities most valued by
              parents? Does the client try to be more like either of their parents in any way?
              How did your parents spend their time?
              What aspects of life were most highly valued by your parents, grandparents, aunts,
              uncles (e.g., spending time with family, family holidays, work, buying nice things,
              appearance, having a nice house, etc.).
              Were there any aspects of life where your parents felt insecure, or where you noticed
              they were competing with others (e.g., job status, possessions, school they send their kids
              to, ﬁtness)?
              To what extent do you think that appearances, status, and possessions were important to
              your parents?
              What (if any) aspects of your parents’ outlook did you respect or admire? Were there
              any of their values that you have ‘inherited’ but that maybe don’t quite ‘sit right’
              with you?
              To what extent did your family participate as part of their local community? Did your
              family belong to any community groups or sports clubs? To what extent did your
              parents join in and get involved?

         Connection to Self
         Enquire about whether the client received suﬃcient nurturance, warmth, praise, empathy,
         and overt aﬀection to develop the capacity to feel good about themselves and to think of
         themselves as a good person. Was the client cherished? If so, can they describe how this was
         expressed? Did they experience unconditional acceptance?
         • Has the client had opportunities during childhood and adolescence to develop
            a coherent sense of self based on warm, nurturing attachment relationships?
              To what extent did you feel others really knew you and understood the real you as a child
              (as opposed to feeling as if certain parts of you were unacceptable and needed to be
              shut oﬀ)?
              Do you have a strong sense of who you are? Who are you? How do you describe your
              ‘self’?
              As you were growing up, did you ever doubt your own existence or feel like you weren’t
              real?
              As a child, did you ever notice feelings of derealisation or depersonalisation (as if you
              were a bystander in your own life, or weren’t in your own body, or that certain body
              parts changed size or felt like they were disconnected from you in some way)?
              As a child, did you ever have the feeling that others saw and accepted the ‘whole of you’,
              including your emotional needs, feelings, and opinions?
         •    To what extent was the client encouraged to develop their own interests, try new
              pursuits, and express themselves openly and without judgement?
              What activities or pursuits give you a sense of well-being or happiness?
              What do you care most about in life? What matters most to you?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          350           Appendix



          •    To what extent has the client had safe opportunities to learn to regulate their emotions
               (bottom-up), such as through healthy physical connection with others and body
               movements (dance, music, walking, running)? How have childhood experiences shaped
               the client’s sense of agency and pleasure associated with the body? To what extent has
               there been unhealthy modelling of using the body in harmful ways in an attempt to self-
               regulate (e.g., self-harm)?
               In your family, did anyone use food or other external ‘substances’ (alcohol, drugs, self-
               harm) as a substitute for comfort, self-soothing?
               Did anyone use exercise or being ‘super healthy’ as a way of feeling good about
               themselves?
               What were your parents’ attitudes towards their own bodies? In your opinion, did they
               treat their bodies with respect?
               How did they refer to others (in terms of body shape/size/appearance)? Did this aﬀect
               the way you felt about yourself and your body in any way?
               Did you ever get involved in body activities (such as dance, running, playing an
               instrument, swimming, hiking, cycling, sailing) purely for pleasure without having to
               worry about it being a source of achievement or recognition, or worry about what others
               were thinking?


          Connection to Nature
          •    Explore the extent to which clients have experienced opportunities to connect with
               nature and other living creatures. Use hypothetical questions to identify the extent to
               which the client feels connected to self and nature, for example:
               If you could ﬁnd a place in your imagination where you feel truly calm, connected, and
               that you belong, where would it be?
               Is there anywhere in nature that you have experienced a feeling of safe and calm? Can
               you picture that now? What feelings does it bring up?
               Have opportunities been available for you to develop a sense of belonging and being
               ‘part of’ nature? For example, did your family spend much time in nature when you were
               a child (playing at the beach, hiking or cycling in the mountains, and so on)?
               If you had holidays, how did you choose where you went? What type of places did you
               visit (i.e., ascertain to what extent holidays were within man-made vs. natural
               environments)? If you were able to choose your ideal holiday destination in nature,
               where would it be?
               Did you have a pet? How did you feel towards your pet? How did your pet feel about
               you? If you didn’t have a pet, what would your ideal pet have been and why? What needs
               could the pet have met that you didn’t get from anywhere else?

          Freedom of Self-Expression
          •    Was the client encouraged to express their emotions openly during childhood? Explore
               parental reactions to emotional events (e.g., loss, stress, conﬂict). Did family members
               openly discuss distressing issues and mutually seek emotional support? Did family
               members seek distraction from emotional issues (e.g., through staying busy,



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Appendix   351



              workaholism, alcohol, overeating)? Or were emotions expressed in an uncontained or
              histrionic manner?
         •    Who expressed anger, and how was it expressed within the family of origin? What might
              the client have learned about expression of anger and other emotions through these early
              experiences and observations?
         •    Inquire about how parents reacted to distress (their own and others’). How did parents
              react when the client demonstrated positive emotions (e.g., excitement) and negative
              emotions (e.g., anger, sadness) as they were growing up?
         •    Explore possible themes of parentiﬁcation, whereby the client has learned to take
              responsibility for their parents’ well-being. Sometimes this can be learned through
              explicit or implicit messages from the parents that their child ‘should’ be caring/
              responsible/close to the parent, but this pattern can sometimes develop more subtly. The
              client with a sensitive and/or highly attuned temperament may have learned to tune into
              parents’ insecurities and stress and intuitively take action to nurture or care for them,
              whilst the parent remains unaware of this fact. Many clients have learned that if they ask
              for what they need, or express their feelings, it will overwhelm the parents who are
              already under pressure and struggling to cope. This may precipitate a pattern of
              ‘shutting oﬀ’ their own emotional needs and taking on the role of substitute spouse or
              carer for the parent, evolving into a pattern of enmeshment and, ultimately, emotional
              neglect. Use hypothetical questions to identify patterns of parentiﬁcation or
              enmeshment within the family of origin:
              When you were upset or distressed as a child, did you ever feel that you needed to protect
              others from your feelings? What did you fear might happen if you told others how you
              were really feeling or asked your parents for help?
              Have you ever felt that one or both of your parents might struggle emotionally if you
              weren’t there to support them?
              Do your parents have anyone other than you in their life to support them with their
              diﬃculties and stress?
              As a child, do you recall noticing when your parents were stressed or anxious and trying
              to make things better for them or to smooth things over? How did you do that?
              If you were to go your own way and be completely independent of your parents, do you
              ever worry that you would be letting them down in some way? Do you ever get the
              message from anyone in your family that your independence makes them feel more
              insecure?
              Do you ever feel guilty or like you are harming your parents if you form friendships with
              others?
              Do you ever feel guilty if you prioritise your needs over taking care of your parents?
              Do you feel that if you were to experience pleasure or happiness, that this would be
              hurtful or disrespectful to others in your family? Almost as if you are taking it from
              them?
              Do you ever feel like you are an extension of one or both of your parents, like you don’t
              have a right to be a separate person?




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          352           Appendix



          •    Use hypothetical questions to identify patterns of emotional expression within the
               family of origin:
               If you felt excited for some reason as a child (e.g., a birthday, seeing a friend), who would
               you have shared your excitement with? What (if anything) might have held you back
               from expressing your excitement fully (e.g., fear of disapproval, being told oﬀ for
               making a noise, disturbing others, or being too loud)?
               Did you ever feel that you had to act happy and cheerful in order to boost others in your
               family?
               Sometimes children fear that happiness is a limited resource and that if they feel happy
               that it might threaten or hurt someone else. Did you ever have any fears around feeling
               happy or good about yourself?
               If you imagine yourself as a child telling your parents that you were happy and excited,
               how would you have felt about that? What feelings would come up for you? And how
               would you expect them to respond, based on how they were back then?


          Play and Spontaneity
          •    Did the client experience opportunities to play, have fun, and be spontaneous during
               childhood? Did parents encourage the client to take time to relax and partake in
               enjoyable activities? Was the client encouraged to balance responsibilities and duties
               with time oﬀ for self-care and restoration? Was the client encouraged to develop an
               interest in activities that were purely for fun without any pressure to perform or meet
               certain standards?
          •    Enquire about how often (if ever) parents were playful, humorous, and engaged in fun
               activities. Did they spend time with the client during childhood, simply playing and
               using imaginative activities and ideas?
          •    Possible hypothetical questions:
               What kinds of games or activities did you like/would you have liked to have participated
               in as a child?
               If you had asked your parents to play these with you, how would they have responded?
               If their response was negative, what would they have preferred you to be doing with your
               time?
               If you had been involved in ‘messy’ activities as a child (e.g., painting, making cubby
               houses using household furniture, playdough), how would your parents have responded
               to this?
               If you made a joke or laughed out loud as a child, how would your parents respond to
               this?


          Autonomy
          •    Did the child have adequate opportunities for the development of a sense of competence
               and achievement? Did they receive praise and encouragement? Were there any
               diﬃculties that may have contributed to a sense of failure or inadequacy (e.g., being
               compared negatively with siblings, relatives, friends; presence of a diﬃculty such as
               dyslexia; high levels of anxiety due to domestic problems)?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Appendix   353



         •    Explore whether there was a natural development of independence, autonomy, and
              individuation throughout late childhood and adolescence. How did parents respond to
              the child as they reached developmental milestones (e.g., starting school, puberty,
              graduation, spending more time outside the home with friends)? Did the parents react
              supportively or were they threatened by these changes to their child’s growth? Did
              parents allow space for the child to experience these events in their own way, or was
              there parental intrusiveness at these developmental junctures?
         •    To explore the potential presence of a dependency schema, explore possible
              overprotective or ‘helicopter’ parenting that may have contributed to schema
              development. Alternatively, this may be linked to an absence of the need for care,
              guidance, and protection being met in early childhood, whereby the child has been
              pushed to grow up and be independent too early (e.g., toilet trained by nine months,
              taking care of siblings at eighteen months, preparing their own food at two years, etc.),
              and has learned to cope either through becoming overly dependent as an adult (e.g.,
              clinging within relationships, illness behaviours) or by becoming hyperautonomous
              (completely self-reliant, resists seeking help or support from others). If the client’s need
              to be dependent was met with no response or even disdain/exasperation during
              childhood, then they will learn not to rely on others and not to ask for help (emotional
              and/or practical). Alternatively, if they don’t have the opportunity to branch out into the
              world and return to a stable base without the parent becoming overly anxious and
              protective, then they learn not to trust their own capacity for independence. In an ideal
              situation, where the child’s ever-changing needs for dependence and autonomy are met
              in an attuned way, the child learns healthy interdependence, whereby they can trust and
              rely on others to support them when needed, without fear that they will be viewed as
              a burden or ‘too needy’. In this way there is often a strong overlap between a Dependence
              schema and other similar schemas, such as Emotional Deprivation and Abandonment
              schemas.
         •    Enquire about parents’ capacity to be self-reliant and whether the client is inﬂuenced by
              parents’ reliance or dependence on them for practical or emotional support, thereby
              limiting their own freedom and development of autonomy.
         •    Possible hypothetical questions to be used to explore possible issues linked to
              dependency/autonomy:
             When you were a child, were there any invisible barriers to you growing up?
             Did you feel like there was anything keeping you from growing up?
             In some families there is confusion between dependence and love. Have you ever worried
             that if you are no longer dependent on your parents, you might not get the love you need?
             Can you think of any times in your life when this has happened (i.e., when becoming
             more independent has felt like a disconnection? e.g., temporary recovery from mental
             health problems, leaving home to attend university).
             If you imagined telling your parents that you would like to move away, or that you
             couldn’t contact them as frequently because you were spending more time with peers,
             how might they react? Would you have any concerns about conveying this message?
             As a child, did you ever feel like others needed you to need them or be dependent on
             them, to give their life purpose or meaning? Do you still feel that now? If so, what do you
             fear might happen if you were to put up a boundary and take steps towards living your




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          354           Appendix



              life your own way? What would you imagine that they would feel? What feelings come up
              for you when you imagine doing that?
              Did you ever feel like you were too needy or dependent as a child? Where did you learn
              that? What happened that gave you that impression? Did anyone ever say anything, or
              was it more their facial expressions (e.g., exasperation) that conveyed this message? Can
              you give examples?
              If you had asked for help as a young child, such as tying your shoes, making your packed
              lunch, or completing homework, what would have been a typical response from your
              parents?
              How did your parents react when you reached puberty (e.g., changes in body shape and
              size, menstruation)? Did you sense it was a good thing or did it cause some level of
              anxiety or threat?
              What happened (or would have happened) when you started spending more time with
              friends and less time at home? Did that change your relationship with your parents in any
              way? Did this lead to any feelings of insecurity in you or your parents? How did you feel
              about that?


          Realistic Limits
          •    Explore the way in which clients and their siblings were disciplined as children. Was
               discipline consistent or unpredictable and chaotic? Was there a lack of appropriate limit/
               boundary setting or, alternatively, were consequences overly punitive?
          •    Enquire about how much freedom the client had during childhood: did they have too
               much or too little freedom?
          •    Enquire about whether either parent encouraged and supported the child to complete
               diﬃcult or boring tasks (e.g., homework, household chores, tidying their room)? Were
               these followed up with fair consequences to ensure that the child followed through with
               normal responsibilities and commitments?
          •    Enquire as to what extent parents were able to set limits on the client and siblings during
               childhood, such as ensuring regular healthy meals, an appropriate sleep schedule,
               attending school, etcetera.
          •    Assess the extent to which parents were able to set limits on themselves and exert an
               appropriate level of self-control over their own behaviours and emotional reactions.
               Were parents unable to set limits on themselves or their children, such as through a lack
               of regular mealtimes, inadequate self-care and hygiene, and/or chaotic sleep schedules?
          •    Did either parent have diﬃculty controlling their temper and behaviours, either in the
               family home and/or in public? Enquire about uncontrolled rage outbursts, violence,
               road rage, and abusive behaviours. If so, what did the child learn about these emotions,
               and their own capacity to manage their own urges and impulses?
          •    Did either parent have a history of addictive behaviours, whereby they were unable to
               prevent themselves from falling into the same coping patterns (e.g., use of alcohol,
               overeating, drugs, gambling, compulsive exercise, internet/gaming addiction,
               workaholism, ‘romantic love addiction’)?
          •    Did the child have adequate support with learning to self-soothe in healthy ways (e.g.,
               through talking about emotions, asking for aﬀection and care, and using healthy forms
               of support such as being in nature, physical exercise)?



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                           Appendix   355



         •    Did the child experience their emotions as manageable, or as out of control and
              frightening? Did the child feel an urge to ‘get rid’ of these urges and emotions through
              acting them out (and/or suppressing them)?
         •    Did any siblings have trouble with out-of-control anger and/or controlling impulsive
              urges? How did that make the client feel at the time? How did the parents respond?
         •    Possible hypothetical questions:
              If you can imagine that, as a child, you had told your mother/father about your out-of-
              control feelings and urges, how do you think they would have responded?
              If you had told your parents about your strong compulsion to binge eat (or take drugs,
              gamble, etc.), how do you think they would have reacted? What stopped you from telling
              them about these urges?
              If you showed your self-harm scars to your family, how would they have reacted? Would
              they have been more or less likely to give you the love and care you were needing?
              If you left home for school (as a child) without having breakfast, how would your family
              members have reacted?
              If you became openly angry and/or shouted as a child, how do you expect that others in
              your family might have responded to you?
              If you can imagine that as a child you told your parents that you couldn’t be bothered to
              complete your homework that was due in the following day, how do you think they
              might have responded?
              As a child, did you ever test your parents to see how far you could take things before they
              would set limits on you (e.g., staying out late, taking drugs/alcohol, starving yourself,
              attacking siblings, missing school)?
              Some children have never had the opportunity to learn to follow instructions. They can
              ﬁnd it diﬃcult to follow the rules at school and might act out in certain ways (e.g.,
              consistently turning up late, non-attendance, rebelling against teacher instructions) – is
              this something that you ever experienced?
              Since adolescence/adulthood, have you ever noticed any attraction to communities or
              environments with strict rules (e.g., military forces, police force, fundamentalist
              religious community or cults)? [Schema overcompensation.]
              Alternatively, have you found it diﬃcult to hold down a job due to not being able to
              follow the rules or expectations?
              Have you ever been in trouble at work due to not following expectations? [Schema
              surrender.]




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          Index

          Abandonment schema                         aims of schema therapy,                    generalised anxiety
            boundary crossing and, 322                         see also goals and                    disorder, 256
            example behaviour, 198                             principles, 13                   social anxiety
            fears, 201                               Ainsworth, M., 18                               disorder, 256
            overlap with Dependence                  Angry Child mode, 6                           imagery rescripting, 260
                    schema, 353                        case example, 92, 128,                bipolar disorder, 26, 29, 254
            and session frequency, 186                         287, 317                      case conceptualisation,
            and session length, 316                    chairwork, 169, 178                           252–6
            therapeutic resources, 336                 in Cluster C                          chair techniques, 257–8
            therapist schema, 191                              presentations, 134            comparison of CBT and
          Abandonment/Instability                      empathic confrontation, 134                   schema therapy,
                    schema, 16                         forensic clients, 294                         251–2
            associated domain, 3                       group settings, 303, 310              conceptualising and
            example behaviour, 5                       limited reparenting, 132–4                    bypassing repetitive
          Abused/Vulnerable Child                      mediating eﬀect, 21                           negative
                    mode                               relationship with BPD, 21                     thinking, 256
            CPTSD, 270                                 session frequency and, 186            depression, 252–3
            see also Vulnerable Child                  in session work model,                   see also depression.
                    mode.                                      133–4                         imagery rescripting, 259–60
          acceptance                                   subjugation of needs                  mode language and mode
            as basic need, 17–18                               and, 197                              model use, 256
            group therapy format                     Angry Protector mode, 8                 OCD, see obsessive-
                    and, 312                           case examples, 237, 239, 311                  compulsive
          acceptance and commitment                    function, 271                                 disorder (OCD).
                    therapy, 62                        group settings, 311                 apparent competence, 61
          addictions/addictive                         likely behaviour of client, 79      Approval-Seeking schema
                    behaviours                         therapist’s schema, 191, 318          case example, 227
            addressing in group therapy,             anorexia nervosa, see eating            online settings, 334
                    306, 312                                   disorders.                    therapist-client interaction
            case examples, 228                       antisocial behaviour, internal                  and, 315, 322
            challenges of addressing, 199                      risk factors in             Approval/Recognition-Seeker
            as coping strategies, 79                           forensic populations,                 mode, 8
            diagnosing underlying                              292, 293                    Approval/Recognition-Seeking
                    unmet emotional                  antisocial personality disorder                 schema, associated
                    needs, 57                                  (ASPD), 29                            domain, 3
            highlighting the impact via                diﬀerence between BPD               Arntz, A., 13, 16, 23, 24, 25,
                    chairwork, 235                             and, 22                               31, 55
            online settings, risk                      mediated by Demanding               Ashayeri, H., 28
                    management, 336                            Critic, 21                  assessment
            in therapist’s personal                  anxiety and depressive                  assessment and education
                    history, 130                               disorders                             phase of therapy,
            see also eating disorders.                 adjustment disorder,                          12, 102
          adjustment disorder,                                 conceptualisation,            assessment questions linked
                    conceptualisation,                         262–3                                 to each schema,
                    262–3                              anxiety disorders, 254–6                      41–55
          aﬀect bridge, 76, 155, 295,                     core fears and possible            central goal, 39
                    298, 320                                   interventions, 259            client’s descriptions of
            diagnostic imagery, 67–77                     eﬃcacy of schema                           childhood, 77–9
          agoraphobia, 27                                      therapy, 27–8                 client’s stage of change, 80
          356


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                          Index        357



            client’s treatment goals                   length of treatment, 81               preparation for end phase of
                     relating to presenting            mode assessment,                              therapy and, 221, 241
                     issues, 81                                 identiﬁcation of             therapeutic approach
            deﬁning treatment goals and                         modes for case                       and, 242
                     gauging client                             conceptualisation, 40,       as therapy objective, 93, 125
                     motivation, 80–2                           68–75                        therapy relationship and, 93
            diagnosis in schema therapy                processing issues in                autonomy phase of schema
                     treatment, 56–7                            assessment, 77–9                     therapy, 12, 106–7
            feedback provision, 82                     sessions 2–8                          behavioural
            focus and considerations,                     client’s temperament, 63                   interventions, 107
                     39–40                                diagnostic imagery, 67–77          cognitive interventions, 107
            incorporating observations                       aﬀect bridge, 67–77             evaluating client
                     of client                            life history, 64–5                         readiness, 105
                     behaviour, 78                        questionnaires, 65–7               experiential techniques, 107
            initial session                               unmet needs, areas for             limited reparenting, 106
               aims, 57–8                                       exploration, 64            avoidance modes, 8
               assessing strength of                   therapist requirements,             avoidance of trauma
                     clients’ Healthy Adult                     82–3                                 processing,
                     self, 61                       attachment theory                                overcoming, 275
               clariﬁcation of therapeutic             inﬂuence of in schema               avoidant personality disorder
                     relationship, 61                           therapy, 2                           (AvPD), 20, 134
               conceptualising                         research supporting the need          characteristic modes, 22
                     modes, 61–2                                for acceptance, 18         Avoidant Protector mode,
               emotional presence and               attendance, session, see session                 8, 255
                     co-regulation, 58–9                        attendance.                  case examples, 92, 189, 283
               evaluating client’s                  attention deﬁcit hyperactivity           as coping mode in social
                     suitability for schema                     disorder (ADHD), 29                  anxiety disorder, 256
                     therapy, 62–3                  attunement                             awareness of schemas and
               exploring coping                        the concept, 11–12, 118                       modes
                     strategies, 59                    Angry Child mode, 134                 group settings, 303
               linking past and present,               bridge into intervention              schema therapists’
                     59–60                                      strategies, 121–2                    cultivation of their
               previous therapy                        and limited reparenting, 110                  own, 314
                     relationships, 61                 parent’s role, 117                       see also therapist schemas.
               questionnaires, 61                      role of in bypassing coping
               sensations and emotions,                         modes, 118                 Bach, B., 21, 65
                     recognising and                   therapeutic eﬀects, 118             backstage modes, 92, 263
                     making sense of, 59–60           see also under limited               Bamelis, L., 22, 29, 102
               wrapping up, 63                                  reparenting.               Banisi, P., 28
            interview questions                     authoritative parenting,               basic needs
               autonomy, 352–4                                  associated with              present at birth, 17
               connection to nature, 350                        superior well-being in       see also under emotional
               connection to self, 349–50                       children and                         needs.
               freedom of                                       adolescents, 19            basic schema therapy
                     self-expression,               autism spectrum disorder                         model, 1–5
                     350–2                                      (ASD), 26                  Baumeister, R., 18
               limit setting, 354–5                 autonomy                               Beck, A., 16, 251, 254
               opening questions, 345–6                assessment questions,               Beckian cognitive therapy,
               play and spontaneity, 352                        352–4                                139
               safe and secure                         balancing with limit                Behary, W., 238
                     attachment, 346–9                          setting, 19                behaviour change
            key problem areas                          childhood trauma and, 269             as core skill for healthy self-
               common key problems                     as core emotional need, 1, 64                 regulation, 213,
                     related to typical                forensic settings and loss                    217–21
                     mode, 56                                   of, 294                      Healthy Adult mode, 217–19
               identifying, 40                         parent’s role, 117                    historical role-play and, 105




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          358           Index



          behaviour change (cont.)                             demanding                   Bishop, A., 20
            supporting via future                              behaviours, 186–8           blocks
                    pattern-breaking                   maintaining regular session           addressing, 194, 200
                    imagery and chair                          attendance, 186               identifying, 200, 203
                    dialogues, 203–8                   middle phase of therapy,            body awareness, beneﬁts of
            supporting via future-                             192–202                               movement for
                    oriented imagery                   narcissistic behaviours, 187                  schema
                    rescripting, 243–4                 pattern-breaking form                         therapists, 324
            targets, 204–6                                blank, 194                       body dysmorphic disorder, 30
            therapy-interfering                           completed, 195                   body experience
                    behaviours,                        pattern-breaking targets              aﬀect bridge imagery, 76
                    interventions to                      for behaviour change,              case examples, 120, 197, 235,
                    address, 185–91                            198–200                               244, 260
          behaviour modiﬁcation, chair                    developing, 194                    debrieﬁng, 183, 221
                    allocation for, 177                problematic behavioural               homework, 221
          behavioural activation, 260                          patterns, case                online settings, 337
          behavioural interventions                            examples, 190, 193            recognising and making
            autonomy phase, 107                        schemas and modes                             sense of, 59–60
            overview, 106                                      inﬂuencing client             safe place script, 153
          behavioural modiﬁcation, 106                         coping behaviours,            therapist self-care, 336
          behavioural pattern-breaking                         case example, 196–7         bonding and stabilisation
            the concept, 185                           setting pattern-breaking                      phase
            addressing blocks, 200                             goals, case example,          case example, 284–5
            behaviour change                                   198–9                         group schema therapy,
               supporting via future                   therapist self-reﬂection                      304–5
                    pattern-breaking                           exercise, 191               borderline personality
                    imagery and chair                  therapy-interfering                           disorder (BPD)
                    dialogues, 203–8                           behaviours                    behavioural pattern-
               targets, 204–6                             addressing through                         breaking and, 185
            consulting with client’s                           chairwork, case               consequences of emotional
                    signiﬁcant others,                         example, 201–2                        abuse for, 20
                    190                                   identifying, 188–91                vs CPTSD, 271
            early phase of therapy,                          schema inventories and          eﬃcacy of schema
                    185–91                                     questionnaires, 190                   therapy, 22–4
            empathic confrontation                        interventions to address,          empathic confrontation
               case examples, 188                              185–91                                and, 126
               inconsistent attendance,                understanding therapist               establishing the schema and
                    188–9                                      schemas, 191                          mode proﬁle of, 21–2
            ﬁnal phase of therapy, 202–8             behavioural techniques                  group settings, low dropout
            ﬁne-tuning case                            and building healthy self-                    rates, 302
                    conceptualisation                          compassion, 216               likely presentation, 56
                    through, 199–202                      case example, 216                  modes characteristic of, 22
            future pattern-breaking                    and development of Happy              presentation, 5
                    imagery                                    Child mode, 224               prevalence in forensic
               step by step, 203–8                     ﬁnal phase of therapy, 246                    populations, 289
               supporting behaviour                       case example, 246                Boterhoven de Haan, K.,
                    change via chair                   overview, 104                                 274, 275
                    dialogues and, 208               beliefs                               boundary crossing
            importance of in schema                    looking for evidence for and          and Abandonment
                    therapy, 203                               against core beliefs,                 schema, 322
            life-interfering behaviours                        145–6                         impact of therapist schemas
               identifying, 196                        undermining negative                          on, 320–2
               interventions to address,                       beliefs, 146–7                   case example of limit
                    192–202                          Bernstein, D., 26, 295                          setting, 321
            maintaining boundaries                   bipolar disorder, 26, 29, 254         boundary setting, parent’s
                    linked to entitled or            birth, basic needs present at, 17               role, 117



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                       Index         359



         Brockman, R., 262                               key content, 87–8                 Critic modes, 170–2, 178,
         Broersen, J., 302                               life problems and/or                      305–7, 311
         bulimia nervosa, see eating                           symptoms, 89–90             Detached Protector
                   disorders.                            relevant modes, 91                        mode, 232
         Bully and Attack mode, 9                           backstage modes, 92            in diﬀerent phases of
           forensic populations,                            frontstage (coping)                    treatment, 166
                   289–91, 295                                 modes, 92                   eating disorders, bypassing
              imagery rescripting, 297                   relevant schemas, 91                      coping modes, 286
           group settings, 304, 310                      therapy objectives, 93            embodying and
           therapist’s schema, 318                       therapy relationship, 92                  personalising the
         bypassing coping modes                          unmet needs, 90                           mode, 164
           the concept, 98–100                        chairwork, 166                       empathic confrontation of
           case examples                              Detached Protector                           non-attendance, 189
              activating emotion, 100                          subtypes, 270               empty chair technique, 165
              eating disorders, 286                   ﬁne-tuning through the               evidence for eﬃcacy of, 32–3
           chairwork, 33, 166, 170, 178,                       pattern-breaking            exploring therapist-client
                   228–34, 286                                 process, 199–202                    chemistry, 323
              case example, 230–1                     identiﬁcation of modes for,          face to face therapy, potential
              group settings, 305–6                            40, 68–75                           for discomfort in, 169
           eating disorders, 286                      see also mode mapping.               ﬁnal phase of therapy, 172–9
           empathic confrontation,                  chair dialogues                        group settings, 305–7, 311
                   237–9                              behaviour change,                      to bypass coping modes,
              implicit assumption                              supporting via future               305–6
                   technique, 238–9                            pattern-breaking            Healthy Adult mode
           examples, 97, 112, 133,                             imagery and, 203–8            developing in various
                   167, 178                           building self-compassion                     treatment phases,
           forensic settings, 294–5                            with Vulnerable                     105, 177
           as goal of schema therapy,                          Child mode, 216               strengthening exercise,
                   11, 81, 140, 151                   emotion-focused therapy                      176–7
           group settings, 304                                 and, 32                       strengthening in ﬁnal
              chairwork, 305–6                        Happy Child mode, 224                        phase of therapy, 245
           role of attunement, 118                  chairwork, 159–64                      initial phase of therapy,
           role of experiential                       addressing therapy-                          166–72
                   techniques, 151                             interfering                 intended purpose, 33
           therapist schema                                    behaviours through,         interviewing coping modes,
                   considerations,                             201–2                               228–34
                   318, 323                           anxiety and depressive                 case example, 233
           through role-play, 234–7                            disorders, techniques       location and number of
           through Socratic                                    for, 257–8                          chairs, 165
                   dialogue, 141                      behaviour modiﬁcation,               middle phase of therapy,
                                                               chair allocation                    172–7
         Calvert, F., 28                                       for, 177                    mode dialogue, case
         care, parent’s role, 117                     beneﬁts for therapist well-                  example, 167, 257–8
         caregiver sensitivity, eﬀects on                      being, 323                  ‘moding out’ a trigger, 166–7
                   attachment, 19                     case example coping modes            negotiating with coping
         case conceptualisation                                interviewing via, 233               modes, 167
           the concept, 228                           case examples, 109                   in online settings, 337–40
           aims/main purpose, 86                      and child modes, 169                    see also under online
           adjustment disorder, 262–3                 cognitive restructuring, chair               schema therapy.
           case examples                                       allocation for, 176         problematic situations,
              childhood origins of                    compassion, chair allocation                 identifying and
                   current problems, 90                        for, 176                            exploring, 176
              client background, 88                   conceptualisation phase, 166         Protector mode, case
              diagnostic                              ‘contaminating the chair’,                   example, 168–9
                   impression, 88–9                            170, 234–5, 285             Punitive Critic mode, case
              inﬂuencing factors, 91                  context anchoring, 164–5                     example, 171–2




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          360           Index



          chairwork (cont.)                            prevalence in forensic                visualising triggering
             rationale for using, 32–3                        populations, 289                       events, 142
             separation of modes, 164                Cluster C personality disorders       cognitive restructuring
             therapist plays Vulnerable                characteristics, 134                  chair allocation for, 176
                     Child, 234–5, 237                 elderly people, 27                    coaching in, 208
             tips for therapists, 178–9                maladaptive coping                    as core skill for healthy self-
             ‘watching from the                               modes, 226                             regulation, 213
                     sidelines’, 169                   mode proﬁle, 22                     cognitive strategies, vii, 11
          Chakhssi, F., 25                             response to emotional                 levels of cognition, 138
          challenges of long-term                             abuse, 21                    cognitive techniques
                     therapy, 96–7                     similarities between                  and building healthy self-
          child in the street exercise,                       depression and,                        compassion, 215
                     61, 215                                  254                            courtroom method, 147–8
          child modes, 6–7                           COAL (Curiosity, Openness,              and development of Happy
             chairwork and, 169                               Acceptance and                         Child mode, 223
             Impulsive and Undisciplined                      Love), 59                      dimensional evaluation or
                     Child modes, forensic           Cockram, D., 27                                 ‘continua’, 147
                     populations, 297–300            cognition, three levels of, 138         ﬁnal phase of therapy, 246
             role of in antisocial and               cognitive development, basic            overview, 104
                     violent                                  needs produced                 responsibility pie graphs, 146
                     behaviour, 291                           by, 17                       cognitive-behavioural
             Vulnerable Child mode,                  cognitive interventions                         therapy (CBT)
                     challenges of reaching            autonomy phase, 107                   behavioural pattern-
                     in forensic                       building schema/mode                          breaking and, 260
                     populations, 295                         awareness, 140–1               comparison with schema
          child sexual abuse, 64                       core beliefs                                  therapy, 27, 32,
          childhood, origins of current                   looking for evidence for                   138–9, 251–2
                     problems in, 90                          and against, 145–6             considered ﬁrst line
          childhood adversity,                            undermining negative                       psychological
                     association between                      beliefs, 146–7                         treatment, 251
                     EMS and two types                 Downward Arrow                        eating disorder study, 28
                     of, 20                                   technique, 142–3               overlap with schema therapy,
          childhood sexual abuse, 31, 32,              identifying cognitive aspects                 138, 140
                     268, 320                                 of schemas and                 Socratic philosophical
          childhood trauma, and                               modes, 138–40, 142                     principles and, 139
                     autonomy, 269                     inﬂuenced by strength of            co-morbidities
          chronic depression, see anxiety                     client’s Healthy Adult         eating disorders and, 280
                     and depressive                           mode, 139                      exclusion from schema
                     disorders; depression.            overlap of CBT with schema                    therapy eﬃcacy
          clariﬁcation-oriented                               therapy, 138, 140                      studies, 29
                     psychotherapy                     overview, 106                         prevalence in treatment
                     (COP), comparison                 psychoeducation phase,                        resistant clients, 97
                     with schema                              140–1                          and suitability for schema
                     therapy, 25                       schema and mode                               therapy, 62
          Clarke, K., 32                                      ﬂashcards, 145                 and the transdiagnostic
          client’s signiﬁcant others,                  schema/mode monitoring                        approach of the mode
                     consulting with, 190                      forms, 143                            model, 256
          clinicians in mental health,                 Socratic approach,                    and treatment resistance,
                     percentage reporting                      application of in                     97, 251
                     emotional                                 schema therapy, 116,        compassion
                     exhaustion, 318                           140–1                         the concept, 106
          Cloninger, C. R., 63                         Socratic philosophical                allocating a chair for, 176
          Cluster B personality disorders                     principles and, 139            compassion-focused
             characteristics, 134                      speciﬁc, 142                                  therapy, 32
             maladaptive coping                        triggering events, preparing          developing through
                     modes, 226                               for, 145                               therapeutic letter




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                         Index        361



                   writing/                           re-victimisation in adult              bypassing, see bypassing
                   journaling, 180                            life, 269                              coping modes.
           evaluating in ﬁnal phase, 105              suitability of a schema                case example, 227–8
           for forensic clients, 300                          therapy approach to            Detached Protector
           group settings, 312                                treatment, 277                         mode, 229
           Healthy Adult mode,                        themes, 268–9                             chairwork with, 232
                   101, 106                           therapist conﬁdence and                function, 226–8
           inﬂuence on the brain, 214                         approach, 267                  interviewing via chairwork,
           limited reparenting and,                   trauma-focused                                 231–4
                   116–17                                     interventions, 274–5              case example, 233
           soothing eﬀect, 169                      complex trauma and                       labelling by the client,
           value of compassion                                dissociation, see                      228–31
                   training, 319                              complex post-                  monitoring techniques, 228
           see also self-compassion.                          traumatic stress               negotiating with, 167
         competence, as basic need, 17                        disorder (CPTSD);              role of, 231
         Complaining Protector                                dissociation.                  ‘showing respect’ to, 233–4
                   mode, 133                        Compliant Surrenderer                    Vulnerable Child mode
         complex post-traumatic stress                        mode, 7                           accessing through
                   disorder (CPTSD)                   abusive relationships                          contamination of the
           assessment and trauma                              and, 270                               chair, 234–5
                   work, 268                          apparent competence                       therapist role-playing
           balancing trauma focus with                        and, 61                             to bypass coping modes,
                   meeting emotional                  case examples, 92, 281                         234–7
                   needs, 266–7                       likely behaviour of client, 62              case example, 236–7
           vs BPD, 271                                secure attachment theory                    chair arrangement,
           caregivers’ reactions and                          and, 78                                237
                   inﬂuence, 268                      self-sacriﬁcing                        see also individual modes.
           case conceptualisation, 271                        behaviour, 196               coping strategies
              Abused/Vulnerable Child                 therapist’s schema, 315                exploring, 59
                   mode, 270                        conﬁdence, parent’s role, 117            exploring in assessment, 59
              Angry Protector                       connection to nature                   core beliefs
                   mode, 271                          assessment interview                   Downward Arrow
              Detached Protector                              questions, 350                         technique, 142–3
                   subtypes, 270                      beneﬁts for schema                     looking for evidence for and
              Healthy Adult mode,                             therapists, 324                        against, 145–6
                   strengthening                      as core emotional need, 13             undermining negative
                   aims, 271                        connection to self, assessment                   beliefs, 146–7
              Punitive Critic mode, 271                       interview questions,         core emotional needs, see also
           case example, 276                                  349–50                                 emotional needs, 1–2
           categories of trauma-focused             Conning and Manipulative               co-regulation
                   treatment                                  mode, 9                        attuned, children’s
                   approaches, 266                    forensic populations, 289,                     requirements, 64
           common schema themes                               291, 295–6                     emotional presence
                   observed, 272                    Conoley, C., 32                                  and, 58–9
           empowering the                           container imagery, 152–3                 therapist-client relationship
                   survivor, 269                    contamination of the chair,                      and, 59, 337
           imagery rescripting, 276–7                         170, 234–5, 285              corrective emotional
           lack of self-trust, 269                  Contented Child mode, 324                        experiences
           Life Events Check List, 268              continuing professional                  attunement and, 118
           manipulation, silence and                          development, beneﬁts           chairwork and, 170, 172
                   shame, 268                                 for therapist well-            experiential techniques and,
           overcoming avoidance of                            being, 322                             104, 150, 183, 267
                   trauma                           control, as basic need, 17               forensic clients, 294
                   processing, 275                  coping behaviours, schema-               group settings, 302
           processing trauma                                  driven, 4                      historical role-play and, 175,
                   memories, 275                    coping modes, 7, 92                              182, 183




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          362           Index



          corrective emotional (cont.)               Dependence/Incompetence                 therapist’s schema, 315, 316,
             imagery rescripting and, 103,                      schema                               318, 319
                    109, 157                           anxiety disorders and, 254            and undermining of
             limited reparenting and,                  associated domain, 3                          conﬁdence in threat
                    114–16, 136                        boundary transgressions                       of danger
             as objective of initial phase of                   and, 320                             management, 269
                    therapy, 166, 167, 259             case example, 91                      ‘wasted session’
             saying goodbye in a healthy               example behaviour, 90                         narrative, 240
                    way and, 247                       overlap with Abandonment            Detached Self-Soother mode, 8
             therapist provision of                             schema, 353                  case examples, 198, 227
                    opportunities for, 11,             overprotective or ‘helicopter’        examples, 228
                    99, 103                                     parenting and,               forensic populations,
             therapist’s schema and,                            125, 353                             289, 291
                    316, 318                         dependent personality disorder          group settings, 306
          countertransference, 40, 58,                          (DPD), 20, 134               therapist’s schema, 316, 318
                    61–2, 193                          characteristic modes, 22            diagnosis
          courtroom method, cognitive                depression                              case example, 88–9
                    technique, 147–8                   behavioural pattern-                  in schema therapy
          COVID-19 Pandemic, 262                                breaking, 259–62                     treatment, 56–7
          criminal behaviour, see                         ‘in the moment’ exercise,          underlying unmet emotional
                    forensic populations.                       261–2                                needs, 57
          critic mode activation goals                 case example, 108                   diagnostic imagery, 67–77
                    and principles,                    common key modes and                  aﬀect bridge, 67–77
                    identify and                                symptoms, 253                case example, 180
                    address, 100                       early maladaptive schemas,          dialectical behaviour therapy,
          Critic modes                                          253–4                                24, 62
             anxiety disorders and, 254                eﬃcacy of CBT for, 251              diary forms, in ﬁnal phase of
             coaching client to refute, 178            elevated mood states,                         therapy, 246
             identify and address                               understanding and          diﬀerences between CBT and
                    activation of, 100                          conceptualising, 254                 Schema Therapy,
             management of, 170–2                      imagery rescripting and, 30                   138–9, 251–2
            see also individual Critic                 risk assessment, 62                 dimensional evaluation
                    modes.                             risk for therapists, 319                      (‘continua’), in
                                                       vulnerability factors for,                    cognitive change, 147
          Davidson, A., 17                                      222                        direction, parent’s role, 117
          Defectiveness/Shame schema                   see also anxiety and                disconnection and rejection
            anxiety disorders and, 254                          depressive disorders.                domain, 16
            associated domain, 3                     Detached Protector mode, 8,             attachment needs and, 2
            case examples, 91, 100,                             229, 283                     correlation with depression
                   108, 198                            the concept, 306                              severity, 253
            correlation with emotional                 apparent competence                   corresponding schemas, 3,
                   abuse, 20                                    and, 61                              16, 78
            example behaviour, 5, 79, 90,              case examples, 100, 111,              therapist schemas, 315
                   196, 198                                     230–1, 239, 244, 283       dissociation
            group settings, 308                        chairwork with, 232                   dissociative symptoms, 272
            limited reparenting and, 116               examples, 142, 228                    key treatment themes, 274
            relationship with BPD, 21                  forensic populations, 289             managing in session, 273
          Demanding Critic mode, 9                     group settings, 306                   modes, alters and identities
            case examples, 92, 223                     likely behaviour of client, 61,               in complex cases,
            chair dialogues and, 224                            78, 79, 112                          272–4
            and eﬀect of emotional abuse               potential role in depressive          and questionnaires, 65
                   on ASPD severity, 21                         disorders, 253             dissociative identity disorder
            potential role in depressive               secure attachment theory                      (DID), 29, 226
                   disorders, 252                               and, 78                    Downward Arrow technique,
            therapist’s schema, 330–1                  subtypes in trauma,                           142–3
          dependence paradox, 125                               270, 272                   Drummond, P., 27




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                         Index        363



         duration of treatment,                       social media-based                   emotional needs, 1–2
                  indicators, 101–2                           treatment                      acceptance, 17–18
         Dweck C. S., 17–18                                   programme, 334                 additions proposed, 13
                                                    eﬃcacy of schema therapy                 attachment to others as, 2
         early life experience, relevant              anxiety disorders, 27–8                balancing trauma focus with
                    types, 2                          borderline personality                         meeting, 266–7
         early maladaptive                                    disorder, 22–4                 basic needs
                    schemas (EMS)                     caveats when conducting                   acceptance, 17–18
           components of EMS                                  research, 29                         supporting research, 18
                    activation, 4                     chairwork exercises, 32–3                 autonomy, 1, 64
           coping styles, 4–5                         eating disorders, 28                      competence, 17
           deﬁned, 2                                  imagery rescripting, 30–1                 control, 17
           recent developments, 13                       therapist-led vs client-led,           optimal predictability, 19
           role of in personality                             31                                present at birth, 17
                    disturbance, 10                   personality disorders                     produced by cognitive
         early phase of therapy                          elderly people, 27                          development, 17
           behavioural pattern-                          forensic settings, 26–7                self-esteem, 17
                    breaking, 185–91                     mixed populations, 24–6                trust, 17
           building schema/mode                          violent oﬀenders, 289               connectedness to nature, x,
                    awareness, 12, 103–4              psychopathology                                13, 64
           empathy, emphasis on, 103                          improvements                   evidence for existence of,
         eating disorders, 40                                 mediated by changes                    16–19
           case example                                       in mode frequency,             fairness, 13
              highest scoring                                 29–30                          freedom of self-expression,
                    schemas, 281                    Elbert, T., 272                                  1, 64
              mental state and                      elderly people, personality              identifying, 261
                    predisposing factors,                     disorders, 27                  meaningful world, 64
                    280–1                           embodying and personalising              as mechanism of change, 11
              mode cycles, 283                                the mode, 164                  physical safety and
              modes linked to onset,                emotion, activating, case                        security, 64
                    origins, 281–3                            example, 100                   play and spontaneity, 1, 64
              precipitants, 283                     emotional abuse                          realistic limits, 1, 18, 19,
              presenting issues, 280                  eﬀect on BPD symptom                           64, 317
              treatment, 284–7                                severity mediated by           satisfaction of as central
                 chairwork to bypass                          schema modes, 20                       precept of schema
                    coping modes, 286                 schemas correlated with, 20                    therapy, 1
                 cognitive and                      Emotional Deprivation                    secure attachment and
                    behavioural                               schema, 16                             connection to others,
                    work, 287                         associated domain, 3                           1, 17, 64
                 empathic                             case example, 98, 227                  self-coherence, 13
                    confrontation, 286                correlation with emotional             subjugation of, and Angry
                 experiential mode work,                      abuse, 20                              Child mode, 197
                    224, 286, 287                     example behaviour, 196                 unmet needs, 67, 231
                 ﬁnal phase of                      emotional exhaustion, mental                and addictive
                    therapy, 287                              health clinicians,                     behaviours, 57
                 imagery rescripting,                         percentage                        areas for exploration, 64
                    286                                       reporting, 318                    case example, 90
                 sequence of therapy,               Emotional Inhibition schema                 empathy, 279–80
                    284–6                             associated domain, 4                      evidence that schemas
           challenges in treating,                    case examples, 196, 227                        result from, 20–1
                    279–80                            chairwork, 229                            inadequate parenting
           complex functions of eating                likely behaviour of client, 79                 and, 16
                    disorder behaviour,               reconceptualisation, 66                   and therapist sentiments,
                    287–8                             therapist’s schema, 318                        131–2
           eﬃcacy of schema                         emotional literacy,                    emotional presence, and co-
                    therapy, 28                               developing, 60                         regulation, 58–9



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          364           Index



          emotion-focused therapy                    Enmeshment/Underdeveloped               role of in bypassing coping
                    (EFT), 32–3                                Self schema,                          modes, 151
          emotions, connecting to in                           associated domain, 3          targeting emotions
                    therapy, 98–100                  Enraged Child mode, 7                      rationales for, 151
          empathic confrontation                       relationship with BPD, 21                reasons for, 151
            the concept, 126                         Entitlement/Grandiosity                 therapeutic letter
            Angry Child mode, 134                              schema, 16, 186                       writing, 180
            bypassing coping modes,                    associated domain, 3                experiential techniques, mode
                    237–9                              Young and Klosko’s                            work and, 152
            case examples, 105, 188,                           hypothesis, 20              eye movement desensitisation
                    286                              evidence                                        reprocessing therapy
            comparison with limit                      for and against belief in                     (EMDR), 31, 155,
                    setting, 126                               a schema, 145–6                       267, 271, 274, 277
            eating disorders, 286                      beneﬁts of chairwork, 33
            encouraging motivation and                 eﬃcacy of schema therapy,           face to face therapy, potential
                    responsibility                             22, 24, 29–30, 33, 251                 for discomfort in, 169
                    through, 112                          see also eﬃcacy of schema        Failure schema, 146, 200
            focus on in working with                           therapy.                       associated domain, 3
                    forensic                           for existence of emotional             correlation with emotional
                    populations, 295                           needs, 16–19                           abuse, 20
            group settings, 309–11                     potential limitations, 29           fairness, as core emotional
               the process, 311                        relationship between                           need, 13
            implicit assumption                                childhood adversity         family (signiﬁcant others),
                    technique, 238–9                           and                                    consulting with, 190
            inconsistent attendance,                           psychopathology, 21         Farrell, J. M., 21, 25, 29,
                    188–9                              that schemas result from                       302, 310
            limited reparenting and, 105,                      unmet needs, 20–1           feedback
                    126–8                            Excessive Responsibility and             in assessment, 82
               guidelines, 127–8                               Standards domain,              client’s experience, 77, 86
            role of the therapist, 239                         16                             questionnaire scores, 67
            and the therapeutic                      exercises for therapists, self-          supervisory settings, 328–9,
                    relationship, 103, 126                     reﬂection                              330–1
            through chair dialogues,                           exercise, 191               feedback in assessment, 82
                    189                              experiential techniques               Fennell, M., 138
          empathy                                      the concept, 150, 183               Ferrari, L., 32
            case examples, 108                         aims, 150                           ﬁnal phase of therapy, 202, 203,
            empathy group, 319                         autonomy phase, 107                            242, 287, 304
            empathy training, 319                      and building healthy self-             behavioural pattern-
            emphasis in early phase of                         compassion, 215                        breaking, 202–8
                    treatment, 103                     chairwork, see chairwork.              behavioural techniques,
            impact of therapist schema                 and development of Happy                       246
                    on capacity for,                           Child mode, 223–4              chairwork dialogues, 245
                    319–20                             drivers of therapist                   cognitive techniques, 246
            source of, 126                                     avoidance, 150                 eating disorders, 287
            therapy relationship and,                  ﬁve stages, 151–2                         case example, 287
                    92, 98                             historical role-play, see              evaluating readiness for
            viewed by client with                              historical role-play.                  termination of
                    suspicion, 63                      imagery work, see imagery                      therapy, 107
          end of therapy                                       rescripting; imagery           imagery rescripting, 243–4
            introducing the reality,                           work.                          implications
                    241–2                              importance of experiential or             for methods and
            potential challenges, 241,                         emotion-focused                        techniques, 242–6
                    248–9                                      interventions, 150–1              for the therapeutic
            saying goodbye, 247                        mode modiﬁcation exercises,                    approach, 242–3
          end phase of therapy, see ﬁnal                       151–2                             for the therapeutic
                    phase of therapy.                  overview, 104, 105                             relationship, 242




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                         Index        365



           introducing the reality that                personality disorders, 26–7           central tenet of the forensic
                   therapy will end,                   schema mode proﬁles of,                       schema therapy
                   241–2                                       289–90                                model, 290
           limited reparenting,                        schema therapy model of               client’s treatment goals
                   response of                                 risk behaviour,                       relating to presenting
                   therapist, 243                              290–1                                 issues, 81
           objectives, 242, 249                        supervision and self-                 deﬁning treatment goals and
           potential challenges of                             reﬂection,                            gauging client
                   ending therapy, 241,                        importance of, 296                    motivation, 80–2
                   248–9                               Vulnerable Child mode,                developing a safe therapy
           saying goodbye, 247                                 challenges of                         relationship, 98
              looking back, 247                                reaching, 295                 goal of schema therapy, 11,
              looking forward, 247                  forensic risk behaviour, schema                  140, 151
              using a transitional                             therapy model of,             goals of supervision, 332
                   object, 247                                 290–1                         identify and address critic
           timing, 249                              formulation, limited                             mode activation, 100
         ﬁnal phase of treatment,                              reparenting informed          schema healing as ultimate
                   implications for                            by background and,                    goal of schema
                   therapeutic                                 129–30                                therapy, 11
                   relationship, 242                freedom of self-expression               setting pattern-breaking
         ﬂashcards, schema and                         assessment interview                          goals, 198–9
                   mode, 145                                   questions, 350–2              Socratic philosophical
           examples, 145, 223                          as core emotional need,                       principles, 139
           in ﬁnal phase of therapy, 246                       1, 64                         strengthen Healthy Adult
           ﬂashcard outline, 145                    frontstage (coping) modes, 92                    functioning, 101
         forensic populations, 289, 342             future pattern-breaking                  therapy objectives, 93
           addressing psychiatric needs                        imagery, 209                good enough parenting, core
                   with schema                         activating an image, 208                      ingredients, 116–17
                   therapy, 289                        and Healthy Adult mode,             Grandiosity schema, 201
           aims of treatment, 291, 294                         207, 208                    Greenberg, L., 32
           central tenet of the forensic               vs imagery rescripting, 203         group schema therapy, 302
                   schema therapy                      step by step, 203–8                   adapting to group delivery,
                   model, 290                          supporting behaviour                          302–4
           Conning Manipulator mode,                           change via chair              bonding and stabilisation
                   295–6                                       dialogues and, 208                    phase, 304–5
           context of treatment, 294                future-focused imagery,                  chairwork
           coping modes prevalent                              supporting behaviour             to bypass coping modes,
                   in, 289                                     change via future-                    305–6
           eﬃcacy of schema therapy,                           oriented imagery                 to challenge coping
                   personality                                 rescripting, 243–4                    modes, 311
                   disorders, 26–7                                                              to ﬁght Inner Critic, 306–7
           expressed anger, working with            Gestalt Therapy tradition,               eﬀectiveness of the
                   high levels of, 295                       history of chairwork                    format, 312
           imagery rescripting                               and, 159                        empathic confrontation,
              therapist instructions,               Giesen-Bloo, J., 22, 29                          309–11
                   298–300                          Giesen-Bloo eﬃcacy study, 23             ﬁnal phase, 311
              working with violent                  goals and principles                     imagery rescripting, 306–9
                   urges, 297                         aims of schema therapy,                limit setting
           importance of good quality                        10–11, 140, 151, 170               examples, 310
                   case                               aims/goals of schema                      requirements, 303
                   conceptualisation, 291                    therapy, 10–11, 140,            limited reparenting, 305
           Impulsive and Undisciplined                       151, 170                        mode modiﬁcation and
                   Child modes, 297–300               bypassing coping modes, 11,                    healing phase, 305–8
           internal risk factors for                         81, 97, 98–100,                 participant selection, 302
                   antisocial behaviour,                     140, 151                        stages, 304
                   292, 293                           central goal of assessment, 39         therapist’s role, 303




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          366           Index



          Gude, T., 27                                 learning to visualise, 221            re-enactment of original
          guidance                                        client’s visualisation, 221                event, 181
            limited reparenting                           evaluation and                     role reversals, 181–2
                   approach, 123–5                             homework, 221                 suitable situation for,
            parent’s role, 117                            identifying the                            example of, 179
          Guilt-Inducing Critic mode,                          embodiment of the             trying out schema-breaking
                   10, 170                                     Healthy Adult, 221                    behaviour, 182–3
            OCD and, 255                                  rationale behind the             histrionic personality disorder,
            secure attachment theory                           imagery exercise, 221                 characteristic
                   and, 78                                therapist tip, 221                         modes, 22
                                                          therapist’s personal             Hoﬀart, A., 27
          Happy Child mode, 7, 13                              examples, 219–21            Holtforth, M. G., 32
            the concept, 222                           masking
            ﬂashcard recordings, 223                           underdevelopment,           identifying needs, 261
            incorporating into case                            61                          imagery rescripting, 154
                    conceptualisations,                mimicked by coping                    ‘aﬀect bridge’ imagery, 155
                    222                                        modes, 228                    anxiety and depressive
            mode work, 224                             overcompensatory modes                        disorders, 259–60
            strengthening methods,                             confused for, 21              behaviour change,
                    223–4                              self-compassion, 213,                         supporting through
            suppression of, 222                                214–16                                future-oriented
          healing, schema/mode                         strengthening                                 rescripting, 243–4
                    healing, 12                           aims in treating                   beneﬁts for clients, 99
          Healthy Adult Connection                             CPTSD, 271                    case examples, 109, 244, 260,
                    Form, 219, 220                        and connecting with,                       276, 286
          Healthy Adult mode, 10, 13,                          213, 246                      communicating a purpose
                    192, 217, 239, 317                    ﬁnal phase of therapy,                     for, 156
            the concept, 5, 101, 212                           245                           comparison with historical
            autonomy and, 12                              middle phase of therapy,                   role-play, 175–9
            behaviour change, 217–19                           104–5                         core memories, 155
            building of as aim of schema                  as ultimate aim of schema          CPTSD, 276–7
                    therapy, 11                                therapy, 101                  and depression, 30
            case example, 92                         healthy self-compassion,                depression and, 30
            cognitive interventions,                           building, 215                 and development of Happy
                    inﬂuenced by                     healthy self-regulation,                        Child mode, 223–4
                    strength of                                cognitive                     eating disorders, 286
                    client’s, 139                              restructuring as core           case example, 286
            cognitive interventions                            skill for, 213                evidence for eﬃcacy of, 30–1
                    inﬂuenced by, 139                Helpless Surrenderer mode,                therapist-led vs client-led,
            cognitive restructuring                            8, 133                                31
               and accessing healthy                   case example, 92, 281                 ﬁnal phase of therapy, 243–4
                    cognitions, 217                    potential role in depressive          forensic populations,
               case example, 218                               disorders, 253                        298–300
            connecting through                         therapist’s schema, 316                 working with violent
                    imagery, 219                     here-and-now focus, 295                         urges, 297
            connecting through the                   historical role-play, 173–9             future pattern-breaking
                    Healthy Adult                      and behaviour change, 105                     imagery vs, 203
                    Connection                         comparison with imagery               group settings, 306–9
                    Form, 219                                  rescripting, 175–9            Impulsive and Undisciplined
            development of Happy Child                 and corrective emotional                      Child modes,
                    mode and, 222–4                            experiences, 175,                     298–300
            functions, 212–13                                  182, 183                      initial phase (therapist
            future pattern-breaking                    imaging assessment                            rescripts), 156–9
                    imagery and, 207,                          example, 180                  in online settings, 334–7
                    208                                in online settings, 334–7             preparatory grounding
            healthy self-awareness, 214                phases, 180                                   techniques, 337




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                         Index        367



           the process, 308–9                       Insuﬃcient Self-Control/Self-             maladaptive schemas arising
           second phase (client                              Discipline schema, 16                     from deprivation
                   rescripts), 156–62                 associated domain, 3                             of, 16
           selecting meaningful                       relationship with BPD, 21               parent’s role, 117
                   images, 155                      International Society of                  requirements
           social anxiety disorder, 260                      Schema Therapy                      group schema
           therapist instructions,                           (ISST), 86, 322, 342                      therapy, 303
                   298–300                          interpersonal problems, 27, 32,              group settings, 303
           in trauma-focused                                 40, 98, 99, 227, 266             schemas arising from
                   interventions, 274               interviewing coping modes, via                     deprivation of, 16
           and treatment of PTSD, 274                        chairwork, 228–34                specifying consequences of
           typical protocol, 276                                                                       crossing limits, 128
           as useful addition to CBT                Jacob, G. A., 13, 22, 25                  therapy-interfering
                   treatment of social              journaling, 128, 180                               behaviours and,
                   anxiety disorder, 252                                                               186–8
           on virtual platforms, 337                Keulen-de Vos, M., 22                  limited reparenting
         imagery work, 152                          key problem areas                         addressing suppressed anger,
           mode dialogues via imagery,                common key problems                              134–6
                   151, 153–4, 234                            related to typical                 case example, 135
           safe place/container imagery,                      mode, 56                           complaining exercise,
                   152–3                              identifying, 40                                  136
           tips and                                   role of in schema therapy, 97           of Angry Child mode, 132–4
                   troubleshooting, 163             Klosko, J. S., 4, 13, 16, 20,             architecture, 114
           variants, 152                                      63, 213                         assessment process
         Impaired Autonomy and                                                                         and, 58–9
                   Performance                      Lack of a Coherent Identity               attunement, 110
                   domain, 16                                  schema, 13                        bridge into intervention
           corresponding schemas, 3                 Lack of a Meaningful World                         strategies, 121–2
           depression severity and,                            schema, 13                        as foundation of the
                   253                              Lack of Nature Connectedness                       therapeutic
         Impaired Limits domain, 16                            schema, 13                              relationship, 117–18
           corresponding schemas,                   Lang’s theory of emotion, 151                process-based approach,
                   3, 297                           Leary, M., 18                                      119–22
         Impaired Limits EMS,                       Lee, C. W., 27, 275                          segue to intervention,
                   Disconnection/                   letter writing, therapeutic, 180                   122
                   Rejection and, 21                Life Events Checklist (LEC-5),               tips for success, 122
         implicit assumption technique,                        66, 268                           triggering experiences
                   238–9                            life history, assessment, 64–5                  case example, 120
         Impulsive Child mode                       life-interfering behaviours                     emotional reactions,
           imagery rescripting, 298–300                identifying, 196                                119–20
           relationship with BPD, 21                   interventions to address,                    historical origins,
         inadequate parenting, need                            192–202                                 121–2
                   deﬁcits arising                  limit setting                                   underlying schema/s
                   from, 16                            assessment interview                            and needs, 120–1
         incarcerated females,                                 questions, 354–5                     understanding, 119
                   associations between                balancing with autonomy, 19            authentic practice, 125
                   BPD symptoms and                    case example, 321                      autonomy phase, 106
                   childhood                           and childhood well-being, 19           boundary setting
                   adversity, 21                       client romanticisation of                 balancing nurturance and,
         inconsistent attendance,                              therapeutic                             123–4
                   empathically                                relationship, 321                 case example, 124
                   confronting, 188–9                  comparison with empathic                  healthy limits vs
         Inner Critic mode                                     confrontation, 126                      problematic
           case examples, 283                          examples, 129, 310                              violations, 124
           chairwork, to ﬁght, 306–7                   limited reparenting and,               and building healthy self-
           group work, 306–7                                   126–8                                   compassion, 215




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          368           Index



          limited reparenting (cont.)                Little Boy or Girl on the Street      mode language and mode
             case example, phases of                            Dialogue, 61, 215                   model use, anxiety
                     schema therapy,                 Lobbestael, J., 20, 21                         and depressive
                     safety and bonding              Lockwood, G., 17                               disorders, 256
                     phase, 105–6                    long-term therapy, challenges         mode mapping
             case examples, 92, 98, 105–6                       of, 96–7                    the concept, 86
             changing role of the                    Louis, J., 17                          beneﬁts for clients, 320
                     therapist, 242                                                         case example, 282, 285
             clinical dilemmas, 130–3                maladaptive coping responses,          collaborative development,
             core elements, 123                               reversing as aim of                   285, 288
             developing a safe therapy                        schema therapy, 11            completed mode map, 95
                     relationship, 98                maladaptive inner critic               developing and sharing
             and development of Happy                         (parent) modes, 9–10                  a schema mode map,
                     Child mode, 223                 Malcolm, W., 32                                86–94
             empathic confrontation, 105,            meaningful world, as core              and development of mode
                     126–8                                    emotional need, 64                    awareness, 93
             face to face therapy, potential         mental health clinicians,              ending a session, 94
                     for discomfort, 169                      percentage reporting          forensic clients, 294
             foundational                                     emotional                     identiﬁcation of modes for
                     component, 136                           exhaustion, 318                       case
             good enough parenting,                  Mertens, Y., 20                                conceptualisation, 40,
                     116–17                          middle phase of therapy                        68–75
             group schema therapy, 305                behavioural pattern-                  psychoeducation phase, 141
             group settings, 305                              breaking, 192–202             template, 93
             guidance and direction,                  chairwork, 172–7                     mode patterns, 143, 330
                     123–5                            client taking more                   mode work, 152, 224, 287
             informed by background and                       responsibility, 104–5        modes
                     formulation, 129–30             mindfulness                            classes of, 5
             limit setting, 126–8                     exercises, 25                         separation of, 164
             messages, examples of, 191               practices, 214                        separation of using
             overview, 103, 114–15                    role in Healthy Adult                         chairs, 164
             provision of care, 116                           functioning, 214             mode/schema awareness, and
             reliance on client inhabiting            training, 324                                 building healthy self-
                     Vulnerable Child                Mistrust/Abuse schema, 16                      compassion, 215
                     mode, 240                        associated domain, 3                 mode-schema pie chart, 228
             response of therapist, ﬁnal              correlation with emotional           Mohtadijafari, S., 28
                     phase of therapy, 243                    abuse, 20                    mood and anxiety disorders,
             role of assessment in ﬁne-               relationship with BPD, 21                     see also anxiety and
                     tuning, 39                      mode assessment, 40, 68–75                     depressive disorders;
             safety and bonding                      mode dialogues                                 depression, 251
                     phase, 105                       the concept, 151                     motivation, 81, 199, 217,
             strategies for online settings,          beneﬁts, 104, 112                             297, 319
                     334–6                            case examples, 167, 257–8
             therapeutic relationship,                using chairs, 152, 257–8             Nameni, E., 28
                     103, 108, 114–15,                via imagery, 151, 153–4, 234         narcissistic behaviours
                     116, 252                        mode ﬂips, potential                    example of, 187
                themes and treatment, 115                     challenges, 97                 empathic confrontation, 188
             therapeutic stance, 128–9               mode frequency,                       narcissistic personality
             therapist self-disclosure, 130                   psychopathology                        disorder (NPD)
             in trauma processing                             improvements                   characteristic modes, 22
                     work, 267                                mediated by changes            consequences of presence of
             unmet needs and therapist                        in, 29–30                              strong coping
                     sentiments, 131–2               mode language, use of in                        modes, 81
          linking past and present,                           treating anxiety and           likely presentation, 57
                     59–60, 82, 121–2,                        depressive                   nature, connecting with, see
                     172, 196                                 disorders, 256                         connection to nature.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                          Index        369



         needs                                      Overcompensatory mode                            future pattern-
           Baumeister and Leary’s                    case example, 193                               breaking imagery.
                   deﬁnition, 18                     may block awareness of                pattern-breaking process case
           comparison of Young’s                             underlying child                        conceptualisation,
                   taxonomy with                             modes, 21                               ﬁne-tuning through
                   Dweck’s, 17                       therapist’s schema, 315                         the, 199–202
           see also emotional needs.                Overcontroller modes, 9–9              Paulik, G., 31
         negative beliefs, undermining,              apparent competence                   personal therapy for schema
                   146–7                                     and, 61                                 therapists, 322–3, 329
         Negativity/Pessimism schema,                case example, 281                     personality disorders
                   associated domain, 4              Flagellating, 78, 282, 285              eﬃcacy of schema
         nurturance, parent’s role, 117              Hyperautonomous, 281                            therapy, 251
                                                     Invincible, 254, 282                       elderly people, 27
         OCD (obsessive compulsive                   likely behaviour of client,                forensic settings, 26–7
                    disorder), 27, 30, 102                   61, 67                             mixed populations, 24–6
           case examples, 317                        Overanalysing, 9, 92, 256               hierarchical structure of, 22
              chairwork mode                         Paranoid, 79, 289, 291                  mode proﬁles, 22
                    dialogues, 257–8                 Perfectionistic, 224, 282               and schema mode proﬁles of
           conceptualisation, 255                    Suspicious, 285                                 forensic
           characteristic modes, 22                 Overvigilance and Inhibition                     populations, 289
           coping modes, 255                                 domain,                         violent oﬀenders, eﬃcacy of
         online schema therapy                               corresponding                           schema therapy, 289
           advantages, 333                                   schemas, 4                      see also speciﬁc personality
           available technology, 333–4                                                               disorders.
           chairwork, 337–40                        Paivio, S., 32–3                       phases of schema therapy
              chairs in the client’s room           paranoid personality disorder,           assessment and education
                    technique, 339–40                         characteristic                         phase, 12, 102
              chairs in the therapist’s                       modes, 22                      autonomy phase, 12, 106–7
                    room technique,                 Parent modes, ﬁghting via                complete course of
                    338–9                                     chairs in client’s room                treatment, case
              moving in front of camera                       during video                           example, 108–9
                    technique, 338                            chairwork, 340                 evaluating client readiness
              tips for online                       parenting                                   for middle phase, 103–4
                    technique, 340                    comparison of diﬀerent                    for ﬁnal phase, 105
           experiential techniques,                           types of, 19                      for termination phase,
                    adapting for online               good enough parenting,                         107
                    settings, 334–40                          core ingredients,              original conception, 12
           imagery rescripting, 334–7                         116–17                         overview, 101–2
           limited reparenting,                       inadequate, 16                         safety and bonding phase,
                    strategies for online             parents’ boundary setting                      12, 104–5
                    settings, 334–6                           role, 117                         limited reparenting, case
           risk management, 336                     parents, boundary setting                        example, 105–6
           therapist self-care, 336                           role, 117                         overall therapist objective,
           training options becoming                pattern-breaking                                 104–5
                    available, 342                    ﬁne-tuning case                        schema/mode awareness and
           videotherapy adaptations,                          conceptualisation                      management phase,
                    335–6                                     through the process,                   12, 103–4
           virtual platforms, 337                             199–202                      physical safety and security, as
         optimal predictability, 17–18                supporting behaviour                           core emotional
           meeting the basic need                             change through,                        need, 64
                    for, 19                                   203–8                        Pilkington, P., 20
         Other-Directedness domain,                   target development, 194              play and spontaneity
                    322, 335                          targets for behaviour change,          assessment interview
           corresponding schemas, 3                           198–200                                questions, 352
         overcompensation (inversion)                    see also behavioural                as core emotional need,
                    modes, 8–9                                pattern-breaking;                      1, 64




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          370           Index



          Pollyanna mode, likely                       associated domain, 4                romanticising of therapeutic
                    behaviour of                     pushing for anger, 134–6                       relationship, case
                    client, 79                                                                      example, 321
          Positive Adaptive Schemas, 13              questionnaires                        Rothbart, M. K., 63
          Positive Schema Questionnaire                assessment, 61, 65–7                rumination, 92, 256
                    (PSQ), 66                          identifying therapy-
          Predator mode, 9, 300                               interfering                  safe and secure attachment,
            forensic populations, 289, 291                    behaviours, 190                        assessment interview
          premenstrual dysphoric                       Positive Schema                               questions, 346–9
                    disorder, 28                              Questionnaire, 66            safe place imagery, 77, 152, 153,
          Pro Real virtual platform, 337               Schema Coping                                 305, 308
          problematic behavioural                             Inventory, 191               safety and bonding, developing
                    patterns, case                     Schema Mode Inventory, 21,                    a safe therapy
                    examples, 190, 193                        22, 66, 281                            relationship, 98
          problematic situations,                      Young Compensatory                  Schaap, G., 25
                    identifying and                           Inventory, 191               Schauer, M., 272
                    exploring, 176                     Young Positive Schema               schema chemistry, 125, 317,
          process issues/information, in                      Questionnaire, 17                      320, 323
                    assessment, 77                     Young Schema                        Schema Coping Inventory, 191
          Process-Experiential Therapy                        Questionnaire,               Schema Diary, example of, 144
                    (PET), 32                                 16–17, 65–7, 190             schema domains, and
          Protector mode                               Young-Rygh Avoidance                          corresponding
            chairwork, 168–9                                  Inventory, 191                         schemas, 3–4
            see also individual Protector                                                  schema healing, as ultimate
                    modes.                           randomised controlled trials                    goal of schema
          psychoeducation, ad hoc, 141                 anxiety disorders, 27–8                       therapy, 11
          psychopathology, relationship                chairwork, 32                       schema mindfulness-based
                    of schema and mode                 comparison of therapies                       cognitive therapy
                    proﬁles to, 21–2                      BPD, 22                                    (SMBCT), 25
          psychotic disorder, 29                          cost-eﬀectiveness for            Schema Mode Inventory
          PTSD (post-traumatic stress                           elderly adults, 27                   (SMI), 21, 22, 66, 281
                    disorder), 27, 31                  eﬀectiveness of schema              schema mode model
            case example, 280                                   therapy supported            avoidance modes, 8
            complex, 267, 270                                   by, 342                         Angry Protector mode, 8
            EMDR treatment, 274                        group schema therapy                     Avoidant Protector
            imagery rescripting and, 30,                        protocol                             mode, 8
                    274                                         evaluation, 23                  Detached Protector
            see also complex post-                     imagery rescripting, 30                       mode, 8
                    traumatic stress                   violent oﬀenders with                    Detached Self-Soother
                    disorder (CPTSD).                           personality                          mode, 8
          PTSD imagery rescripting, and                         disorders, 289               child modes, 6–7
                    treatment of, 274                rationale for experiential work,           Angry Child mode, 6
          Punitive Critic mode, 9, 207                          32, 151, 207, 219,              Enraged Child mode, 7
            addressing through                                  261, 262                        Happy Child mode, 7
                    therapy, 100                     realistic limits, as core                  Impulsive Child mode, 7
            case example, 276                                   emotional need, 1, 18,          Undisciplined Child
            chairwork, 171–2                                    19, 64, 317                          mode, 7
            CPTSD, 271                               repetitive negative thinking,              Vulnerable Child mode, 6
            dissociative processes linked                       conceptualising and          Healthy Adult mode, 10
                    to activation of, 274                       bypassing, 256               maladaptive inner critic
            mediating eﬀect, 21                      resignation, replacement of                     (parent) modes,
            potential role in depressive                        surrender by, 13                     9–10
                    disorders, 252                   respect for others, parent’s               Demanding Critic mode, 9
            secure attachment theory                            role, 117                       Guilt-Inducing Critic
                    and, 78                          responsibility pie graphs, 146                  mode, 10
          Punitiveness schema, 66                    Romano, M., 30                             Punitive Critic mode, 9



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                         Index       371



           overcompensation                            key hypothesis, 20                     beneﬁts for therapist well-
                   (inversion)                         recent developments, 13                        being, 129, 323
                   modes, 8–9                          role of Vulnerable Child               and evaluation of therapist
              Approval/Recognition                             mode, 240                              reactions, 248
                   Seeker mode, 8                      schema mode model, 5–10                exploring the client’s
              Bully and Attack mode, 9                 schema modes, 6–10                             capacity for, 346
              Conning and                              treatment model, original              forensic populations, 296
                   Manipulative mode, 9                        formulation, 12                schema/mode awareness
              Overcontroller modes, 9                  treatment phases, 12–13                        and, 143
              Predator mode, 9                            see also phases of schema        Self-Aggrandiser mode, 8
              Self-Aggrandiser mode, 8                         therapy.                       apparent competence
           surrender coping modes, 7                   ultimate aim, 151                              and, 61
              Compliant Surrenderer                 Schema Therapy Case                       forensic populations, 289
                   mode, 7                                     Conceptualisation              function, 222
              Helpless Surrenderer                             Rating Scale                   likely behaviour of client,
                   mode, 8                                     (STCCRS), 328                          61, 79
         schema modes                               Schema Therapy Competency              self-coherence, need for, as
           deﬁned, 5                                           Rating Scale                           core emotional
           higher-order factors driven                         (STCRS), 328                           need, 13
                   by, 22                           schema-breaking behaviour              self-compassion
         schema therapist well-being                   historical role-play trying            beneﬁts of training in for
           continuing professional                             out, 182–3                             schema
                   development, beneﬁts                trying out with historical                     therapists, 324
                   for therapist well-                         role-play, 182–3               building, schema therapy
                   being, 322                       schema/mode activation,                           intervention
           see well-being of schema                            visualising, 142                       approach, 215–16
                   therapists.                      schema/mode awareness,                    case example, 216
           social support, beneﬁts for                         building, 12, 103–4,           coaching in, 208
                   therapist well-being,                       140–1                          as core skill for healthy
                   322                              schema-mode diary, 228                            self-regulation,
           supervision, beneﬁts for                 schema/mode monitoring,                           213
                   therapist well-being,                       forms, 143                     Healthy Adult mode, 213,
                   323                              schema/mode proﬁles,                              214–16
         Schema Therapy                                        relationship to                processes involved, 215
           aims/goals, 10–11, 140,                             psychopathology,            self-esteem, as basic need, 17
                   151, 170                                    21–2                        self-harm, and suitability for
           approach to mood and                     schemas, Young’s concept,                         schema therapy, 62
                   anxiety disorders, 251                      2–4                         self-monitoring circle, 228
           assumptions behind, 324                  schizophrenia, 26                      Self-Pity Victim mode, 8, 133
           basic model, 1–5                         secure attachment                      self-reﬂection, therapist
           basis of, 226, 343                          assessment interview                           exercise, 191
           challenges of long-term                             questions, 346–9            self-regulation
                   therapy, 96–7                       coherence in retelling the             required skills, 213
           complete course of                                  details of childhood           role of Healthy Adult
                   treatment, case                             as sign of, 77                         mode, 212
                   example, 108–9                      and Compliant Surrenderer           Self-Sacriﬁce schema
           diﬀerences between CBT                              mode, 78                       associated domain, 3
                   and, 27, 32, 138–9,              secure attachment and                     eﬀect of emotional
                   251–2                                       connection to others,                  maltreatment on
           duration of treatment                               as core emotional                      anhedonic depression
                   indicators, 101–2                           need, 1, 17, 64                        mediated by, 21
           evidence for eﬃcacy of, 22–8             secure attachment theory, and             therapist schemas, 316
           exponential interest in by                          Compliant                   self-sacriﬁcing behaviour,
                   therapists across the                       Surrenderer mode, 78                   Compliant
                   globe, 342                       Seebauer, L., 13                                  Surrenderer
           the journey, 97                          self-reﬂection                                    mode, 196




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          372           Index



          self-trust, lack of in                     somatic processes, 4                           Surrenderer mode;
                     CPTSD, 269                      somatic sensations, 320                        Helpless Surrenderer
          session attendance                         somatic signs, 228                             mode, 329
             empathically confronting                stages of change, 80, 312, 346
                     inconsistent                    Steel, C., 31                         targets for behavioural pattern-
                     attendance, 188–9               structural dissociation, 272                     breaking
             maintaining regular                     structuring initial session,             for behaviour change,
                     attendance, 186                            57–63                                 198–200
          session structure                          stuck points, examples of, 200           developing, 194
             typical, 107                            Subjugation schema, 145, 191,         technology, see also online
             attunement section, 109–10                         201, 275                              schema therapy, 333
             ‘Work’ section, 110                        associated domain, 3               temperament
             ‘Wash Up’ section, 111                  substance use disorders, 29, 40          assessment of client’s, 63
             clinical example, 111                   suicidal ideation, in depressive         of therapists, 314
          Shaw, I. A., 21, 25, 302, 310                         disorders, 252             termination activities, see also
          Siegel, D., 59, 60                         suicidality, and suitability for                 ﬁnal phase of
          Simpson, S., 28, 94, 280                              schema therapy, 62                    therapy, 107
          single session framework,                  suitability for schema therapy        therapeutic letter writing,
                     30, 32                             co-morbidities and, 62                        151, 180
          Slowey, L., 28                                CPTSD, suitability of              therapeutic relationship
          Smith, E., 280                                        a schema therapy              and autonomy, 93
          social anxiety, 30                                    approach to                   behavioural interventions
          social anxiety disorder imagery                       treatment, 277                        and, 104
                     rescripting, as useful             evaluating the client’s, 62–3         building during
                     addition to CBT                    suicidality/self-harm and, 62                 assessment, 58–9
                     treatment of, 252               supervision                              case example, 108
          Social Isolation/Alienation                   beneﬁts for therapist well-           characteristic schema
                     schema                                     being, 323                            therapy style, 114
             associated domain, 3                       common supervisory issues,            clariﬁcation of, 61
             case example, 227                                  330–1                         contribution to change, 267
             correlation with emotional                   Aggrandising and/or                 developing a safe
                     abuse, 20                                  Overcompensating                      relationship, 98
             eﬀect of emotional                                 therapists, 331               developing a safe
                     maltreatment on                      avoidance of experiential                   relationship and
                     anhedonic depression                       work, 330                             treatment alliance, 98
                     mediated by, 21                      avoidance of recordings of          development of autonomy
          social support, beneﬁts for                           clinical work, 330–1                  and, 93
                     therapist well-being,                impact of supervisor’s              empathic confrontation and,
                     322                                        schemas on                            103, 126
          Socrates, 139                                         therapist’s                   forensic settings, 295
          Socratic approach, application                        conﬁdence, 331                implications of ﬁnal phase of
                     of in schema therapy,              goals, 332                                    treatment, 242
                     116, 140–1                         ISST model, 328                       limited reparenting and, 103,
          Socratic dialogue, bypassing                  overview of schema therapy                    108, 114–15, 116, 252
                     coping modes                               supervision, 327–8            provision of care, 116
                     through, 141                       supervisory relationship,             provision of emotional
          Socratic philosophical                                328–9                                 security, 59
                     principles, and                      educator/coach role of the          role of attunement, 117–18
                     cognitive                                  supervisor, 328               role of boundaries, 123–4
                     interventions, 139                   limited reparenting role of         romanticising the, 321
          Socratic principles, and                              the supervisor, 329           themes and treatment, 115
                     cognitive                            mentoring role of the               therapist disclosure and,
                     interventions, 139                         supervisor, 328–9                     129
          Socratic questioning, 121                  surrender coping modes, 7             therapeutic stance of the
             Downward Arrow                          Surrenderer mode, see also                       therapist, 128–9
                     technique, 142–3                           Compliant                     the concept, 57



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                          Index        373



           limited reparenting                         examples of, 237–8                     intervention methods, 11–12
                   changes, 241                        identifying, 188–91                    original formulation, 12
         therapist exercises, self-                       schema inventories and           treatment phases, see phases of
                   reﬂection                                   questionnaires, 190                    schema therapy.
                   exercise, 191                       interventions to address,           triggering events
         therapist requirements,                               185–91                         ‘moding out’, 167
                   assessment                       tips for therapists                       preparing for, 145
                   phase, 82–3                         attunement, 122                        visual analysis, 142
         therapist schemas                             be aware of client coping           troubleshooting, 163, 199
           awareness and healing of, 314                       modes, 111–12               trust, as basic need, 17
           and behavioural pattern-                    case conceptualisation, using
                   breaking, 191                               as a compass, 112           Undisciplined Child mode
           boundary crossing and,                      chairwork, 178–9                      forensic populations,
                   320–2                               enhancing client motivation                  297–300
           building therapist well-being,                      and                           imagery rescripting, 298–300
                   322–4                                       responsibility, 112         Unfairness schema, 13
           bypassing coping modes,                     imagery work, 163                   unmet emotional needs, see
                   318, 323                            learning to visualise Healthy                under emotional
           common schemas amongst                              Adult mode, 221                      needs.
                   psychotherapists,                   online chair technique, 340         Unrelenting Standards/
                   316–18                              successful attunement, 122                   Hypercriticalness
           Compliant Surrenderer                    Trachsel, M., 32                                schema
                   mode, 315                        transference, 320                        anxiety disorders and, 254
           considerations bypassing                 transference-focused                     associated domain, 4
                   coping modes,                               psychotherapy (TFP),          and potential beneﬁts of
                   318, 323                                    comparison with                      developing the Happy
           Demanding Critic mode,                              Schema                               Child mode, 222
                   330–1                                       Therapy, 22–3                 therapist’s schema, 191, 316
           Detached Self-Soother                    trauma
                   mode, 316, 318                      childhood trauma and                van Genderen, H., 13, 23
           early maladaptive schemas,                          autonomy, 269               van Vreeswijk, M., 25, 302
                   314–15                              ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’             Victim/Self-Pity mode, 186
           impact on capacity for                              scenario, 66                video therapy
                   empathy and schema                  imagery rescripting, 156               chairwork, 339
                   healing, 319–20                     and questionnaires, 65                 client experience, 333
           interaction with client                     schema therapy approach,            violent oﬀenders with
                   schemas and modes,                          266–7                                  personality disorders,
                   314, 315–16                         see also complex post-                         randomised
           and therapist burnout, 318                          traumatic stress                       controlled trials,
           therapist-client schema                             disorder (CPTSD);                      289
                   chemistry, case                             PTSD (post-                 visualising Healthy Adult
                   example, 317                                traumatic stress                       mode, 207, 208
         therapist self-care, online                           disorder).                  Vulnerability to Harm or
                   settings, 336                    trauma memories,                                  Illness schema
         therapist well-being, model for                       processing, 275                associated domain, 3
                   enhancement of, see              trauma processing,                        association between physical
                   also well-being of                          overcoming                             abuse and anxious
                   schema                                      avoidance of, 275                      arousal mediated
                   therapists, 323                  trauma see.                                       by, 21
         therapist-client chemistry, 125,           trauma-focused interventions,             correlation with emotional
                   317, 320, 323                               preparation for,                       abuse, 20
           case example, 317                                   274–5                       Vulnerable Child mode, 6
         therapy-interfering behaviours             treatment model                           accessing through
           addressing through                          aims/goals of schema                           contamination of the
                   chairwork, case                             therapy, 10–11, 140,                   chair, 234–5
                   example, 201–2                              151, 170                       anxiety disorders and, 254




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
          374           Index



          Vulnerable Child (cont.)                     beneﬁts of continuing               Yalcin, O., 65
           building healthy self-                             professional                 Yılmaz, M., 20
                   compassion, 216                            development, 322             Younan, R., 20
           case example, 92                            beneﬁts of self-reﬂection,          Young, J. E., 1, 2–4, 5,
           challenges of reaching in                          129, 323                              11–12, 13, 16,
                   forensic                            beneﬁts of social                            17, 18, 20, 27,
                   populations, 295                           support, 322                          63, 86, 212, 213,
           relationship with BPD, 21                   beneﬁts of supervision                       240, 251,
           role of in limited                                 for, 323                              344
                   reparenting, 240                    building, 322–4                     Young Compensatory
           therapist role-playing                      model for enhancement                        Inventory, 191
              to bypass coping modes,                         of, 323                      Young Parenting Inventory
                   234–7                               online schema therapy,                       (YPI), 65, 155
              case example, 236–7                             therapist self-care,         Young Positive Schema
              chair arrangement, 237                          336                                   Questionnaire
                                                     Westerhof, G., 25                              (YPSQ), 17
          ‘watching from the sidelines’              whiteboard summary, 142               Young Schema
                   exercises, 168–9                  women in prison, associations                  Questionnaire (YSQ),
          Webber, M. A., 302                                  between BPD                           16–17, 65–7,
          Weishaar, M., 4, 16, 63, 213                        symptoms and                          190
          well-being of schema therapists                     childhood                    Young-Rygh Avoidance
            beneﬁts of chairwork,                             adversity, 21                         Inventory,
                   323                               Wood, A., 17                                   191




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108918145.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press
