        Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
An Essential CBT Guide to Rewiring the Brain and
 Overcoming Anxiety, Depression, and Intrusive
   Thoughts Using a Highly Effective Form of
                Psychotherapy
                 Table of Contents
Introduction
Part 1: Clarifying the Problem and Setting Goals
Chapter 1: Identifying the Problem
 Automatic Thoughts
 Intrusive Thoughts
 Identifying Your Thought Patterns
 Types of Negative Thoughts
Chapter 2: Setting Your Therapy Goals
 Identify Your Goal
 Identify Your Starting Point
 Identify the Steps
 Get Started
Part 2: CBT Techniques
Chapter 3: CBT Techniques for Specific Ailments
 CBT Techniques for Overcoming Anxiety
 CBT Techniques for Overcoming PTSD
 CBT Techniques for Overcoming Depression
 CBT Techniques for Overcoming Anger
 CBT Techniques for Overcoming Procrastination
Chapter 4: Tools Used in CBT
 Journaling
 Unraveling Cognitive Distortions
 Cognitive Restructuring
 Exposure and Response Prevention
 Interoceptive Exposure
 Nightmare Exposure and Rescripting
 Playing the Script Until the End
 Progressive Muscle Relaxation (PMR)
 Relaxed Breathing
Part 3: Putting CBT to Work
Chapter 5: Behavioral Activation
 How Does Behavioral Activation Work?
 Conceptualizing Your Behavior Model
 Behavioral Activation Techniques You Need to Know About
 Personalized Positive Activities
 Rewarding Yourself
 Getting Back on the Horse
Chapter 6: Change Your Core Beliefs
 Conceptualize the Swap
 Rate Your Beliefs
 Identify the Nature of Your Negative Core Belief
 Keep a Positive Forward Focus
 Maintain a Data Log
 Heal the Origins of the Old Belief
 Self-Monitor Your Behaviors
Chapter 7: Mindfulness-integrated CBT
 The Four Stages
Part 4: Supportive CBT Practices
Chapter 8: Increasing Mental Stamina
 Improving Your Problem-Solving Abilities
 Using Mantras and Meditation
 Soaking in the Healing Benefits of Nature
 Finding Value in Feeling Small
 Stargazing and Cloud Watching
 Healing Through Art and Music
 The Power of Writing
Chapter 9: Increase Physical Wellness
 Eating a Healthy Diet
 Drinking Plenty of Water
 Maintaining Your Personal Hygiene
 Caring About Your Looks
 Getting Regular Activity
 Relaxing on Purpose
 Getting Proper Sleep
Chapter 10: Maintaining Wellness
 Regularly Assessing Your Approach
 Integrating Supportive Practices
 Seeking Support When It’s Needed
 Having Empathy for Yourself
 Continually Educating Yourself
Conclusion
                       Introduction
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a form of therapy that focuses
on the connection between your thoughts (cognitive) and your
actions (behaviors). CBT works based on the concept that your
thoughts about various circumstances stimulate how you feel
emotionally and physically towards those circumstances. In most
cases, these feelings are neutral or positive; however, they can also
be negative and destructive. For those experiences, CBT seeks to
use the power of cognitive restructuring and behavioral
implementation to support you in experiencing freedom from your
destructive feelings and behaviors.
CBT was originally proposed in the 1960s by Dr. Aaron T. Beck, who
was a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Beck studied
and practiced psychoanalysis and had conducted several tests on
the psychoanalytic of patients who were suffering from depression.
He was surprised when all his original beliefs around depression
were invalidated by his findings which ultimately lead him to look
even further into the way depression could be conceptualized. What
he found was that patients who have depression experience streams
of negative thoughts that arise spontaneously within their minds. Dr.
Beck called these cognitions “automatic thoughts.” From there, he
went on to discover ways to begin evaluating these automatic
thoughts and coached his patients through thought-based practices
that were used to combat the automatic thoughts and restore peace
within the brain. This went on to become what we know as cognitive
behavioral therapy.
CBT is an evidence-based psychological treatment that works on the
foundation of thoughts and behaviors. This is not about “thinking
positive so that you can feel better”. CBT is about strategically
adjusting your thought processes so that you can adjust the way you
feel about things; thus, helping you have less intense responses to
the world around you. It works in a very specific manner and requires
consistent implementation for it to be effective in helping you treat
your behavioral concerns such as anxiety, depression, PTSD, anger,
and even procrastination. It has even been used to treat eating
disorders and various addictive behaviors in people.
Based on research, CBT has been proven to be just as effective, if
not more effective, than using medication alone when it comes to
treating depression and anxiety specifically. People who experience
these two psychological disorders are known to experience
consistent relapses in their depressive or anxious episodes even if
they are being treated with specific medications. When these
individuals partake in CBT, however, they are far less likely to
relapse and, if they do, they are far more resilient towards their
relapses. This means that if you experience depression and you use
CBT to treat it, you are less likely to experience major depressive
episodes following successful treatment because you are now
equipped with the proper skills to overcome depression before it
becomes problematic.
If you are ready to begin living a life free of the problematic
symptoms of your anxiety or depression, “Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy” will show you everything that you need to know to
understand CBT and begin implementing it in your own life. Be sure
to take your time and read this book in the order that it has been
written to successfully treat yourself with CBT. Make sure that you
truly find the time to fully understand the tools in Chapter 4 and that
you understand how to implement them before moving forward so
that you are equipped to deal with any challenges that may arise
along your journey. This will ensure that you are ready to embrace
the entire journey and are successful in your efforts.
Part 1: Clarifying the Problem and
           Setting Goals
   Chapter 1: Identifying the Problem
You think more than 70,000 thoughts every single day. Your thoughts
are a constructive tool developed by your mind to support you in
interpreting the world around you, making sense of what is
happening, and interpreting events taking place in your environment.
The number of thoughts that you experience in a day is so high that
you likely don’t even realize that you are actively thinking most of the
time. While you experience it happening, you are most likely not
staying consciously aware of your thoughts processes and patterns
and what they are telling you.
As someone who is seeking to experience healing within your mind,
it is important that you realize that your thoughts are not factual
statements regarding the world around you or the events that are
taking place. Instead, they are merely interpretations. The reality is
that your thoughts are actually electro-chemical impulses that take
place within your brain. This means that the thoughts and emotions
that you experience in response to the world around you are not
factual representations of the world around you but instead
representations of your perception of the world around you. For
example, if you were in an environment that was dark and had few
people around, you might interpret that environment to be a
dangerous place. However, if the environment were, in fact, safe,
then the only reason it would be considered “dangerous” is that you
have perceived it to be that way, not because it actually is. What you
think about something is the foundation upon which emotions are
created, not what that something actually is.
How each individual person thinks about the world around them and
what emotions arise from various experiences or situations depends
on many different factors. Things such as your previous experiences,
your culture, your upbringing, any religious beliefs that you might
have, and your family’s values all impact how you interpret the world
around you. Because of this, not everyone is going to interpret the
world in the same way. If you were to take two people from different
backgrounds and put them together in the same environment, the
chances are they would each have completely different emotional
responses to the world around them.
The reality that thoughts are not factual and that we all experience
different thoughts and emotions in relation to our environment proves
that we cannot assume that everything is exactly as we believe it to
be. In doing so, we may wrongly interpret our environment and
behave in a way that is completely inappropriate to the said
environment. This either causes us to create a negative experience
between ourselves and someone else or simply within ourselves. For
example, if you were to enter an environment that you perceived as
unwelcoming, you might be rude or withdrawn from others in that
environment and find yourself feeling extremely uncomfortable and
struggling to create connections with others. Alternatively, you might
find yourself experiencing intense anxiety or discomfort because
your belief of the environment has you feeling as though you are
unwelcome, even if you truly are welcomed and wanted.
Know that your thoughts are not always factual and that means you
do not have to believe them immediately. Instead, you can challenge
your thoughts and look for opportunities to identify the truth so that
you can respond to your environment as it is; thus, giving you the
opportunity to respond in a way that is more appropriate to your
actual situation. To begin challenging your thoughts and creating the
opportunity to experience freedom from your perception so that you
can see into the truth, you need to know how to identify the problem,
i.e., your negative thought patterns. By identifying negative thought
patterns or unwanted emotional responses, you can begin to create
a plan to take back control over your thoughts and experience
greater emotional freedom in the process.
Automatic Thoughts
Automatic thoughts happen in response to the world around us,
hence the name. When you experience an automatic thought, you
will likely experience it in a way that brings an image, memory, or
words into your mind in a fairly instantaneous manner. You may also
experience a physical sensation, an imagined sound, or even just a
deep knowingness about something that takes place in your intuition.
Because automatic thoughts happen in such an unconscious way,
we rarely take the time to slow down and critique these thoughts to
discover if they are actually true or not. We rarely question their
validity, so we find ourselves completely believing the thoughts as
they are. This means that if you have an automatic thought about
something, you will probably believe it no matter how obscene it may
truly be. For example, if someone cut you off when you were driving,
and in your mind, you labeled them as something harsh, you may
automatically believe that to be true. In reality, it may just be
someone who is in a rush to get to work or even to the hospital, and
they are not actually an unkind person at all, they are just in a hurry.
There is rarely an experience that happens beforehand that makes
you consciously aware of your automatic thoughts. They simply pop
into your head, rattle around for a while, and pop back out so that a
new one can take their place. These thoughts are typically presented
to you by your subconscious mind and support you in interpreting the
world around you exactly as you believe it to be based on your
previous experiences or knowledge you have from elsewhere.
Because these thoughts are automatic and typically rooted in
previous experiences, we have a tendency of feeling as though we
are being personally victimized by our thoughts when “bad” things
happen. For example, if you were raised to believe that not making
your bed every morning was a horrible thing and you forgot to make
your bed one morning, you might end up experiencing automatic
thoughts that say something like “I’m a bad person!”
Since you automatically believe these thoughts, this can lead to
them becoming destructive and harmful. They become even more
destructive and harmful when your automatic thoughts become
habitual and persistent, repeating themselves over and over in your
mind and leading you to believe them even further. They can even
set off an entirely new chain of thoughts that can be negative as well,
particularly if the original, believable thought was negative, too. Your
thoughts will continue to follow these habitual, automatic themes for
days, weeks, months, years, or even decades, leading to you having
an automatic thought pattern that is either constructive or
destructive.
Based on the nature of automatic thoughts, these are believed to be
the foundation upon which our core beliefs are based on. After a
lengthy period of time, repeating the same belief to yourself over and
over again, it essentially becomes programmed into who you are and
leads to you having this core belief lingering in the background of
your life. Core beliefs can further shape your experience,
interpretation, and perceived environment and either supports you in
having a positive experience or a negative experience. Once you
have something wired into you as a core belief, it requires a stronger
strategy to eliminate that belief. This is where CBT comes in. By
helping you identify where the belief came from and shaped your
thoughts, you can develop a new core belief that is more productive
to your positive life experiences.
Intrusive Thoughts
Intrusive thoughts are unwanted thoughts or images that arise in
your mind to produce a disturbing or distressing experience for you.
They are a form of automatic thoughts that can become destructive
in nature. Often, intrusive thoughts are obsessive, and we find
ourselves automatically thinking them repeatedly; thus, producing
the distressing or disturbing feelings on a consistent basis. An
example of an intrusive thought would be, I am worthless, no one
loves me. When you think something like this, especially on a regular
or obsessive basis, it can result in you developing a core belief that
you are worthless and that no one will love you. As a result, you may
find yourself acting compulsively to try and cope with the painful
feelings or emotions that are arising from these unwanted thoughts.
Although they can be rather terrifying, intrusive thoughts are not
factual representations of the truth. Just because you experience
intrusive thoughts does not mean that the material within them is
true. It also does not mean that somewhere within you, there is a
desire to act upon the information being presented to you in your
thoughts. For example, a common intrusive thought that people have
involves driving into a crowd of people when they are driving their
car. Realistically, if you have this thought, you likely have zero desire
to drive into a crowd of people. So, naturally experiencing a thought
like this can bring about many disturbing or distressing feelings. You
may begin to wonder what is wrong with you, why you are feeling
that way, or if you have some secret dark place inside of you that
longs to cause harm unto others. However, the truth is actually quite
the opposite. This is a classic case of intrusive thinking, and the
thoughts do not reflect what you want to do, but instead are likely a
reflection of what you do not want to do. Your mind simply thinks of
the most inappropriate thing it can imagine that you do not want to
experience and then produces a thought based on that inappropriate
thing.
The more you try to push intrusive thoughts out of your mind, the
more you may actually have these thoughts. Research done at
Harvard University showed that the harder people tried to stop
thinking about something, the more they actually thought about it.
This happens because as you attempt to not think about the said
thing, your mind will try to “check in” to see if you have truly stopped
thinking about it. As a result of this “check-in”, the thought comes
back and you experience it again; thus, recreating the experiences of
distress and disturbance.
Intrusive thoughts are normal, but they can create a serious
disturbance in the mental wellness of people who experience them
on a regular basis. In fact, intrusive thoughts are common in things
like depression, anxiety, PTSD, and even more serious cases of
anger. If you experience intrusive thoughts and feel as though you
have no control over them, you might find yourself feeling as though
you are trapped inside of a mind that is scary and even dangerous.
This fear can lead to you feeling an even deeper experience of
anxiety, depression, PTSD, or anger. What you need to do is use
CBT to begin regaining control over your thoughts and putting an
end to the intrusive thoughts that you have been experiencing so far.
Luckily for you, the tools needed to help you do that are provided in
this book.
Identifying Your Thought Patterns
Before you can begin healing your thoughts, you need to have an
idea of what it is that you are trying to heal. You need to identify what
thought patterns you are having, how they are causing troubles for
you, and where they are coming from. When you understand your
own thought patterns in this way, it becomes easier for you to
develop a clear path for how you can begin healing your thoughts
and designing a more positive and empowering life for yourself.
In cognitive behavioral therapy, there is a very simple and
straightforward tool when it comes to identifying your thought
patterns and discovering how they are contributing to your negative
experiences. The tool that you will use is called “Thought Record”. A
thought record is essentially a sheet of paper or a journal where you
jot down a few notes each time you consciously become aware of a
negative thinking pattern you have been experiencing, such as
intrusive thoughts. By using this Thought Record, you can begin to
get to the root of all the negative thoughts that you are having. The
chances are, you will recognize a pattern (or multiple patterns) in
your negative thinking that will support you in making sense of what
your triggers are when it comes to having negative thought patterns.
For example, maybe, any time you are around a person wearing a
black toque, a negative thought creeps in because of a negative
experience you had with a person in a black toque. The pattern,
then, would revolve around people who are wearing black toques
and the emotional response that you have when you witness them.
You can easily create your own thought record by using a journal or
a blank piece of paper and creating a space for you to write down
each of the seven pieces of information every time you experience a
negative thought:
         Where were you? (Write down where you were, what you
      were doing, and who was with you.)
         Emotion or feeling (Write down the emotions that described
      how you were feeling and rate the emotions from 0-100
      wherein 100 means you felt the maximum level of the said
      emotion.)
          Negative automatic thought (What was the negative
      thought(s) going through your mind at the time? Did they trigger
      any memories or images in your mind?)
          Evidence that supports the thought (What evidence leads
      you to believe that these thoughts were true?)
          Evidence that does not support the thought (What evidence
      can you find that leads you to believe that these thoughts were
      false or inaccurate?)
          Alternative thought (What alternative thought could you think
      of instead of the intrusive thought?)
          Emotion or feeling (What did it made you feel after critically
      thinking about your experience?)
You want to track your thoughts for several days to get a strong
sense of what your thought patterns are and how they are affecting
your emotional wellbeing. Ideally, you should practice using your
thought record on a daily basis for at least seven days. Using it
longer will support you in having a stronger idea of all your patterns
and how they are impacting you. The thought record itself will also
support you in demystifying your thoughts and finding healthier ways
of thinking about the situations that you are experiencing. This can
be a great way to begin the process of healing your mind from
negative thought processes.
Types of Negative Thoughts
You have learned about automatic and intrusive thoughts, but you
might be surprised to learn that there are nine different types of
negative thoughts that people tend to experience. Below are
included each of these negative thought types and what they mean
so that you can begin identifying what types of negative thinking you
are experiencing the most. Having a stronger understanding of what
these thoughts are can be helpful in determining whether or not they
are true and what types of alternative thoughts you can turn to in
order to experience freedom from your negative thoughts.
All-Or-Nothing Thoughts
When you feel as though things need to be done perfectly, or else
they are a complete failure, you are experiencing an all-or-nothing
thought. These thoughts lead to a very black-and-white way of
thinking and, more often than not, lead to you feeling as though you
cannot do anything right because small amounts of negativity feel
like a complete loss to you. For example, if you give a presentation
and not everyone loves it, you will feel as though you were a failure
even though this is not true. All-or-nothing thoughts are a very
common experience for those who find themselves identifying as
“perfectionists”.
Catastrophizing
Any time you believe that the absolute worst possible thing is going
to happen, you are catastrophizing. Often, catastrophizing thoughts
can lead to stress, anxiety, depression, and other ailments because
they lead to you automatically believing in the worst possible things.
For example, if you think of something like “if I leave my house and
walk down the street, I will get hit by a car and die,” you are
catastrophizing.
Emotional Reasoning
If you experience a feeling and then believe that it must be true
because you feel that way, you are experiencing emotional
reasoning. The emotional reasoning sounds like this: “I feel unloved;
therefore, I am unloved.” This is a common type of negative thought
that can quickly reinforce your feelings and lead to you genuinely
believing that everything you feel is based on factual truth.
Filtering
Filtering is a negative thought process whereby you disregard the
positive in favor of the negative. For example, if you take a test and
you score 90%, but instead of celebrating your score, you stress
over the fact that you must not know 10% of the content. This means
you are filtering. Essentially, you are filtering out your positive
experiences in favor of your negative ones.
Jumping to Conclusions
Any time you assume that you know something based on a small
piece of evidence you have, you are jumping to conclusions. For
example, if you walk into work one morning and your boss does not
smile at you like they normally do, you assume they’re angry with
you. This is clearly showing you are jumping to conclusions.
Realistically, many other potential factors might lead to the lack of
smiling, such as if they were busy, thinking, or upset from something
that happened earlier that morning. Your assumption is a symptom of
you jumping to conclusions.
Mind Reading
If you feel as though you know what someone else is thinking
without ever having actually been granted the evidence supporting
your belief, you are practicing a negative thought process known as
mind reading. Mind reading sounds like this: “I know that person
does not like me, I can feel it.” This is often following a situation
where very little, if anything, happened to prove that the other person
did not actually like you. Instead, you are attempting to read their
mind and formulate facts based on your thoughts and feelings.
Overgeneralizing
When you experience something in one or two instances and then
claim that it happens every time, you are experiencing a negative
thought process known as overgeneralizing. Overgeneralizing can
be extremely negative because it stops you from recalling positive
experiences in your life. An example of overgeneralizing something
is if you were to say, “No one ever respects me.”
Personalizing
Personalizing is a form of negative thinking whereby you assume
responsibility for everything you experience or witness. For example,
if your best friend does not message you back, you may feel as
though you did something wrong to result in them being angry with
you. In reality, they may have just been busy and unable to message
you back, and you did not do anything wrong.
Should Statements
“Should statements” refer to you having a specific expectation as to
how things “should” be. For example, if you believe that there is a
specific way to clean the dishes and you say something like “I should
know how to clean the dishes properly” yet you missed something
that you believe should be done, you are thinking negatively. These
types of thoughts typically hold you up to unreasonable standards
and make you feel poorly when you do not achieve them, even if
your reason for not achieving them was completely valid.
Chapter 2: Setting Your Therapy Goals
CBT is a forward-focused approach that relies on setting goals and
focusing on how you can improve your future. Unlike other forms of
therapy that rely heavily on talking about and healing the past, CBT
focuses on the present moment and how you can adjust your
thought processes to improve your future experiences. Part of being
able to successfully make that happen is having a goal in mind.
Setting goals ensures that you have something to look forward to
that is both measurable and achievable. Ideally, these goals need to
be meaningful too so that you are genuinely invested in doing your
part to make sure they come true.
There is a very specific way in which goals are going to support you
with your CBT, which means that you need to be fairly specific in
your goal setting. In this chapter, we are going to explore how you
can set achievable goals for yourself so that your therapy can be
both effective and efficient. Make sure that you take the time to
genuinely invest in this practice as it is equally vital to your success
as any other step in this book. Identifying your goal will support you
in determining what your course of action needs to be to support
your success. This chapter will walk you through the process of
setting the perfect goals for your therapy so that you can move
forward in your healing journey with clarity and direction.
Identify Your Goal
The first thing you want to do when it comes to setting your goal for
CBT is to identify exactly what it is that you want to achieve. An easy
way to start is to simply ask yourself, “What is my overall goal?” This
will give you an idea of what it is that you desire to achieve and what
exactly you are trying to move away from. By keeping things simple
and staying focused on results, you will ensure that your therapy is
efficient and successful.
As you set your goal, focus on making one that is positive and
forward thinking. Remember, any time you attempt to move away
from something such as a thought, you attract it into your life more
because your brain will regularly check in to see how you are doing.
If you want to move away from a certain behavior, you need to
choose a positive solution-focused goal rather than a negative
problem-focused goal. For example, you do not want your goal to be
“to stop feeling so anxious” because this focuses on trying to move
away from something you don’t want anymore. Instead, you want
your goal to say “to start feeling more peaceful and confident” as this
focuses on a positive solution that heals your trouble with anxiety
without having such an emphasis on anxiety itself.
You also want to make sure that the goals you are setting are
“SMART”. SMART goals are highly achievable because they include
all of the components required to create a strong and clear goal that
has measurable results. To set a SMART goal, you need to ensure
that it has the following qualities:
           Specific
    It is important that you be highly specific in the goal that you are
    setting when it comes to setting goals for yourself. You need to
    know exactly what you are working toward so that you know what
    you need to do to get there. Being specific ensures that you are
    not driving aimlessly looking for a destination that was never
    actually specified. Imagine driving around your city attempting to
    find your friend’s house when they had not yet given you the
    address. It would be frustrating, right? Instead, it would be made
    much simpler if you had the address and a map that showed you
    how to get there. The same goes for your goals. When you are
specific about the destination, making the plan to get there
becomes much simpler.
An example of a specific goal when it comes to CBT would be “to
feel confident in situations involving my family”. If you were
someone who felt intensely anxious around your family, this would
specify that you want to feel more confident around them so that
you can stop experiencing anxiety. Plus, it is written in a positive
solution-oriented manner that keeps you focusing on what you
want as opposed to what you don’t want.
       Measurable
Making your goal measurable ensures that you can take sizeable
steps towards your goal and have a clear understanding as to
whether or not they are getting you the results that you desire. In
the aforementioned goal, the measurable quality was the feeling
of “confidence”. If you experience anxiety around your family and
you desire to feel confident, then you know that you need to pay
attention to how confident you are feeling each time you go
around them. If you find yourself feeling less anxious but not yet
feeling confident, you know that you need to adjust your approach
or take bigger action in achieving your desired results.
       Achievable
It is important that you do not infuse your goal with an all-or-
nothing negative thinking process. You do not want to set a goal
that requires you to change your personality completely and
become an entirely different character. Instead, you want to
choose a goal that is genuinely achievable so that you do not feel
as though you are constantly chasing something that will never
come your way. Be reasonable with yourself and your
expectations and avoid trying to set your standards too high. This
doesn’t mean that you can’t expect more from yourself, but it does
mean that you shouldn’t expect an unreasonable amount.
Setting goals that are unachievable are common for people who
have frequent negative thought processes. The subconscious
thoughts surrounding this thought process are, If I set the goal so
high, I can’t achieve it and then I can continue feeling bad about
myself. This may sound harsh of your brain, partly because it is,
but also because you may not want to believe that your brain
would want to sabotage you. The truth is, your brain does not
want to sabotage you at all; what it is trying to do is protect you by
keeping your core beliefs reinforced with evidence. The process of
breaking down core beliefs can be emotionally trying at times as it
requires you to discard your beliefs about what is “right” so that
you can see things for what they are. In an attempt to avoid you
from enduring this, and to save its own energy, your brain tries to
sabotage you to keep everything “normal”.
      Relevant
The goals you choose should always be in alignment with the
issue that you are trying to overcome. With setting goals for CBT,
you want to make sure that you choose a goal that directly reflects
the reason why you have sought after this information in the first
place. Upon purchasing this book, what was the very thought you
had? What was it that you hoped to change and overcome? This
thought likely reflects the challenges that you are currently facing.
Therefore, it should be considered when you are setting your
goals. Keeping your goals focused on something that is relevant is
important as it ensures that what you are focused on truly matters
to you.
If you are unsure as to what truly means the most to you right now
and what part of your thoughts need to be addressed, check back
to your thought record log. Consider what the most prominent
pattern on your record is and start there as this is likely the one
that is holding everything else back. Starting at the very
foundation of everything that needs to be adjusted is the best way
to make sure that you are going to have the strongest impact
when it comes to genuinely changing your life with CBT.
      Timely
Finally, the goal that you officially choose needs to be a timely
goal that you are actually capable of working towards achieving at
this moment. You do not want to attempt to set out to change
something when you are not presently in a position where you
can. Fortunately, most thought changes come from within, so they
are almost always going to work out with your timing. However,
sometimes you may find that it is not necessarily the best time to
work on a certain pattern so you may choose to start somewhere
else. For example, if you are attempting to overcome anxiety
around your family but there is presently someone who is ill in
your family, thus causing more stress between you and your
relatives, it may be a better idea to wait until things have settled
down before you begin.
Alternatively, you might set a more reasonable time frame for
yourself when it comes to considering how much success you
want to have achieved by a specific time. Rather than expecting
yourself to be completely confident in three months, for example,
you might give yourself six. Be honest with yourself and focus on
adjusting things that you truly can approach at this time in your life
so that you are not setting yourself up for failure by trying to climb
a mountain before you are ready.
Identify Your Starting Point
Now that you have a SMART goal in place, it is time to start mapping
your course to success! The first thing that you need to do is identify
what your starting point is. To determine your starting point, you
need to honestly assess where you are at in your life regarding this
current goal. An example is expanding on the previous goal. If you
want to be more confident around your family but you currently
experience crippling anxiety every time you even think about calling
them, you need to be honest about that. Rather than determining
that your starting point will include you strutting into their homes and
standing tall as you defend yourself against all of their remarks,
determine your starting point as growing more confident with simply
talking on the phone with them. This is more reasonable and
achievable and honors where you are at in your life right now.
If you are not entirely sure as to where your starting point should be,
consider journaling about where you are at right now. Take inventory
of everything going on in your life relating to this specific area of
focus and be honest about how it impacts both you and your ability
to achieve your desired goals. Spend some time really exploring all
areas of your life from friends and family to your personal emotions
and thoughts and honestly account for how your goal is being
impacted by all of these areas of your life. This is going to help give
you a more realistic account of what your exact starting point is so
that you can chart a course that is going to genuinely account for you
and your needs.
Remember, this is a private experience that is unique to you, so
there is no need for you to attempt to glorify where you are currently
at. If you are having a particularly challenging time, honestly
embrace that and allow yourself to honor where you are at without
feeling the need to pretend that you are further ahead. Being more
honest with yourself will support you in having a more positive
experience by allowing you to start with steps that are manageable
and achievable for you at this time in your life.
Identify the Steps
Once you have identified both your goal and your starting point, you
need to determine what the necessary steps are for you to succeed.
Since you are working towards achieving a stronger and more
positive thinking behavior, it is important that you keep your steps
manageable. When it comes to overcoming things such as anxiety,
depression, anger, or any other troubling experience, you need to
give yourself space to genuinely process your emotions. Attempting
to process too much at once may result in you feeling overwhelmed
and struggling to move forward as a result of emotional exhaustion.
Give yourself time to adjust and heal your emotions in addition to
healing your thought patterns so that you can fully embrace each
step and move forward with a strong foundation.
To create strong and manageable steps, you need to chunk your
goal down into smaller portions. How this looks will depend on what
goal you are trying to achieve, but ultimately, you want to be able to
turn these chunks into their own mini goals. That way, each time you
achieve one step towards your larger goal, you are achieving a goal
in and of itself. This supports your mind in experiencing the
gratification it desires and keeps you focused on moving forward. If
you find that certain steps are harder than others or they are not
getting you the results you desire, you can easily adjust those steps
to help keep you on track.
In addition to charting out your steps, consider obstacles that you
may face along the way and how they may impact your ability to
succeed in achieving your goal. With something as sensitive as
emotions, facing unexpected obstacles can be overwhelming and
can slow you down. Considering what obstacles you may face and
accommodating for them, planning for them, or at least preparing for
them, is going to support you in confidently moving towards your
goal even if you face a challenge. Mentally, this is going to prevent
you from feeling distraught, doubtful, or defeated any time you face a
challenge because you will already be prepared to endure anything
that said challenge might bring your way.
Once you have considered what the smaller portions of the goals
are, you need to lay your steps out in order. Write them down from
start to finish as if you are writing out a game plan to get you from
point A to point B so that you can clearly see what it is that you need
to do. This will ensure that you are putting one foot in front of the
other and not attempting to bite off more than you can chew at any
given time.
Get Started
Finally, all you need to do is get started! If you successfully followed
the steps above, then your goal should be perfectly set up so that all
you need to do is embark on the first step in your plan. Give yourself
the pep talk you need to get started and then go ahead and begin
taking action!
Part 2: CBT Techniques
       Chapter 3: CBT Techniques for
             Specific Ailments
Using CBT to approach your healing can look different depending on
what it is that you are attempting to heal from. For example, healing
from depression and healing from anger will look completely
different. Knowing how CBT looks for each unique ailment can
support you in fully recovering from them through this therapy
practice. In this chapter, we are going to cover CBT techniques for
the following ailments: anxiety, PTSD, depression, anger, and
procrastination.
Keep in mind that if you are dealing with various ailments at once,
you will want to address each of these. How you choose to address
multiple ailments will ultimately be up to you. Check in with yourself
and ask which solution feels best. Is it to slowly heal each ailment at
once or to heal them one at a time starting with the one that causes
the most problems for you? Following the path that feels best for you
will ensure that you are not overwhelming yourself and that you are
experiencing complete healing from each ailment that you have been
struggling with.
CBT Techniques for Overcoming Anxiety
As you focus on overcoming anxiety, you need to focus on
overcoming all that comes along with anxiety, too. This means that
you need to practice building up your tolerance towards uncertainty,
your ability to recognize rumination (repetitive worrying thoughts,)
your ability to recognize thought distortion, and your capacity to
increase your mindfulness. You will also want to begin building up
the ability to speak kindly to yourself and tolerate your imperfections
without feeling as though they take away from who you are and what
you have to offer the world.
The best way to create your action plan with CBT is to consider your
thought records and begin determining what thoughts are
contributing to your anxiety and what behaviors are arising as a
result of these thoughts. The way you think has a massive impact on
the development of your anxiety. For example, if you were invited to
go out to coffee with someone new, your thoughts would completely
shape the experience for yourself. If you were to think of this as a fun
new opportunity to make a connection, you might feel happy and
excited by the idea. If you were to think that coffee wasn’t really your
thing or you weren’t overly interested in the said person, you might
feel neutral about the idea. If you were to think about how you
struggle to make conversation with new people and that you will
probably make a fool of yourself in front of this new person, you
would find yourself feeling anxious and sad about the experience.
Each thought process and emotion would lead to a completely
different behavioral reaction in the people around you. For this
reason, you have to be very conscious of your thought processes
and how they might be contributing to the development of your
anxiety.
With anxiety, you need to practice “thought challenging” or critically
assessing your thoughts to determine whether or not they have any
validity. You can do this by first identifying what the negative thought
is, and then challenging it by analyzing the evidence upon which it is
founded and where it comes from. You might also look for
opportunities to weigh the pros and cons of your thoughts to see if
they are genuinely helping you or if they are hindering you from
trying new things. Once you have successfully done that, you can
begin replacing your negative thoughts with realistic thoughts. Note,
the key here is not necessarily to replace them with “positive”
thinking, but instead, replace your negative thoughts with realistic
thinking. For example, the coffee date could go badly, but it could
also be incredible, and you could have a great time. By adjusting
your perspective, you can introduce new thoughts and expand your
mind so that you can begin exploring and experiencing a more
positive mindset and emotions in your life.
Another great practice when it comes to overcoming anxiety with
CBT is using exposure therapy. Exposure therapy essentially states
that you are going to expose yourself to situations that make you
anxious with the conscious awareness that anxiety will arise.
Through that awareness, you can intentionally adjust your thought
process to accommodate a new perspective that is less likely to
produce anxious feelings. After exposing yourself to your triggers
enough times, you begin to realize that your trigger is not nearly as
fearsome as you believed it was and you no longer experience such
immense anxiety towards it.
CBT Techniques for Overcoming PTSD
Individuals with PTSD experience similar symptoms as those who
experience anxiety, except that PTSD is more intense and long-
lasting. Whereas anxiety tends to come in waves and then
disappear, PTSD can affect individuals on an ongoing basis with no
seeming end to the symptoms. Often, people with PTSD find
themselves feeling trapped in their trauma and struggling to discover
any solace or comfort from the distress that has been caused by
traumas. As a result, the thoughts of someone with PTSD tend to be
more frequently interrupted by disturbing and distressing thoughts
than someone who has anxiety.
If you are living with PTSD and you are searching for an opportunity
to overcome your symptoms and experience freedom from your
distress, there are some key CBT techniques that you can practice
to help you overcome your traumatic responses. As you use CBT to
overcome your PTSD, you will need to re-evaluate your thought
processes, identify your distortions and assumptions, and balance
your thought processes to release catastrophizing and other
negative thought patterns from your mind. You will also need to
expose yourself to your inner narrative related to your trauma so that
you can begin to experience desensitization towards the memories
themselves and maintain a higher sense of control when these
memories or triggers arise. Another great way to support the healing
of PTSD with CBT is to educate yourself on how trauma changes
your brain so that you can have an educated evidence-based
approach to changing your thoughts. Sometimes, knowing exactly
what is happening in your brain to cause your symptoms of PTSD
can be extremely helpful in helping you realize that what you are
experiencing through your thoughts are symptoms and not facts.
As you begin to develop the techniques to overcome your PTSD,
you will need to monitor your thought record and consistently update
it to keep a close eye on how you are progressing. This will also
support you in discovering where your triggers lie and what exactly
you need to begin desensitizing yourself towards. Furthermore, you
can begin educating yourself on these triggers and retroactively
replacing your thoughts (which were based on your distorted
perception) with facts. For example, if your PTSD was triggered by
someone yelling in your general vicinity, you may immediately begin
experiencing flashbacks and fear that result in other symptoms
arising. You may find that later, on that night, you could not rest, and
sleep seemed impossible. When you finally did fall asleep, you had
nightmares. This is because your brain subconsciously perceived the
yelling as a direct threat to you.
Now, you can retroactively evaluate the experience and assure
yourself that you were not being attacked and that you were
completely safe in that experience. You can also support this
reassurance with evidence from the environment, i.e., by recalling
that said person was not yelling at you, or maybe, they were not
yelling at all, but instead, they were cheering in celebration. This will
help you begin to retrain your mind to see things in a more accurate
and factual manner so that your subconscious can stop feeling the
need to instantly protect itself any time someone raises their voice.
You want to practice this reflection for every single trigger that you
experience. Consistently reassure yourself that you are safe and that
the experience you had was safe even if it didn’t feel like it to you. In
doing so, you teach your mind to begin seeing a new perspective in
these experiences so that you can begin feeling more peaceful each
time they arise.
CBT Techniques for Overcoming Depression
For many people, depression arises after the repetitive thinking of
negative thoughts that feature a lack of hope, motivation, or
inspiration. In many cases, these thoughts are harmful and
destructive and are often worded in a way that tears the sufferer
down, thereby causing them to feel as though they are worthless and
that they do not have anything to offer the world around them. This
can result in a negative spiral that can either lead to depression or
worsen depression that might be caused by other conditions, such
as hormonal imbalances.
If you are experiencing depression, you need to use CBT in a way
that addresses your negative thoughts and improves your self-talk.
Instead of obsessing over your shortcomings and emphasizing your
flaws through obsessive thinking, you need to begin swapping these
thoughts out for more realistic ones that are rich with compassion
and consideration. Your thoughts need to become more gentle and
considerate towards yourself if you are going to improve your
depression through CBT.
The most common technique used in treating depression with CBT is
swapping your thoughts. This works by first identifying the negative
thought that is causing you to feel depressed or that is increasing
your depression, and then swapping it out for a more positive or
realistic thought that can support you in improving your mood. You
will do this by learning to identify your thought patterns automatically
and recognize when you are experiencing thoughts that are
unhelpful. For example, say you wake up one morning, and your first
thought is, This day already sucks. I don’t see any point in even
trying. I already know I am not good enough. This thought is
unproductive and will only worsen the way you feel about yourself
and about life in general. Through thought swapping, you can
recognize that this was an unhelpful thought and swap it out for one
that is more productive. An alternative thought might be something
such as, That thought is not helpful. I know I can make an effort and
at least try. I am worth the effort. Let me start by getting out of bed.
Then, you would continue to take it one step at a time and swap your
thoughts out every single time you notice that they are unproductive.
After doing this often enough, your mind will begin to recognize the
more positive perspective and naturally start swapping your negative
thoughts out for these realistic ones that nurture positivity. As a
result, you will begin to feel more positive.
Even though you are recognizing them on a more consistent basis,
you should still continue to write them down in your thought records
to ensure that you are truly improving your depression in a positive
manner. This also gives you the opportunity to see where your most
common thought patterns lie and what they reveal about the actual
cause of your depression. For example, if you find that you are
consistently experiencing negative thoughts in relation to your self-
worth based on what one of your parents told you when you were
growing up, you can guess that the cause of your depression is
childhood related. This allows you to focus on healing these
childhood wounds by using evidence from your adult life that
supports true reality versus the reality that you interpreted as a child.
For example, if your parents consistently told you that you were poor
at making or keeping friends, you may now feel as though you are
not worthy of having friends in your life. You can challenge these
thoughts by recognizing that you are no longer a child, you were
likely never truly bad at making friends, that your parent may have
been projecting on you, and that they likely had a hard time showing
true love or acceptance. This helps you realize that what your parent
said was not necessarily true and gives you the space to recreate
your own reality now, as an adult.
CBT Techniques for Overcoming Anger
Anger is commonly considered to be a secondary emotion because
it tends to arise when other emotions are not being adequately
handled. For example, if you are experiencing anxiety or fear and
you are not producing an “answer” for these emotions, you may then
begin to experience anger. This anger is meant to give you the
energy and focus required to develop a solution for overcoming the
anxiety or fear that you were originally experiencing.
Some people grow up without any clear guidance or direction on
how they should express or respond to emotions that they
experience in their life. As a result, they frequently struggle to
manage their emotions in a productive manner, which can lead to
consistent feelings of anger and frustration. It is likely that this anger
arises from both the fear of not having their emotional needs met, as
well as from the habit of responding to things with anger due to
knowing that the emotional need will not be fulfilled otherwise. Anger
is also frequently aroused from the negative thoughtform of “should
thoughts”. For individuals struggling with anger, CBT is a great way
to retrain their mind to approach situations with emotions other than
anger while still successfully having their needs met.
For CBT to be effective in treating anger, you will need to discover
what your triggers are and begin developing resistance towards
those triggers. You will also need to develop trust in yourself and
your ability to get your needs met in a productive manner so that you
can stop relying on anger to fuel the process. This requires you to
prepare for angry events by determining what it is that you want to
do the next time you are angry, such as approaching it with a more
level-headed response. Then, when you encounter an angry
experience, you need to identify the pain-point, or the emotion being
triggered, swap out your “hot thoughts”, and respond to the anger
itself. You can do this by addressing the anger within you,
recognizing its purpose, and then choosing to fulfill that purpose in a
less aggressive manner. And then, you need to disengage from the
aggression and discover a way to respond to the event itself with a
more level-headed approach.
This process for addressing anger will be used on a regular basis in
order to be effective since problematic anger is typically a habitual
behavioral pattern. By regularly processing anger in a more
constructive manner, you can begin to break this habit and enforce
new ones that support you in getting your needs met without causing
harm to anyone else or yourself. If you find that you deeply struggle
with anger, you may need to expose yourself to lesser triggers first
so that you can begin building up your response system in a less
intense environment. You should also keep a detailed thought record
of each angry encounter (including the ones you handle effectively)
so that you can remain clear on what arouses your anger and, if
necessary, heal that part of you that feels so angry or neglected.
CBT Techniques for Overcoming Procrastination
Procrastination is typically the symptom of a more challenging inner
experience, although not always. For some people, procrastination
arises because they fear that they cannot perform well enough, so
they simply avoid performing at all. For example, if you fear that you
cannot do well with a work assignment, you may procrastinate doing
it because you worry that you will not do well enough and that you
will somehow suffer because of it. Procrastination can also arise
from things like boredom, disinterest, or feeling adversity towards the
action itself. In some cases, a small amount of procrastination is not
necessarily problematic and may even be normal. However, when
procrastination begins to interfere with your world, social life, and
your confidence in yourself, it is time to address your procrastination
and begin overcoming it.
When it comes to overcoming procrastination, you need to build up
stronger confidence in your abilities, adjust your perspective of the
situation you are facing, and get very clear on what your outcome
needs to be. By doing these three things, you can begin feeling the
inner motivation you need to accomplish things while also
developing the outer motivation by increasing your desire to achieve
whatever it is that you have set out to achieve.
The best way to begin changing the way your mind works around
procrastination is to begin identifying small goals and setting out to
accomplish them. This is going to support you in exposing yourself to
situations that typically trigger procrastination, while also building up
your inner rewards system. Each time you identify a small goal and
achieve that goal, you teach yourself what you need to do to curb
procrastination and actually keep yourself motivated. Then, when the
goal is achieved, your brain releases dopamine which causes you to
feel good. This is like a mental reward as dopamine creates a strong
positive reaction in your brain that leaves you feeling almost as
though you are experiencing the ‘happiness high’. The more you
condition yourself to create this reaction in your brain, the easier it
becomes for you to motivate yourself and stay focused on achieving
your goals.
When it comes to finding ways to combat your procrastination, you
will need to emphasize your focus on challenging your thoughts.
Often, procrastination is experienced when we justify why we can put
an activity or action off until a later time. For example, I can watch
TV for half an hour and then start my task later. Half an hour isn’t
much time, so I will still have plenty of time to get it done. Before you
know it, you have justified your way out of time, and you no longer
have time to waste. Then, you feel an intense amount of stress and
get overwhelmed as you attempt to get a significant amount of work
done with not enough time left to complete the task. When you see
these thoughts arising, you must challenge them and begin backing
them up with evidence that supports your need to get the task done.
For example, The last time I decided to watch TV for half an hour, it
became three hours and then I did not have enough time. I need to
start now so that I can be done. Then, if I have time left, I will watch
some TV after. This more rational thought process realistically
explores what will happen if you do not get the task done and
supports you in getting up to get it done.
        Chapter 4: Tools Used in CBT
Creating your CBT healing pathway starts by identifying your goal
and then determining what thought patterns need to be treated, such
as those relating to anxiety or anger. Then, you need to equip
yourself with knowledge of the tools that are available to you to be
used in CBT. With the understanding of what tools are available to
you, you can begin creating the foundation upon which your healing
will happen. This chapter will explain what CBT tools and techniques
are used in virtually every form of therapy. You will want to read
through these tools and develop a strong understanding around
them, and then rely on this chapter as a resource when you
encounter a bout of negative thinking.
It is important that you understand that these tools are based on your
mind; therefore, it may seem challenging or even overwhelming to
attempt to enforce them all at once. The goal with CBT is never to
make all of your changes immediately and expect them to stick
overnight. Instead, it is to equip yourself with the correct resources
and continue making small yet powerful changes so that your
response to triggers continually improves over time. The more you
reference this chapter and educate yourself on how these tools work,
the easier you will find it to employ these tools during situations
where you need to adjust a negative thinking pattern. Over time, the
habitual thoughts that lead to you struggling on an emotional level
will begin changing in favor of the new habits that you are
introducing into your life. This is how you will know that the tools are
working. You can track your progress and change using your thought
records as a way to get a strong understanding of how you are
improving and what may need to be adjusted to support you in
achieving your goals.
Journaling
Journaling is a common tool used in therapy to support individuals in
feeling a sense of release from their thoughts and emotions. When
you journal, you allow yourself to openly and freely express
everything that you are feeling inside and explore what may be
causing these feelings. You can write about everything from the
trigger to your reaction and how you feel after the fact. Journaling is
also a great way to reflect on parts of your life that may be
responsible for producing triggers in the first place. In general,
journaling is a great practice to use when it comes to therapy as it
supports you in releasing your thoughts and feelings from your mind
and getting them out in front of you. This can be very therapeutic.
Using a journal is especially important with CBT because it works not
only as a tool to help you release what you feel inside but also as a
tool to support you in getting a deeper understanding of yourself and
what you need. Journaling after an episode of difficult emotion/s
allows you to freely and openly write exactly what you are feeling
and then later reflect on that and get a sense of what caused the
experience. Through this understanding, you can then begin
implementing the proper adjustments into your life so that you can
prevent it from happening again, or at least reduce the amount in
which it happens.
Journaling is also going to help you get an idea of how far you have
come, what is working and what isn’t, and what may be a good
solution going forward. As you reflect on what you have written, you
can visually see your progress on paper which can support you in
feeling as though your hard work is paying off. There are many
valuable benefits to journaling as you are undergoing CBT.
It is important that you use journaling diligently in your CBT
practices. Ideally, you should journal at least once per day, and any
time you have experienced an episode of difficult or troubling
emotion/s. Any time your anxiety, depression, anger, PTSD, or
procrastination tendencies arise, use this as an opportunity to write
down what happened, what you did in response to that experience,
and what the result was. This can be used as your thought record or,
in addition to your thought record, a way to keep track of your
episodes and get a stronger and deeper understanding of what may
be going on for you each time a trigger is pulled.
Unraveling Cognitive Distortions
Cognitive distortion is the name used to describe the process of your
brain lying to you or producing thoughts that are false. For example,
if you are experiencing anxiety and you believe that you are dying
because your heart rate has quickened, you are experiencing a
cognitive distortion. The primary goal of CBT is to unravel cognitive
distortions so that you can begin experiencing stronger control over
your thoughts so that you no longer experience the spiral that comes
from these distortions. By gaining control over them, you can recover
control over yourself entirely and prevent or slow down the
progression of the symptoms of your emotional troubles, such as
depression and anxiety.
Unraveling your cognitive distortions requires you first to develop an
awareness of what distortions you are vulnerable to and how they
impact you. Typically, cognitive distortions are a part of your
automatic and intrusive thought processes, and they tend to slip in
under your conscious radar. The best way to bring them forward into
your awareness consciousness is to begin taking notice of the times
you experience the symptoms of your emotional ailment. Once you
recognize your emotional state, you can begin considering what your
current thoughts are, what your thoughts were when it first started,
and what your thoughts were right before it started. This gives you
an understanding of the progression of your thoughts and emotions
and how they resulted in you experiencing emotional symptoms of
your thought patterns.
Having the negative thought list from Chapter 2 can be extremely
helpful in supporting you in identifying what negative thinking
patterns you are experiencing and the aftermath of those patterns.
Then, after you have identified your negative thought pattern, you
can move on to the process of cognitive restructuring.
Cognitive Restructuring
Cognitive restructuring is the process of challenging your negative
thought patterns and cognitive distortions and replacing them with
realistic and factual thoughts that essentially combat the distortion.
The cognitive restructuring process takes place over three steps:
identifying what caused the distortion, challenging the distortion, and
replacing it with realistic information. Typically, cognitive restructuring
is used to restructure actual beliefs that have taken root in your mind
and resulted in you feeling bad about yourself. For example, you
have a belief that if you have no money, you are worth nothing.
Then, every time you look in your savings account, you see that you
have not saved up any money yet because your budget is typically
spent paying your bills and keeping a roof over your head. Because
of your belief, any time you look in your savings account, you would
believe that you were worthless, and this would only be changed if
you were able to add more money into your savings account. The
reality is that everyone is born worthy and that money does not
change your value, but your belief holds you back from believing so.
As a result, you may never believe that you are worth anything and
you may continue feeling too depressed to make any changes in
your life.
Instead of allowing faulty beliefs to reinforce your negative or
unwanted emotions, you need to challenge them and replace them
with new beliefs that are realistic and manageable. You need to
rethink what your beliefs are and how they are negatively impacting
you and can be adjusted to actually serve you in feeling better about
yourself and the world around you. For example, if you were to
challenge the belief about money and choose to believe that
everyone is inherently valuable simply for being born into existence,
you would realize that your belief about money is no longer valid.
This adjustment in your belief allows you to begin feeling better
about yourself and can improve your mood enough that you then
have the energy required to increase the funds in your savings
account.
The best way to change your beliefs is to challenge them. To
challenge your beliefs, you need to question why they exist and
where they come from so that you can have a strong understanding
as to why you believe them in the first place. Often, we find that our
beliefs come from something someone said to us many years ago.
This is typical during our childhood or early adulthood. They can also
be developed by hearing the same thing being repeated to you by
someone in your life. You then automatically learn to believe these
beliefs and never take the time to consider whether they are
constructive or destructive and if they are actually supporting you in
living a better life or not. In the instances where they are not, you
need to question why you have held onto them and what they may
be protecting by sticking around. In most cases, you may realize that
they are not actually protecting anything and have no value. You
simply continued to believe them because you always have. Then,
you can choose a new belief and replace your old beliefs with said
new belief; thus, fulfilling the technique of cognitive restructuring.
Exposure and Response Prevention
Exposure and response prevention are techniques commonly used
in people who have the obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD);
although it can also be used in other situations. With exposure and
response prevention, you want to repeatedly expose yourself to a
trigger that typically stimulates a compulsive behavior or response
from you. For example, if you compulsively bite your nails every time
someone yells at you or around you, you want to expose yourself to
loud environments and consciously refrain from biting your nails.
Once you are done, or during the process, you can write about how
you are feeling and what emotions were triggered for you as you
attempted to deny the compulsive response.
The idea behind exposure and response prevention is that the more
you consciously enter situations that typically arouse a compulsive
response out of you, the more you can consciously hold back from
engaging in the compulsive behavior. Over time, you will have
exposed yourself and held back from the behavior so many times
that you no longer experience the intense need to engage in the
compulsive behaviors, so you no longer have to worry about the
triggers.
If you are using exposure and response prevention on something
more intensive, such as compulsive behaviors that could be
perceived as harmful to yourself or someone else, it is important that
you do so with the support of someone else. Dipping into these types
of emotions and compulsions on your own can be scary, so it is
important that you feel as though you have adequate support in
helping you overcome these experiences successfully. You also want
to make sure that you are fully mentally prepared to handle the
experience so that you do not feel as though you are being
blindsided by the compulsions as they arise.
Interoceptive Exposure
If you struggle with anxiety, interoceptive exposure is a tool that you
will need to take advantage of. Interoceptive exposure requires you
to expose yourself to feared sensations in order to elicit the anxious
response. Then, you activate the unhelpful beliefs that are
associated with the sensation and allow yourself to facilitate new
learning about the experience so that you can adjust your
perspective on it. The idea of interoceptive exposure is to educate
you on how your symptoms of panic are not dangerous even if they
feel uncomfortable or worrisome.
An example of interoceptive exposure would be if you were afraid of
bees and wasps and you put yourself in the vicinity of them to elicit
the fearful response. Then, as you are in their presence and the fear
begins to arise, you recall information about bees and wasps that
remind you about how positive they are to the environment and
about how unlikely it is that you would be stung by one. As you
continue to remain in their vicinity and allow the fear to run its
course, while reminding yourself of the education you have learned
about bees as wasps, you begin to overcome the panic and find
yourself feeling less stressed out in the presence of them. The same
goes for anything else that may elicit panic attacks within you. By
consciously arousing the panic, you allow yourself to adjust the
internal narrative around it and reduce the panic that you experience
as a result.
Nightmare Exposure and Rescripting
Nightmares, especially ones relating to traumas, can be particularly
disturbing and can lead to many distressing emotions if they occur
on a frequent basis. Nightmares are a common symptom in people
who have experienced traumas or who are experiencing intense
negative emotions on a consistent basis. Nightmare exposure and
rescripting work similarly to interoceptive exposure, except for the
specific thing that you are trying to arouse, which are the emotions
relating to the nightmares.
To arouse the feelings you experience in your nightmares, you must
first begin to recall them in as much detail as you can. As you do, the
emotions accompanying the nightmares should begin to arise once
more, typically overcoming you sometimes in a rather intense
manner. With these emotions now stirred up once again, you can
identify what emotion you would rather experience and develop a
new image associated with your desired emotion. After moving back
and forth through the process of awakening the emotions relating to
the nightmares and then rescripting them with new desired emotions
and images, you train your mind to adjust its focus each time the
nightmare is aroused. Typically, what will end up happening during
your sleep then is that, if the nightmare begins to start, your mind will
naturally switch to the preferred emotion and image that you have
rescripted it with. As a result, you should no longer experience
disturbing nightmares.
Note that when you are dealing with a nightmare, rescripting it can
take time since nightmares themselves typically happen when you
are asleep; therefore, it can be challenging to tap into them with your
conscious mind. You might need to continually use the rescripting
method for several nights before you find complete freedom from
your nightmares. If you do not experience instant relief, you need to
continue practicing your rescripting process until the nightmares
begin to go away. Trust that as long as you stay committed, they will
disappear in due time, and you will no longer have the disturbing or
distressing experience of your nightmares.
Playing the Script Until the End
People who suffer fear or anxiety often find themselves getting
trapped in the worry of the worst-case scenario and the pain that
would accompany it if it should happen. Due to their fear of the pain,
they find themselves struggling to move forward or take action on
anything because they fear that they will experience that pain. In
many cases, the fear can lead to panic or anxiety because they are
so worried about what the pain will be like and what they could lose
or what might happen to them. So, they remain frozen in fear.
If you find yourself getting caught in the worrying narrative of fear
and pain associated with the worst-case scenario when your anxiety
or panic triggers are pulled, playing the script out to the end may be
the perfect tool for you to call on. All you have to do with this tool is
to consider the part of the narrative that you are feeling stuck on and
then ask yourself, “And then what happens next?” This can help you
put your worry into perspective and realize that, in many cases, the
worst-case scenario is truly not a big deal.
For example, if the stuck-thought that you are experiencing is, If I
speak in front of that crowd, I will make a mistake, and they will
tease me. It will be horrible, then you may stay trapped in the fear of
making a mistake. This can make the idea of getting on stage
frightening and may even hold you back from going and speaking
altogether. However, if you were to follow that thought with the
question “And then what happens next?”, you might realize that the
worst-case scenario truly wouldn’t be as horrible as you might think.
For example, maybe your speech goes horribly, and people don’t
enjoy it, but the chances are that they completely forget about it by
the time the next speaker is done speaking. Or, maybe they do
remember it, and they get a good laugh from it while you gain a
positive learning experience so that you can do a better job next
time. In most circumstances, the worst-case scenario is truly not the
“life or death” experience that our panic makes it out to be. By
playing the script out until the end, you can support yourself in
realizing that, in most cases, not everything is as bad as it may
seem.
Progressive Muscle Relaxation (PMR)
Progressive muscle relaxation or PMR is a process where you relax
one group of muscles at a time until your entire body is relaxed. In
people who experience panic or anxiety, PMR is a great way to
mindfully bring relaxation back into the body in a holistic manner with
a manageable approach. Attempting to completely relax all at once
in the face of fear or panic can be nearly impossible as anyone who
has ever experienced panic would know. You simply cannot
encourage your entire body to relax at once and expect anything to
happen. It is too much for any one person to attempt to do all at
once. If anything, you may attempt to consciously try and then your
lack of positive results will lead to you feeling even worse and
wondering why you cannot relax.
With PMR, you consciously focus all your attention on just one area
of your body at a time. During this process, you allow the muscles in
your area of focus to completely relax, and you consciously and
intentionally release any stress or tension that may be residing within
that part of your body. Then, when that one area is completely
relaxed, you move on to the next one. In doing so, you allow yourself
the opportunity to completely relax each area of your body until your
entire body is relaxed from any panic or tension that you may be
experiencing. Because you have broken the process up into
manageable stages, your ability to stay focused and completely
relaxed is improved, and you are more likely to experience full relief
from your anxiety.
Relaxed Breathing
Relaxed breathing is not necessarily a CBT-specific tool, but it is
regularly incorporated into CBT to support individuals in experiencing
complete release from their emotional symptoms. Relaxed breathing
is a mindfulness practice that is used to help draw relaxation into
your body through the breath so that you can restore rational
thinking to your mind during particularly emotional experiences. As a
result, you can critically consider your thoughts and begin using
cognitive restructuring to slow the progression of your problematic
thoughts and troubling emotions.
When you are experiencing emotional distress, your body begins to
change the way your automatic nervous system functions. Your
breathing changes, your pulse changes, your muscles tense or
weaken, and you begin to feel completely different within your body.
The idea is that you can slow down or even reverse these symptoms
by intentionally controlling your breathing; thus, pressuring the rest of
your system to slow down and even out. From this more relaxed
state, you can experience more effective and rational decision
making, allowing you to move away from compulsive behaviors.
There are various relaxed breathing methods that you can try;
however, two seem to be the most common breathing patterns. The
first one is the four in four out, and the second one is the 4, 7, 8
methods. For the four in four out method, you simply want to relax
your body and begin breathing into the count of four and then
breathing out to the count of four. This brings a rhythm to your breath
and helps you to even it out; thereby, restoring calmness into your
body. If you are experiencing a panic attack or are in any other
extremely heightened state of energy, the four in four out method is
great because it follows a consistent in-and-out rhythm.
The 4, 7, 8 method is slightly different as it requires a certain amount
of holding your breath. For this method, you want to breathe into the
count of four, hold your breath for the count of seven, and then
breathe out for the count of eight. This is meant to gently bring your
body back to a state of calmness by managing your stress through
“overriding” your stress responses within your body. If you are feeling
particularly panicked, holding your breath may not feel achievable so
you may prefer to use the four in four out method, or start with the
four in four out method and then progress to the 4, 7, 8 method as
you begin to calm down. In doing so, you take back control over your
automatic responses and train your body to begin experiencing
peace even during uncomfortable or stressful experiences.
Part 3: Putting CBT to Work
     Chapter 5: Behavioral Activation
Now that you have a strong understanding of the tools available to
you in CBT, how they are used, when, and why, it is time for you to
begin putting CBT into action in your own life! The very first step in
CBT is engaging in a process known as behavioral activation. A
behavioral activation is a form of therapeutic intervention that is used
to integrate behavioral changes in an individual’s day-to-day life. In
this chapter, you are going to discover how you can use behavioral
activation to begin making real adjustments in your lifestyle so that
you can start overcoming your emotional symptoms and start
experiencing more emotional freedom in your life.
How Does Behavioral Activation Work?
Behavioral activation is built on the belief that actions precede
emotions. In other words, the way you spend your time impacts the
mood that you are going to be in. Therefore, if you consistently
spend your time behaving in unproductive ways, your mood will
consistently remain troubling. Behavioral activation is most
commonly used in treating things like depression or anxiety as it
supports you in understanding and breaking your behavioral cycles
so that you can begin experiencing a better life overall. However, this
method can also be used in supporting you in successfully
overcoming other troubling emotional symptoms too.
With behavioral activation, you have three primary goals. These are
to identify the troubling cycle that is causing the distressing
behaviors, to implement new behaviors, and to reward yourself for
the new behaviors. These are believed to support you in breaking
habits relating to your emotional struggles by halting the behaviors
that are causing them while stimulating your mind to see these new
behaviors as positive and enjoyable. By retraining your mind in this
way, you condition yourself to begin acting in a way that supports
you in feeling a greater sense of emotional wholeness and joy.
Conceptualizing Your Behavior Model
The first step in engaging in behavioral activation is recognizing what
the behaviors are which prevent you from experiencing more positive
emotions in your life. By identifying these cycles, you can pinpoint
the exact behavior that is resulting in you not feeling better in your
day-to-day life. This gives you the opportunity to change that
behavior. The easiest way to identify what your exact cycle is will
involve an activity log and consistent journaling in this log. You want
to jot down nearly every activity that you are doing, what emotions
coincide with that activity, and anything else that particularly stands
out to you at that moment. By doing this over several days, you will
begin to see patterns in your activities, just like you would in your
thought records when you are tracking your thoughts.
After you have developed a log over several days to give you your
starting point, you can begin to identify the exact cycle that you seem
to go through. For example, you have been feeling depressed, and
you feel as though you have no drive or motivation to begin doing
anything in your life. If you were to look at your log, you might notice
that you are feeling tired, and so, you decline invitations to go out
and do things. Each time you decline an invitation, you feel bad
which causes you to have even lower energy levels. This makes you
less likely to go out and do anything in the near future, too. This
leads to a constant cycle of lowered energies because you are no
longer taking the time out of your day to do things that bring you joy
and lift your spirits.
From the example above, you can see that the pinpointed problem
was the fatigue or lowered energy levels causing you to avoid going
out and doing anything in your free time. You need to pinpoint
exactly where your problematic behaviors lie to give you a stronger
understanding of what is causing you to experience your current
emotional symptoms. Then, you can begin to develop a plan for how
you are going to combat those problems to increase your positive
feelings and decrease your negative or frustrating ones. In the above
example, the problem was the low energy which led to you not
engaging in the things that mattered to you anymore. The behavioral
activation solution then would be to engage in more of what
mattered, even if you were feeling a lowered sense of energy. By
regularly engaging in the things that mattered to you, even if you had
lowered energy and could only do so for a short period of time, you
would be able to stop the spiral of feeling bad and further lowering
your energy. Over time, the spiral will reverse, and you will begin
feeling an increased sense of energy; thus, allowing you to
essentially reverse your state of depression.
Behavioral Activation Techniques You Need to Know About
When it comes to conceptualizing your behavioral activation model
and determining what course of action you are going to take to
improve your emotional symptoms, you need to know what
techniques are available for you to use. Those listed in Chapter 4 are
incredibly supportive, but there are additional techniques that are
specific to behavioral activation that you will likely need to use to
experience success from this strategy.
The techniques that you need to know include:
         Self-monitoring of activities and mood (to see which
     behaviors are impacting your mood and whether or not your
     overall mood is improving)
         Activity scheduling (used to motivate you to do things
     particularly when you have been struggling to stay motivated,
     such as with depression)
         Activity structuring (used to adjust the structure of
     activities you are engaging in to support you in breaking the
     cycle of your difficult moods)
         Problem-solving (to support you in feeling strong enough in
     overcoming various struggles that you may face in your day-to-
     day life)
         Social skill training (to support you in feeling more
     confident in social situations so that you can overcome anxiety,
     depression, etc.)
         Hierarchy construction (the process of ranking activities
     based on how easy they are to accomplish, and then starting
     small and increasing your efforts as you go)
         Shaping (training yourself to begin engaging in healthier
     behaviors)
         Reward (stimulating your brain to see positive activities as
     rewarding and worthwhile in order to overcome thoughts like, It
     does not matter, or I get no value from this)
         Persuasion (persuading yourself to begin engaging in more
     positive behaviors so that you can overcome challenging
     emotional symptoms)
    Behavior contract (having your friends and family commit
to only reinforcing healthy behaviors within you so that they are
not enabling your troubling emotional experiences)
    Life area assessment (determining where it is that you
actually want to experience success in your life and discovering
what actually matters to you so that you can incorporate those
things into your therapy)
Personalized Positive Activities
Once you have identified the problem areas in your behavioral
cycles, you need to pick some personalized positive activities that
you can swap these problematic behaviors out with. These activities
will be used in alignment with the techniques mentioned above to
support you in completely swapping out problematic behaviors and
experiencing relief from troubling emotional symptoms. It is important
that you choose activities that are relevant to you as attempting to
engage in “positive” activities that do not matter to you may only
result in you feeling worse by causing you to feel as though you are
unable to feel better. In reality, the more likely cause is that you are
attempting to feel better using positive activities that do not interest
you or excite you; thus, rendering them useless for you.
A great way to begin identifying personalized positive activities is to
simply sit down with a piece of paper and write down all of the things
that make you feel good in your life. Write down which people you
enjoy spending time with, what hobbies have brought you the most
joy in the past, and what interests you have that cause you to feel
active and engaged. Creating a list of things that make you feel good
in your life will give you plenty of inspiration for things that you need
to do when you recognize your negative behavioral cycle being
activated so that you can swap out the negative behaviors for ones
that make you feel better. For example, if you notice yourself about
to say no to spending time with your friends because you are feeling
a low sense of energy, you may instead agree to a quiet evening
together or schedule for something in the near future. Then, instead
of sitting around feeling bad about yourself, you can engage in
something else that makes you feel positive so that you are
engaging in activities that genuinely support you in feeling better.
Rewarding Yourself
The last thing you need to do when you are using behavioral
activation is actually putting your concept into action by practicing
your new positive activities. Every time you do, you need to reward
yourself for doing so. This is how you are going to condition your
mind to begin engaging in more positive behaviors and feeling as
though the engagement is genuinely worth your while. Rewarding
yourself will look different from person to person so you will need to
determine what your best course of rewarding actions will be. You
need to determine a series of rewards that will actually make you
feel positive for engaging in your positive behaviors.
Again, the best way to know exactly what rewards are going to be a
proper fit for you is to sit with your journal and determine what small
things make you feel incredibly good in your life. This could be a
favorite drink, small activity, or even a small object that makes you
feel really good any time you receive it. Then, you simply grant
yourself one of these rewards every time that you engage in positive
activities that lead to you feeling better. This way, you feel more
positive from the activity itself, and then you feel an even greater
influx of positivity from the reward. Completing this new cycle will feel
much like achieving a goal and receiving a tangible reward for it;
thereby, causing an increase in dopamine in your brain and an
easier ability to integrate the new cycle to go forward. As you
continue integrating your positive behavioral cycle and experiencing
all of the positive rewards associated with it, you will find that it
becomes increasingly easier for you to build yourself up and adjust
your behaviors through this repetitive practice.
Getting Back on the Horse
Any time you attempt to break old habits and replace them with new
ones, you are going to experience difficulty in maintaining your new
habits in the early stages. This is because your natural response to
certain stimuli and triggers will be to engage in your previous
habitual behaviors and not your new ones. It is important that you
understand that these setbacks are not a negative reflection on you
or your ability to feel better, but rather, they are a natural experience
that everyone has. This is simply your brain trying to fulfill the cycle
that feels natural, familiar, and comfortable to it. As you adjust your
behavioral cycles to accommodate your new positive behaviors, the
number of times that you engage in previous behaviors will
decrease. Your brain will adapt to the positive experiences and begin
understanding that there is a more effective method for getting its
needs met that does not produce such a negative or uncomfortable
result. When your brain begins to realize this, it will start adjusting to
accommodate your new healthier habits and supporting you in the
transitional process rather than resisting you.
Getting back on the horse requires you to truly understand that these
backslides are in no way a reflection of you, your willpower, or your
abilities. It is truly just a natural experience that everyone has.
Simply get back on track when the next cycle is triggered and allow
yourself to continue practicing until it becomes easier for you to
engage in your positive behaviors on a consistent basis.
If you find that you are not thriving with your current action plan, you
may benefit from reassessing your behavioral activation cycle and
seeing if there is something that you may have missed. If you have
continued to log your activities and moods since the beginning,
which you should do, then you can also factor these into your
consideration as you determine what may be holding you back from
success. With this knowledge in mind, you can adjust your course of
action so that you can begin experiencing greater success from your
behavioral activation practices. You may need to continually
reassess and adjust your plan a few times over before you find a
system that truly works for you. Do not worry if it takes you some
time, the more you focus on this process, the more likely you are to
find success with using the behavioral activation strategy in your
CBT.
 Chapter 6: Change Your Core Beliefs
Our core beliefs are responsible for supporting us in interpreting the
world around us and formulating opinions about the things that we
see or experience in our lives. Our beliefs are typically formed in our
childhoods; however, they can be shaped or introduced at any time
with enough repetition or with a particularly strong emotional
influence. For example, if a coworker bullied you on a constant basis
and led you to believe that you are not good at your job, then you
may begin to develop the belief that you are not capable. Or, if your
coworker was to humiliate you in front of your boss or use a
humiliating experience to validate why you are not good at your job,
then you may associate this negative feeling with this negative
opinion and thus formulate a negative belief that you are not
capable.
Beliefs can be positive and helpful, or they can be negative and
unproductive. The positive and helpful ones typically support us in
living more positive lives by allowing us to see the best in life and to
assess things in a way that supports us in feeling positively
connected to the world around us. These beliefs do not need to be
changed because they are helping you thrive in your life by allowing
you to genuinely feel good and contribute positive things to the world
around you.
Negative beliefs, however, are damaging and can result in you
having unproductive and isolating experiences with the world around
you. When you are experiencing negative beliefs, you may find
yourself believing that you are not worthy or capable of being a part
of society, that you have nothing to offer, or that you are a bad
person. These types of beliefs can lead to you having an unhealthy
mental atmosphere; thus, leading to negative thoughts that can
produce negative emotions. All of which are the perfect foundation
for emotional symptoms like anxiety or depression to thrive on. If you
want to experience complete freedom from these troubling
symptoms, you will need to learn how to change your negative
beliefs so that they no longer limit your views on yourself and the
world around you.
Changing your core beliefs requires you to identify what these beliefs
are, pick the new beliefs that you want to switch them for, and then
engage in the process of switching the beliefs around. When done
correctly, you will completely mentally disconnect from the negative
core belief that was limiting you so that you can attach to the more
positive belief that expands your opportunities and opens your mind.
In this chapter, we are going to explore what these very steps are
and how you can begin practicing them in your own life.
Conceptualize the Swap
The first thing you need to do when it comes to switching your
negative core belief for a positive one is to identify what exact beliefs
you are trying to swap. You need to consider exactly what your
negative core belief is and how it impacts you, then choose a
positive core belief that you want to replace it with. You need to
make sure that you completely understand the difference between
your negative core belief and your positive core belief, including how
both have impacted you in your life.
Identify why your negative core belief limited you and what types of
troubles it has caused for you, including how it has contributed to
your anxiety or depression. Then, identify what your new positive
core belief will be like and how it will lift these limitations and support
you in experiencing a more positive life going forward. For example,
maybe your negative core belief was I am not worthy, and it led to
you denying yourself the opportunity to try new things because you
felt like you were not worthy of having a good time. If you were to
replace this negative core belief with one like I am worthy, then the
limitations of your unwillingness to try new things would be lifted
because you would realize that you are worthy of enjoying yourself
and trying new things. Get clear on what you are losing and what
you are gaining. Realize that what you stand to gain is far more than
what your negative core belief has ever given you.
Rate Your Beliefs
Once you know what beliefs you want to swap and the reason for it,
you need to take a moment to honestly rate these beliefs regarding
how much you genuinely believe in them. You will rate your beliefs
on a scale of 0-100, where 0 means that you do not believe in said
belief at all and 100 means that you believe in it completely. You
need to rate both your negative core belief that you want to release
and the positive core belief that you want to integrate into your life.
You do not need the numbers to add up to 100 either. For example,
you could say that you believe I am unworthy 80% and I am worthy
10%. If you are unsure as to what you want to rate these two beliefs,
simply spend a few minutes considering each one and let yourself
intuitively pick the number that feels right for you. You only need to
be accurate towards what you are feeling. There is no index or
system that you need to consider when you are rating these beliefs.
Identify the Nature of Your Negative Core Belief
It is important that you understand the nature of your negative core
belief, or what type of negative core belief it is. There are two types
of negative core beliefs that people tend to have: the stable ones
and unstable ones. Stable negative core beliefs remain consistent no
matter what, and virtually nothing that you experience in your life will
change the fact that you have this negative core belief. Unstable
negative core beliefs fluctuate with your mood, and this means that
you may believe them more when you are sad as compared to when
you are happy.
When you have a negative core belief that is stable, you believe it no
matter how you feel and you likely cannot recall a time in the recent
past where you did not believe it. This type of negative core belief
can be slightly harder to change as it requires you to put more effort
into finding evidence that it is not true or does not need to be true for
you any longer. Unstable core beliefs can be easier to adjust
because of the very fact that they fluctuate so much. It can be easier
for you to assure yourself that they are untrue because you do not
believe them nearly as much when you are feeling positive; thereby,
helping you remind yourself that they are not true even when you are
feeling negative.
Keep a Positive Forward Focus
Now that you have thoroughly addressed your situation, it is time to
start putting a serious strategy toward the process of swapping out
your negative core belief for a positive core belief. The method that
you are going to use is simple, though it does require consistent
practice. All you need to do to swap your beliefs are to consistently
stay focused on your new positive core belief and strengthen your
faith in it while ultimately ignoring the old negative core belief. The
more you attempt to focus on dismantling your negative core belief,
the less you are going to be able to do so because you will be
regularly reinforcing it with attention and energy. The more you
attempt to stop thinking about it or believing in it, the more your
attention will focus on it. As you already know, our brains like to
“check” to see if we are doing a good job at not doing something,
which results in us mentally doing it anyway.
Adjusting your focus and keeping your attention on the positive core
belief will allow you to invest your energy in the new belief that will
actually support you in feeling better. Any time you find yourself
considering your negative core belief, simply begin thinking about
your preferred positive core belief instead. Do not attempt to
dismantle, debunk, or demystify the negative core belief. Simply let it
go and begin thinking about the new more positive belief instead.
This will ensure that you are investing your time and energy into
increasing your belief in the positive core belief; thus, allowing it to
completely take the place of the old negative one.
Maintain a Data Log
Another great strategy for improving your ability to integrate your
new positive core belief is to practice maintaining a data log. To do
this, you need to commit to keeping a log about your new positive
belief for at least two weeks. During these two weeks, you need to
write down every single reason why your positive belief is true. This
means that you need to consciously accumulate evidence that
proves that it is true and write it down every single time you come
across more evidence that supports your new belief. For example,
say you want to boost your belief in the saying “I make money easily”
and then you find a dollar on the ground. This would prove that you
make money easily because a dollar came into your life with no
efforts on your own.
By accumulating positive evidence that supports your positive core
belief, you show your mind that this belief is, in fact, true and that it is
safe for you to begin trusting in your new belief fully. Over time, your
brain will realize that your evidence must be true and it will begin to
increase the amount in which you believe in this new belief. Soon,
your old negative core belief will no longer be relevant because there
will be too much positive evidence supporting your new positive core
belief.
Heal the Origins of the Old Belief
Sometimes, old negative core beliefs can be particularly hard to let
go of because they are rooted in your childhood, and you have had
them for a tremendously long time. As a child, your brain has not yet
developed to the point that you are capable of realizing that you can
have thoughts, beliefs, and opinions of your own. Instead, you still
believe that you are deeply connected to your parents or guardians
in your life, and you feel as though anything they think or believe
must also be thought and believed by you. Often, these beliefs are
developed not through a direct verbal transmission from your parents
to you, but instead, through behaviors and the way that you perceive
these behaviors. For example, if your parents never asked for your
opinion about family matters, you may then believe that your opinion
is invalid and therefore you believe that no one needs to listen to you
or respect your opinion in life.
Taking the time to consider where your belief has come from,
especially if it is rooted in your childhood, gives you the opportunity
to actually heal the origins of your negative core belief so that it is
easier for you to release it and replace it. This healing process may
look different depending on how your belief came to be and what it
felt like for you as you adopted the belief. However, it is important
that you honor your body and mind as you go through the process of
healing and allow for yourself to express whatever emotions that you
may need to in order to heal. As long as you are not harming
yourself or anyone else in the process, releasing your emotions is a
great way to allow yourself to completely heal from the origins of
negative core beliefs so that you can effectively replace them with
new positive core beliefs.
Self-Monitor Your Behaviors
During the process of swapping out your beliefs, it is important that
you self-monitor your behaviors. Many things may take place during
the transitional process that can actually have a negative impact on
your ability to swap out your beliefs. These include
overcompensating for the negative core belief, surrendering to the
belief, avoiding triggers, or feeling any emotional symptoms arising
from the belief, such as anxiety or depression.
If you are overcompensating for your negative core belief, you will
notice because it will feel as though you are trying far too hard to
remove it. It may feel as though you are fighting yourself to integrate
the positive core belief. This leads to you feeling overwhelmed,
frustrated, and resentful towards yourself for not being able to
integrate the new positive core belief. If you are experiencing this,
you need to slow down and attempt a more moderate behavior to
use alongside integrating your new core belief. For example, instead
of aggressively and obsessively repeating your positive core belief in
your mind, you could simply say it once and then choose to drop the
topic of your beliefs altogether. You may also need to simply start
acting as if you believe the new belief even if you do not necessarily
believe it just yet. It can take a few months for this to fully work, so
be patient with yourself and do not grow frustrated, aggressive or
obsessive if it does not start working right away. Remember, your
negative beliefs have likely had a long time to root themselves into
your mind and have a negative impact on your life. If you want to
release them, you will need to be patient and give your new positive
core beliefs just as much time to integrate themselves and take root
in your mind, too.
If you are surrendering to the negative core belief, you need to stop
and consider why you believe in it. Any time you notice yourself
surrendering to the negative core belief by modifying your behavior
or thoughts to accommodate for it, you need to confront this behavior
and then begin acting as if you believe your new positive core belief.
If you allow yourself to continually surrender to the negative core
belief, you will find that it is impossible for you to change because
you are avoiding the opportunity to change your belief out for a new
positive one. The same is true for any instance where you find
yourself avoiding triggers because you do not want to be confronted
by your negative core belief. If you do not expose yourself to the
situations that grant you the opportunity to make changes, you are
not going to have access to what you need to genuinely facilitate
changes in your life.
If you find that your mood is low and you have not been consciously
aware of your thoughts or beliefs for some time, take a minute to
reflect on your negative core belief and see what may be going on
with it. You may discover that you have been unconsciously buying
into the belief and allowing yourself to be shaken by it. Any time you
find yourself feeling anxious or depressed, honestly ask yourself how
much you are buying into the negative core belief on a scale of 0-
100. If you realize that you have been buying into it quite a bit, give
yourself the opportunity to release from it by consciously using this
as a chance to integrate your new positive core belief instead.
   Chapter 7: Mindfulness-integrated
                 CBT
Mindfulness-integrated CBT or MiCBT is a CBT approach that
incorporates the power of mindfulness with a standard of CBT
practices. Using MiCBT, trained therapists have been able to
address a variety of psychological disorders in their clients and
support them in experiencing full healing from these disorders.
Mindfulness and CBT fit together perfectly as they both involve a
self-healing approach when it comes to addressing emotional
symptoms of psychological disorders and correcting the behaviors
and thought processes that may be contributing to them.
Mindfulness, or mind-fullness, means to approach life with your mind
fully attentive to the world around you. Your objective when engaging
in mindfulness is to bring your awareness completely into the
present moment and engage in it with a non-judgmental, non-
reactive, and accepting attitude. Mindfulness allows you to begin
experiencing life alongside a healthy form of detachment that allows
you to gain the most out of every moment without feeling so
personally open and vulnerable to the world around you. As a result,
addressing things like stress, anxiety, and depression becomes
easier because you are not using the world around you to reinforce
your inner beliefs that promote the development of stress, anxiety,
and depression.
When combined with CBT, mindfulness amplifies your capacity to
adjust your behaviors so that you can lessen the impact of your
psychological disorders and experience emotional freedom from
them. MiCBT integrates both mindfulness and CBT into a therapeutic
process that takes place over four stages. This chapter will explain
these four stages to you, including how to engage in them.
The Four Stages
The four-stage process of MiCBT allows individuals to improve the
way they are feeling and progressively change their unhelpful
behaviors. Unlike CBT, which works predominantly on thoughts and
beliefs that lead to unwanted behaviors, MiCBT seeks to help you
develop control over the processes that are allowing you to maintain
these unrealistic thoughts and beliefs. Thus, your focus is not only to
change the content of your thoughts but to change the entire process
that leads up to the content, too.
The four stages that you will encounter in MiCBT include the
personal stage, the exposure stage, the interpersonal stage, and the
empathetic stage. Each of these stages is designed to support you in
progressively getting to the root cause of each thought process and
neutralize the impact that they have on you. At each stage, you will
engage in different practices and techniques to support you in fully
grasping the purpose of the stage and the lessons within it before
moving on to the next stage.
Personal Stage
The personal stage is stage 1 in MiCBT. This stage is devoted to
teaching you about mindfulness skills so that you can begin to
discover how you can let go of unhelpful thoughts and emotions so
that you can successfully address life’s challenges. Your goal in
stage 1 is to develop equanimity so that you can begin experiencing
life from a more neutral perspective. This is how you can stop feeling
as though you are personally being victimized by other people’s
thoughts, actions, and behaviors, as well as your own. Here, you
learn how to stop taking everything quite so personally so that you
can start assessing things with greater reason rather than being
hijacked by your emotions.
To successfully begin practicing the personal stage, you need to start
learning how to tune into your own thoughts and pay closer attention
to them. A great way to do this is through mindfulness meditations
where you sit and allow yourself to enter a meditative state before
allowing yourself to become aware of what your thoughts are and
how they are impacting you. You can also practice what is known as
a “body scan” whereby you direct your conscious awareness to
various areas of your body so that you can become aware of any
sensations or tension that may be present in that area of your body.
These types of practices allow you to become aware of your own
inner voice that continues to chat with you in your mind even if you
are not always consciously aware of it.
As you continue growing more consciously aware of your intuition
and your inner voice, you can begin using this to support you in
mindfully detaching from the world around you. This mindful-
detachment, or equanimity, is not intended to isolate you but is
instead used as a way to neutralize your perspective of the world
around you. Mindfulness will support you in doing this by allowing
you to become aware of your inner voice and what it may be saying
to you and detach from it any time you recognize that the voice is
seeking to stir an unnecessary emotional response from you. For
example, if you are in a public space and you begin experiencing
anxiety because your inner voice tells you something bad is going to
happen and you have no reason to believe that such is true, you can
override it with evidence disproving your inner voice. From there, you
can prevent or slow down the unwanted emotional response and
begin addressing the environment around you with a rational
response instead.
Exposure Stage
In stage 2, or the exposure stage, your goal is to begin learning how
to self-regulate yourself in situations that you may have been
avoiding in the past. So, in stage 1, your focus would have been
learning how to build up your skills during your regular day-to-day life
without pushing yourself to engage in any overly triggering
experiences.
In stage 2, you want to intentionally begin exposing yourself to the
things that trigger your psychological responses, such as anxiety or
depression, so that you can begin to build confidence in yourself and
in your abilities. The more you expose yourself to these triggering
situations and successfully engage in self-regulation, the more
confident you are going to feel in yourself and in the control that you
have over your responses to the world around you. This is going to
allow you to feel more confident in addressing challenging situations
so that you can genuinely believe in your capacity to control your
thoughts and emotions at any given time.
As you move into the exposure stage, it is important that you do not
do so before you are ready to. Remember, your goal here is to build
up your confidence, so you do not want to risk that by overexposing
yourself and reinforcing your theory that these more challenging
situations are dangerous and that you are incapable of handling
them. Ideally, you should begin by exposing yourself to things that
you would consider to be smaller triggers first. For example, they
make you feel anxious but not so anxious that you could not possibly
handle them even if your anxiety was triggered. Gradually increasing
the severity of the trigger as you go along will support you in feeling
a greater sense of confidence in yourself and your self-regulation
skills. This will ensure that you are ready to handle the larger and
more daunting tasks as they come along; thereby, allowing you to
experience full success from your MiCBT.
If you do find yourself overexposed and feeling a lack of confidence
in any given situation, it is important that you take the time to
mindfully draw your awareness to reality and recognize that you are
in the process of healing and that, sometimes, setbacks are going to
happen. Giving yourself the opportunity to rationally consider what
happened and mindfully become aware of how you can improve in
the future, while also disengaging from the emotions relating to your
setback, will support you in feeling more confident going forward.
Interpersonal Stage
As you move into stage 3, or the interpersonal stage, you are going
to begin developing a stronger interpersonal understanding, as well
as improving your communication skills in challenging situations.
Here, you will gain the opportunity to learn how to respond to other
people’s reactivity, rather than react back and escalate the situation;
thus, deteriorating the quality of the interaction and increasing the
chance of a negative experience.
In this stage, you want to use your mindfulness to help you identify
your thoughts and feelings and recognize how they are impacting
you in your day-to-day life. Then, as you go about your daily life and
begin to feel the arousal of thoughts and feelings that could indicate
the oncoming of an anxious or depressive episode, you need to
begin enforcing new strategies instead. You will start by mentally
slowing down the process and taking a moment to assess what your
thoughts and emotions are, and what your goal is in the present
situation. For example, your boss wants to talk to you, and this elicits
an anxious response within you. Rather than attempting to avoid the
conversation or bringing a severe amount of anxiety into the
conversation with you, you could instead recognize your anxiety and
your anxious thoughts and consider what their goal is. Maybe you
are worried about getting in trouble, so your goal is to avoid having
an uncomfortable conversation about your poor work ethic of late.
Your goal, then, would be to have a constructive conversation that
does not cause hurt feelings or a sense of deep shame in you. You
could start by recalling equanimity and intentionally practicing
healthy detachment from the situation so that you could then
address it from a neutral perspective. Through this, you may realize
that there are many possible reasons for why your boss would want
to talk to you, and not only to reprimand you for the work that you
have been doing.
Once you have slowed down your thoughts and emotions and given
yourself a chance to rationally process what your goal is, you can
choose a more rational response to the conversation that you are
about to encounter. For example, if you do go in to have the
conversation with your boss and it turns out that they do want to talk
to you about your recent work ethic, instead of allowing yourself to
react with anxiety, you can slow down and choose to respond with
calmness. Rather than growing so anxious that you can hardly focus,
you can instead listen to what your boss has to say, respond
thoughtfully, and agree to implement any changes into your routine
to improve your work ethic. This way, you can have a productive
conversation with your boss without finding yourself being sucked
away into your anxious response and struggling to remain
professional and attentive during the conversation.
If you find yourself entering a conversation with someone who is
experiencing a high level of reactivity to the situation, such as by
getting excessively angry or anxious, this stage will also support you
in learning how to detach from the other person’s reactivity. In doing
so, you will be able to guide yourself through the process of having a
more thoughtful and intentional response. This helps you avoid
stumbling into your own unwanted emotional symptoms. This can
also help you refrain from having reactive conversations that become
escalated by both you and the other individual; thereby, potentially
leading to an unwanted situation, such as an intense argument or a
challenging panic attack.
Empathetic Stage
The fourth and final stage of the MiCBT process is the empathetic
stage. During the empathetic stage, you will discover how you can
experience an increased sense of empathy and compassion towards
yourself and others in daily interactions. This will increase your
sense of self-worth while also supporting you in developing a deep
sense of care and connection with those around you. This helps you
to develop stronger relationships with both yourself and others. This
allows you to experience the fulfillment of one thing that every
human needs, which is a genuine connection with others.
During the empathetic stage, you want to teach yourself to see
others as human beings who have human responses to the world
around them. Here, you can take the time to recognize that not
everyone is actively aware of how their behavior impacts themselves
and others and they may not be ready to deal with this information
yet. In fact, some people may never be ready to take responsibility
for their actions and how their behaviors and beliefs impact both
themselves and everyone around them. In learning to experience
empathy for these people, you discover how to stop blaming
everyone around you for the negative way that they may impact your
life. Instead, you allow yourself to see them for who they are. If you
need to, you can detach from them and terminate your relationship
with the said person to preserve your own sense of wellbeing. The
goal here is to stop holding such deep resentments towards others
for their actions so that you can stop taking their actions personally.
You also need to learn how to increase the amount of empathy and
compassion that you feel for yourself so that you can stop blaming
and resenting yourself every time you make a mistake in your life. In
realizing that you, too, are only human and that you are also
susceptible to making mistakes and growing at your own pace, you
let yourself off the hook for things that you have done in your life.
This allows you to begin forgiving yourself and releasing the shame
that you may carry from the way that you have acted or behaved in
your past. It can also support you in feeling more forgiving towards
yourself during the growing process as you learn how to do things in
a better way and become the best version of you. Instead of holding
yourself to impossibly high standards and then feeling anxious or
depressed when you cannot meet them, you can hold yourself to
reasonable, human-level standards, and feel proud of yourself when
you try your best.
Developing this type of empathy in stage four ultimately requires you
to continue practicing self-regulation and honestly assessing your
thoughts and emotions from moment to moment. By mindfully
addressing them and restoring your rational thinking processes, you
can bring your emotions back into balance and prevent yourself from
experiencing such an intense spiral of negative or unwanted
emotional responses. Here, you allow yourself to fully have control
over your mind and emotions and experience the world around you
free of your troubling emotional symptoms.
Part 4: Supportive CBT Practices
Chapter 8: Increasing Mental Stamina
In CBT, the best way to achieve your goals is to have practices that
are both focused on overcoming unwanted behavioral challenges
while also improving your life in general. The practices that are
specifically focused on supporting you in overcoming unwanted
behavioral challenges, such as behavioral activation or MiCBT, are
going to be the tools that help you overcome specific challenges.
Supportive CBT practices will allow you to reinforce your life with
positive behaviors so that you can improve your life in general. This
makes you more resilient to the development of future problematic
behaviors. In other words, by practicing supportive CBT practices,
you improve your chances of experiencing full relief from challenging
psychological disorders, such as anxiety and depression, by
strengthening your mind and wellness overall.
This chapter introduces you to support practices that can increase
your mental stamina and help you feel a stronger sense of general
wellness and control within your mind. This will be supportive in
helping you feel as though you and your mind are on the same page
and that you can truly work together with yourself to overcome any
challenges that you may have regarding your thoughts and
emotions. This also helps you with developing a strong relationship
with yourself so that you can feel a greater general sense of
positivity concerning your own being.
Improving Your Problem-Solving Abilities
Not having a strong ability to solve problems in your life can lead you
to feel overwhelmed in the face of uncertainty. People who struggle
with their problem-solving abilities often find themselves feeling a
lack of confidence around trying new things or engaging in uncertain
experiences because they fear that if something goes wrong, they
will not know what to do. This type of uncertainty can spark a fear of
being endangered without the necessary skills to survive, even
though most situations are not actually life-threatening. From this
state, the development of anxiety is only natural. As your anxiety
begins to develop, you find yourself unwilling to try new things out of
fear of being vulnerable without the necessary skills to protect
yourself. If you consistently decline new things because of this fear, it
can also leave you feeling depressed, which can further deteriorate
the quality of your mental health.
Learning how to improve your problem-solving abilities means that
you equip yourself with the skills required to navigate uncertain
situations so that you no longer experience such a deep sense of
vulnerability in these experiences. Essentially, you build your trust in
yourself and in your capacity to survive no matter what experiences
you may face. One great way to improve your problem-solving skills
is by playing logic-based puzzles or games. Things like Sudoku or
riddles are designed to encourage you to start thinking critically so
that you can discover what the solution is to the puzzle or the
problem. Regularly engaging in these problem-solving games is a
great way to increase your capacity to solve problems. This allows
you to feel more confident in your problem-solving abilities.
Mindfulness is also a great practice when it comes to problem-
solving as it teaches you how you can detach from intense emotional
responses so that you can assess situations from a rational state of
mind. Bringing yourself back into rational thinking improves your
decision-making skills as well as your problem-solving skills, which
will then allow you to address challenges in your life with a clearer
perspective.
Using Mantras and Meditation
Mantras and meditation are a great way to improve your mental state
by helping you improve your mindfulness while also allowing you to
feel a greater sense of freedom from intrusive or negative thoughts.
Mantras, or personal mottos, are a great way to empower yourself
and inspire yourself to see things from a more resilient, confident,
and positive perspective. Your personal mantra can be anything that
you desire it to be, so long as it supports you in feeling empowered
and inspired to overcome any challenges that you may face in your
life. You can also change your personal mantra or use a couple if
you feel that you need empowerment in multiple areas of your life.
Your mantra can be repeated at any time that you need extra mental
support in overcoming adversity in your life. It can also be repeated
during meditation as a way to reinforce your mantra in your mind so
that it is even stronger when you use it actively in your day-to-day
life. Mantra-based meditations can involve you meditating and then
chanting your mantra over and over to yourself, or you can simply
say it to yourself quietly in your mind and allow yourself to feel
overcome by the power of your mantra.
Meditating itself is also highly valuable. While meditating alongside
mantras can be extremely powerful, using meditation on its own can
improve your mindfulness as well as support you in feeling a deeper
sense of relaxation in your life. From a mindfulness front, meditating
gives you the opportunity to become more aware of what types of
thoughts are residing in your mind and how they may be making you
feel. The goal is to recognize the thoughts and the accompanying
feelings without attempting to judge them or manipulate them in any
way. Instead, you simply want to become aware of them so that you
can gain an honest understanding as to what is going on inside of
you at that moment. From a relaxation perspective, meditation allows
you to sit with yourself and experience peace from the world around
you; thus, giving you the opportunity to “offload” anything that may
be causing you to feel overwhelmed or stressed out. The more you
meditate, the less residual stress you carry with you; thus, making
future stressful situations less overwhelming for you to endure.
Soaking in the Healing Benefits of Nature
Nature has an incredibly healing impact on humans. Even though we
have boxed ourselves up in homes, surrounded ourselves in cement,
and confined a significant amount of nature to either garden beds or
allocated forests, we still crave nature in the very center of our
beings. Getting out and being one with nature for any period of time
can have a significantly healing impact on your life. Nature allows
you to remove yourself from the hustle and grind of day-to-day living
and immerse yourself in an entire ecosystem where the motto seems
to be “let it be” as everything just does what it pleases at any given
moment. Plenty can be learned through nature and plenty of healing
that can be done in its presence.
Forest bathing and tree-hugging are considered to be two incredibly
powerful practices to support you in overcoming mental distress and
feeling a sense of peace in your life. Forest bathing, or simply
spending time in a forest, allows you to relax in a quiet and serene
place and simply watch the world exist around you. In the forest,
there is no agenda, sense of time, or pressing need to get anything
done. Instead, the forest is completely devoted to being in the
moment and living peacefully amongst those around you. If you hug
a tree while you are there, you can use this as an opportunity to slow
down and truly physically connect yourself to one of the most serene
life forms in the entire forest. Trees have plenty to offer when it
comes to learning about mindfulness as they spend their entire lives
focused solely on growing up toward the sunlight and standing
strong in their place. Trees do not walk, run, or crawl. They are
stationary and spend their entire long lives building themselves up in
just one spot. Soaking in the slow and focused energy of the tree for
a moment can support you in remembering that not everything has
to be fast and that some of the biggest things in life come from the
slowest and smallest efforts.
Another way that you can engage with nature is through bird
watching. Bird watching is incredibly peaceful, but it also gives you
the opportunity to be mindful. When you are watching birds, you
must sit still and remain quiet so that you do not scare the birds
away. Your patience and calmness is required, which encourages
you to learn how you can sit quietly and enjoy the peace around you
as the birds that you are watching live their lives. Plus, the very act
of watching carefree animals enjoy their lives without any stress or
concerns is a wonderful way to remember the true values of life and
to restore peace into your own mind.
Finally, if you want to get out into nature and physically engage with
it, gardening is a great hobby that is both peaceful and productive.
The act of gardening itself allows you to remove yourself from your
typical environment and focus your energy on something that is
relaxing and slower. You can focus your time on tilling soil, planting
seeds, watering your garden, pulling weeds, or simply checking in on
things to make sure that everything is growing healthily. As you are
in your garden, you can commit to spending this time by only paying
attention to your garden and what is happening within your garden.
Plus, with a garden, you are remaining productive by teaching
yourself to stay focused and achieve long-term goals successfully.
Gardens take time, patience, and consistency which are three
mental practices that can change your mental world completely
when it comes to learning how to overcome anxiety, depression, and
other psychological disorders. As you continue gardening, you will
begin to reap in the rewards of your practices with the healthy plants
that grow under your care, which allows you to feel accomplished
and meaningful.
Finding Value in Feeling Small
One of the biggest reasons why people experience anxiety or
depression is because they feel insignificant. Feeling insignificant
can be exhausting, upsetting, and painful. Often, feeling insignificant
can leave you feeling unworthy and like there is nothing for you to
live for because you are not significant enough to have value. Of
course, this is not true, though, the feelings of insignificance can lead
you to believe that is the case.
If you want to stop feeling the pain associated with feeling
insignificant, you can start finding the value in feeling small. Feeling
small could make you feel insignificant, or it could be seen as an
opportunity to relieve yourself from the weight of the world that you
have been carrying on your shoulders.
If you find yourself feeling personally responsible for solving all of the
world’s problems and helping everyone in your life to feel better or
experience better things, feeling small can lead you to believe that
you are incapable of fulfilling your purpose. This is painful for anyone
to experience. However, if you put life back into perspective and
realize that it is not your job to personally solve all of the world’s
problems and make everyone feel better, suddenly, being small is
not such a bad thing.
Being small means that you are not required to oversee everything
and cure every problem that the world faces. You can now
confidently focus on yourself and your needs. This is because it is
not your responsibility to fulfill the needs of anyone else but yourself.
Since it is not your responsibility to manage anyone else’s emotions
or needs but yourself, you can feel good about focusing all of your
energy and attention on fulfilling your needs and helping yourself feel
better. Then, from this state of feeling better, you can even support
others in having a better life themselves – if you desire to. The key
difference here is that you are doing it from a state of personal power
and feeling in control of yourself and your feelings, rather than
feeling as though it is your obligation to fulfill everyone else’s needs
and never feeling as though you have the energy to do so.
If feeling small gives you a feeling of fear, like you are too small to
matter to anyone else, you will need to spend some time genuinely
assessing the reality behind this. Is it true that you do not matter, or
is this an overgeneralization that you are telling yourself? If you are
being honest with yourself, you will know that this is an
overgeneralization and that it is not true because you do matter and
to many other people in the world, too, whether you realize it or not.
The best way to combat this situation is to develop evidence that
proves that you matter no matter how big or small you may feel.
Stargazing and Cloud Watching
Similar to getting out into nature or watching birds fly about their day,
stargazing and cloud watching are two powerful ways to increase
your relaxation and plug yourself into a mindfulness practice. For
some people, complete meditation practices simply do not feel
achievable, especially if you have been living with a significant
amount of stress in your life on a day-to-day basis for quite some
time. Releasing the need to do meditation, look for any specific way
and engage in meditative practices. Stargazing or cloud watching is
a great way to gain the same benefits without feeling the pressure to
sit still and bring yourself into a relaxed state.
One great thing about stargazing and cloud watching is that they are
fairly accessible activities for virtually anyone to enjoy. Even if you
struggle with mobility issues, are feeling a particularly low sense of
motivation, or it is too cold to go outside, you can still engage in
these activities. Simply sit next to your window and look out into the
sky and see what arises in front of you. As you do, allow yourself to
be whisked away in the daydreams that arise and allow yourself to
engage in all the same practices that you would during traditional
meditation. Notice the thoughts and emotions, do not judge them or
attempt to shape them and accept them for what they are. This way,
you can gain all of the values of meditating without actually having to
go out and meditate.
Healing Through Art and Music
Art and music are two great ways to process what is on your mind
and express yourself in an incredibly powerful way. What’s the best
part? You do not have to be an incredible artist or a musician to let
these two art forms support you in healing. Art and music are both
used in many different forms of therapy as a way to help people
express themselves when they feel as though they cannot put what
they feel into words. Engaging in the arts as a way of strengthening
your mind can involve admiring other people’s artwork or music, or
creating your own. There is no right or wrong way to go about this.
Simply getting you involved is powerful enough.
If you choose to create artwork, you can do so in any different
number of ways. Simpler art forms like macaroni frames and tapping
a tambourine can be incredibly therapeutic and offers just as much
expressional release as more complex art forms like painting
landscapes or composing a new song. Engaging in just a few
minutes of artwork per day or a few hours per week can support you
in feeling a stronger sense of release from the emotions and
thoughts that you are experiencing inside. One great thing about art
is that even though it is a gentle expression, it is still a physical
expression. The process of moving your hands through the motion of
creating can support you in physically moving the energy of your
thoughts and emotions out of your body so that you can begin to
experience energetic and emotional release from them.
If you find that creating art on your own is not helpful or that you
want to create something more complex than what you already know
how to do, joining an art class is a great way to expand your skills
while also committing to art on a regular basis. Painting classes,
guitar lessons, drawing classes, or even simply coloring with a group
of friends can be a great way to engage in art on a regular basis and
gain the therapeutic values of this activity.
If creating art is not of interest to you, you might consider admiring it.
Listening to music or attending art galleries is a great way to connect
with other people through the unspoken method of artistry.
Sometimes, seeing something on paper or hearing a specific sound
through a song will resonate with you and the feelings or thoughts
that you are having. These types of connections help you feel as
though another human being understands you. They also help you
begin to discover a new way for you to express yourself when you
lack the words to formulate the correct expression on your own. In
many cases, admiring other people’s artwork is a powerful way to
expose your own thoughts and emotions to yourself so that you can
make better sense of them, and then you can find your own method
of expression after the fact.
The Power of Writing
Like art and music, writing is a powerful way to strengthen your mind
and keep yourself feeling mentally whole and complete. Writing can
be done in almost any way that you please, as long as you are
actively engaging in it on a regular basis. Poetry and creative writing
are two great ways to release what is on your mind through creative
expression in the form of words. Through these two forms of writing,
you do not necessarily have to dig into literal representations of what
you are feeling or write specifically about your thoughts and feelings.
Instead, you can translate your thoughts and feelings into a work of
art that expresses yourself but allows you to keep the personal
details out of it.
Alternatively, you might consider picking up a different type of writing,
such as journaling. Journaling on a regular basis can support you in
releasing the things that are on your mind in a more factual and
complete manner. Through journaling, you can say exactly what you
think and feel without any fear of another person reading it or trying
to make sense of it. In your journal, you can write what you feel that
you cannot say out loud to other people. Because of this ability, to be
honest, you can support yourself in expressing what you are feeling
and process it more completely so that you do not feel as though you
are stuck holding onto it inside. This can help release feelings of
shame and guilt, amongst other painful emotions, and allows you to
completely heal from anything that may be bothering you or keeping
you feeling trapped in emotional distress.
Chapter 9: Increase Physical Wellness
In addition to keeping your mind healthy, you also need to keep your
body healthy. In CBT, your physical actions are believed to impact
your thoughts and emotions directly. By keeping your physical
actions focused on maintaining your overall health and supporting
your wellness, you can tell your mind that you matter and that you
deserve to be taken care of. With psychological disorders like
depression, not taking care of your physical self is a common
symptom that can further deteriorate the way you feel and your
ability to bounce back from depressive episodes. Taking care of
yourself can help you combat these feelings and behave in a way
that keeps your depression at bay by ensuring that you feel good
overall. Furthermore, you ensure that your body’s physical systems
are functioning healthily which supports the healthy functioning of
your brain; therefore, promoting a more positive mindset overall.
When it comes to increasing your physical wellness with the specific
aim of supporting your CBT efforts, there are four main areas that
you want to pay attention to. These are food and water, hygiene,
physical activity, and resting. By paying attention to these four areas
and behaving in a way that promotes their health, you ensure that
you stay physically healthy; thus, promoting your healthier mindset.
Eating a Healthy Diet
When you are experiencing things such as anxiety and depression,
staying on top of your dietary habits is not always easy. With both
conditions, it is not uncommon to avoid eating often because you
genuinely feel as though you are not hungry. The reality is that you
are hungry; however, your increased stress has resulted in your
appetite being suppressed so that the energy that would be used to
digest food can instead be used to manage your symptoms of stress.
Because of this suppressed appetite, it is not uncommon to
completely avoid eating or to find yourself only eating the things you
absolutely crave. Eating this way for a prolonged period of time can
result in your body becoming even more stressed because it lacks
the nutrients that it needs to thrive. Once your body begins to lack
vital nutrients, a whole slew of other issues can arise. This can lead
to increased stress, increased anxiety and depression, decreased
resiliency, decreased immune system functions, and many other
troubling symptoms that can further impede your ability to
experience a healthy life, including emotionally.
Focusing on eating a good healthy diet on a day-to-day basis is
important if you want to nourish your body and reduce the number of
stress hormones being produced inside of you. If you need to, start
with eating small healthy meals or snacks throughout the day as a
way to begin building up your appetite. As your body grows used to
these smaller meals and snacks, you will be able to continually
increase the amount of food that you are eating on a consistent
basis until you find yourself consuming healthy portions daily.
In some cases, your diet can be used to help combat emotional
disturbances, too. For example, if you are experiencing depression,
increasing the number of B vitamins and omega fatty acids that you
consume has been said to be very supportive in managing your
moods. If you are experiencing anxiety, decreasing your caffeine
intake and eliminating other stimulating substances from your diet
can support you in gaining more control over your anxiety.
Drinking Plenty of Water
Like food, many people who are experiencing anxiety or depression
will also forget to drink a healthy amount of water on a day-to-day
basis. Dehydration is another factor that can increase the number of
stress hormones being produced within your body. It can produce
troubling symptoms that can worsen your mood, such as headaches.
Increasing your water intake and ensuring that you are consuming
three liters of water every single day can support you in staying
healthy and keeping your body happy. Water is essential in
supporting your brain which is made up of 73% water so that it can
function healthily.
If you struggle to drink enough water on a daily basis, try setting a
reminder in your phone and carry a water bottle with you everywhere
you go. Any time you experience even a small amount of thirst, take
a sip of water. Begin training yourself to drink when you are thirsty so
that you can ensure that you remain well-hydrated and that your
body does not suffer increased stress due to dehydration.
Maintaining Your Personal Hygiene
Personal hygiene is another part of our daily routine that tends to be
overlooked when we are experiencing intense anxiety or depression.
Simple activities like brushing your teeth or hair or taking a shower
may seem pointless when you are experiencing depression. You
may find yourself feeling as though you lack the energy to stand up
long enough to get the job done, so you simply avoid it altogether.
Avoiding personal hygiene is not only unhealthy for you, but it also
worsens your mood and leads to you having an increased likelihood
of remaining depressed or anxious.
For example, if you are too depressed to shower, you avoid going
out because you feel as though your hair looks greasy and you smell
somewhat like body odor. Because of this, you might decline going
out with friends because you are embarrassed about the way you
look. You declining offers to go out not only prevents you from
engaging in experiences that could boost your mood but also keeps
you feeling bad about yourself because the primary reason you
declined was that you were feeling embarrassed about yourself. This
can seriously lower self-esteem and self-confidence and makes it
even harder for you to break your mood and feel free from your
depression.
Even if you don’t feel like it, make an honest effort to at least shower,
brush your hair, and brush your teeth on a day-to-day basis. Keeping
up your basic hygiene practices will improve your health and keep
you feeling a small sense of pride and confidence in yourself even if
you are feeling particularly low.
Caring About Your Looks
Your looks do not dictate your worth, but they can have a massive
impact on your mood overall. If you consistently look like you do not
care about yourself, such as by not brushing your hair and wearing
dirty clothes that don’t fit or that don’t go well together, you are going
to feel like you do not care about yourself either. When people see
you, whether you realize it or not, you are going to feel a sense of
embarrassment because you have not taken pride in the way you
look.
Caring about your looks does not mean that you have to be vain or
that you have to apply makeup or put hours of effort into your
appearance. Instead, it simply means that you take the time to clean
yourself up and dress up nicely so that you look as though you care
about yourself. When you behave as you care, your mind begins to
recognize this and produces the feelings of caring too. You also
begin to feel better because you can take pride in your looks when
you go out in public. You do not feel as though you have to avoid the
public, look away in shame, or feel embarrassed for how you look.
Instead, you can feel proud about yourself and your appearances.
Getting Regular Activity
Physical activity is not only great for supporting a healthy body, but it
is also great for supporting a healthy mind. When you participate in a
regular activity, you allow yourself to release any built-up energy that
may be lingering in your body and producing feelings of depression
or anxiety. Ideally, you should engage in at least 30 minutes of
intentional physical activity on a daily basis or about 200 minutes per
week. If you are struggling to incorporate physical activity into your
routine, you can break these minutes up into short bursts so that it
does not feel like such a big amount of pressure. For example, if you
are feeling extremely depressed and the idea of 30 minutes of
walking or yoga feels overwhelming, you can simply dedicate five
minutes to stretching. Then, an hour or two later, you can do another
five minutes of stretching. Do this every hour or two until you have
fulfilled your thirty minutes per day. As you begin to feel better from
getting up and moving, you can start elongating your workouts until
you are successfully getting a healthy amount of physical movement
for 30 minutes per day.
If you struggle with physical activity due to mobility issues, consider
talking to your doctor and discovering what types of activity you can
safely do. Even simple things like stretching, yoga, swimming, or just
getting outside to work in the garden can support you in getting
some physical movement into your daily routine so that you can start
feeling better about yourself and in your life.
Relaxing on Purpose
Many people fail to make time for relaxing on purpose and mistake it
for sitting on the couch with their feet up as they scroll social media
and read about stressful topics or listen to other people flock their
negativity around. True and complete relaxation allows you to
release stress from your mind and engage in peaceful activities. This
can be watching a funny show on TV, reading, taking a bath or a
relaxing shower, cooking or baking, or even just laying back on the
couch with your eyes closed daydreaming about life.
Relaxing on purpose gives you time to unplug and tune out from the
world around you. During this time, you want to release yourself from
the pressure of the world and give yourself the freedom to just “be”
with no strings attached. If you have a big family or find yourself
living in a home that is not relaxing for you, you might consider
engaging in some other form of relaxing activity on a regular basis.
Going to a spa, sitting at the park, attempting float therapy, or
engaging in other solo activities can be extremely helpful. You don’t
have to be alone if you would prefer to relax in the presence of
someone else. Even having a quiet evening on the couch with your
family as you watch a funny movie can be relaxing. The goal is to
engage in any activity that is going to allow you to release yourself
from the stressful demands of life and simply enjoy yourself.
Getting Proper Sleep
Rest is powerful, and unfortunately, many people do not get proper
sleep every single night. When you are depressed or anxious, you
might find yourself feeling extremely tired on a regular basis. In fact,
you might even find yourself sleeping more often than not, potentially
causing you to wonder why you are still so tired despite getting
plenty of rest. The reality is that when you are depressed or anxious,
your mind is often too stressed out to allow you to experience a true
and deep rest. Instead, your sleep is typically light and restless or
filled with nightmares that result in you feeling stressed out and
uncomfortable in your sleep.
Getting a healthy sleep every single night is important, and it can be
accomplished even if you do not feel as though you are getting
enough rest right now. It does take some intention and practice,
however, especially if you have been having particularly restless
sleep each night. Using nightmare rescripting can be a great way to
relax the state of your sleep even if you are not necessarily
experiencing nightmares. This CBT practice can support you in
restructuring your sleep state in general so that you can experience
greater relief from any stress that may be following you into your
sleep each night.
You can also improve the state of your sleep by meditating before
bed using aromatherapy, keeping your bedroom clean and tranquil,
ensuring that your bedding is comfortable, and by keeping your
house at the right temperature. Avoiding stimulants in the evenings
and night times and switching to relaxing foods and teas like those
infused with chamomile and lavender is a great way to relax your
body from the inside out. You also need to make sure that you are
sleeping on a consistent schedule. Even though you may feel
exhausted every single day, maintaining a consistent bedtime and
wake time and avoiding sleeping in between can ensure that your
body becomes used to sleeping on a consistent schedule. This can
help you overcome feelings of chronic exhaustion and support you in
feeling better rested when you wake up. Be kind to yourself if it takes
a while to level out your sleep. These patterns do take time and are
not something that will change right away. Several weeks on a
consistent sleeping schedule with a strong and consistent bedtime
routine can be extremely helpful though.
    Chapter 10: Maintaining Wellness
Putting in the effort to heal yourself from troubling emotions like
depression and anxiety only matters if you are going to continue
putting in the effort to maintain your wellness. If you immediately
stop practicing your wellness approach the moment you start
experiencing relief from your symptoms, or if you throw in the towel
when you do not see the results you desire, you can guarantee that
your results will not come. You need to stay devoted and continue
supporting your healing practices even long after you feel relief from
the symptoms that were disturbing you for so long. By maintaining
your wellness on an ongoing basis, you can ensure that you
experience complete ongoing relief from your psychological
disorders so that they do not slowly creep back in after you have
spent so much time healing from them.
The following practices are things you can do to maintain your
mental wellness on an ongoing basis.
Regularly Assessing Your Approach
As you continue down the path of healing yourself from depression
and anxiety, it is imperative that you regularly assess your approach
and make sure that you are having the best impact on your overall
health that you possibly can. Reassessing your approach on a
consistent basis allows you to ensure that you are always using the
best approach possible and that you are making significant
improvements on a regular basis. If you find that your approach is
not effective or that it is not giving you the results you desire, you
can take a moment to consider what about your approach may be
holding you back. Then, you can accommodate for the necessary
adjustments.
Reassessing your approach also gives you the opportunity to
determine when you can successfully move to the next stage of your
healing. For example, if you have been using your approach
consistently for several months and you are experiencing success
with it, you might find that you no longer need to use the same
intensive approach because you have made so much progress.
Instead, you can transition to a more moderate approach that allows
you to maintain your success if you feel that you are ready. Or, if you
are using the MiCBT practices, you can successfully determine when
you are ready to progress to the next stage by regularly monitoring
your improvements and assessing your approach.
Although you want to assess your approach on a regular basis, it is
important that you do not assess it and consider it ineffective simply
because you have not experienced immediate success. Be honest
with yourself if you feel that you are using the best approach but that
you need more time before you can experience full relief from your
symptoms. Just because you are assessing your method does not
mean that you need to change it, or that it is not working. It is simply
an opportunity to reflect on your approach and ensure that you are
taking the best one possible to support your healing process.
Integrating Supportive Practices
The supportive practices recommended in Part 4 of this book are not
only highly valuable self-care practices but also have a very real
impact on supporting your mental health. Integrating these practices
into your life, in addition to maintaining your CBT approaches, is
imperative if you want to experience consistent ongoing relief from
your symptoms. You may find, in time, after your CBT approaches
have successfully supported you in overcoming your anxious or
depressive thoughts, that the supportive CBT practices are a great
way to maintain your mental wellbeing. If you find yourself at this
stage, incorporating these into your daily routine will ensure that you
stay mentally healthy and that you reduce your vulnerability to
experiencing difficult symptoms of anxiety or depression again.
As you integrate these supportive practices into your life, make sure
that you are considering how they personally impact you.
Remember, you are your primary focus here, so you need to always
consider your thoughts and feelings when you are engaging in any
behaviors that are intended to support your healing. Pick activities
and self-care practices that genuinely fill you up and make you feel
good about yourself. There is no shame in having a self-care game
that looks completely different from how the “standard” self-care
game looks or that it incorporates practices that were not listed
above. As long as these practices are genuinely healthy for you and
promote your mental (and physical) wellbeing in a positive manner,
they are likely a great addition to your self-care routine. Keeping your
routine personalized and productive will ensure that you do feel
better when you engage in it and you can use this routine to support
full relief from troubling emotional symptoms.
Any time you find yourself struggling to maintain your self-care
practices, put extra effort in. Remember, depression and anxiety will
encourage you to let basic self-care practices like eating a healthy
meal and brushing your teeth seem like options instead of
necessities. This is a false thought, and it needs to be replaced by
engaging in healthier behaviors, such as actually eating a healthy
meal and brushing your teeth. Even if your basic self-care practices
are the only thing you have the energy to engage in all day long, put
the effort in and make sure that you continue taking care of yourself.
Not only do you deserve it, but you need it. Plus, these behaviors will
help combat your depressive and anxious thoughts so that you can
resume a healthier thinking pattern sooner.
Seeking Support When It’s Needed
Just because you have made the decision to engage in self-healing
does not mean you are immune to needing support. Support is an
invaluable tool that can make your own self-healing practices far
more effective and efficient. Learn how to ask for support when you
need it and teach yourself how to find healthy support. This is a great
way to help you experience greater success with CBT.
When you are seeking support, consider exactly what you need and
make sure that you look in the right places for this support. For
example, if you need support in processing difficult traumas from
your past, consulting a friend may not be the best option. Although
they mean well, your friend will likely not have the tools required to
support you in the best way possible. Finding a professional
therapist and letting them know that you are using a CBT approach
is a great way to ensure that you get the support you need and that
your therapy has the most powerful impact possible.
With that being said, do not discount the support of a positive friend
who is compassionate and empathetic to you even when you are
experiencing challenging emotions and thoughts. Friends and family
members who show you compassion during your down times are
invaluable and can support you by reminding you that you are loved
and that you are worthy. If you are feeling anxious or depressed, you
might feel compelled to isolate yourself from your loved ones and
keep to yourself. You may experience cognitive distortions that tell
you that they do not want to be around you or that you are a burden.
Make sure that you use your CBT tools against these distortions to
disprove them. Then, put as much effort as you feel you can into
keeping your important relationships nurtured. If you are worried
about being seen as a bad person for not being able to give as much
energy or attention to your relationships, make sure that you stay
transparent with your loved ones. Letting them know how you are
feeling and being clear about the energy you have to contribute
supports them in understanding you and can be extremely helpful in
maintaining your relationships during troubling times.
Having Empathy for Yourself
It may seem hard at times, but having empathy for oneself is
absolutely imperative. As you learned about with MiCBT, having
empathy for yourself means that you give yourself the chance to
remember that you are only human and that you are dealing with
real and challenging problems. You are not required to be anything
more than you are, and you are perfect as you are. Do not attempt to
hold yourself to unreasonable standards or bully yourself because
you feel that you are not producing the results that you desire. These
types of behaviors are counterintuitive to your desired results and
will prevent you from experiencing emotional resolve from things like
anxiety, depression, anger, PTSD, and procrastination.
Being empathetic towards ourselves does not mean being
complacent either. Your goal is not to let yourself off the hook for not
taking positive action towards healing. Instead, it is to remind
yourself that, sometimes, the results do not look as you wish they
would and, sometimes, they take longer to achieve than you
expected. This does not mean that you are a failure or that you are
not worthy of healing. It simply means that you are having a hard
time with your very real and very big emotions. Be gentle with
yourself and express patience towards yourself when it comes to
dealing with your emotions. The more patient and empathetic you
are, the easier it will be for you to overcome your distressing feelings
and find peace in your life.
Continually Educating Yourself
As someone who has dealt with psychological disorders, you are
vulnerable to experiencing them again in your lifetime. Even if you
experience complete relief from your CBT approach and you find
yourself feeling much better, you may still find that your old
behavioral cycles can be triggered from time to time. This happens
because, in many cases, your old behavioral cycles have many
different triggers. Each of which can be retriggered at any given time
without any notice. During your CBT, you will encounter many of
these triggers on a day-to-day basis and will overcome them using
your CBT approaches. However, there may still be some triggers
that you only encounter on an occasional basis rather than on a
regular basis. As such, you may not get many chances to practice
CBT on these triggers because you simply don’t encounter them
often enough. When this happens, if you are not careful, it can
retrigger the occurrence of your depression or anxiety.
Continually staying educated on how you can lead a healthier mental
life and assessing your thoughts for how they are supporting you is
the best way to make sure that you are always equipped with the
knowledge that you need to keep your mind healthy. Be sure to read
up on mental health, stay focused on keeping your general health
up, and educate yourself on the experiences that you may have if
your depression, anxiety, PTSD, anger, or procrastination is
retriggered. Regular education can help you stay clear on the
warning signs and regain control over your mind before you
experience a large problematic episode which can support you in
staying clear of your disorder altogether.
                        Conclusion
You have completed reading Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: An
Essential CBT Guide to Rewiring the Brain and Overcoming Anxiety,
Depression, and Intrusive Thoughts Using a Highly Effective Form of
Psychotherapy. The contents of this book should have supported
you in understanding what CBT is and how it can support you in
overcoming your psychological disorders and emotional symptoms.
Depending on how quickly you have read through this book, you
may still be experiencing fairly intense symptoms of your emotional
struggles despite having read everything within this book. It is
important that you do not simply toss it aside and forget about it as
you continue to face your daily struggles. Simply educating yourself
on what needs to be done will not support you in healing. You will
actually need to do the healing work. By remaining devoted and
showing up for yourself every single day, you give yourself the
attention that you need to truly embrace your healing journey with
CBT.
It is important that you truly understand that self-healing does not
mean isolating yourself from others. Isolating yourself is a common
desire when you are experiencing something like anxiety or
depression. However, doing so can impede your healing. Even on
days where you do not feel like it, show up for yourself and attempt
to make contact with at least one person per day who does not live
with you. Doing so will support you in feeling a deeper sense of
connection with those around you and will help you feel more
attuned with the outside world.
You also need to make sure that you consistently practice your new
mindfulness and CBT practices. Even though individuals who
recover from psychological disorders using CBT are far less likely to
relapse than those who are solely being treated with medicine, you
will always be vulnerable to experiencing a relapse in your
symptoms. Continuous self-monitoring and keeping yourself well-
educated and equipped with the knowledge that you need to combat
potential relapses will support you in overcoming them before they
become problematic. Even if they do become problematic again, it is
no reason to be ashamed.
Dealing with emotional disturbances like anxiety and depression is a
real, valid, and often painful experience for anyone to endure. Be
compassionate with yourself and trust that if you can treat yourself
once, you can do it again. The more times you pick yourself back up,
the harder it becomes for you to fall to the point of feeling
irreparable.
As we wrap up, take a moment to consider how magnificent it is that
you are here treating yourself. The amount of personal power that it
takes for you to recognize that you are in need of support, and to
have the willingness to step up and support yourself, and the amount
of trust that you have placed in yourself and your ability – these are
all admirable and goes to prove that you are a strong, capable, and
worthy individual. You can heal from your emotions, and if you
remain dedicated, you will.
When you put down this book, put it down knowing that it is always
here, ready to be picked back up again at any time that you may
need it. Rain or shine, 3:00 pm or 3:00 am, no matter where you are
or who you are with, and no matter what you are feeling, this book is
here for you as a constant resource to support you in overcoming
any troubles you may be facing. If you simply need to reference this
book for support or if you want to read it cover to cover once again,
there is no right or wrong answer. No one will judge you if you feel
that you need to re-educate yourself on the materials of this book so
that you can continue moving towards your inner space of healing
and freedom. Treat this book as your personal journal. It is a private
and personal place for you to come to any time you need support or
need to understand something within yourself on a deeper level.
If you enjoyed this book and felt that it added value to your life and
supported you in truly overcoming your challenging emotional
symptoms, please take the time to honestly review it on Amazon
Kindle. If you know of someone else who may benefit from CBT, you
may also consider letting them know about this book. The more that
we can spread the message of healing and empower others to
discover how they can heal themselves, the fewer people need to
suffer from symptoms of anxiety and depression.
