"CYNDI DALE STARTS WHERE OTHER CHAKRA BOOKS LEAVE
                       OFF. "
                                                          -Catalyst Magazine

 Originally published in 1996 as New Chakra Healing, Cyndi Dale's
 groundbreaking book offered crucial new information about the human
 energy system for individuals and healers alike. It introduced readers to the
 thirty-two energy centers of the human body and was the first to explain
 how to work with the energy of the back side of the chakras. The success of
 New Chakra Healing established Cyndi Dale's career as an energy healer
 and intuitive. It went on to become a bestseller translated into fifteen
 languages around the world.

   Thoroughly revised and updated, this classic book is now The Complete
Book of Chakra Healing. Now an even more vital resource for every library, it
offers substantial new health information that wasn't available upon first
publication. It promises to be the most comprehensive and helpful resource for
working with the human energy system.

• Up-to-date scientific research validating the subtle energy system and how it
 creates the physical world

• Fresh understanding of the connections between physical, emotional, and
 spiritual health as proven through quantum physics, esoteric texts, and Dale's
 experience as a healer

• Numerous illustrations depicting previously unseen energetic disease
 patterns

• Further detailed evidence on the powerful healing potential of the chakras

• Depiction of the negative influences causing problems and disease, such as
 cords, binding, and curses, as well as ways to deal with them

• Explanations of the meridians and two dozen energy bodies
  THE
COMPLETE



CAooAI~f



CHAKRA
HEALING




OzxxNCa
                    ABOUT THE AUTHOR
 Cyndi Dale is recognized internationally as an authority on subtle energy
 anatomy. She is the author of several books on energy healing, including the
 original and revised New Chakra Healing, which has been published in
 more than ten languages, and six other best-selling books on the topic,
 including Advanced Chakra Healing, Illuminating the Afterlife, and The
 Subtle Body. Through her company, Essential Energy, she provides intuitive
 assessments and life-issues healing for thousands of clients a year, seeking
 always to uplift and inspire others to their true purpose and personalities.
 Her enthusiasm and care ignite all who attend her workshops, training
 sessions, and college classes, which are offered around the world.

   Cyndi has created several CD trainings, including Advanced Chakra
Wisdom, Illuminating the Afterlife, Energetic Clearing: Healing Energetic
Wounds, Releasing Negative Influences, and Creating Healthy Boundaries and
Healing Across Space and Time: Guided Journeys to Your Past, Present, and
Parallel Lives, produced by Sounds True; and Healing Across Time,
coproduced by Sounds True and One Spirit. She has also produced her own
training DVDs, including the Song Bird series.

   Cyndi has studied cross-cultural healing and energy systems and has led
instructional classes in many countries, including Peru, Costa Rica, Venezuela,
Japan, Belize, Mexico, Morocco, Russia, and across Europe, as well as among
the Lakota and the Hawaiian kahunas. She currently lives in Minneapolis,
Minnesota, with her two sons and five pets (at last count). More information
about Cyndi's classes and products is available at www.cyndidale.com.
THE CLASSIC GUIDE REVISED & EXPANDED




               THE
             COMPLETE
CAOO,~r
  Y~~
     C HAKRA
     HEALING



     ACTIVATE THE
TRANSFORMATIVE POWER
       OF YOUR
   ENERGY CENTERS



      CYN D I DALE
              OTHER BOOKS BY CYNDI DALE

           New Chakra Healing, Llewellyn Worldwide

           Advanced Chakra Healing, Crossings Press

       Advanced Chakra Healing: Cancer, Crossings Press

   Advanced Chakra Healing: Heart Disease, Crossings Press

   Attracting Prosperity Through the Chakras, Crossings Press

Attracting Your Perfect Body Through the Chakras, Crossings Press
 Illuminating the Afterlife, Your Soul's Journey Through the Worlds Beyond,
                                Sounds True

 The Subtle Body: An Encyclopedia of Your Energetic Anatomy, Sounds True

                The Littlest Christmas Star, Essential Energy

                                CD Programs


                  Advanced Chakra Wisdom, Sounds True

                   Illuminating the Afterlife, Sounds True

         Healing Across Space and Time: Guided Journeys to Your

                Past, Future, and Parallel Lives, Sounds True

             Healing Across Time, Sounds True and One Spirit

Energetic Clearing: Healing Energetic Wounds, Releasing Negative Influences,

               and Creating Healthy Boundaries, Sounds True

                The Littlest Christmas Star, Essential Energy

                                DVD Programs


                          The Song Bird Sessions

                            Attracting Prosperity

                       Healing Cancer: It's Possible

                            FORTHCOMING
           Everyday Clairvoyant: Extraordinary Answers to Love,

                      Destiny and Balance in Your Life

                   (coming in March 2010 from Llewellyn)

To my father, whose death taught me about life, and to my son Michael, whose
 life taught me about love. A special thank you to the now grown-up Michael,
who loaned his skills to help me with revisions. My father would be pleased at
the adult he has become. And there are two more important thank you's. One, to
  Anthony J. W. Benson, business manager and friend extraordinaire, whom I
 first met through Llewellyn. The second is to Gabriel, my second son, whose
                         sunny nature lights my heart.
                                 CONTENTS


List of Illustrations ... xiii

ENERGY ADVANCEMENTS: NEW DREAMS FOR HUMANITY . . . XVII

THE REVOLVING DOOR: THE HUMAN ENERGY SYSTEM . . . 1

                o

YOU AS INFINITY: YOUR TWELVE CHAKRAS . . . 35

                ~~~~~ zree `

YOUR TWENTY SPIRITUAL ENERGY CENTERS . . . 91

THE DEVELOPING SELF . . . 113

FROM FRONT TO BACK: WORKING WITH YOUR IN-BODY CENTERS .
. . 153

                jw"

THE YOU AROUND YOU: YOUR ENERGY FIELD . . . 175

                ~iht7~7"~e'' veUe-n

IN YOUR FIELD: MORE OF WHAT'S AROUND YOU . . . 221

GETTING INTO THE FLOW: RAYS OF ENERGY . . . 231
THE GUARDIAN PRINCIPLES . . . 243

             ~'~cLppGe~' ~~

THE SPIRIT'S DESIGN . . . 253

OF SPIRITS AND HEALING: CORDS AND OTHER ENERGETIC
BINDINGS . . . 279

             cep

WORKING WITH THE BODY: THE KEY POINTS . . . 287

ENERGY CHANNELS . . . 309

             /zctp~~ ~ccr~c~z

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONS . . . 313

FREEING YOUR EMOTIONS . . . 339

             ~ifz~p~er Cf tx"~eerz,

BEING YOUR DIVINE SOURCE SELF: LIVING AS AN EVERYDAY
SHAMAN . . . 357

             ~~-~r ~evefzZ~een

THE COMPLETE CHAKRA HEALER'S VIEW OF DISEASE PATTERNS . .
. 367

Bibliography... 409
Index... 415
                          ILLUSTRATIONS


Figure 1.1: William Tiller's Layers of Reality ... 7

Figure 2.1: The Twelve-Chakra System ... 36

Figure 2.2: The Seven In-Body Chakras ... 39

Figure 2.3: Structure of a Chakra ... 45

Figure 2.4: Communication in the Chakras ... 47

Figure 2.5: The First Chakra ... 51

Figure 2.6: The Second Chakra ... 53

Figure 2.7: The Third Chakra ... 56

Figure 2.8: The Fourth Chakra ... 59

Figure 2.9: The Fifth Chakra ... 61

Figure 2.10: The Sixth Chakra ... 64

Figure 2.11: The Seventh Chakra ... 67

Figure 2.12: The Eighth Chakra ... 73

Figure 2.13: The Ninth Chakra ... 75

Figure 2.14: The Tenth Chakra ... 79

Figure 2.15: The Eleventh Chakra ... 82
Figure 2.16: The Twelfth Chakra, Points 1-14 and 25-32 ... 85

Figure 2.17: The Twelfth Chakra, Points 15-24 ... 86

Figure 3.1: Your Twenty Spiritual Energy Points ... 94

Figure 3.2: Three Forms of Kundalini ... 102

Figure 4.1: Stronghold Programming ... 123

Figure 5.1: Detecting the Chakras with a Pendulum ... 173

Figure 6.1: The Layers of the Aura ... 177

Figure 6.2: Aura of a Person Suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome ... 179

Figure 6.3: The First, Second, and Integrative Auric Layers ... 183

Figure 6.4: The Third Auric Layer ... 189

Figure 6.5: The Fourth Auric Layer ... 193

Figure 6.6: The Fifth Auric Layer ... 195

Figure 6.7: The Sixth Auric Layer ... 198

Figure 6.8: The Seventh Auric Layer ... 202

Figure 7.1: The Electromagnetic Field (EMF) and the Chakras ... 223

Figure 7.2: One Light Body... 228

Figure 7.3: The Energy Egg ... 230

Figure 10.1: Most Soul/Mind/Body Connections ... 257
Figure 10.2: Intermediate Healing Stage Involving Expression of Essence ...
 257

Figure 10.3: Advanced Healing Stage ... 257

Figure 12.1: The Thirty-Two Chakras and the Spine ... 288

Figure 12.2: The Coccygeal and Sacral Vertebrae and Their Chakric
 Connections ... 291

Figure 12.3: The Lumbar Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections ... 297

Figure 12.4: The Thoracic (Dorsal) Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections
 ... 299

Figure 12.5: The Cervical Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections ... 302

Figure 16.1, 16.2, and 16.3: Descriptions of the Self ... 363

Figure 17.1: Energetic Indications of AIDS ... 368

Figure 17.2: Energetic Indications of Allergies ... 370

Figure 17.3: Energetic Indications of Addictions ... 374

Figure 17.4: Energetic Indications of Sugar Addiction ... 375

Figure 17.5: Energetic Indications of Anxiety ... 377

Figure 17.6: Energetic Indications of Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid Arthritis
 ... 379

Figure 17.7: Energetic Indications of Asthma ... 381

Figure 17.8: Energetic Indications of Autism, Asperger Syndrome, and
Attachment Disorders ... 383

Figure 17.9: Energetic Indications of Breast Cancer ... 385

Figure 17.10: Energetic Indications of Prostate Cancer ... 386

Figure 17.11: Energetic Indications of Depression ... 388

Figure 17.12: Energetic Indications of a Headache ... 391

Figure 17.13: Energetic Indications of Heart Disease ... 392

Figure 17.14: Energetic Indications of Irritable Bowel Syndrome ... 395

Figure 17.15: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Bacteria ... 397

Figure 17.16: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Fungus ... 399

Figure 17.17: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Parasites ... 401

Figure 17.18: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Virus ... 403

Figure 17.19: Energetic Indications of Pain ... 405

Figure 17.20: Energetic Indications of a Phobia ... 407
             ENERGY ADVANCEMENTS:
            NEW DREAMS FOR HUMANITY
More than a decade ago, New Chakra Healing was first published. I remember
how proud I was. The cover gleamed, the pages were fresh and crisp, and the
illustrations were bright and colorful. More importantly, the content promised
to help readers fulfill life's dearest needs, including good health, great
relationships, purposeful work, and spiritual connectivity.

  Since that time, New Chakra Healing has been published in nearly a dozen
languages and has been reprinted fourteen times. It has been considered an
authority on the chakras, subtle energy bodies that underlie the human body. It
has broken new ground, integrating cross-cultural healing disciplines,
scientific analysis, and energetic principles. And it has helped thousands of
people around the world fulfill the dreams most important to them.

  I couldn't possibly list the comments I've received, nor express my gratitude
for being able to help people realize the beauty and power of the energetic
world underneath this one. A few individuals, though, stand out in my
memories. There's the mother who lived in poverty in Estonia, who used the
principles of this book to start a business and provide food and education for
her five children. There's a medical doctor in Russia who started doing hands-
on healing, applying the energetic knowledge in this book. People line up
outside his door for his unique contributions. There's the father of three whose
back is now aligned, and he can return to work after being unemployed for four
years. And there are the thousands of other important people who can now
embrace their own ability to heal.

   For all that's been accomplished by this book and others that open people to
their hearts and true selves, there is more to be done, for the world needs
more. As the author of New Chakra Healing, I want to respond. This book, a
revised, updated version of New Chakra Healing, is my response.

  If you've worked with the first New Chakra Healing, you'll open these pages
and still find a familiar friend. The difference between this version and the
first is that this one is designed to meet the golden challenges of a new era.
Like its parent, this Complete Chakra is still a revolutionary path to healing
and manifesting. It continues to present the leading-edge twelve-chakra system
and outlines the corresponding twelve auric bands. It covers the twenty
spiritual points-energies that help us access higher and powerful wisdom. It
continues to impart a plethora of cross-cultural and scientific information and
wisdom, concepts that reveal the energetic nature of you-you as your own
universe and you as a wise, spiritual being. This Complete Chakra Healing,
however, is more than a dressed-up version of the original, differing from its
progenitor in four main ways.

   Journey through these pages and first you will notice rich and rigorous
references to cutting-edge contemporary science, physics, and research. Fifteen
years ago, when I was first researching New Chakra Healing, the scientific
evidence was sparse. Pioneers were beginning to shatter the Newtonian
concepts that kept the world locked into "safe thinking," but most mainstream
people were more comfortable biting into Newton's apple than reaching for the
stars. A considerable and ever-increasing mound of scientific material is now
suggesting that chakras, auric fields, and other energetic structures are real.

   Second, you'll discover a diverse array of client stories and examples,
carefully chosen to relate to contemporary concerns. Generation to generation,
certain life issues remain the same, but time marches on. Since writing New
Chakra Healing, I have provided oneon-one consulting to approximately
20,000 more individual clients, in addition to serving the thousands who have
attended my seminars worldwide. Along the way, I have observed variations
in people's interests. Collectively, we're asking different questions than we did
a couple of decades ago; the world is, quite simply, more complex, and so are
our "quests."

  Third, you'll be gifted with a lot of new information, ranging from
descriptions of important energy bodies and fields to new healing techniques.
Structurally, I've included a dozen new sections, several new chapters, an
index, expanded explanations of concepts such as kundalini, and illustrations
describing the energetic signature of several diseases. I've also outlined
various energetic levels of reality, such as Dr. William Tiller's domains, which
describe our connections with other realms, and the four zones, which are
areas to check when diagnosing healing issues. The world has been
exponentially expanding in knowledge. I've culled the most effective healing
information and techniques from my new healing tool kit to share with the
"new" Complete Book of Chakra Healing.

  Finally, this version of New Chakra Healing is based on a distinct
philosophical perspective. The original New Chakra Healing was aimed at
meeting the needs of the individual. The theme was that you couldn't give love-
or achieve higher purpose-unless you first heal yourself. You cannot surrender
yourself to your purpose unless there is a self to surrender.

  In comparison, the overall objective of this revision of New Chakra
Healing, The Complete Book of Chakra Healing, is to call forth a higher world
order. It's time to work for a global, if not a universal, dream, rather than for
individual goals alone. We've only to acknowledge the increased discord in the
world, to notice the heartbreaking, hopeless eyes of starving children, and to
measure the increased rates of heart disease and cancer to understand that we
are a people in need. If we're to survive-and better yet, thrivehumanity must
begin to function as a people, as a tribe that is unified and whole rather than
divided and distinct. While we've made gains personally, we must now expand
our thinking and hearts to make strides collectively. We must establish and
pursue a new dream for humanity.

   Everything-and everyone-is made of energy. The subtle energy structures,
including the chakras and the auric fields, underlie all of physical reality,
actually forming the structure of this so-called "reality." Books like Complete
Book of Chakra Healing teach this concept, but also empower individuals and
groups to employ energy toward higher goals. Why not take the ideas in this
book and learn how to "love thy neighbor as thyself," the greatest
commandment we can pursue? Why not access the energy of the chakras and
spiritual points to create more heaven on earth? Why not apply the knowledge
of subtle energies to invite Spirit into the world? Toward this end, this version
of New Chakra Healing offers specific ideas on serving the world in a
peaceful way.

    Some of the information in the original New Chakra Healing invited
metaphysical thinking toward new horizons. It was the first book to present a
twelve-chakra system, in contrast to the accepted Western seven-chakra model.
It linked the chakras and spiritual points with in-body vertebrae and introduced
other novel ideas. The truth is that there were many ancient systems, including
some Hindu, Yogic, and indigenous, that colored outside of the rigid Western
lines. Around the world and across time, chakra systems have four, nine,
twelve, or any other number of chakras. We will further explore some of these
systems in chapter 1. Many spiritual or healing modalities emphasize spinal
work and other ways to access higher spiritual energies in the body. This
version of New Chakra Healing will continue to expand these themes as well
as others, not to defy the most common approaches, but because they work,
accessing near-miraculous capacities for healing and manifesting.

   You'll also find a plethora of new information, carefully cultivated to
provide quality insights and resources for healers of self and others. Over the
last few years, my own learning has accelerated. Since writing New Chakra
Healing, I've been enriched by new shamanic, religious, and medical teachers
from countries including Russia, Pakistan, Morocco, Wales, and various South
American countries. I've studied with some of the brightest minds in America
and Europe. I have pursued research available over the Internet and also
research stored in concrete institutions, such as the World Research Foundation
in Sedona, Arizona. The access to these sources is mainly due to an
international, volcanic interest in subtle energy.

   In response, I have created a breakthrough system called the four pathways
approach to healing in my Advanced Chakra Healing series. These books are a
perfect companion to the "new" Complete Book of Chakra Healing, as they
outline the four levels of awareness and energy accessible through the chakras.
In addition to several other practical books about the chakras, including one on
finances and another on achieving optimum fitness, I have authored The Subtle
Body: An Encyclopedia of Your Energetic Anatomy. Creating these books has
brought me into new universes of thought and knowledge, and I have included
as much of my findings in Complete Chakra Healing as I could.

   In this revised edition of New Chakra Healing, you'll find outlines of energy
bodies, fields, and healing techniques that weren't included in the first
rendition. Esoteric philosophers have long worked with the Akashic Records,
the storehouse of everything ever said, done, or thought-but how about the
Book of Life, its "kissing cousin"? We examined the outer bounds of the auric
field, but what about the structure of the energy egg or the etheric template,
which actually contain parts of the field? These and other subtle anatomies are
imperative tools for the healer's medical bag.

   I encourage you to embrace and experiment with the ideas in this book with
one core concept in mind: faith. Have faith in your own perceptions, abilities,
and wisdom. Discernment will help you sort pertinent from nonpertinent
information, especially if you base your filtering on your personal vision-the
vision you hold of your truest and greatest self. Above all, I encourage you to
hold faith in your importance in the world. You matter. There is no competition
for your spiritual mission.

  Without faith in our mission and ourselves, we won't be able to create the
world inside and outside of us that we desire. In many ways, I owe my faith in
self-and God-to New Chakra Healing. When it was first published, hardly
anyone in the "normal world" knew about chakras.

   But it was my family that forced me to develop faith. It was a large family
get-together in Minnesota, where we gathered on the deck of my aunt and
uncle's house. As was everyone else, I was happily consuming potato salad
and picnic food when the elderly parents of my cousin-in-law asked what I'd
been doing lately. I explained that I had just come out with my first book, and
they asked me about the topic.

   "Chakras," I replied, feeling my face flush. "They are energy centers that run
the body."
   While the dear couple asked questions, I noticed the rest of the crowd wasn't
exactly gathering around to hear my answers. In fact, the entire group-a good
twenty people-actually gravitated to the south side of the deck, as far away
from earshot as possible. Feeling the porch beams bend, I was sure we would
all end up in the lake.

   My family's reaction was actually beneficial. It forced me to ask myself if I
really believed that the chakras existed or not; if I was willing to apply this
knowledge to help myself and others; if I was actually ready to continue
expanding chakric wisdom to new levels. Was I willing to stake my
professional reputation on something subtle and invisible-or not? By
responding yes to these queries, I found that I was actually saying yes to a new
life-to a life that has been meaningful, challenging, grace-filled, and exciting.
As you explore the revolutionary world of the chakras, and of the subtle or
seemingly invisible energies that compose your own life, I hope you discover
the same joy as I have: the joy of living for and in the dream of establishing a
world in which everyone is loved and cherished.
               THE REVOLVING DOOR:
             THE HUMAN ENERGY SYSTEM
We like to imagine what our life would be like "if only." If only we had a lot of
money. If only we were thin, more successful, or had a better car. Have you
noticed how you felt when you actually obtained one of your "if only" goals?
You were still dissatisfied, weren't you? After the initial rush, you probably
felt emptier than before. That's because true happiness isn't derived through
external accomplishments or belongings. Our deepest drive is for meaning,
which is an invisible, not tangible, quality.

   We all want to feel fulfilled. We want to know that our lives matter and that
we're making a difference in others' lives. I believe that this drive for purpose
is the distinguishing mark of the twenty-first century. We yearn for more than
materiality. We're following an inspiration to touch heart-to-heart, calling forth
our spirit through connection. We strive for peace, internally and communally.

   We have only to look around to understand why we long-and need-to make a
personal contribution toward peace. War tears families apart while individual
families war within. Mothers worry about feeding their children tomorrow
while fathers wonder if there will be a tomorrow. Well-meaning individuals
and organizations draft peace treaties that leaders and terrorists tear apart. It is
little wonder that most of us want only to be a light, not another source of
darkness, in the world. Unfortunately, the sheer number and intensity of
problems facing us leave us feeling incapable and overwhelmed.

   We all want to make a difference, but this is only possible if we first realize
that no one can do enough to "save the world." None of us can do enough. Real
change and true transformation are only possible if we concentrate our efforts
where they really matter. These actions start inside of us, in the inner realms,
where we work invisibly, spiritually, and subtly. We must start-and end-our
strivings for truth in the world of energy, for it is this unseen world-and the
structures within it-that creates and sustains the physical universe. To fulfill
your destiny, to embrace and live out your amazing, creative, life-enhancing
potential, you must first understand how to recognize and direct these systems
under reality.

   How much easier would it be to move a mountain if you could first perceive
it as a mound of sand? And what if you could shift a single grain-and move the
rest of the mountain automatically? It's possible, for this is the nature of energy.
This is what it means to work energetically, to operate on the subtle and
spiritual planes, rather than only on the physical and material side of reality.

                THE INVISIBLE UNDER AND WITHIN THE VISIBLE


Everything in reality is constructed from energies that seem "not real." Oh, they
are real, but we can't see, touch, hear, or measure them with known tools.
These are the subtle energies, which are immeasurable, invisible energies that
move at incredible speed. They aren't any less real than physical, visible
energies. It's just that we're not used to perceiving them, nor are most of us
trained to work with them.

   Subtle energies compose physical reality. By the time an illness or problem
is obvious, it has been brewing under the surface for a long time. When a
disease or issue vanishes, it's because we've already done the work necessary
to erase it, inside-to-out. All lasting change, good or bad, starts with movement
at the subtle level underneath the material world.

   If we really want to help the world, we must first become the best self that
we can be. How can we help others if we are strong not only physically but
also emotionally, mentally, and spiritually? How can we "give up" a self to a
higher cause unless we have a self to "give up"? If you really want to achieve
optimum health and well-being, you must be willing to learn about the self
underneath the self, the subtle self formed of energetic structures such as those
described in this book. By gaining a sense of inner self, you can then better
help the world elegantly and powerfully. You can then fulfill your spiritual
destiny.
                    WHY WE CAN'T SEE WHO WE REALLY ARE


Look in the mirror. You see an image. Most people think this snapshot defines
the real self, but it doesn't. Does it reflect your soul? Your spirit? By staring
only at our features, we can't even determine which mood we are in. How,
then, could we even begin to distinguish our divine self or find our true
purpose?

  The mirror isn't wrong. However, like anything in physical reality, it can't
show us what's really happening underneath. To accomplish that goal, we need
a different tool kit. We need intuition, inner knowing, metaphysical knowledge,
and an education about subtle energies. And we need to practice seeking and
directing the invisible energies that can create change.

  Why aren't we taught about the invisible world in school? How come those
of us interested in the paranormal or supernatural are all too often considered
weird or odd? Why can't most people determine that the fate of the world
depends on commanding the powers available within and under the material
world, not the other way around?

  There are a lot of reasons. Society is plagued by abuse, low standards, and
fear. Ideologies and institutions function on-and produce-confusion rather than
genuine concern. Even religion often emphasizes the concrete part of reality,
convincing us through dogma that we aren't supposed to look under the surface.
As well, we are afraid of our own powers, thinking that to show our true and
magical selves will attract ridicule and endanger our loved ones or ourselves.
These factors generate a schism between our inner and outer selves. This
disconnection leaves us impotent and unable to summon the spiritual energies
necessary to help the world.

  Above all others, there is one major reason for the chasm between our inner
and outer selves: our family patterns. Estimates state that anywhere between 70
and 99 percent of our families are dysfunctional. Many of us have grown up in
families affected by abuse of some sort, and most of us have directly or
indirectly experienced neglect or physical, sexual, verbal, or emotional abuse.
   Patterns of abuse appear in many forms, including alcoholism, substance
abuse, and drug or food addictions. Abuse is also present in any situation
involving physical endangerment, ranging from being beaten to being
threatened. It can include emotional and mental traumas arising from constant
criticism and put-downs or a lack of acceptance or support. Any disregard for
one's rights, individuality, or privacy is abuse.

  Any extreme system, when it involves rigidity or lack of boundaries, is
abusive. Spiritual abuse, while less frequently discussed, can be as damaging
as physical abuse, whether it stems from forced denial of a divinity and
essential belief system, or from a forced adherence to a dogmatic and
judgmental system. The gauge of abuse is that anything that makes us feel we
are a bad person is abuse. Which of us has not experienced at least some
conditions that have left us feeling inherently bad, guilty, or flawed?

  Most of us coped with our childhood difficulties by stunting, stuffing,
ignoring, or hiding our invisible self-the self that:

• is sensitive;

• is vulnerable;

• wants to be loved and nourished;

• instinctively loves other people and wants to nourish them;

• understands animals, plants, and nature;

• is connected to the Divine Source (a highest power or divinity as you
 understand it), spirits, and the universe;

• knows the invisible language of the inner soul, of nature, and of the Divine
 Source; and

• is intuitive, can see pictures, hear voices, feel feelings, and know things at
 the deepest level of truth.
   However, underneath this grim picture is a universal truth. None of us has
fully succeeded in secreting away the invisible self. If you ever find yourself
feeling hurt, happy, loved, wanting to be loved, walking alone outside, or
wondering at the beauty of the stars, for example, you are still connected to
your invisible self. At times, we might want to repress this internal self in
order to protect, destroy, or conceal it, but none of us can completely do so.
Being alive is about having our visible and invisible parts joined together and
mutually supporting each other. If we are alive, it is because at least some
aspects of our visible and invisible selves are working together. If we are
alive, it is because at least part of us really wants to be, no matter how bad life
may have been or may now seem. Disease, disorders, depression, denials,
problems, predicaments, plagues, stress, traumas, confusion, doubts-all these
stem from incomplete connections between our visible and invisible selves.

   I call the visible self the material self, and I call the invisible self the
spiritual self. The material self could also be called the physical or sensory-
based self. Other words for the spiritual self are the subtle or psychic-based
self. Disease (dis-ease, or lack of ease) such as low self-esteem, post-
childhood trauma, sexual dysfunction, addictions, money problems,
relationship ills, and lifestyle confusion originates with misunderstandings and
disconnections between these material and spiritual selves.

                           HEALING AND SOUL WORK


Healing is the process of joining the material and spiritual selves, the visible
and invisible, the physical and the subtle. The healing process may also
involve rejoining parts of ourselves that, although previously bonded,
experienced a trauma so great they disconnected or forged bonds where none
existed. In the former case, we may need to work with memories, energies, and
belief systems; experience long-held and hurt feelings; soothe injured body
parts; or sort out old and current relationships. In the latter case, we may need
to look at aspects of our soul, mind, or body that have never been examined. In
either case, true healing-the process of becoming fully alive and happy-relies
on merging our material and spiritual selves.
   How are we to do this? The key lies in the paradox of the mirror. At first
glance, we can only see our physical self in a mirror. This is equivalent to
noticing the physical symptoms and relief for our problems. We can learn how
to use these presenting physical issues as doorways, or revolving doors, to link
the visible and invisible parts of ourselves. By analyzing the energetic
problems causing a life issue, we can discover the real cause of our
challenges. Alice from Lewis Carroll's book Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland falls through a looking glass and finds that she has stumbled into
an entirely different reality-but one that just might underlie the "real world."
Effective healing involves a similar traversing between worlds-or perhaps
"stumbling" is the more accurate term-through the revolving doors that connect
the various parts of us.

   Working with our revolving doors can be hard, calling for painful self-
examination, tough corrective actions, and critical maneuvering. However, by
reforging the bonds between the material and spiritual aspects of our being, we
free ourselves from the fetters that keep us from complete expression. We free
ourselves to become truly real, open, and happy. We free ourselves to heal.




HEALING OFTEN INVOLVES conducting inner and outer journeys that might
take us through one or several levels of reality. These levels could be
compared to the layers of a dessert parfait: maybe there are cookie crumbs on
the bottom, delectable flavors of ice cream next, then a mound of whipped
cream, and finally, chocolate syrup and a cherry. Reality is fairly similar,
except that the bottom layer (or physical reality) is slowest in vibration, and
the top layer (the most spiritual reality) is the highest in vibration.

  Stanford physicist Dr. William Tiller presents a more scientific model of the
layers of reality (minus the cherry on top) in several of his writings. He
portrays several layers of reality. From highest to lowest vibration, he
describes the levels as the domains of the Divine, of spirit, three layers of
mind, astral, etheric, and finally the physical stratum. Energy flows from higher
to lower orders, with the higher domain providing instruction for a lower
domain. Each domain occupied a different time/space continuum and operates
under its own set of rules; however, each vibratory level is linked to all others.
Except for the physical domain, we experience these domains as subtle, or
immeasurable. The etheric level, however, is considered most vital to our
immediate lives, as it penetrates all aspects of physicality, creates matter, and
interacts with our mind to generate patterns that connect us to the higher
domains' (see figure 1.1).

   Essentially, healing involves maneuvering the revolving doors between
these visible and invisible domains. To achieve a real change, we must
decipher the site of the original issue, pinpoint its originating domain, and then
release the problem. This journey through the looking glass might take us into
physical matter, or force us to examine an issue within our emotional self,
mind, soul, or even spirit, but it will eventually involve a lesson for the soul,
the part of us that holds everything we've ever done, thought, or said. As stated
by author Zachary F. Lansdowne in his book The Rays and Esoteric
Psychology, "Following birth, a human being learns to integrate the etheric
body with the dense physical body, and then the mental body with the
emotional body. After learning how to coordinate all aspects of the personality,
we begin the process of integrating personality with soul"'
               Figure 1.1: William Tiller's Layers of Reality

Dr. William Tiller proposes several layers of reality, consisting of domains
that shift energy from high to low vibration; the domain of the divine is the
              highest and the domain of the physical is the lowest

                              OPENING THE DOORS


To enter our revolving doors is to cross the threshold into the realm of
purpose. I believe each of us has been born to achieve a certain purpose, or
spiritual mission, and that purpose is our ultimate calling. It originates in our
spirit, or essence, the self that was and is one with the Divine Source and the
energy behind creation. We each have a different purpose because we are each
unique creations.

   Living our purpose is the dynamic process whereby we heal our blocks and
misperceptions while expressing our true selves. Seen practically, living our
purpose is fully expressing our spiritual self in the material world. Living our
purpose is the process whereby we achieve completion, or recognition of our
wholeness. Even if our soul fails to recognize its divinity, it is no less divine;
it is simply a slowed-down version of our spirit. Our spiritual self provides
the direction; our material self creates concrete reality. When these parts of
ourselves are fully linked, we are being all that we can possibly be. That is the
key to happiness.

  Because we each have a different purpose, each of our healing processes
requires selfreliance. As we go about reclaiming our visible and invisible
selves, we learn to accept responsibility for understanding our invisible self
and healing any misunderstandings we hold about it. How?

  According to venerable Cherokee medicine woman and leader Dhyani
Ywahoo, we must first put aside our negative emotions in order to seek a sense
of wholeness. Then we are to "sing out the light," which is our sacred
responsibility.'

  We must accept responsibility for bringing this internal spiritual self into our
external material reality. Becoming self-responsible may mean knowing when
and how to protect or reveal our inner truths. It may mean acquiring practical
skills that will help guarantee success. It will certainly mean healing the
barriers between our material and spiritual selves. Fully understanding not
only the nature of our purpose but also the nature of our energy systems
becomes imperative, because through our body, mind, and soul we acquire
knowledge of self and our abilities.

   Learning about these energy systems will require understanding, more than a
science textbook can provide. Understanding terms such as chakra, energy
center, kundalini, mana, and intuition becomes important, because they are
means we can use to blend our material and spiritual selves. Understanding
and accepting our own individual fears, challenges, and opportunities also
becomes important, because it requires a willingness to destroy the limitations
that narrow our sights.

   On my own path, I have faced many hurdles and challenges in order to break
free of the rules governing my limited perceptions. Growing up in an upper-
middle-class family, I knew myself as my family and culture knew me. My
body was composed of organs, tissues, and blood, and it needed food and
clothing. My mind required textbooks and instruction. My soul needed
salvation, which was guaranteed by my weekly Sunday school attendance.

  It wasn't until my twenties that I began to question the validity of these
"concrete" rules. I went through two near-death experiences for which doctors
could not diagnose causes. Though I did the "right things," I wasn't happy in my
marriage. Although I was full of intelligence and ideas, books and universities
couldn't answer my questions.

   The past years have involved a search that has taken me from the jungles of
Peru to the Tor of Glastonbury, England, and from anatomy texts to Hindu
mysticism. I've studied Christianity at the seminary and tracked down the
Bribri Indians in Costa Rica. On the path, I have met many fellow journeyers.
One truth has emerged, a truth other travelers have repeated: understanding the
self depends on accepting that there is much, much more to us than the physical
shell we have been told is reality. Ywahoo has a beautiful way of describing
this truth: "We are the days and the nights, and we are the stars that illumine the
starry chambers." She suggests that the sun and the moon dance within us,
unfolding mystery.4

   In addition to self-reliance, I believe the journey into the self requires that
we learn to work within the human family and the forces of nature and change.
Just as our purpose is a doorway for our own self-expression, it is also an
opportunity to help others; because of this opportunity, fulfilling our purpose,
living our dreams, and becoming happy are contingent upon transforming the
barriers that prevent complete connection between others and us. Disjointed
relationships can be based on a lack of understanding about our own or
another's true inner nature, or on actual real-life traumas. Being a revolving
door means dealing with the people who are gumming up the works and
opening to the people who keep us in the flow. Because of our
interdependence, understanding our relationships with the visible beings and
invisible beings (such as angels, spirit guides, and the Divine Source) takes on
new meaning.

  In Mutant Message Down Under, Marlo Morgan passes on the wisdom of
her Aboriginal teachers, who are called the Real People: "All human beings
are spirits only visiting this world. All spirits are forever beings. All
encounters with other people are experiences, and all experiences are forever
connections. Real People close the circle of each experience. We do not leave
ends frayed ... If you walk away with bad feelings in your heart for another
person, and that circle is not closed, it will be repeated later in your life. You
will not suffer once, but over and over until you learn. It is good to observe, to
learn and become wiser from what has happened"5 Concepts such as karma,
dharma, cords, rays, and principles explain our relationships in this broader
context.

  The idea of interconnectedness and interdependence is not a new one. In my
practice, I have seen these truths played out time and time again. One obvious
example concerns a client who at age thirty-six expressed considerable
dissatisfaction with her life. She wanted a loving husband, a purposeful career,
and a healthy body, but felt she lacked the means to achieve any of them.

  I began by asking her who she believed herself to be. She couldn't answer.
During the course of many months, we used a broad array of means to help her
peel away the layers of beliefs and experiences that had defined her.

   That stage was painful. She recalled childhood abuse; she remembered
being told she was a bad person. She said that her parents often shamed her for
what she "just knew," such as that there were angels or that the plants could
speak. Gradually, she began to dream about the self she was underneath her
life-created self. Instead of voicing complaints to me and her therapist, she
began to wonder what she was supposed to do with her life. What were her
real gifts? Who was she supposed to help?

   Her search within gradually melted away her excess weight. She started her
own business by doing what she had wanted to do when she was a child.
Through her business, she began to create art forms that helped people know
themselves and see their inner natures through external means. She began to
talk to angels again and understand that she deserved to be happy. The last time
I saw her, she was preparing to move-with her new husband.

   Sometimes our maladies do not originate with us. Early in my career as an
intuitive healer, I worked with a male client who was father to a three-year-old
child named Leslie. Leslie had terminal liver cancer, which had metastasized
to her brain. Her prognosis? Two weeks. Divorced and the sole custodian of
his child, Brad came to see me, asking for a miracle.

                            ARE THERE MIRACLES?


I never guarantee or promise the miraculous. Even when they occur, I can't take
credit; no healer can or should. Yet, I've seen my clients receive miracles, and
have been grateful for the grace given. I believe the nature of the miraculous is
best explained by Harry Edwards, a phenomenal healer from the 1950s, who
outlined several theories about the source of miracles.

  One idea is that there are general laws that regulate healing and that these
are accessible to anyone, regardless of religion or background. Another
concept is that healing is granted directly from a Divine Source and overrides
the laws of the universe. Yet another conjecture is that all things emanate from
God and that wise beings (usually discarnate) can initiate healing through
divine acts. Edwards presents his own belief, which is that there are law-
governed forces that control the universe and that these apply to healing. There
are therefore no true "miracles," only the application of these God-provided
laws.' Edward's theory suggests that anyone can invoke the higher principles of
the universe, established and maintained by the Divine Source, to enable
healing.

   As I watched Brad cry, I reviewed Edward's suggestions, all the while
struggling with my own fear and powerlessness. Did I have the necessary
training to help this little girl? Did I have the faith required to believe that she
could be healed? As a Christian, I believe in a loving God-but am well aware
of my own lack of faith and trust. As tears welled in my eyes, a voice, which I
believed to be the Divine Source, spoke in my mind.

  "The cancer is not hers."

   Not always the sharpest pencil in the bin, I dully repeated the statement. "So
the cancer is not Leslie's?"

  "The cancer is not hers."

  Edward's philosophy suddenly made sense to me. There are natural laws,
which I believe to be divinely inspired. I can help someone heal his or her
problems, but if he or she doesn't want to, I can't force a change. But neither
can someone afflicted with another person's energy "heal" that energy.

  Together, the father and I meditated and asked that the Divine remove the
unnatural energies from Leslie. A few weeks later, Leslie's father called. The
cancer had disappeared. Leslie was now able to continue her life journey.
Freed from the effects of energies not her own, she could now become her real
self.

  This spiral between our spiritual self and our material self, this unveiling of
our being, is a journey we must all undertake if we are to be our true and happy
selves. It begins by understanding that there is more to us than meets the eye.
We are holistic beings-beings who are whole and who live in wholeness.
Happiness involves manifesting this reality inside of ourselves, but also in the
physical world.




How MIGHT WE envision the creation process, starting from our spirit and
ending with our bodies? Picture the Divine Source as a great sun. Our spirits
once dwelled within it like tiny, brilliant sparks of light. This Source sought to
create more light-or lovethroughout the known and unknown universe and sent
each of us forth to accomplish this goal. Each of us carried forward one or
more spiritual truths or principles, upon which to found the next stages of
creation.

  We are to share our truths with each other. To do so, however, we have to
understand and, finally, actually become them. Understanding our divine nature
and the truths that reflect it occurs through experience.

   Spirit doesn't easily gain experience. First of all, a spirit is like air. On the
plus side, it knows that it is eternally connected to the Divine Source, always
receiving unconditional love and therefore, perfect support. Criticism, sword
slashes, or negative thoughtsthese pass through our spirit like a knife through
air. On the minus side, this immateriality means that it's challenging, if not
impossible, for a spirit to gain experience. Can one pick up a cup without a
hand? It's hard to offer others something to drink unless we can do so.

  To solve the dilemma-to provide experience-the Divine Source formed a
soul out of our spirit. Our soul is like a "slowed down" aspect of our parenting
spirit, with one main difference. Lower in vibration, and therefore relatively
concrete, it is affected by experience. It can learn-but also be hurt. It can
express truths-but also believe in lies. As the part of us that imprints
experience, the soul is also able to formulate conclusions based on these
experiences. And many of these conclusions have been wrong.

   In essence, our soul re-creates its original wound. This is the first
misperception, formed after the first time the soul decided that it was separate
from the Divine. At some point after distinguishing from our spirit, our soul,
flying free, fell. Maybe it was betrayed by another soul. Perhaps it became
scared, called to the Divine for help, failed to perceive the Divine's response.
Maybe we called upon our own powers, and they failed us. The original
scenario-the one that made our soul think, "I'm separate from the Divine"-is
usually the same situation that causes us grief in this lifetime, over and over
again, as well as other lifetimes.

   Reincarnation is the process of incarnating in a body, lifetime after lifetime.
Our spirit encourages soul reincarnation as a way of clearing our original soul
wound and learning how to express our divine truths. Before birth, our soul
agrees to this process, forming a soul plan or life contract with the Divine and
others. And then, it experiences an event similar to the one that caused the
original injury. Instead of summoning help or operating from a spiritual
perspective, it closes down. Common sense tells us that if we do the same
thing, over and over, we'll get the same outcome. Perception creates beliefs,
and beliefs create physical reality. Because it always perceives situations the
same way and forms the same beliefs about events, our soul creates the same
dark, negative reality it has always experienced.

  Our soul downloads both negative and positive beliefs into yet another
aspect of self, the mind. In turn, the mind programs the body with these beliefs.
The body responds with actions and feelings, which in turn either support or
deny the accuracy of the mind's beliefs. We become blocked or unable to
perceive love if we cling too strongly to our beliefs and perceptions.
                             THE HOLISTIC HUMAN


An ethical physician will tell you that drugs only work sometimes, tests only
reveal so much, and treatments only help some people. An honest therapist will
acknowledge that you can't just think yourself rich, thin, or happy, nor does
feeling happy pay the rent or cure a sick relationship. Even a spiritualist will
warn you that faith can only take you so far. Miracles can work wonders, but
faith doesn't guarantee you will receive a miracle.

   To create change powerfully, one must powerfully change. Change occurs
when we braid together all four human dimensions: physical, emotional,
mental, and spiritual. These are the four dimensions that interact to create the
tapestry of self and life.

   The idea that each human being is composed of physical, mental, emotional,
and spiritual dimensions is not new. This concept has been referred to as
holism. Supported and researched through disciplines ranging from physics to
medicine to spiritualism, holism is the belief that a person is composed of a
number of different aspects, and each aspect interrelates with the others. In
fact, each aspect is reflected by and projected upon the other aspects. While
the divisions between our body and mind are distinct at a superficial level, at
another deeper level these distinctions blur. For example, our body may hold,
reflect, or act out what is being experienced by the mind. When healing one
part of someone, such as a broken leg, we are also indirectly making a change
on all other levels, say the mind or soul. In my books about the four pathways
approach to healing, which initiates with the parent manual Advanced Chakra
Healing, I outline a more complete picture of the various levels of awareness. I
encourage you to learn about these four pathways of existence by reading that
series of books. Fixing this leg might require the participation of feelings,
thoughts, and spirit if it is to really work. If our mind says, "Let's stay sick; I
like taking time off work," the broken leg will certainly be a long time
mending.

  This mind/body connection has recently received considerable
documentation. One current study has determined that the key ingredient in
healing from broken bones is not as scientifically based as we might assume. Is
it the quality of care, the ability of the doctor, or the speed of the bone setting?
No, the most crucial recovery factor is whether or not someone likes his or her
job. This fact has been documented through studies available at the
Northwestern College of Chiropractic in Bloomington, Minnesota.

  Emotional states also play a significant role in creating and also alleviating
disease. Heart disease, the leading killer among Western nations, is often
associated with emo tional issues. A study at Duke University, for instance,
showed that hostile people have a 29 percent greater change of dying of heart
disease than calm people; this figure leaps to a 50 percent increased chance of
heart problems in people sixty and older.'

   Emotional problems often carry over from childhood. Dr. Maxia Dong at the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention conducted a study of 17,000 adults
in the San Diego area in California. She found that the chance of heart attack
was 30 to 70 percent higher in people who had suffered abuse as children.'

    To enable healing, we clearly need to sort through beliefs and feelings, but
it's imperative to remember that even visible issues have an invisible cause.
For instance, a study conducted by Dr. Joel Whitton, professor of psychiatry at
the University of Toronto Medical School, shows the link between soul
decisions made before birth and tangible life issues. Whitton hypnotized
several subjects to the stage before birth. Many of these subjects were amazed
to discover that their current life issues, including phobias and illnesses, were
actually initiated at this time. These "soul contracts" were considered life
events that would teach lessons and help clear negative soul perceptions. One
individual rewrote his life script; upon awakening from the trance state, he
experienced a near miraculous recovery.' The healing process opens us to all
levels of reality-and wisdom.

   Describing the setting and supposedly miraculous healing of a broken leg in
Mutant Message Down Under, Morgan says, "In setting the bone earlier that
day, the two native physicians worked by sending the thoughts of perfection to
the body. There was as much going on in their heads and hearts as in their
hands ... What would happen in America if physicians put as much faith in the
healing ability of the human body, as they do believing drugs can or cannot
cure?" 10

   Many East Asian, African, and South American practitioners first look for
the disease in the spirit before trying to mend the body. Several Japanese and
Native American approaches first examine the families, lifestyles, or
environments of the stricken person. Early Polynesians believed that "most
internal illnesses other than obvious temporary upsets ... were supernaturally
induced by spirits and demons because of the breaking of some tapu [taboo] by
the individual or some member of his family."" Although Western civilization
has been a bit slow to appreciate these ideas, the proof is there, as many
alternative caregivers and receivers will attest.

   The body/mind/soul connection is, interestingly enough, being played out
and explored in contemporary physics and mathematics. Many leading
physicists now assert that the holographic theory, the larger paradigm in which
holism is housed, explains much of the universe, as well as our human
condition. In The Holographic Universe, Michael Talbot, a well-known writer
on new physics, says, "Our brains mathematically construct objective reality
by interpreting frequencies that are ultimately projections from another
dimension, a deeper order of existence that is beyond both space and time: the
brain is a hologram enfolded in a holographic universe. 1112 Here we are
reminded of William Tiller's presentation of the domains-and encouraged to
reflect that we actually exist in every domain simultaneously. Not only is the
universe a hologram, in which the whole is reflected in its parts and vice
versa, but so are we.

   If we are holographic, a dis-ease in a part of our self-an illness, a stress, a
bad relationship-points to an illness in our entire being and vice versa. A
spiritual belief of being bad can make us feel bad, think bad thoughts about
others, and ultimately, feel bad physically. Obviously, this can only happen if
the body, mind, and soul are interconnected. Here again we see the idea that
revolving doors exist to connect points between the visible and invisible, the
material and the spiritual.
   What happens when we begin to blur objective and subjective reality? When
we really begin to grasp that we are equally material and spiritual, or physical
and subtle, in nature? When these paradigms slip, we could become confused.
But we are also encouraged to form a new model, one that can invite healing. If
we were to stop perceiving ourselves as collections of parts, we would
instead picture ourselves as a series of circles existing and expressing in a
confluence of waves. Our physical body flows into our emotional reality,
which connects to our thought forms, which link to our spiritual or intuitive
processes, which flow right back into our physical body.

                             THE SCIENTIFIC BODY


To understand and invite healing, we must begin with an understanding of the
nature of energy and the existence of quanta. I propose the following as a
working definition of energy: "information that moves," or "informed
vibration."

   Medical doctor and author Paul Pearsall, in his book The Heart's Code,
states that everything is full of information and is also made of energy. This
means that energy is full of information." We also know that energy never
stands still. Everything in the world vibrates. We put these two factors
together, vibration and information, and conclude that energy is information
that moves.

   There are two basic types of energy. First, there is energy that moves faster
than the speed of light, which could be called psychic, spiritual, or subtle
energy. There is also energy that moves slower than the speed of light. We
might label this sensory, material, or physical energy. Albert Einstein and other
scientists have asserted that matter cannot move faster than the speed of light,
but a recent experiment has actually shown that a pulse of light (which carries
information and vibrates) can, in fact, move faster than the speed of light.

   In the experiment, the light beamed into the chamber sped through so quickly,
it could be said that it exited before it even entered.14 The existence of this
super-speed energy can explain psychic phenomena, miracle healing, spirit
visitations, long-distance telepathy, and even the way that subtle energy
structures work. Basically, a subtle or spiritual energy body, such as a chakra,
is able to convert fast-moving energy to slowmoving and vice versa. It can
literally translate psychic data into material reality and concrete objects (such
as a tumor) into ether.

   When we're sick or challenged, there's something wrong with the
information or vibration-or both-instructing our body, mind, or soul. We might
be holding on to a rigid, destructive belief or a repressed emotion, or
thousands if not millions of other bits of data that prevent wellness. Then
again, our problems might come from dissonant vibrations, such as exposure to
a toxic chemical or electropollution, electrical or geomagnetic forces that
create damage in our bodies. Sometimes it's hard to separate information from
vibration, sometimes it's impossible; but the healing process usually reduces to
diagnosing the "bad" information or vibrations and inserting "good"
information or vibrations.

   That sounds easy enough, but modern physics is complicating matters-as
well as making it more magical and intriguing-with its investigation into the
quantum world. Quanta are subatomic particles, considered by many scientists
to be the basic stuff from which everything in the universe is made. Minute
energy units, quanta are able to exist both as waves and particles, and flow
from one form to the other. Michael Talbot points out that quanta usually
operate in waves-freely streaming and unbroken energy flows. He says, "The
only time quanta ever manifest as particles is when they are observed""
Invisible quanta become visible when their effects are measured.

  When applied to others or ourselves, the implications of these concepts of
particles and waves are stupendous. If we, like everything else in the universe,
are made of quanta, suddenly, it is assured that we are composed of both
visible and invisible energies. We can exist in material and spiritual form
simultaneously. What we are depends upon how we perceive ourselves, as
well as how we react to others' opinion of themselves or of us. Our mirror
image changes as we change our views and therefore our energy. We can
occupy real space and other nonapparent space simultaneously. We can exist in
one era and another simultaneously. We can be healed and still need healing
simultaneously.

  To effectively work at the quantum level, we must be able to bring our body,
mind, and soul fully into this reality and into balance.

   We are speaking now of wholeness, a philosophy explained by Ywahoo, in
reference to her own Cherokee people. She states that the Indian looks to the
whole, as a person is a continuum. "If we are thinking `part,' then we are giving
energy to the problem. It is better to know wholeness .1116 This book accepts
as a basis the belief that we are material and spiritual beings and exist on both
planes simultaneously. Given that these two aspects of being can interrelate,
and therefore affect each other positively or negatively, we need an operational
set of principles, tools, and rules that would enable us to both connect these
two selves for our individual and collective good.

   The thirty-two-chakra system is such a set of principles. In a quantum
framework, chakras operate as revolving doors that can transform psychic to
sensory energy, and vice versa; they can open the portals between antiworlds
that can erase problems and replace them with light. We will examine the
thirty-two-chakra system and its corollary concepts in order to maximize the
positive contacts between our spiritual and material selves. Just as important
is the discussion about the aspects of the individual self that should be making
the decisions about what could and should happen. The emphasis on soul
purpose is deliberate, because the soul is the aspect of each self that carries
each individual purpose from the Divine Source-God, Buddha, Spirit, Creator,
Christ, or other Higher Power. Therefore, this is the aspect of the self to put in
charge.

   This book assumes that there is indeed a higher spiritual power, a Divine
Source to which all souls are connected. Strengthening and maintaining this
connection through the soul is essential to being fully human. Because of our
common spiritual background, I and many of my clients refer to this Divine
Source as "God" However, I encourage all my clients-and readers-to derive
their soul work from their own spiritual traditions.
                         AN EXPLANATION OF HEALING


COMPLETE CHAKRA HEALERS carry big tool kits, chock full of acceptable
health care treatments. Our training and capacities for using the acceptable
tools and techniques varies, but there's a lot to choose from. The medical bag
includes the best of allopathic medicine, including surgery, prescription drugs,
diagnostic devices, casts and splints, and symptom-related treatments.

   Complete Chakra healers can also access nearly endless complementary
tools of the healing trade. Many of these include or have evolved from Eastern
medicine, the longstanding tradition of working energetically, emotionally,
spiritually, and mentally, as well as physically. This approach is usually called
"holistic" medicine in that it involves treating the whole person. In the West,
we label this approach as "complementary" or "alternative" care, although
much of the world considers it "traditional" care. Holistic medicine has an
easier time embracing the subtle or spiritual world for healing purposes than
allopathic medicine.

  In terms of healing, subtle healing draws upon invisible resources, shifts
energies that are intuitively rather than physically perceived, and is frequently
"super" natural in nature. In contrast to allopathic approaches, subtle healing is
best explained by quantum rather than classical physics.

   A quantum-explained world is very different than a classically explained
world. Energy or subtle-based healing methods might be effective, but we can't
often see how they work. Likewise, we cannot always see what's happening in
the quantum or microstates. In a classical healing system, an object can be
described according to its position and speed, as well as a unique set of
quotients. We can guess where we might find a bowling ball-or an electron-if
we know where it is, what direction it's pointing, and at what speed we direct
it. On the quantum scale, an electron, for instance, can exist simultaneously in
many positions and velocities. When moving from place to place, it doesn't
take the straightest route-it might take all available roads simultaneously. 17 in
regard to healing, the multiple locations of a particle (or person or softball)
suggest possibilities for creating miracles, or at least some great results. A
tumor in the brain might possibly also exist in a tree in the rain forest in South
America. What if we could "blink" it out of the brain and locate it only in that
tree? For that matter, what if we could also "blink" it in healing from a star, the
future, or another dimension?

   Various quantum theories suggest that we can. Physicists have observed that
every particle in the "real world" is partnered in the "antiworld" with an
antiparticle. English physicist Paul Dirac introduced the theory in 1928,
describing antiparticles as companions in mass and spin that hold an opposite
charge. Antimatter is a source of energy. When an electron meets its mate (the
positron), both disappear, leaving two photons, or units of light. We now have
light-and usable energy. The existence of antimatter also suggests that there are
"anti-universes," other worlds that touch our own.

   Some quantum scientists suggest that there are many such antiworlds or
parallel realities. These concurrent realities contain that which "did not"
happen. If this world holds our sick self, another world includes our well self.
In yet another, we might be dead. Treatment for a this-world terminal condition
might exist in yet another parallel reality. An effective energy healer could
simply exchange a preferred reality for this one.

  MIT scientist Seth Lloyd explains these parallel realities (and healing)
based on his interpretation of entropy, the subject of the classic Second Law of
Thermodynamics. According to this law, energy gradually reduces in
availability until it cannot be accessed. In his book Programming the Universe,
Lloyd essentially asks, "Where does this energy go?»1s

   According to the First Law of Thermodynamics, energy can't be destroyed.
This means that the "lost" information has to go somewhere. Lloyd proposes
that it slips into a pocket of the universe, or perhaps into one of the many
antiworlds, but it can be flipped back into this reality upon being observed.19
According to quantum physics, information (or energy) cannot be destroyed,
but can only exist if it's observed.

   How do our dreams leave the pockets secreting them? Upon being "seen" or
intentionally desired, they might descend through the frequency levels below
the quantum layer and then becomes dense in material reality.20 Perhaps, as
we've suggested, they flip in from an antiworld or one of Tiller's domains. No
matter where our dreams linger, we have to see them-to really desire them-to
make them come true.

   I'd like to return to a sub-point made a few paragraphs ago. I stated that the
meeting of a particle and its antiparticle produces light. Light is created in
many ways, but it's always formed from photons, which are quantum pieces of
energy that operate like waves and particles. Since time began, the healing
process has been compared to bringing light where it is dark. Contemporary
metaphysical healers often call themselves "light workers." The tradition of
comparing healing with the production of light is not new; in fact, it stretches
through the millennia and throughout all cultures.

   Chakras and auric fields, the energy bodies at the heart of this book, are
called spinning wheels of light and bands of light, respectively, according to
the Sanskrit definitions of the words. In the Incan tradition, the meridians-one
of the structures of the energetic anatomy most frequently addressed by the
Eastern culture-are called rivers of light. The meridians and the chakras are
thought to connect a person into a Luminous Energy Field, which creates and
sustains reality.21

  And what was the first creation of the Divine? Light. Light was the first
matter-or energy, which means that we are essentially surrounded by, and also
made of, light.

   Many scientists are now speculating that we exist within a great field of
light. Researchers including Dr. Hal Puthoff have shown that a "zero-point"
field encompasses the material world. The zero-point is a field of light that
looks like a vacuum but is really a sea of electromagnetic energy, quite
possibly speckled with virtual particles.22 Virtual particles are units of matter
that are currently not real but can become so, such as when they are perceived.
There is always light, no matter how dark reality appears to be. Researcher
Lene Hau Vestergaard has shown that even at near-zero-point, light might
vanish, but there is still a background radiation.23 These discoveries suggest
that not only are we encompassed by a field of light, but that light holds
everything we might need-if we could only learn how to access it for our well-
being.

   Yet other research shows that we, ourselves, are made of light. As reported
by Lynne McTaggart in her book The Field, the human body is really a
biophoton machine. Researchers including Fritz-Albert Popp have discovered
that DNA itself is a storehouse of biophoton emissions, or light. Advanced
organisms emanate more DNA photons than do less-evolved organisms, and it
appears that the zero-point field plays a major role in originating and
interacting with this internal light. Disease occurs when the body interjects too
much or too little light from the field.24 The universe is essentially surrounded
by-and produced from-light, and so are our bodies.

   How do we control or manage our relationship with this field? How do we
live as the light that we are? These questions reveal our essential quest, as
human beings. We might guess that if we know that we deserve to be loved, our
DNA will emanate biophotons in a manner supportive of optimum physical,
emotional, mental, and spiritual welfare. If we hold destructive ideas about the
world or ourselves, we'll reject light and live darkly. We will literally make
ourselves, and perhaps others, sick.

   We dwell on this planet with more than six billion other souls-and how can
we begin to count the souls in the invisible realms? Energy is transferable from
one person to another. Have you ever spent time with someone who is negative
or self-effacing? You start to feel down and dreary, don't you? I believe that up
to 80 percent of our problems are caused by energies that are not our own; this
includes physical illness. You might not be making yourself sick-someone else
might be. Then again, perhaps we can achieve a state of union in the world
where we can all help each other become well.




                            THE FULL HUMAN ENERGY SYSTEM


One thing missing in alternative, metaphysical, or AMA-approved health care
explanations of healing has been a clear picture of the human energy system, a
picture of not only the spiritual or material sides of our being, but of the
revolving doors between the material and spiritual realms. The Complete
Book of Chakra Healing presents a view of the visible and invisible aspects of
our beings, and highlights various methods that can be used to open these
portals.

Chakras and Energy Points


Through my work, I have perceived thirty-two energy centers upon which the
holistic human is based. Twelve of these centers are chakras, the skeleton of
our physical energy system. The other twenty energy centers exist on the
spiritual plane. Understanding the nature of these energy centers is critical to
understanding ourselves, our truths, our purposes.

   Chakras regulate, maintain, and manage the physical, emotional, mental, and
spiritual aspects of our being on the physical plane. Chakras themselves serve
as revolving doors or portals between our body, mind, and soul. In Vibrational
Medicine, Richard Gerber considers chakras to be specialized energy centers,
which are multi-dimensional in nature, describing them as "dimensional
portals within the subtle bodies which take in and process energy of higher
vibrational nature so that it may be properly assimilated and used to transform
the physical body."25

  Chakra is actually a Sanskrit term meaning "wheel of light." A chakra is
nothing more or less than a wheel of light revolving in and through our energy
system. C. W. Leadbeater, in his classic text The Chakras, describes chakras
this way: "The chakras or force-centers are points of connection at which
energy flows from one body of a man to another ... all these wheels are
perpetually rotating, and into the hub or open mouth of each a force from the
higher world is always flowing."" There are major and minor chakras. The
major chakras manage our most critical functions and issues; the minor chakras
regulate less fundamental needs. All are important, but one could picture their
differences like the differences between our arteries and capillaries. Wounding
an artery is a catastrophe; we have only a few, and each is critical to our
survival. A wounded capillary, on the other hand, results in minor discomfort.
There are thousands of capillaries, and though important, the work done by one
can be absorbed by others while repair is in progress.

   Of the twelve physically oriented chakras, seven are located in the actual
physical body. These chakras have been known to most Eastern cultures and
several South American cultures for thousands of years, and have recently been
employed in the methods of many Western holistic practitioners. However, no
practitioner I know has adequately explored the full dimensions of the back
sides of these seven in-body chakras, preferring instead to highlight the front
sides. This book will illustrate the nature and function of both sides of the in-
body chakras, and how the spine and vertebrae serve as revolvingdoor
connections between the front and back sides of these chakras.

   The remaining five, out-of-body chakras, associated to our visible existence,
have been only vaguely referred to in other material. My awareness of these
chakras comes primarily from my work. Their existence, however, has been
perceived by other healers and described by other spiritual systems across
time. In other words, mine is not the first system to work with more than seven
chakras.

   The Narayana system, a yoga derivative, works with nine chakras, as does
the chakra system expounded upon in the Yogaranjopanishad. The Waidika
system is a Layayoga method and outlines eleven major chakras.27 Other
schools work with an eighth chakra, called the Bindu or the Soma chakra.28

  The seven-chakra system used most frequently in the West usually places the
chakras inside of the body. Yogic tradition, however, usually locates the
seventh chakra "above the top of the head," not "at the top of the head"29 Other
healers situate a chakra under the feet. This list includes David Furlong, who
describes his system in his book Working with Earth Energies. Most systems
recognize secondary or minor chakras; Georgia Lambert Randall, for instance,
presents twenty-one minor and forty-nine minute chakras, as well as the basic
seven.30 Also, many systems reference chakras in the hands and feet, the basis
of the twelve-chakra system's eleventh chakra, which surrounds the body but is
strongest around the hands and feet.31

   The additional twenty energy centers, which exist in the invisible realm,
have not been discussed before in any modern book. This book will explore all
the chakras and energy points to locate the revolving-door connections
between these out-of-body chakras and our in-body energy centers and
systems, in addition to several other energy centers, such as the energy egg,
Akashic Records, and Book of Life, and other secondary chakras that
supplement the energy healer's tool kit.

Auras


Another important aspect of our energy system is our aura, the bands of light
surrounding all living things. Studies at the Neuropsychiatric Institute at the
University of California, Los Angeles, used high-frequency photography to
show blue and white rays emanating from people's fingertips. If a subject
became excited during filming, the color changed to a spotty red. In one subject
who became drunk, the photographs showed a murky haze around the hands.32
Several other studies also support the existence of the aura. The most
substantive includes research headed by A. S. Popov, a Soviet scientist from
the Bioinformation Institute. Popov and his team actually measured the
biocurrents manifested in the surrounding energy body, discovering that living
organisms emanate vibrations at a frequency between three hundred and two
thousand nanometers. After labeling this field the "biofield," they found that
people with a strong and widespread biofield could transfer energy more
successfully. This research was later confirmed by the Medical Science
Academy in Moscow.33

   I believe that each auric band is connected to one of the human chakras, and
that the chakras themselves are connected to visible organs, and therefore, to
our very existence. Barbara Ann Brennan, a former scientist for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and now a respected healer,
sees this connection as a seal regulating the energy exchange. She suggests that
the points of the chakras connect to a main power current and can be seen as
the "roots" or "hearts" of the chakras. Within the hearts are "seals that control
exchange of energy between layers of the aura through that chakra." Each
chakra has seven layers, and these correspond to a layer of the auric field.34

  I also believe that as each of our twelve chakras is affected by energies we
bring into this life, our experiences within it, and the reflections of the higher
twenty energy points, our auras will metaphorically tell us the stories of
ourselves. While they hold the projections of all that has happened, is
happening, and perhaps will happen, these auric bands serve as input centers
for the spiritual energies that can alter or heal our past, present, or future. We
will examine these twelve auric fields in depth, in addition to several other
additional fields that support our well-being, such as the morphogenetic field,
miasms, the etheric template, and the energy egg.

Rays


The third major energy affecting us are rays, usually defined as waves of
energy that are universal in nature. There are many types of rays, for there are
many types of universal energies. In my work, I see six major revolving doors,
or entry points, for these rays, plus thirty-two minor entry points. Isolating
these entry points in our physical or energetic systems is important, so that we
learn how to manage both the incoming and outgoing flow of universal
energies. By managing our own ray process, we can effectively work on
relationship problems, career questions, physical ailments, and many other
issues.
   The concept of rays originated in Vedic literature. They were considered
seven attributes of God, subtle energies able to convert high vibrational energy
into accessible, physical energy. Each was associated with a specific rishi, or
master, or agent of the Absolute.35

  Aligning yourself with certain rays can also be helpful. Your attraction to
specific rays will depend upon your overall energy system, personality,
healing needs, purpose, and developmental process. Many people find it
beneficial to perceive a connection to spiritual beings or entities through these
rays. In exploring this possibility, I emphasize alternate methods of taking in
and sending out ray energy, because working through another being presents
challenges and difficulties that can outweigh the benefits.

Principles


Governing the flow of universal rays and the interaction of spiritual and
material energy with our human energetic system is a set of guidelines called
principles. Principles are not rules but regulations. The difference is that rules
are rigid, and regulations are flexible. Understanding the principles that
regulate our system can save us a lot of hardship by steering us away from
mistakes and toward success. We will explore the principles I work with and
various applications of them.

                          OTHER HEALING CONCEPTS


There are a few additional concepts that are important to understand. Most
relate to the need to find your purpose as a means to heal, a process that differs
slightly between men and women.

   As we work with energies and their applications, we must remember that
there are gender differences. Knowing how to best work with your own energy
system, while following gender-based applications, can clear up much of the
current confusion held about energy.
Kundalini


One of the points of gender difference lies in the use of kundalini, the life-
energy force, often symbolized as a serpent. Kundalini is an explosive energy,
often used and well documented in Eastern traditions, many of which see
kundalini as the energy of will, passion, and physicality. Other cultures purport
similar ideas. For instance, Mayan masters teach that "we are the integration of
the seven powers of light, traveling in the form of the serpent, undulating
eternally with movement and measure"36 While the New Age is ushering in a
Westernized view of kundalini, misconceptions abound, such as beliefs
regarding its inherent dangers and the preparation stages for using it. Confusion
regarding this energy, which many believe to be the crucial force behind
actualizing oneself, arises from lack of awareness. Most people are not aware
that:

1. Kundalini is actually an energy connected to a higher, spiritual energy point.

2. It affects men and women differently.

3. It can be reached and used through material and spiritual access points.

4. There are actually three types of kundalini that can be accessed
 respectively for physical well-being, mindful development, and spiritual
 enlightenment. These are the red (or serpent) kundalini, the golden kundalini,
 and the radiant kundalini.

   I believe that employing this "snake energy" is critical to achieving growth,
maintaining self-awareness, and tapping into our own power. I share Richard
Gerber's belief that kundalini is the creative source of the universe, assisting
with the "alignment of the chakras, the release of stored stress from the bodily
centers, and the lifting of consciousness into higher spiritual levels"37 We will
explore the three forms of kundalini as effective tools that actually tie the entire
human energy system together when used in concert with a second, equally
effective energy.
Mana


This second energy is mana energy. The kahuna healers of Hawaii feel that
mana is the life force permeating the universe, and that it is highly concentrated
in living things.38 Because of its use in manifesting, performing miracles, and
healing, this mana energy is critical to the healing process.

Karma and Dharma


In the exploration of ourselves, we will inevitably travel paths journeyed by
other metaphysicians. In doing so, we will explore two other important
concepts: karma and dharma. Typically, karma is seen as a retributive process
whereby we re-experience our mistakes or dilemmas until we get them right. I
see karma as a completely different process, one that we can actually choose to
engage in or not.

   Frederic Wiedemann sees karma as "the sum total of the consequences of all
our actions..." He says, "Regardless of whether our actions create positive or
negative karma, the law of karma assures that we must experience the return of
the effects of our actions. While this ... may seem binding ... it is in reality very
freeing." Wiedemann views the law of karma as a cosmic feedback system that
allows us to become conscious of our deeds, and therefore learn from them.39
I cleared up some of my own confusion about karma by perceiving the
following:

1. There is a karmic center connected to an actual energy body (a chakra).
 Working with this energy center is the key to clearing misperceptions about
 ourselves.

2. Karma can be changed through revolving-door points in any of the energy
 centers, or chakras.

3. Karma is only important because it leads us to dharma; the dharmic
 conversion process is the only one that can help us transform karmic energy
 (from pain to wisdom).

   If karma is the process that pushes us back toward our past, dharma is the
process that pulls us forward toward our future. Dharma is actually another
word for purpose. Wiedemann explains, "Its duty is to serve life and increase
God consciousness in whatever manner best suits the person's talents and level
of attainment. The soul's calling can be viewed as a blueprint which contains
information as to why we are here. 40 When karmic energy is harnessed
appropriately, it can speed up our dharmic process, which in turn speeds up
our healing process. Dharma is almost always connected to the soul and the
soul-body, which must be effectively integrated with our mind and physical
body to be fulfilled. We will explore means of achieving this integration.

Cords


One other theme woven throughout this book is the idea of cords. Cords are
energetic connections between people, beings, or parts of us that serve as
negative relationship contracts. Purpose and relationship are two sides of the
same coin. We need people to achieve our purpose, and purpose to clarify our
relationships. Cords are formed when we contract with another person to meet
our needs. This contract may seem beneficial on the surface, until we realize
that these contracts are usually formed out of fear and self-destructive beliefs.
These beliefs result in patterns that create self-destructive habits and limit the
bonded relationships to a low standard of quality.

  Cords are especially dangerous because they can be carried across time.
They may be formed soul to soul, mind to mind, or body to body during our
existence (past lives or this life), or in any other soul/mind/body configuration.
They may directly or indirectly affect us, but are almost always detrimental.
The exception is a cord between a mother and newborn. Cords generally gum
up our energy system, filling holes that need to be there, clouding mirrors that
need to be clear, and damaging barriers that need to be strong. In short, we
cannot work efficiently-or at all-with our energy systems if we do not address
our cords and the reasons we are holding them. In this book, we will be
exploring cords and other bindings or energetic restrictions, including energy
markers and codependent bargains.

  All of these terms-chakra, aura, rays, principles, kundalini, mana, karma,
dharma, and cords-have been introduced to make you more comfortable with
learning about your energy system. Regardless of their familiarity, they are
presented as an invitation to experience one of the most important events of
your life. It is an invitation to come through the doorway of yourself-to meet
yourself.

  Know that no matter how deep and penetrating your energetic studies, the
energy system-and yourself-will remain at least a partial mystery. No matter
how fully committed you are to healing yourself and the world, at least some
aspect of your spiritual calling will remain unknown and, perhaps, undone.
You can apply any and all of these healing principles, and still not be certain
about the results. This is because life is built upon uncertainties. It is formed
on the overriding principle of continual change.

   The past actually never repeats itself. Every moment is new. Every second
that enfolds into the past is gone forever. Yes, it is stored as memory or as an
imprint that lasts eternally, but the self that opens the envelope of the past is a
"new self," one who will of necessity see the past with different eyes. The
future, which can be perceived or at least guessed, is built on shifting sands.
Every time we veer a little to the right or the left, we alter the "set" future, if
only in minor ways.

   Change stresses most of us. We look for guarantees in order to assert some
sort of authority and control over the unknown. Having moved into the twenty-
first century, we've only to open the newspaper, connect to the Internet, or
examine any number of books to see just how hard we're all trying to discover
what is set and determined. Doomsday soothsayers read the Mayan
manuscripts about 2012 to warn us of ending times, as do Christians who
decipher the Book of Revelation and insist we're now moving into the final
days. Optimists suggest that these and other writings from the pastfrom the
dead-insist that we're simply shifting into higher gear. We might ascend or
literally leave Earth with our bodies intact. Maybe we'll attune to the fifth
dimension. Or perhaps we're getting set up for "one thousand years of peace,"
another spin on Revelation.

   Whatever the case, it might serve us to stop looking to the past as a means of
interpreting the future or to the future for all our answers about today, for the
truth is that even "God" doesn't know exactly what is going to happen. The
Master of Uncertainty, the Divine Source must Itself participate in the world if
He/She is to shape it, to share love, and to provide inspiration. Certainly, some
aspect of the Divine is fully and exactly aware of what has happened, what is
happening, and what will happen, but some other part of the Divine holds back
and dances with us in uncertainty. To be uncertain is to have power to change-
to change our perceptions from the past, our actions today, and our attitudes
about tomorrow. As said by Alice from the vantage point of Wonderland, "I
can't go back to yesterday-because I was a different person then.""

   The nature of energy-and of light-is such that every time you think a new
thought, you become a new person. And isn't that beautiful? Isn't that grand? To
learn about energy is to learn about choice, and then to make the choices only
you can make to assure the world a future, and a good one at that.


              EXERCISES: THROUGH THE DOORWAYS OF THE SELF


We each have the ability to know ourselves, to express ourselves, to be
ourselves. Exercises can help us gain access to the innermost areas of
ourselves, the areas that are sometimes the most difficult for us to see and feel.
The following exercise can help you delve within. It is a six-step series of
processes for gaining access to your intuition, your access point to uncovering
the invisible you.

1. Grounding-The process of bringing yourself fully within your body. When
 grounded, you will be able to feel all parts of your physical body, from your
 toes to your head. You will also be able to feel the full extension of your
 energy system, including parts of you above and below your feet and head.
2. Centering-The process of bringing yourself to your center, or middle. To be
 centered is to be fully connected to the part of your body that serves as the
 meeting ground for all your energies. This meeting ground is usually found
 within the abdomen, solar plexus, or heart.

3. Protecting-The process of clearing, repairing, and erecting energetic
 boundaries in order to keep yourself safe. The safer you feel regarding
 visible and invisible elements or beings, the more intuitive you can be.

4. Opening-The process of opening your energy centers. You may remain open
 after an exercise (if you are appropriately protected) or choose to close back
 down when finished.

5. Accessing-Accomplishing what you set out to accomplish, such as
 performing a healing or obtaining data.

6. Closing-The reverse of opening. It includes appropriately closing energy
 centers, reprotecting, centering, and grounding.


               EXERCISE: MEDITATING ON YOUR ENERGY SYSTEM


The best way to learn how to use your energy system is to practice. You may
perform this guided meditation by yourself by first reading it through then
trying it, by taping it then playing it back, or by having someone read it to you.

A. Prepare yourself by finding a comfortable position in which to rest. With
your feet touching the floor, begin to breathe deeply. Concentrate first on the
inbreath, picturing a soft, yellow light entering your body with each breath.
See or feel this light circle around your chest, opening and clearing.

B. With each additional in-breath, this light moves farther within your body,
swirling first into your neck, your shoulders, then through your arms and
hands. The light passes through your hands, bringing with it any energies you
feel ready to release. The light continues spreading upward, moving into your
head, gently pushing all the way to the top of your head, then outward. Here
too, the light brings out all the energies you no longer need, clearing your
sense of self, your inner vision, your own truth and light.

C. The light then begins to move downward, pulsing, clearing, opening as it
travels into your solar plexus, your abdomen, moving into your hip area. It
parts into two beams at it stretches down into your legs, finally pooling at
your feet. It continues downward, finding a path, a channel, into the earth.
Here, below, you find a part of yourself awaiting you, an energy center open
to this energy. The light passes into, then through, this energy center, carrying
with it all the substances that you no longer need, passing them into the earth
for transformation.

   You rest your attention on this part of you underneath the ground and find
 that it begins to breathe at the same rate as your lungs are breathing. In, then
 out. In, then out. You notice that the out-breaths above and below are now
 removing of all energies, emotions, thoughts, colors, and experiences that
 have ceased to serve you. Your upper and lower breaths occur in rhythm to
 each other.

D. You are now grounded. You can feel yourself from your head to your feet.
You are safe. You are now able to move your conscious awareness
elsewhere, bringing it to your center. Simply allow yourself to find your
center, that part of yourself in which you feel most at home. Linger here for a
while. Experience the warmth, the colors, the feelings, the knowledge that
you hold about yourself there. Bring some light into this aspect of yourself.
Allow it to expand; allow yourself to be at one with it.

E. As you grow comfortable inside of yourself, you become aware of the aura,
 the energy bands, around you. Draw your attention outward and ask to see any
 discolorations, markings, colors, or shadows that indicate a hole or block. If
 you see anything, ask for the appropriate color or shade with which to repair
 your aura. You may also ask your inner self or an outer guide to tell you if
 there is a part of your aura that needs attention. If there is, ask for help in
 repairing it. You may also allow yourself to simply expand your energy out
into your aura, bringing with you the feeling of light you have spread
throughout your body. Let this light fill in any gaps or holes. Let it push out
any unwanted energies or people. Let it warm and protect you. When you feel
safe, bring your attention back to your center.

F. Centered again, picture a light switch, the main control switch for your
 energy centers. Flip on the switch. By doing this, you are awakening your
 intuitive abilities to see, hear, or know what you need to understand. Safely
 opened, you can now gain access to information.

G. Right now, concern yourself only with your center. Ask your internal self
what awareness would help you stay centered more often in everyday life.
Give yourself a minute to see, hear, feel, or sense an answer. Take time to
follow any provided instructions.

H. It is now time to close. You will remain grounded and centered throughout
this process, and after you have regained full consciousness. Examine your
aura again. Are there any now-apparent or new holes, blocks, or problems to
address? Heal anything preventing you from living a full and active life. Once
again, imagine your central light switch, this time picturing it as a dimmer
switch. Adjust the dimmer up or down, selecting the intensity that feels safest
for you. Bring your awareness back to your breath, feeling your in- and
outbreaths as they continue to move through and around your body. Feeling
your hands, your feet, your head, your heart, let your breath guide you back to
a full and conscious awareness of yourself. When you are ready, open your
eyes.
                    You As INFINITY:
                 YOUR TWELVE CHAKRAS
As stated previously, you have many selves and connection points between the
material and spiritual universes. The first twelve centers are connected to the
material self. They help us bring the mana, or subtle energy particles, of the
invisible world into physical form. Energy converters, such as chakras, also
perform the opposite task, transforming physical energy into the invisible
energy of the subtle world.

   Seven of these energy centers are clearly chakras, or spinning wheels of
light particles, because they are body-based and operate according to physical
laws. The next five are also chakras. Though their connection points lie outside
the physical body, they still operate according to physical principles (see
figure 2.1). These chakras added together compose the twelve-chakra system, a
revolutionary approach to healing and manifesting. In this chapter, we will
examine these twelve chakras and also outline a few other important energy-
based centers.

   The other twenty centers are spiritually based; they are located outside this
time/space continuum. Of course, you might wonder how I know they exist if
they can't be seen, felt, or heard. As with many hypotheses, the test of this
reality is causal. Through my work, I have seen the existence of such points
demonstrated. There are also references to these points in esoteric literature
and in indigenous practices and various spiritual traditions. These top centers
are not officially chakras, for they comprise energy that, if measurable, I
believe would rotate faster than light itself. Although they lack physical
attributes, these spiritual energy points help us transmute physical energies into
immaterial energy and vice versa. They provide us with guidelines to stretch
beyond our normal, human limitations.
                  Figure 2.1: The Twelve-Chakra System

Chakras are located both inside and outside of the physical body and convert
    material, or physical, energy to spiritual, or subtle, and vice versa
                       DESCRIBING OUR ENERGY CENTERS


All of the energy centers contain clues to everything that affects us. In fact, they
perfectly mirror all that has ever occurred, is occurring, or might occur. They
cannot help but do it, because each energy center functions as a complete unit
unto itself, while serving the whole energy system. Holism, at its best, is
portrayed through the human energy system. Regardless of their locations (or
lack of one), all energy centers have the following in common:

• Purpose-All energy centers regulate the human energy system and seek to
 maintain equilibrium in health while assisting the mind's, body's, and soul's
 need to grow, develop, and heal.

• Function-All energy centers link the visible and invisible aspects of an
 individual's body, mind, and soul, and exchange energy between the spiritual
 and physical realities.

• Energy Form-All energy centers are composed of quanta, which can be
 subdivided as quarks (energy that moves slower than the speed of light) or
 tachyons (energy that moves faster than the speed of light); both of these
 particles move in spiral-like motions from material to spiritual form and vice
 versa.

• Frequencies-Each energy center operates at its own optimum frequency.
 Generally, the more physical and the lower the center, the lower its
 frequency. The higher the center, the higher the frequency. A study by Dr.
 Valerie Hunt of UCLA in 1988 depicted the seven in-body chakras as ranging
 in hertzian color band frequency between 250 and 2,000 hertzians, or cycles,
 per second.' For the most part, these frequencies qualify as visible light on
 the electromagnetic spectrum. Above the head energy centers are ultra-violet
 and higher; below the feet energy centers are infrared and lower. All these
 frequencies are interrelated, however. If one is out of synch, all others will
 be, too.

• Effects-All energy centers affect an entity's physical, mental, emotional, and
 spiritual well-being by storing, analyzing, dispersing, and transforming data
 regarding these processes.

• Communication Vehicles-Each energy center has a built-in mechanism for
 communicating to the other energy centers and to the organism as a whole.
 This feedback process is a psychic process that involves receiving, encoding,
 sending, and deciphering data between centers and the mind, body, or soul of
 the organism. In short, all energy centers double as intuitive centers, each
 using its own peculiar form of psychic process.

   While the energy centers have a lot in common, they also differ greatly.
While each serves the greater purpose, each also meets a particular function.
While each affects our physical, emotional, mental, or spiritual well-being,
each also regulates a separate process. While the in-body, out-of-body, and top
spiritual energy centers are members of the same family, each group has its
own distinctions. The major differentiation among the centers is in how each
affects our purpose. By examining these differences closely, we can gain a
better understanding of what is going on inside and outside of us all the time,
usually without our immediate knowledge.

   In this chapter, we will look at the human chakras-seven in-body chakras and
five out-of-body chakras. In chapter 3, we will explore our twenty spiritual
energy points.

                      HOW THE IN-BODY CHAKRAS WORK


The seven chakras located within the human body are the most well-known
chakras, and they ought to be. As people, we live, breathe, eat, love, and die
within our physical forms, so it makes sense that we would associate foremost
with our physical chakras.

   The in-body chakras are shaped like conical funnels. Their point of contact
with the physical body lies in the spine (see figure 2.2). Because the chakras
align with the spine, the names of these chakras are relatively easy to
remember. Beginning at the hip area, they are:
               Figure 2.2: The Seven In-Body Chakras

Shaped like conical funnels, the seven in-body chakras connect with the
                      physical body at the spine
 "Chakras are shaped like spirals, the point of the spiral rooted in the central
 nervous system at the spine, and the vortex or wide part of the spiral passing
                     through the dense body, at the front."

                  - Diane Stein, from Women's Psychic Lives

   The lower six chakras are actually two-sided, with one side spinning out the
front of the body and the other out the back. I perceive that the highest chakra,
which emits from the crown, has a back side as well. This back side is less
apparent because it opens into a higher dimension than the others.

   In this chapter, we are going to examine the front side of the chakra system;
chapter 5 is devoted to the back side. You are probably either intellectually or
intuitively familiar with the front side of the in-body chakric system, since it is
the part regulating the conscious process.

  Within the front-side chakras we find:

• Records-Of all we have experienced in this lifetime, including experiences
 we have brought into this lifetime and key experiences from our ancestors
 and relatives.

• Storage-Of our own memories; unexpressed feelings; operating beliefs and
 patterns; soul beliefs and patterns; desires, hopes, and dreams; and other
 people's energies, experiences, hopes, dreams, beliefs, and opinions.

• Regulatory Functions-Of key physical organs and systems; major belief
 systems; emotional actions and reactions; and the soul's integration with, and
 input into, the body and mind.

• Communication Functions-Through the physical process, the psychic
 process, and the intuitive process.

Records
As recording centers, the chakras work much like brain cells do. Let's say that
early in life, we experience trauma (such as sexual abuse) in the first chakra,
located in the genital and hip area. The first chakra will record or lock in the
memory of this trauma. I have seen very dramatic examples of this recording
process. One client experienced replays of her father's abuse whenever her
husband touched her genitalia in the same way her father once did. Another
client, a sixteen-year-old girl, told me that after her first sexual encounter, she
was flooded with abuse memories. The first chakra (and all the others) records
memories that result from being hurt or touched in its physical locality-the
genital/hip area in the case of the first chakra. As you will see, however, the
first chakra also regulates a number of other systems, including the skin.
Therefore, first-chakra issues, such as response to sexual violation, can have a
widespread impact. For this rea son, I recently helped a client with a skin
disease by intuitively guiding her into her first chakra. Through this approach,
she began to remember sexual abuse issues, for which I referred her to a
therapist. Her skin condition cleared up during therapy.

   As recording centers, our chakras also imprint memories that are not ours, or
that stem from a different lifetime. I worked with one client who for her entire
life had been plagued with dreams in which she experienced a miscarriage.
Having never miscarried, she was puzzled and concerned that these dreams
were premonitions. Finally, I asked her to find out if her mother had ever
miscarried. She found out that her mother had miscarried twice before my
client was conceived, but had never thought that it was important to tell her
daughter.

   Another client, a therapist, was convinced that her fears about sex stemmed
from her most recent past life as a Holocaust victim. She says that since birth,
she has been terrified of hangers and other similar articles. She now believes
these were instruments of rape in her past life. Under controlled hypnosis (not
with me), she has relived these horrifying experiences. These memories were
imprinted in her chakric system.

Storage
The storage function of the in-body chakras is similar to that of the recording
function but broader. As we have seen, we can record or store our own
memories, memories of our physical ancestors, and memories from our past
lives (memories from ancestors or ourselves). Storing is different from
recording. To record is to imprint; to store is to hold the energy of something
intact. We might record something to learn from it. However, storing the energy
of that thing preserves it-sometimes so we can learn, but other times to prevent
damage or to hold onto it until we can safely deal with it later.

   For instance, we can store emotions, beliefs, physical experiences, and
spiritual misperceptions that might be too negative or self-destructive to deal
with right away. If we were often physically struck as a child, we may
subconsciously decide not to immediately deal with that trauma. Perhaps
reacting would invite further wrath, so we encapsulate the experience and hide
it from ourselves. I've met many people who have forgotten entire blocks of
time until the memories are suddenly triggered years later.

   Therapists often report this phenomenon. One of my friends, a psychologist,
said, "People frequently come to me only after they have become strong or safe
enough to deal with their pasts." He says that at this point, intact memories,
feelings, and experiences frequently emerge through flashbacks, dreams, or
therapeutic discussions.

   Where did these memories and experiences go? I believe they have been
stored in the chakras themselves or in parts of the body near the primary
chakras. I learned this during the early stages of my healing training. Once,
while practicing therapeutic touch, my touch on a client's shoulder provoked an
outbreak of anger and memories of an event she had forgotten. My sense was
that, in order to protect the physical heart itself, she had stored-intact-that
experience in her shoulder. She fully remembered it only when her heart had
become strong enough to handle it.

   The trouble with this process is that these unexpressed memories, feelings,
and beliefs, whether ours or someone else's, can draw detrimental
circumstances to us and cause further unhappiness. If we hold on to mental
perceptions such as "I am powerless," "I am a dirty person," "The world isn't
safe," or "All women/men are out to get me," these beliefs can generate a
whirlpool of problems until we uncover and release them. We may avoid
healthy relationships and opportunities in favor of ones that underscore our
self-destructive opinions. We may experience secondary physical and psychic
effects which, depending on which chakra is affected, could include heart
disease (heart chakra), PMS (abdomen chakra), migraines (hip/genital chakra),
and more. Our propensity to store information can also affect our soul, because
the soul is affected by each and every circumstance endured by our body and
mind. If our soul already mistrusts our body's sexuality, our childhood
experience maybe just another nail on the coffin of our resistance to purpose.

   One of the most dangerous side effects to storing energy occurs when what
we hold isn't ours. I believe that our chakric ability to hold the energies of
others is a cultural predisposition. Many native tribes, for example, believe
memories may be passed down "through the blood." I have unearthed
memories that have affected my life, but these memories haven't been mine. I
can remember feelings and experiences from my mother to female ancestors
several hundreds of years back. Some of these memories have helped me by
teaching me about strength and love, but many have harmed me because they
have reiterated already detrimental conclusions about being bad or powerless.

  In cultures that acknowledge stored memory, such as American Indian,
Peruvian, and Central American tribes, there are systems for working
positively with this phenomenon. In Peru, for instance, a shaman I know helps
each patient bring forth his or her ancestors, helps heal them, forces the
negative spirits onto another plane, and makes the positive ones promise to
help his patients. We have no such process in Westernized civilization, except
in various charismatic or evangelical movements; therefore, storing another's
energy is typically problematic. Because we lack the cultural understandings
or methods for recognizing or dealing with this process, we are victims of the
blurring of our own patterns, beliefs, feelings, and needs with those of others.

  I believe this blurring was the issue facing one of my clients. At age forty, he
began to question why everything he did seemed so closely to mirror what his
father had done. They shared similar professions and habits, and had married
similar women. We intuitively explored each chakra and, using imagery, began
to separate his desires, experiences, and feelings from his father's. He removed
intact beliefs and experiences from his father's past. After six months of this
work, my client barely resembled the man I had first met. He began to dress,
stand, and act differently. He was exploring other career options, and he had
started marriage counseling with his wife. His last words to me were, "I've
spent my whole life being my dad. Now I'm just going to be me."

   Storing another's reality can create yet another problem. Since we didn't
cause or participate in the experiences we have stored, we cannot cure or heal
them. However, they can operate within us as if they were our own feelings
and experiences. One of the first things I do when working with clients is to
ask them to separate their issues, energies, and feelings from someone else's.




CHAKRAS ARE STRUCTURED in three ways. These divisions include front
and back sides, left and right sides, and inner and outer wheels.

   The in-body structures have a front and back side. In general, the front side
governs everyday behavior and regulates our relationship with the physically
based world. The back side responds to our own unconscious programs and
manages our relationship with the less-tangible reality. As well, each in-body
chakra has a left and right side. The left side is feminine and regulates female-
oriented issues, while the right side of the chakra is masculine and runs male-
oriented issues. Our feminine functions involve receptivity, attraction,
relationship, intuition, and programs regarding one's own femininity or the
female gender. Our male functions involve action, domination, success, and
rationality, and programs about one's own masculinity or the male gender.

  All twelve chakras also have an inner and outer wheel. Our inner wheel
reflects programming from our own spirit and the Divine Source. This
programming enables actualization of our spiritual gifts, the abilities necessary
to carry out our spiritual mission. The outer wheel holds our personal issues,
private desires, hurts, sounds, and soul issues. Its job is to help us adapt to the
surrounding reality. Ideally these two wheels should operate in concert with
each other. While they might not move at the same speed, their relationship
should be rhythmic and consistent.

   In a healthy person, the inner wheel establishes the actual speed and
direction of both wheels (see figure 2.3). The two wheels usually circle
clockwise, but there are exceptions. During menstruation, a woman's wheels,
especially the first, fourth, and eighth, might move counterclockwise in order
to release built-up emotions. The outer wheels will often circulate
counterclockwise when someone is in grief, shock, near death, or performing a
physical cleanse. The outer and sometimes inner wheel of the eighth chakra
might permanently rotate counterclockwise in a shaman, someone who
performs mystical healing. And some individuals could be considered
"contrary," or shamanic, by nature. Many or all of their inner or outer wheels
might spin counterclockwise all the time. Energy healers must often intuitively
analyze these three chakric structures to determine exactly what is happening
inside of a chakra, and therefore, a subject's physical body.




                            REGULATORY FUNCTIONS


Besides serving as a storage unit and emotional clearinghouse, each chakra has
individual physical or regulatory functions. For instance, the first chakra reigns
over the organs and body parts located in the hip and genital area. It directly
affects our sexual processes and genitals, the large intestine processes, and
sacral vertebrae area. The second chakra, located in the abdomen, maintains
the small intestines, kidneys, and appendix, and the uterus and ovaries in
women.
   Perhaps the easiest way to work with the chakras physically is through their
associated endocrine glands. Each chakra is affiliated with a specific gland.
Endocrine glands produce hormones, substances that stimulate growth and
development. There are nearly 100 known hormones in the body. Working with
a chakra through diet, intentional healing, holistic processes, and other means
can create optimum function for the related gland and the entire region related
to that chakra.
                          Figure 2.3: Structure of a Chakra

 Every in-body chakra is composed of two wheels, an inner and an outer; the
 inner wheel reflects our spiritual essence, as well as divine essence, and the
 outer wheel relates to our human programs; ideally, these run in concert with
                                   each other

  This is a list of the twelve chakras and their related glands, as I have
determined through research and practical application. While some of these
body parts aren't officially endocrine glands, they still regulate hormone
functions. Out-of-body chakras connect to the inside of the body through their
specific glands.




Communication Functions


Because chakras dictate or assist with physical, mental, emotional, and
spiritual processes, they function like revolving doors between these four
dimensions of our humanness. Your emotions can affect your physical health;
your self-judgments can alter your relationship with the Divine Source; your
physical well-being can have an impact on your effectiveness in the world.
Therefore, the chakras also serve a communication function. Basically, each
chakra can communicate with our internal and external worlds, which means
that each chakra has separate physical, psychic, and intuitive means of
expressing its needs and desires, and the needs and desires of our whole being
(see figure 2.4).

  Physical communication is the process of soliciting, processing, or sending
sensory (measurable) energies through the physical body to express needs
regarding the physical or emotional processes. It is also the process of
receiving assistance through the physical/sensory body to meet our needs.




                  Figure 2.4: Communication in the Chakras
          Chakras use physical, psychic, and intuitive communication

  Psychic communication is the process of receiving, processing, encoding,
and sending invisible (or subtle) energy to meet our needs, usually in regard to
mental understandings and processes.

  Intuitive communication is the process of receiving, processing, encoding,
and sending psychic data in a managed way in order to meet our needs or
receive direction regarding important matters, usually in regard to spiritual or
soul-based understandings and processes.

  In short, we use:

• Physical communication to meet our physical or emotional needs.

• Psychic communication to meet our mental needs.

• Intuitive communication to meet our spiritual needs.

  For instance, you are hit on the head with a baseball bat. Your head hurts,
and you are sad. The fifth chakra, located in the throat, can express both the
pain and sadness by being verbal. You will cry, rant, rave, and ask for help.
The process may turn into a psychic one to gain an understanding about what
happened. If you are aware of your psychic abilities, you may ask an invisible
guide why the injury occurred and be told, "You weren't paying attention to the
game." A less aware person may simply hear a song in his or her head-
guidance coming through the fifth chakra seemingly unbiddenwith lyrics such
as, "Didn't see it coming, didn't see it coming, pay attention next time." The
soul may involve itself by "speaking" later about this event if you sit down and
meditate, self-reflect, use a journal, pray, or ask for guidance from the Divine
Source. You may then "hear" a voice in your head that says, "That hit in the
head was to tell you there is something coming in your life you have to watch
out for."

                  THE SEVEN INDIVIDUAL IN-BODY CHAKRAS
When looking at each of our seven in-body chakras, we will consider certain
key indicators about each:

Location-The site of the physical center of each chakra.

Color-The color psychics typically associate with each chakra. The color
indicates the type of frequency or tone affiliated with each chakra. Each color
could be turned into a musical note or a mathematical frequency. In general,
the lower the chakra is located within the body, the lower its tone or color.
The lower the tone, the stronger the effect that chakra has on our material self
(versus our spiritual self).

Endocrine Gland-The hormone gland associated with the chakra.

Descriptors-Symbols that have been linked to the various chakras. Each chakra
has a predominant yang, or male, theme, which concerns the energy output and
its effect on the world, and a yin, or female, theme, which concerns energy
input and its effect on our self.

Source of-A list of what comes from each chakra; an indication of what each
 chakra adds to the system as a whole.

Seat of-The ultimate purpose of each chakra.

Key Word-A word about a particular chakra to help differentiate it from the
others. If you remember any word about a particular chakra, this would be it.

Energy Type-The type of energy that flows in and out of each chakra.

Physical Communication Style-How we express or receive measurable,
 tangible data through each chakra. This data is usually recognized as physical
 sensations.

Psychic Communication Style-How we express or receive intangible data,
 which when processed through a chakra produces a physical or emotional
 effect. This data is currently scientifically immeasurable and not always
confirmable by others.

Intuitive Communication Style-How each chakra relays spiritual information to
 us or receives information designed to meet our soul's needs.

     In general, the main difference between the psychic and intuitive styles is
    that the first is sympathetic, which involves absorbing outside energies
    fully into the body. Intuition is empathetic, which involves first recognizing
    or registering external energies, but secondarily releasing, transforming, or
    transmuting them. The danger in psychic sympathy is that you cannot
    process energy that is not your own; it can therefore block your own
    system, causing problems.

Problems-A partial list of the most typical ailments, including addictions,
 associated with each chakra, particularly those illnesses stemming from
 imbalance within the chakra itself.

Health Tips-Lifestyle tips for healing or creating health within this chakra.

Contains-Suggestions of what information is stored within each chakra and
could be reached by communication with it.

First Chakra (The Root Chakra)


The first chakra, the root chakra, is critical to our survival. Most experts,
including Dr. Richard Gerber, link it with our survival instincts and our fight-
or-flight responses.2

   Located in the genital area, the first chakra receives its basic programming
from our family. Through this programming, we make decisions regarding our
right and will to survive. Our earliest experiences are also recorded here,
resulting in the awareness or repression of our most primal feelings.

   In Wheels of Light, Rosalyn L. Bruyere says, "In the first chakra, to be aware
is to be tactile. Nothing happens until it happens in the first chakra; and nothing
has happened until we sense it, until we feel it in a tactile way, until it touches
us ... Our interaction with our environment is dependent upon our own body's
ability to simultaneously record and make us aware of the occurrence of some
event or experience."' As we move through life, this chakra regulates our
physical existence and needs, including issues surrounding sexuality and
passion, and the availability of our most basic needs-money, housing, food,
clothing, and loving relationships. The first chakra also regulates the physical
realm in which it dwells, including our sexual functions.

Location-Lower hips, genital area (see figure 2.5).

Color-Red.

Endocrine Gland-Adrenals.

Descriptors-Images of a serpent, snake, dragon, or "holy fire," similar to the
flame of the Holy Spirit. The yang aspect of the chakra relates to how we put
ourselves out into the world and how successful we are at surviving. The yin
component concerns how able we are to receive material assistance and keep
our "will to live" alive.

Source of-Passion; raw, primal feelings, including rage, terror, joy; survival
 energy; material energy for achieving life purpose; fundamental programming
 about what we deserve in and out of life.

Seat of-Existence on the physical plane; the will to live.

Key Word-Awareness.

Energy Type-Fed by fire energy from inside and outside ourselves. It is the
 recipient chakra for kundalini, the raw earth energy feeding our life force and
 assuring survival.

Physical Communication Style-Communicates physical or emotional needs
 through real-life sensory impressions: aches and pains, physical awareness,
 touches, smells, vibrations, movements, feelings. May involve getting sick as
a means to becoming aware of a problem.




                      Figure 2.5: The First Chakra
          A fully functioning first chakra gives this awareness: "I am"

Psychic Communication Style-Conveys information regarding our mental needs
 through physical sympathy, the registration of physical and feeling-based
 sensations from sources that are perceived as not there. This can include
 feeling physical pains, illnesses, and feelings that belong to someone else;
 getting hit with smells, nausea, touches, vibrations that seem to come from
 nowhere. I associate abilities such as psychometry, the act of reading physical
 objects, with this chakra.

Intuitive Communication Style-Receives or sends physical sensations that
 make us look at a soul or spiritual issue or need, causing us to sometimes
 experience an imaginary reality, as if we were really there. While these
 experiences are woven from psychic energies, they usually involve a higher
 learning and call for a significant change in lifestyle.

Problems-Root area for addictions and compulsions; sexual dysfunctions
 (physical, behavioral, or emotional); nervous system diseases or disorders;
 urinary tract disorders; rectal problems; some circulatory, skin, or
 reproductive issues; headaches. Family dysfunctions and gender role
 confusion; any childhood abuse issues; money, career, and finance issues;
 questions about housing, food, and basic needs. Addictions may involve abuse
 of alcohol, hard drugs, sex, and gambling; cutting; overeating; and cravings for
 red meat and milk products.

Health Tips-Eat three balanced meals a day; support adrenals with plenty of
water, B vitamins, and minerals; exercise aerobically on a daily basis.

Contains-Our roots, including family values, beliefs, and heritage; original
feelings about ourselves, our right to exist, our right to occupy space, our right
to be loved, our right to get our needs met; programming affecting our basic
needs, including the needs for money, love/being loved, sex, food, air, water,
housing; material energy for achieving life purpose.

Second Chakra
Our second chakra, located in the abdomen, is the center of our feelings and
creativity. Through this chakra, we begin to understand our reactions to our
inner and outer worlds, and decide how we are going to express these
reactions. Feelings originating here are generally "softer" than feelings
stemming from the first chakra, and the healthiest way to work them out is
through creative or emotive expression. This center is particularly important to
women, who, I believe, store most of their life energy within it.
                  Figure 2.6: The Second Chakra

A functioning second chakra brings us this awareness: "I am feeling"
Regarding physical processes, it is linked to the intestines, abdominal organs,
and female reproductive system.

Location-Abdomen (see figure 2.6).

Color-Orange.

Endocrine Gland-Ovaries or testes.

Descriptors-Water elements and water animals, such as fishes and lizards. Its
yang element involves how we express feelings to others and create within the
world; the yin aspect involves absorbing or interpreting others' feelings;
making self-judgments about our own feelings and creativity; and being able
to take in the life energy needed to feel and create.

Source of-Feelings; creative energy; birthing and gestation activity (for babies,
 businesses, ideas, projects-anything); women's power.

Seat of-Feelings and our awareness of them (feelings being the language of the
 body); creative abilities; female identity.

Key Words-Feeling, creativity.

Energy Type-Chi energy, which is seen as life energy in the Chinese system.

Physical Communication Style-Involves feeling and expressing our feelings
 through the appropriate physical medium, such as crying, screaming, laughing.

Psychic Communication Style-Known as feeling sympathy, the ability to
 experience our own or another person's feelings for the purpose of
 understanding and clearing self-destructive beliefs. This gift helps us dissect
 emotions, which are feelings joined with thoughts (as in, "I am angry,
 therefore, I am bad").

Intuitive Communication Style-Uses feeling empathy to learn a soul lesson or
 help integrate the soul more fully into the body. It could involve experiencing
the feelings of someone we hurt or actually experiencing our soul's feelings as
it more fully integrates into the body.

Problems-"Itis" issues, such as diverticulitis and colitis; appendix disorders;
 kidney problems (childhood issues); fertility issues; women's issues, such as
 PMS, candida, ovarian disorders, uterine problems; issues from stored, stuck,
 or unexpressed emotions from self or others; codependency (literally taking
 on or stor ing another's feelings); creative blocks. Addictions include
 overeating gluten-based carbohydrates; shopping addiction; and emotionalism
 or underemotionalism.

Health Tips-Monitor breadstuffs, substituting gluten-free products, yams, sweet
potatoes, oranges, and other sweet but low-glycemic foods for addictive
substances. Consider soothing exercises including Tai Chi, Qi Gong, yoga, or
swimming.

Contains-Feelings of self and others.

Third Chakra (The Solar Plexus Chakra)


The third chakra is highly complex. Known most commonly as the "power
center," it functions as the storage house for the judgments, opinions, and
beliefs we have gathered about ourselves and the world. These judgments, in
turn, affect our self-esteem and selfconfidence. Perhaps this is why this center
is seen as the source of cognition, the "knowingness" that tells us how to
operate within the framework of school, society, and the world. In Women's
Psychic Lives, Diane Stein describes this center as a "psychic energy pump"
for the physical and nonphysical bodies. She says, "Emotional and psychic
balance are located at this center and thought-forms are produced here .114

  This center is especially important for men, who, I believe, must rely on it
as their decision-making point instead of the first chakra. This chakra also
correlates to our digestive process and interrelates with the organs located
within it.
Location-The solar plexus region (see figure 2.7).

Color-Yellow.

Endocrine Gland-Pancreas.

Descriptors-Air elements and airborne entities, including birds. The yang
presence involves expression of self in the world; the yin aspect concerns
opinions and judgments about self and other.

Source of-Personal power; self and other judgments; intellectual understanding
 of physical/worldly existence; men's power.

Seat of-Self-esteem, power, directed will, ability to discern, male identity.

Key Words-Power, discrimination.

Energy Type-Mental, intellectual.
                      Figure 2.7: The Third Chakra

A functioning third chakra will result in this awareness: "I am feeling and
                                 thinking"
Physical Communication Style-Perceived as ideas, thoughts, or intellectual
 understandings that register at gut-level to help us succeed, interface with the
 world, deal with people, and make effective decisions.

Psychic Communication Style-Known as mental sympathy or clairsentience
 (clear sensing), the means of knowing or sensing something that, while it can
 be justified, isn't rational. This information usually applies to working through
 issues of personal power and self or other judgments.

Intuitive Communication Style-Use of mental empathy to effectively achieve a
 position in the world that will help the soul achieve its purpose. Data
 received or generated usually creates situations, opportunities, and events to
 benefit the soul and self as a whole.

Problems-Digestive and metabolic disorders, weight issues, feelings of
 confusion or craziness, power issues. When linked with heart, codependency
 and caretaking (mixing up love and power needs). Different issues for
 different organs-liver problems indicate anger with men or male self; spleen
 disorders indicate female anger and defense issues, or faulty use of female
 power; stomach problems indicate swallowing others' opinions or thoughts;
 gallbladder troubles indicate resentments, grief about men, our male self or
 achievement in the world; pancreas disorders indicate the ability to take in or
 hold the "sweetness" in life or having been smothered, over-mothered, or
 under-nurtured. The adrenals (first chakra) and kidneys (located in the third
 chakra) are energetically shared with the second chakra, and so reflect issues
 of power and feelings-the adrenals hold beliefs regarding our creative
 reactions to perceived dangers or opportunities; the kidneys hold childhood
 perceptions regarding emotional needs. Addictions include abuse of
 caffeinated and charged beverages, coffee, beer, and corn-processed alcohol
 and sugars; overwork; perfectionism; over-criticalness; and prejudice leading
 to paranoia or intense hatred.

Health Tips-Eat five to six small meals a day, each combining a healthy fat
(such as olive oil or another omega-3-based fat), a low-glycemic
carbohydrate, and a protein. Establish a structured exercise program.
Contains-Opinions, differentiated beliefs.

Fourth Chakra


Since time began, the heart has been seen as the center of the human body, the
melting pot for the divine energy of the crown and the life drive of the genital
area. In the Cherokee tradition, Dhyani Ywahoo shares that most
transformations occur at the level of emotion "through the lungs and the energy
bridge or doorway behind the heart Indeed, most of our decisions would be
prosperous and authentic if they were to be made by the heart, the center of
relationships, love, and compassion. Some would say human success depends
upon evolving our hearts.

   The change in the psychic energies of the evolving heart could indicate this.
At birth, the heart is green, indicating an inborn healing ability and energy.
During our productive adulthood years, it should be seen as pink, the
integration of the white (purpose) color of the crown and the red (passion)
color of the first chakra. Finally, we are to achieve gold, the color of universal
love. On a more mundane level, this chakra affects the physical processes
involving the heart and lungs (circulation and respiratory functions).

  Only recently has science begun to snap a clear picture of the heart's
importance physically and emotionally, but also energetically. It is now
classified as an endocrine gland, since it produces many hormones necessary
for bodily functions. Its electromagnetic field (EMF) is five thousand times
more powerful than that emanating from the brain, producing fifty thousand
femtoteslas (a measure of EMF) in contrast to the ten emitted by the brain.' As
well, it acts like its own neurological center to help regulate the health of
nearly every cell and organ in the body, generation information both
psychically and physiologically.'

Location-Heart (see figure 2.8).

Color-Green, pink, gold.
Endocrine Gland-Heart.

Descriptors-Earth-type elements and mammalian animals. The yang function
pertains to relationships with others and what we are giving to the world; the
yin aspect relates to the relationship with self and what we are willing to
receive from the world.
                       Figure 2.8: The Fourth Chakra

When fully functioning, the fourth chakra adds this perspective: "I am feeling
                            and thinking lovingly"
Source of-Healing energy; our innermost desires; our dreams.

Seat of-Compassion, relationships.

Key Words-Love, healing.

Energy Type-Astral (connects to the astral plane and the dream world).

Physical Communication Style-Communicates about physical and emotional
 needs through actual physical sensations, including heart pains, pangs, and
 emotional tugs. Source of healing energy used in hands-on healing, hugging,
 and physical touch. The heart is communicating or receiving whenever we are
 doing what we love to do.

Psychic Communication Style-Receives messages from aspects of self and
 guides through dreams, out-of-body experiences (astral projection), receiving
 and sending healing energy, guided or automatic writing, and journaling.

Intuitive Communication Style-Occurs when working with higher frequencies
 and energies through the heart, such as channeling guides, rays, principles,
 out-of-body chakric energy, and, when fully mature, Divine Source or Christ,
 as individualized to our uniqueness. Soul issues, such as giving and receiving
 or living our heart's desires, are input, guided, and healed through this center.

Problems-Heart or circulatory diseases or disorders; blood pressure
 problems; lung-related problems, including asthma, allergies, bronchitis, and
 pneumonia; relationship problems; sleep disorders. Together with the third
 chakra, there are codependency and caretaking issues. Addictions include
 abuse of chocolate, sugar, and wine; love addiction (must always be "in
 love"); and inability to let go of a finished relationship.

Health Tips-Enjoy a heart-healthy Mediterranean diet; exercise aerobically but
also walk.

Contains-The ability to relate.
Fifth Chakra


The fifth chakra is very useful for manifesting and for self-protection. Through
it, we express what we think, feel, see, desire, and detest. The front of this
chakra is often known as the seat of responsibility, for through it we say yes or
no to life's options. Also linked with the soul, this chakra is seen as a vehicle
for the soul's expression of its desires. Of great psychic importance, this
chakra allows us to share the information we are receiving from the invisible
self. Its physical presence involves the throat and auditory processes.
                          Figure 2.9: The Fifth Chakra

A functioning fifth chakra will enable us to say that "I am feeling, thinking, and
                             lovingly expressing"
Location-Throat (see figure 2.9).

Color-Blue.

Endocrine Gland-Thyroid.

Descriptors-Figures relating to the etheric element or humanity. The yang
function relates to expressing and voicing truths; the yin aspect is attuned to
receiving guidance.

Source of-Truth.

Seat of-Wisdom; responsibility.

Key Word-Expression.

Energy Type-Etheric, an emotional energy that has been charged with spiritual
 awareness.

Physical Communication Style-Uses language, sounding, singing, toning, or any
 other verbal means of communication to express the experiences, needs, or
 emotional states of our physical awareness. Gathers information regarding
 these matters by hearing or reading.

Psychic Communication Style-Center of clairaudience (clear hearing), the
 ability to hear or speak psychically to ourselves, spirit guides, or other
 people. Can also be called verbal sympathy. Abilities such as guided writing,
 channeling, transmedi- umship, and telepathy are linked with this chakra. It
 ideally uses these abilities to clarify and clear debilitating mental belief
 patterns, and eliminate cords that feed it "old tapes."

Intuitive Communication Style-Often seen as the seat of the soul, the entry point
 for a nonintegrated soul on a daily basis. The soul speaks verbally or
 psychically through this chakra to help us create the circumstances necessary
 to achieve purpose. The soul will also send or receive guidance from higher
 beings through psychic channels available to this chakra.
Problems-Any disorders affecting the throat area, including the jaw or mouth,
 thyroid, larynx, tonsils, and thymus; inability to say no or yes; victimization
 from nonassertion; issues of under- or over-responsibility. Addictions result
 from an oral fixation-must always be eating, talking, or have something in
 mouth. Compulsive munching on crunchy or salty food when bored, angry, or
 anxious.

Health Tips-Substitute healthy snacks for unhealthy ones; listen to music when
emotional; get an exercise buddy and talk when exercising. Use verbal
affirmations to create change.

Contains-The ability to define ourselves in the world.

Sixth Chakra (The Third Eye)


Revered since ancient times, this chakra, also called the third eye, is our inner
and outer visual center. Through it, we obtain, record, and send pictures,
symbols, colors, and images that represent reality. Linked to the pituitary
gland, this center regulates many of our hormonal and endocrine functions,
basing its physical health on our self-image and goals. As Gerber says, the
endocrine glands affect all aspects of physical functions; within this backdrop,
the "chakras are thus able to affect our moods and behavior through hormonal
influences on brain activity."8

   The pituitary gland is considered an important energetic organ, in that it
contains magnetite, a magnetically sensitive compound that in birds, helps them
find due north and maintain balance when flying. Science has discovered a
cluster of magnetite crystals near the pituitary in humans, which suggests that
the pituitary explains our sensitivity to magnetic (and electrical) fields. Many
people are concerned about the adverse affects of human-generated
electromagnetic fields on our health; the pituitary might be part of the
mechanism that alerts us to an unhealthy exposure to such fields.' It seems we
are hardwired to assess these fields through our pituitary gland.
   My observation is that the pituitary works with the second chakra to enable
manifesting. The infrared energy from the back side of the second chakra, when
stimulated by an emotional desire, enters the back side of the sixth chakra. The
anterior pituitary receives this energy, as well as the numerous choices
available to us. These potential life paths emanate from the Divine and enter
like streams of light into our sixth chakra. The combined emotional and divine
energy next enters an empty space, which physically lies in the center of the
pituitary. This space stores our self-image and deserving beliefs. These
programs help us select one of the entering life paths. Our choice is next
projected into the posterior or front side pituitary and establishes our future. If
our internal programs are self-destructive, we will select a negative or
immature future. If the internal programs are self-loving, we will choose a life-
enhancing future.
                     Figure 2.10: The Sixth Chakra

When the sixth chakra is fully functioning, we can say that "I am feeling,
             thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision"
Location-Forehead (see figure 2.10).

Color-Purple.

Endocrine Gland-Pituitary.

Descriptors-Figures pertaining to the spiritualized human, such as saints,
spirits, and gurus. The yang aspect pertains to ability to see and reach the
future, and perform strategic planning measures; the yin function relates to
self-image and self-perception.

Source of-Insight.

Seat of-Visions and visioning.

Key Word-Vision.

Energy Type-Cerebral; the front of the third eye draws energy from the brain
 and the seventh chakra.

Physical Communication Style-Uses ability to see, draw, or otherwise project
 images to communicate or determine physical or emotional needs or desires.

Psychic Communication Style -Through clairvoyance (clear seeing), this
 chakra can help us internally visualize images, including colors, symbols,
 forms, metaphors and literal or figurative pictures of beings, events, or ideas
 from the past, present, or future. This ability also pertains to being able to
 send this type of visual data. Some people are able to perform clairvoyant
 functions with their physical eyes. Work done with this ability usually applies
 to clearly seeing and working with the imagination.

Intuitive Communication Style-The means employed by the soul to
 communicate desires for the future, and to present views that need to be
 changed to reach it. Advanced intuits can actually create their projections
 with the use of imagination or "i-magic- ation" Insight, inspiration, and other
 visually based abilities are based here.
Problems-Glandular or endocrine issues (this chakra is linked to the pituitary
 gland); hormonal imbalances; growth or development issues; difficulty in
 planning for the future; eyesight issues; headaches in the brow indicate a
 problem with the third eye, either from over- or underuse; adolescent issues.
 Addictions usually involve over- or under-eating of any food and include
 binge-purge, anorexia, bulimia, and other body image distortions.

Health Tips-Eat hormone-free, grass-fed meat and poultry; if possible,
substitute fish for red meat. Use visual capacity to enable health-for instance,
aesthetically arrange small portions of food on plate and set mood with
lighting; pin picture of someone with desired body on refrigerator or
bathroom mirror; use visual imagery to imagine what you want to look like.

Contains-Self-image and the means of correcting/shaping one's view of self
and the world.

Seventh Chakra (The Crown Chakra)


Connected to the pineal gland, cerebral cortex, and our higher chakras, this
chakra regulates many in- and out-of-body functions. Gerber says, "Currents of
energy are taken into the body through a stream entering the crown chakra." 10

   The "psychic center" for higher knowing, it receives the spiritual energies
and guidance necessary to activate our purpose. Because it is connected to
higher planes, the seventh chakra is seen as the center of our divinity, the place
through which we know our unity with the Divine Source and all other spiritual
beings.

   Recent research is associating the pineal with biochemical and
electromagnetic properties that encourage good health, but also enable
enlightenment. Biochemically, the pineal gland regulates the use of tryptophan,
an amino acid, to produce hormones that regulate sleep, appetite, emotions,
circadian rhythms, body temperature, consciousness, and mystical and psychic
experiences."
                     Figure 2.11: The Seventh Chakra

A fully functioning seventh chakra results in this awareness: "I am feeling,
      thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision of divine purpose"
   Through my twenty years of client work, I have come to believe that the
pineal gland is supposed to be our master organ, regulating not only our
physical but also our spiritual well-being. At birth, it retains our connection to
the Divine. If a child is not supported in his or her unique identity, the pineal
gland might become coated with heavy metals, such as mercury, aluminum, or
cadmium, as a protection. These metals actually prevent the spiritual
awakening that is supposed to begin at age thirteen and can cause health
problems later in life, including depression and insomnia.

   During menopause, both genders are supposed to shift their hormone
regulatory functions from the sexual glands (ovaries and testes) and the
pituitary gland to the pineal, thus activating a cascade of hormone changes,
which advance our consciousness and promote physical healing.

  Making the leap into the pineal gland can be done at any time. I worked with
an African woman who had suffered three heart attacks in one month. After one
energetic treatment, which involved shifting from her pituitary gland to the
pineal, she returned to the doctor for a heart scan and received an absolutely
clean bill of health. Even the scar tissue was gone.

Location-The crown (see figure 2.11).

Color-White or clear.

Endocrine Gland-Pineal.

Descriptors-Spiritual entities and essences, such as spirit or god forms, angels,
or powers. Contains the yang ability to live our Divine identity by expressing
purpose, and the yin ability to take in energies essential to feeding our
spiritual nature.

Source of-Divine awareness.

Seat of-Our oneness with all.

Key Word-Divinity.
Energy Type-Ketheric, a materialized form of spiritual energy originating
 beyond the earth's time/space continuum.

Physical Communication Style-Describes our physical needs and emotional
 desires through our thoughts and any actions that feed our purpose.

Psychic Communication Style-A higher level of kinesthetic awareness felt as
 Divine inspiration, metatonic or peak experiences, spiritual awakenings, and
 the like. Center of spiritual sympathy or attunement to otherworldly entities,
 good or bad. Intuitive Communication Style-Source of prophecy, the ability to
 sense the desires of the Divine Source.

Problems-Immune system disorders; cancers; bone disorders; nervous system
 disorders. All problems relating to the pineal gland, which operates as the
 psychic attunement and purpose center, and as an immune system regulator.
 Learning disorders or difficulties; schizophrenia, multiple personality
 disorder, neurosis or psychosis; major depression. Headaches; dizziness or
 light-headedness. Dissociation or being ungrounded; imbalance of any type;
 lack of self-understanding; lack of direction. Addictions may involve over-
 commitment to a religious or spiritual group or its dogma; over- or under-
 eating; and the compulsive use of prayer or meditation.

Health Tips-Eat foods associated with spiritual values; use prayer or
meditation regularity; remember to exercise (can forego for spiritual pursuits).

Contains-The receptive means for understanding path and purpose.

                       THE FIVE OUT-OF-BODY CHAKRAS


In order to fully understand the human, physically based energy system, we
must learn about the top five human chakras. These five chakras connect to the
physical body, but are not located or based within it. Rather, they serve as
intermediaries between the higher, invisible chakras and the in-body chakras.
Their presence firmly validates C. W. Leadbeater's belief that "chakras
naturally divide into three groups ... respectively the physiological, the
personal, and the spiritual" 12

   Basically, the lower seven chakras meld our physical, mental, emotional,
and spiritual energies with the glue of the physical body. Changes made within
these seven chakras tend to produce substantial, tangible results. We get a job,
get sick, get well, gain or lose a relationship. However, as Gerber observed,
the chakras provide a regulatory function for our bodies; there are other bodies
or energies affecting us. He says, "Changes in the physical body are merely the
observable end result of physiologic events occurring simultaneously on a
variety of energy levels."" One such level involves the top five chakras, which
link the material with the spiritual energy centers. They combine the visible
and invisible, working most frequently with elemental and celestial energies.

   Elemental energies pertain to the type of quanta creating the earth plane: fire,
water, air, and earth. These four elements combine to form six other elements:
wood, metal, stone, ether, light, and star. (For information about using these
elements, see my Advanced Chakra Healing books.) Celestial energies run on
a faster, higher frequency, probably through tachyons-particles that move faster
than the speed of light. These are the energies relating to concepts, ideas,
principles, values, and spirituality. I believe that the top five chakras work
with an alchemy of their own. They are the chakras through which magic is
wrought, imagination becomes real, and humanity receives salvation. They are
the chakras which exchange elemental and celestial energies. Let's examine
each of these chakras in depth.

Eighth Chakra


The eighth chakra is incredibly interesting. I find this chakra from the bottom
up; it is located about an inch and a half above the head. Stein says, "Feel it by
holding your left palm high above your crown center and notice the energy-"" I
perceive it as flat, so it is hard to find from the top down.

  Working with this chakra, I have come to believe that it is our portal into and
out of this time/space continuum. Inside it, my clients and students report
experiencing the sense of being in space, and they often visualize different
stellar or planetary images. The winds, circles, lines, and paths to our own and
others' pasts, presents, and futures can be found here.

   Here one also finds the Akashic Records, the "books" upon which is
recorded all we have ever seen, done, or said, in this life or any other.
Cherokee teacher Ywahoo calls these records "The Temple of Understanding"
that contain "all the programs of our expression in this life and the other lives
that are co-existing."'S Because of this, we can gain access to anything about
our past through the eighth chakra. If appropriate, we can read the pasts of
others. We can journey to any place that exists in the present or in other
dimensions, and probe into potential or destined futures. It is also possible to
read alternative pasts, presents, and futures here. When working with clients
who have a difficult time separating their issues from those of others, I often
guide them into their eighth chakra.

   For instance, a CEO spent two sessions trying to determine the cause of his
fear of flying, an obvious hazard in his position. I had him feel his eighth
chakra, picture his Book of Self (Akashic Records), then look up images
describing the origin of his fear. He recalled times in his early childhood when
his father read aloud newspaper stories concerning airplane crashes.
Regaining this information helped my client rethink the decision that planes
were dangerous. Yet another client had heart cancer, a rare and deadly disease.
She had already gone through two surgeries and was looking at a third. We
invoked her Akashic Records, and she reviewed her childhood for traumas. A
week later, she called me. The cancer had completely disappeared-but
strangely, so had about a third of her childhood memories. They had been
erased, along with the cancer.

   The eighth chakra also contains two other important energy centers. One is
the Book of Life. While the Akashic Records meticulously present facts, the
Book of Life offers only positive perspectives on what has occurred, or will
happen. It allows the viewer to read the past, present, or future through rose-
colored glasses, seeing the benefit of all experiences, thoughts, or interactions.
I employ this book when people are truly stuck or unable to release long-held
guilt, resentment, or patterns. For instance, I worked with a woman who had
been sexually abused as a child and couldn't forgive her father for the
atrocities. I believed that her unforgiving attitude was the root cause of the
cancer and heart disease invading her body. We walked through the abuse using
the lens of the Book of Life, and she was able to see the lessons learned from
these experiences, forgive her father, and release her resentment. Both
conditions cleared up within a month. (Know that abuse is NEVER to be
allowed. When abuse has occurred, however, the victim must inevitably move
toward forgiveness after first processing the emotions and consequences of the
trauma. To do anything else is to remain in bondage to the past.)

   The Shadow Records hold what was never done, said, or thought. They
appear like a thin film around the eighth chakra and a shadow around the
Akashic Records. I guide clients into them if they are wondering what might
have happened if they had made different choices in the past. These records
also highlight the different outcomes of possible futures. The Shadow Records
are especially useful in clearing regret, the belief that we have lost or might
lose a desirable opportunity.

   In general, the eighth chakra is rich in information about our karma, the slate
of issues we have come to work out and learnings we seek to acquire. Because
we record information about others and their roles in our lives in this chakra, it
is here that we can find many of the cords that currently affect us. We can also
trace our patterns (the habitual processes in which we get stuck) through the
eighth chakra, making it a valuable access point for healing chronic physical or
emotional problems, as well as difficult relationships. Because it relates to
time, many of our time issues can be resolved through this chakra.

Location-About one-and-one-half inches above the head (see figure 2.12).

Color-Black, silver, or ultraviolet. This chakra is frequently black, which
reflects our ability to absorb others' energies. It changes to silver or
ultraviolet, which signifies the capacity to serve as a clear energy conduit,
when we decide that we no longer need to take on others' energies
shamanically.
Endocrine Gland-Thymus.

Descriptors-A feminine-based chakra with a male core, most often associated
with visual images such as the moon, stars, universal night, planets, other
dimensions, and time itself. Its yang elements relate to ways we are living out
karma; its yin aspects are its ability to hold memory and serve as our personal
scribe.

Source of-All past knowledge; karmic memory; access to other dimensions and
 times.

Seat of-Time and timelessness; karma; soul relationships; portals in and
 through this time/space continuum.

Key Word-Time.

Energy Type-Spatial.

Physical Communication Style-Affects our sense of balance, time, and
 planning. Keys into the emotions and physical experiences that have occurred
 in the past.

Psychic Communication Style-Access point for past-life information, present-
 life data, alternate-reality portals, other dimensions and levels, selected and
 possible futures.

Intuitive Communication Style-Place that regulates our destiny points, the
 decisions our soul made before we were born regarding life events. Also the
 place in which we can change these decisions.

Problems-Time issues (being too late, too early); metabolism; difficult
 relationships; chronic problems, diseases. Any problem that has been carried
 over from a previous life, whether physical, emotional, mental, relational, or
 career-related. There are many addictions associated with this chakra, all of
 which relate to the tendency to absorb others' energies. We then crave
 substances, drugs, stimulants, and depressives of all sorts to compensate.
                     Figure 2.12: The Eighth Chakra

 A fully functioning eighth chakra will enable us to say that "I am feeling,
thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision of divine purpose in a timely
                                   manner"

Health Tips-Shift the chakra's color, using guided visualization and intention,
from black to silver or ultraviolet. This will eliminate most addictive
tendencies. Next employ the "shaman's diet," consisting of healthy and pure
foods with little sugar or salt.

Contains-The Akashic Records, the book that records all we have ever done,
been, thought, or said in any incarnation.

Ninth Chakra (The Soul Chakra)


Our ninth chakra is the least understood, yet I sometimes believe it is one of
our most important chakras. I believe Jungian counselors unknowingly yet
frequently work at this level, for the ninth chakra, functioning as the "seat of
our soul," communicates through images, archetypes, patterns, numbers, and
other basic symbols.

   Basically, this chakra works just like one of our physical cells. It contains
our soul genes, the programs underlying the choices we have made regarding
our physical body, emotional states, and mental beliefs. In Vibrational
Medicine, Gerber refers to these genes as a template, suggesting that the
etheric body is the skeleton for the physical body. He adds, "Energetic changes
occur at the etheric level before becoming manifest as physical cellular
events."" Within this chakra lie the fundamental seeds of our soul purpose and
information regarding our life purpose and life tasks.

  All healing must be locked into the ninth chakra to be completely integrated.
Only by healing the soul body, which carries all data from one incarnation to
another, can we be assured that we are not just going to repeat our lessons over
and over.

Location-Approximately one arm's length above the head (see figure 2.13).

Color- Gold or infrared.
Endocrine Gland-Diaphragm.

Descriptors-Mushroom shaped; masculine in appearance, with a feminine
overlay. (Its appearance, of course, depends on the nature of the represented
soul.) It con tains all symbols, patterns, and archetypes pertinent to a
particular person; each symbol functions like a chromosome. Contains the
yang ability to imprint and design the physical body and to mold a life for
meeting the soul's ends, and the yin ability to channel energy from the Divine
Source to create and change the soul itself.
                     Figure 2.13: The Ninth Chakra

A fully functioning ninth chakra will lead you to know this: "I am feeling,
thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision of divine purpose in a timely
                       manner while creating all that I am"

Source of-Creation and change energy; master plans; life seed.

Seat of-Soul genes and templates; personal archetypes and symbols.

Key Word-Soul.

Energy Type-Radioactive.

Physical Communication Style-Helps select the appropriate sperm and egg for
 this incarnation and oversees the physical and emotional programming
 functions.

Psychic Communication Style-Speaks to us and external forces through
 symbols, archetypes, designs, universal and individualized feelings and
 realities. All symbols refer to our basic beliefs about self.

Intuitive Communication Style-Here, we can tap into representations of the self
 and soul for healing, insight, and knowledge. From this chakra, we can gain
 knowledge of soul, life purposes and life tasks, destiny points, significant
 relationships, and power symbols. It also helps us uncover soul damage for
 the purpose of healing it.

Problems-Addictions are often carried over from a past life. Can also involve
 overconcern for others and resulting drive to compensate, such as by starving
 ourselves.

Health Tips-Remember that our own health and welfare is important, not just
that of others. Select an ethnic or cultural group and follow their guidelines,
such as the Genesis Diet (eating as Adam and Eve did in the Garden of Eden)
or another spiritual approach.

Contains-Programming of the soul and self.

Tenth Chakra (The Grounding Chakra)
I believe that one of the biggest crimes in the metaphysical movement is the
lack of or incomplete teachings about the tenth chakra. We simple cannot be
effective in daily life, perform psychic functions, or attempt to fulfill life
purpose if we are not grounded.

  To be grounded means that we are fully attached to the earth; we are "in" our
bodies. Grounded people can draw on their full faculties, abilities, and
experiences, and thus are able to handle any situation. In this way, they are
comparable to the Shambhallic warrior, the spiritual warrior who lives fully
fearless and ready for action.

  Ungrounded people are quite easy to spot. They tend to be unfocused,
spacey, or out of touch with their own needs and feelings. When I am
ungrounded, I usually feel like I am out of my body. This is typically a fear
reaction. Many of us dissociate both from an experience and from our self to
cope with problems.

   In my work, I have found that the tenth chakra works like an earth lung,
breathing in elements needed by the physical and emotional body, as well as
the chakric and auric systems. It also releases all wastes from these systems
into the ground for transformation. When we or others are not grounded, we are
probably dissociating from a perceived trauma. When we are not grounded in
our tenth chakra, we may experience a light to severe inability to deal with
stress or the inability to cope with everyday realities, maintain boundaries, and
think with a clear head. We may experience difficulty separating our feelings
or reality from those of others. Disconnection from our tenth chakra makes us
vulnerable to physical or psychic attacks of any nature. It is also impossible to
fulfill our life mission without full assistance from this chakra, because
creation requires the full blend of spiritual and material energy; it is through
this chakra that we breathe in material energy.

   Almost every time I think about this chakra, I remember one of the first times
I witnessed its power firsthand. A few years ago, a man came to me asking for
help in finding his spaceship. For years, he had been unable to hold down a job
or a relationship because of this quest. I psychically saw that his soul was only
in his body from the torso up. He had no self in the lower extremities and even
complained of frequent leg and foot numbness. Rather than address his request,
I asked him if he would be willing to have me help him ground. He agreed.
Through breathing and visualization, I had him find and look in his tenth
chakra.

   His entire demeanor changed. His eyes became focused. He stopped
jittering. He began to talk about how painful his life had been, both growing up
and into his twenties. After a while, he admitted that by searching for a
spaceship, he didn't have to deal with this pain. We spent a few sessions
helping him face the issues and learn how to be grounded. He then consented to
long-term therapy with a mental health professional.

   This story leads to another interesting function of the tenth chakra. I believe
this chakra holds many of our family-of-origin heritage and past-life issues. In
fact, I see it as playing a very important role in these matters.

   Before and during conception, the tenth chakra, along with the ninth chakra,
selects the physical chromosomes regulating our genetic makeup. While the
ninth bases these decisions on soul requirements, the tenth substantiates its
claims based on our ancestral background, choosing genes from our gene pool
that will enable us to meet the physical and psychological challenges we will
face.

Location-Approximately one-and-a-half to four feet under the feet (see figure
 2.14).

Color-Earth tones, including citrine, brown, mauve, russet, limestone yellow,
olive greens, obsidian.

Endocrine Gland-Bones.

Descriptors-Contains all four earth elements: fire, earth, water, and air. The
yang function pertains to eliminating waste and channeling energy for real life
achievement; the yin components pertain to receiving earth energy for the
entire system.

Source of-Daily life energy; daily cleansing energy; energy needed to
 spiritualize the body. Nurturing and sustenance; information on immediate
 past, present, or everyday life matters. Chooses physical characteristics from
 our gene pool to help us meet lifetime challenges; through our feet, transports
 information from our past lives; through our legs, transports information from
 our lineage.

Seat of-Everyday life energy and information.

Key Word- Grounding.

Energy Type-Elemental.

Physical Communication Style-Dumps waste products from the physical and
 emotional bodies and from the aura. Also receives elemental energy from the
 ground and feeds it into the physical energy system. In women, this energy is
 stored in the abdominal chakra; in men, in the solar plexus chakra. Provides
 and maintains the influx of energy necessary for "flight or fight" to deal with
 life's daily occurrences and dangers.

Psychic Communication Style-The key to effective energy receptivity, this
 chakra is the grounding chakra, keeping all chakras aligned by locking all
 energies in the ground. Without grounding, the energy body is too frightened to
 receive or send appropriate information or hold its boundaries.
                     Figure 2.14: The Tenth Chakra

A completely functioning tenth chakra enables us to say that "I am feeling,
thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision of divine purpose in a timely
       manner while creating all that I am in a grounded, practical way"

Intuitive Communication Style-Serves as a locking in or buttoning down place
 for the soul, which must be fully integrated at all levels of the physical and
 energy body to accomplish its purpose.

Problems-Foot, ankle, and leg problems. Adrenal problems (not being
 grounded impinges upon fight-or-flight reactions; shares this function with the
 second and third chakras). Weight issues (not being grounded causes the body
 to hold weight to feel safe). Avoidance issues; a sense of being airy or "out to
 lunch"; paranoia, schizophrenia, and other neurosis or psychosis affiliated
 with dissociation of some sort. Difficulty in staying centered or being in one's
 body; vulnerability to outside influences, including harmful spirits and
 dangerous people. Because it holds all denied family issues, it is a critical
 component in recovering from childhood or inter-generational abuse or abuse
 patterns. Addictions involve cravings for rooted foods, such as nuts and
 potatoes, or derivate substances, such as vodka made from potatoes. This is
 the origination of sensitivities to electropollution and other human-made or
 natural EMF energies; cosmic and planetary rays; seasonal emissions, such as
 goldenrod or other hay fever-producing substances; mold and yeast; and
 chemicals, including those found in paint and carpeting.

Health Tips-Live as organically and chemically-free as possible; get outside
every day; follow an Eastern approach to health care, which is based on
seasonal fluctuations in diet and exercise.

Contains-Earth memories, needs, and transformational abilities.

Eleventh Chakra


"Other less talked about chakras are those in the palms of the hands and ... the
soles of the feet," says Stein." Knowing about the eleventh chakra can be very
beneficial energetically. Seen as a pink film around the hands and feet, this
chakra can transmute charged external physical or emotional energy into the
raw energy our body needs to think, react, and respond. For instance, when
tired, we can drink in elemental energy through our feet, soak in the power
from a thunderstorm through our hands, or absorb an angry person's negative
energy and convert it into strength for our own response. We can also release
our own energies through this chakra in order to let go of blocks, resistance,
pains, and issues no longer assisting personal growth, or in order to direct
psychic or physical energy to effect change.

   I have heard many students and clients report success in using this chakra at
work. One woman was constantly denigrated by her boss. She started to
visualize the energy he sent her as black in color. When he directed this
blackness at her, she began to deliberately allow it to enter the pink chakra
around her hands. She would then leave the blackness outside of her system,
absorb the energy, and reflect his energy back to him as a pink light. She would
do this without saying a word. She reported, "It was like the cat would get his
tongue! Almost every time I do this, he turns red, swallows his words, shakes
his head as if his thoughts were lost, and just plain walks away!"

   Healers of any sort, including hands-on professionals, nurses, doctors, or
counselors, would do well to learn how to use both the feet and hand outlets of
this chakra. They are very useful for converting negative or diseased energies
and perceptions, and reflecting them back in a positive way.

Location-Around the hands and feet (see figure 2.15).

Color-Pink.

Endocrine Gland-Connective tissue, the home of the meridians.

Descriptors-Any image related to giving and receiving, such as an open or shut
hand. Its yang function related to energy to put out into the world,
opportunities grasped or turned away; its yin function pertains to assistance
taken in or help received.

Source of-Energy transference; entry point for receiving or sending energy
designed to meet our needs or deal with situations.

Seat of-Transmutation for physical energy.

Key Word-Transmutation.

Energy Type-Etheric.

Physical Communication Style-Takes in elemental or emotional energy
 available in the outside world and converts it into energy needed by the
 physical or emotional body to respond to any given situation. For instance, we
 can soak in the energy from a rainstorm or an angry person, and use it to react
 appropriately to the climactic emergency or dangerous person.
                   Figure 2.15: The Eleventh Chakra

 A fully functioning eleventh chakra enables us to say that "I am feeling,
thinking, and lovingly expressing my vision of divine purpose in a timely
 manner while creating all that I am in a grounded, practical way that requires
                    an ability to cope with any situation"

Psychic Communication Style-Reads the energetic properties of outside forces,
 takes in the actual energy behind the situation, and provides raw energy for
 psychically responding. This chakra can also send energy out through our
 hands and feet to deal with this situation.

Intuitive Communication Style-Gives the soul the hands and feet it needs to
 reach for its desires, protect itself, convert physical energy to spiritualized
 energy, and receive assistance or data.

Problems-Problems with hands or feet. Problems in reaching for what we
 want; problems in accepting or receiving help, resources, input; difficulty
 dealing with difficult or dangerous situations; inability to deal effectively
 when in fear. Loss of energy when doing psychic work. Addictions include an
 obstinate drive for power-or the opposite, a desire to be powerless.

Health Tips-Eat and exercise methodically; the tendency will be to play and
live hard. Create a structure and follow it.

Contains-The ability to transmute physical energy into psychic or spiritual
energy and vice versa.

Twelfth Chakra (The Secondary Chakra System)


The twelfth chakra is actually a collection of thirty-two points on the body and
in the aura. I see these in-body points as the secondary chakra system. These
thirty-two secondary points serve as the endocrine function associated with
chakra twelve. When combined, these points should entrain to the heart, which
sets the optimum tone for the body. While most of these secondary chakras are
located within our physical body, some of these reach beyond the physical
body. The thirty-second secondary chakra, for instance, is in the center of the
earth, because our physical survival is contingent on our ability to tap into
certain earth elements.
 The secondary in-body chakra points are (see figures 2.16 and 2.17):

1. Legs

2. Buttocks

3. Coccyx

4. Sacral vertebrae

5. Lumbar vertebrae

6. Thoracic (dorsal) vertebrae

7. Cervical vertebrae

8. Cranium

9. Silver cord to the soul

10. Bubbling springs in the feet

11. Ankles

12. Knees

13. Thighs

14. Hip bones

15. Navel and sexual organs

16. Appendix

17. Kidneys and adrenals

18. Large and small intestines
19. Pancreas

20. Liver

21. Gallbladder

22. Spleen

23. Stomach

24. Diaphragm and lungs

25. Arms

26. Bubbling springs in the palms

27. Wrists

28. Elbows

29. Clavicle

30. Throat (including larynx, thyroid, and tongue)

31. Upper brain (spiritually oriented functions involving cerebrum, pineal,
 pituitary, hypothalamus, and thalamus glands)

32. Center of the earth
Figure 2.16: The Twelfth Chakra, Points 1-14 and 25-32
                Figure 2.17: The Twelfth Chakra, Points 15-24

   Each of these secondary chakras relates to the primary chakra numerically
connected to it as well as a particular vertebra on the spinal column. Chapter
12 will explore these access points in more depth. Each secondary chakra is
also connected to a specific human archetype.

   In general, our twelfth chakra ensures the connection between natural forces
and our own body. It determines us as human, because its boundaries are the
human visible and invisible energy body. "Man is a soul and owns a body-
several bodies in fact; for besides the visible vehicle by means of which he
transacts his business with his lower world, he has others which are not
visible to ordinary sight"18

  Linking in with our aura, this chakra effectively encapsulates us while it
opens us to non-apparent energies. In this way, it appears similar to the egg-
shaped body perceived by anthropologist Carlos Castaneda during his training
with don Juan, a Yaqui Indian sorcerer. However, the twelfth chakra (and auric
field) are not identical to the energy egg that surrounds the body, which is
described in chapter 7. The difference between Castaneda's portrait and mine
is that I see lines connecting this outer shell to our internal self, thus allowing
us to operate as both a closed and open system.




DOZENS IF NOT hundreds of other energy bodies and channels compose our
subtle anatomy. This is a partial list of them, as well as their functions. (More
information is available in my book The Subtle Body.)

• The causal body, which regulates the physical body.

• The mental body, which processes thoughts and feelings.

• The emotional or blue body, which relays feelings.

• The pain body, which holds the energy of pain.

• The gray body, which links you with beings from various dimensions.

• The tar body, which contains the codes of your spiritual purpose and
 spiritual destiny, as well as the star seed of destiny. It lies within the tenth
 chakra.

• The star seed of destiny, which births from the tar body and gravitates into
 the seventh chakra. Once reaching this chakra, it bursts open, transforming the
 intuitive abilities into spiritual gifts and positively altering the pineal gland.
• The silver body, which attaches to the Akashic Records and other eighth
 chakra records, including the Shadow Records and the Book of Life, as well
 as the silver cord.

• The silver cord, which connects the soul to the body while you are alive.

  Working with these other energy bodies enables a greater capacity for
chakra change and, therefore, holistic healing.




                   GAINING ACCESS TO OUR HUMAN CHAKRAS


Ways of experiencing the human chakras are multifold. Many of us rely on our
intuition to find these centers. We might be able to psychically see, hear, or feel
(hands-on or through the "knowing sense") these energy centers. A few people
can actually see the chakras with their physical eyes. Studies at UCLA have
produced audiotaped sounds of these energy centers.

   When working with students, I have them find the chakras using pendulums,
devices made of stones or rings hung on a thread or chain. The tester hangs the
pendulum over one of the subject's chakras. The subject, willing his or her
chakra to open, is usually as surprised as the tester to find the pendulum
acquires a life of its own, moving with the frequency and directional flow of
the chakra.

  Another way to pinpoint these chakras is through a reductionistic or process-
ofelimination approach. For example, if you have cirrhosis of the liver, you
can deduce you have issues in your third chakra. Knowing that the solar plexus
contains the liver, you can examine the functions of the third chakra and begin
to reason the non-apparent issues behind your physical disease. The third
chakra is the seat of self-esteem and personal power; perhaps you are angry
with men for being judged as a child and need to examine your self-esteem in
regard to these judgments.
Chakra Combinations


Chakras pair up with other chakras to create strong relationships between the
two. It is easy to remember these correlations because the chakric colors are
complementary on a color chart. For instance, there is a complementary tie
between the following chakras:

• First and fourth (red and green).

• Second and fifth (orange and blue).

• Third and sixth (yellow and purple).

• Seventh and first through the heart (white and red, resulting in pink).

   Their functional relationship is logical as well, for instance, the first chakra
is our seat of passion. As our life energy vibrates up the spine, it passes
through our feeling and thought processes. These perspectives alter our
immediate life and death reactions to given situations, and culminate in a heart-
felt response, that of compassion (or being "with passion"), rather than just
passion.

   Looking at the second and fifth chakras, we could examine the following
scenario. Let's say we feel sad because someone insulted us. That sadness
originates in the second chakra. Our fifth chakra is the one available for
expression of this sadness. We can say, "Don't say that to me," or decide to just
swallow our response. Likewise, our third and sixth chakras interrelate. We
may store a judgment such as "I am ugly" in our mental chakra, the third. This
affects our perception of self, a concept regulated by our sixth chakra. How we
see ourselves will have a direct impact on what we think we deserve or don't
deserve in our future. Hence, our strategic planning skills (third-eye abilities)
are determined by our third chakric programs.

  There is another pattern we find in chakric interrelationships. Sometimes the
chakra holding the block affects the chakras above and below it so much that
these chakras, rather than the problematic chakra, are considered to be the
chief troublemakers. For example, I worked with a man who was having a
difficult time deciding between job options. He admitted that when he was
young he was taught that it was bad to make the wrong decision. My sense was
that, because job issues, decision making, and self-esteem fixate in the third
chakra, he was experiencing a third chakra block or issue. However, he also
reported frequent bouts of abdominal pain and gas and a constricted feeling in
his heart, which would worsen when he discussed his career.

   I believed that to protect his third chakra, his second and fourth chakras had
become blocked, creating his physical discomfort. Rather than address these
secondary issues, I took a chance and had him experience the feelings, beliefs,
and pictures associated with his third chakra. After three sessions, during
which he let himself remember childhood experiences which could be
affecting his current attitudes, his second and fourth chakra problems
disappeared. He also said he could now feel his stomach and breathe for the
"first time, ever!"

  Obviously, the interplay between our chakras can be as complicated or as
simple as we make it. The most reliable method for working with it is and will
continue to be listening to our intuition, that deep, quiet voice within us that
knows, sees, and is all.
                YOUR TWENTY SPIRITUAL
                   ENERGY CENTERS
Although our twelfth chakra rounds out our human existence, it does not limit
the extension of our being. There are twenty higher spiritual centers. In fact,
there is an additional one that we can reach through the sheer grace of the
Divine Source, as we shall see. These spiritual chakras do not have locations,
colors, or regulatory functions as we understand them; because they exist
outside of the physical framework we call reality. However, they can channel
energies so powerful, so intense, that their impact on our physical or emotional
bodies can be greater than that achieved through our inbody chakras. Because
we can absorb their energies through our physical bodies, we can sometimes
experience these energies pictorially, associated with colors, shapes, or forms;
physically, having certain predictable physical sensations; or mentally, making
us respond in a logical, repeatable thought sequence.

   In many ways, these higher chakras pertain more to our real self than do our
physically based chakras. They have existed in many forms, many ways, and
many times, because they do not fluctuate and change when we change bodies.
They are the parts of ourselves still held within the Great Divine Source-the
Invisible Consciousness, Jung's Conscious Unconscious, Chaos, God, the
Buddha, the Atman, the Universe, the Force-whatever we choose to call the
unchanging All. Though the Divine Source energy is perfect, our higher
spiritual bodies are not necessarily faultless. Remember, our higher spiritual
bodies are intrinsically linked to our lower chakric bodies through our soul, so
they record, affect, and are affected by all we experience through our body,
mind, or soul. While the Faith energy point, for instance, channels the energy of
pure faith through it into all aspects of our being, any issues, fears,
misperceptions, experiences, and blocks we hold about faith may warp our
perceptions of this energy. We may not receive all the energy available to us,
or our "programming" may severely affect our impressions of this energy.
These energy points, or our perceptions of them, need to be healed, just as our
human chakras do.
   While examining these energy points, it may be helpful to remember that
there is a lot of information not yet known about them. I began developing this
system more than twenty years ago, with little comprehension about what I was
doing. My uncovering of these points began because a friend was experiencing
tremendous personal distress. Neither medical nor alternative professionals
were able to help her, so in desperation she approached me for help. I asked
for a dream to provide clarity into the situation.

   That night, it seemed to me that a being appeared and showed me a ladder
reaching from beneath the ground to the stars above. He told me the human
energy system was much broader than anyone guessed and that, yes, many of
the rungs were tangible. However, the other guiding forces were far and near,
as visible yet invisible as the stars themselves. The next day, I began to use
applied kinesiology, intuition, and lucky guesses to help my friend. On myself
and on her, I experimented with the different inspirations and systems that came
to me.

  My appreciation for this work caught fire as I saw various clients respond.
A friend was healed of carpal tunnel syndrome during one session. Another
cleared up her money issues and began making money the next day. Another
received career inspiration. Yet another felt his spine adjust on the table
without any physical help. I believe that my work with the thirty-second energy
point, grace, actually saved my own life.

   Over the last two decades, I have continued to work with and refine the
system, knowing that neither this system nor any other will bring forth the key
to healing. Rather, the key is our willingness to bring truths through us, so we
may live and be them.

   My favorite client story that illustrates the power of working with the
spiritual points involves the healing of a little girl. Abby had been diagnosed
as autistic. Abby had little to no relationship with the outside world, preferring
instead to clutch her Raggedy Ann doll. If her doll were taken from her, she
would bang her head on the wall until the doll was returned. Abby's mother
and I invoked every spiritual point over two months, and we saw slight
improvements; for instance, her mother could escape with Raggedy Ann long
enough to wash her. After our work, we stopped working with each other for
three months, to see what might happen. Healing often occurs over time, as the
physical body has to integrate energetic work. Too much change will cause a
major healing crisis.

   Abby's mother called three months later. Her daughter's diagnosis had
shifted from full-fledged autism to a more minor condition, Asperger
syndrome. She still loved her Raggedy Ann doll more than anything but had
started to interact with other people and didn't resort to head-banging anymore.
The only known difference in Abby's life had been the work with the spiritual
points.

   I believe that "more" of Abby had been invited into her body through our
work. From my point of view, many conditions are caused by soul
fragmentation, which involves the splintering of a soul during past life,
prebirth, or during life, usually due to overwhelming trauma. Sometimes huge
chunks of the soul never enter the body or leave because of life's challenges.
The related chakras are then unable to operate appropriately, creating
functional problems. The spiritual points empower the externalized aspects of
the soul so that they feel comfortable enough to return, thus activating dormant
chakra powers and opening related healing, manifesting, and spiritual gifts.
While we can work directly with the soul, such as through regression,
accessing the spiritual points is often a gentler approach, and doesn't require
the full participation of the client or subject.

   To explore these energy points, we will organize information according to
the following categories:

• Purpose

• Function

• Energy form
• Communication process

• Problems

• What the energy point contains




              Figure 3.1: Your Twenty Spiritual Energy Points
Point 13: Yin (Female) Energy


Purpose-To provide the universal female perspective and energies necessary
 for receiving, processing, protecting, and creating.

Function-To keep us aligned with the forces regulating absorption, gestation,
 and birthing. It helps us understand and heal issues regarding pain, negativity,
 suffering, and trauma, and to transmute these experiences into sources of
 power and strength. Its yin aspect is the spiritual receptivity to growth and
 change; its yang aspect concerns decisions about what to do with pain and
 grief. Related to its functions, this point contains our programs regarding our
 feminine nature, beliefs about our ability and deservedness about receiving,
 the effects of our past and current emotions, our spiritual ability to internally
 and externally create, and our higher intuitive abilities.

Energy Form-Dark power; energies on the low end of the color spectrum. This
 energy relates to yin in the Chinese system, including cold, contraction, and
 black. Some people see the major color as magenta.

Communication Process-Linked specifically into the yin function within each
chakra. For women, its energies' major entry point is the second chakra; for
men, the major entry point is the first chakra.

Problems-Confusion regarding feminine process, female identity, or women's
 needs and issues; issues surrounding feelings, creativity, and the birthing or
 gestation of babies, ideas, concepts, projects, or the self; chemical or organic
 absorption or transmutation concerns; emotions of pain, grief, sorrow, loss;
 misconceptions around strength, power, feelings, creativity, and deservedness
 around receiving. Also problems related to gathering and holding the energies
 needed to dream and manifest, and the primary call for protecting our loved
 ones and ourselves. I have used this point to help several women conceive
 when previously unable to do so.

Contains-Our perceptions regarding the female universal energies.
Point 14: Yang (Male) Energy


Purpose-To provide the universal male perspective and energies necessary for
 expressing, forcing, building, and defending.

Function-To keep us aligned with the forces regulating the expression of
 dreams, the forcing of change, building and making, and the defense of
 ourselves in the world. This point assists us in comprehending and living out
 our worldly roles. It is affected by judgments and opinions of self and others,
 and learned behaviors. Its yin aspect regulates the ideas and emotions that
 determine success; its yang functions relate to the courage and determination
 required to make dreams come true. This energy point channels the energy
 necessary to materialize spiritual energy to meet our needs. Through this
 point, we connect to our beliefs about power; to our emotions regarding
 loyalty, courage, and preparedness; to our physical skills and abilities,
 exhibited in warriorism; and to our call for direct action. Action can include
 thinking, manifesting, expressing, building, and defending.

Energy Form-Light power; energies on the high end of the color spectrum. The
 energy relates to the yang in the Chinese system, including heat, expansion,
 and white.

Communication Process-Linked specifically into the yang function within each
chakra. For men, the energies' major entry point is the third chakra; for
women, it is the fifth chakra.

Problems-Confusion regarding masculine process, male identity, or men's
 needs and issues; issues surrounding self-perception, judgments, and skills
 required for achievement in the world. Emotions involving lack, limitation,
 violence, and cruelty. Beliefs regarding personal and positional power, which
 affect physical well-being, including health, status, and career. This point
 relates to problems in shaping and directing energies needed to achieve
 success and defend ourselves, our loved ones, and our ideas.

Contains-Our perceptions regarding the male universal energies.
Point 15: Balance of Polarities


Purpose-To align the polarities inside and outside of us, tying these
 complementary energies together, strengthening each.

Function-To create a positive exchange of energies between seeming dualities,
 including life and death; female and male; good and bad; absorption and
 elimination; love and indifference. This point regulates the physical, mental,
 emotional, and spiritual yin and yang functions within each center by
 emphasizing the complementary nature of these opposites.

Energy Form-Can be seen as a beam connecting two parallel columns or as the
 line between the yin-yang symbol.

Communication Process-Links the yang and yin functions within each chakra or
energy point. The energy of this point enters every human chakra, specifically
through the spinal column.

Problems-Balance problems of any sort and the inability to make peace with
 any oppositional qualities or natures inside or outside oneself. Symptoms vary
 greatly. Physically, problems can underlie epilepsy, dizziness, and scoliosis.
 Emotionally, they could be experienced as conflicting feelings about a
 relationship. Mentally, they can result in apathy caused by opposite beliefs
 regarding our needs, safety, self-perception. Spiritually, they can result in the
 inability to achieve purpose due to internal struggles regarding our desire to
 be versus our desire to do.

Contains-Our perceptions regarding the relationship between seemingly
opposite qualities.

Point 16: Balance of Similarities


Purpose-To align everything inside and outside of us that is similar.

Function-To emphasize similarities and to put things similar together. This
energy point can connect all that is already similar, reveal similarities in that
which appears different, or emphasize individuality in what appears the same.
Its function can be pictured by visualizing the spine. Notice the tissues that are
similar in each vertebra and then pretend to adjust the spine by lining up these
similar tissues. This center works that same way. Now picture the tissue that
is different. Make these differences so vast the tissue actually becomes the
same. Yes, this center can also make in-born differences so extreme that they
actually curve around and return to the point at which they become the same.
This point's function is also comparable to the yinyang symbol. These
separate entities cohabit because they are different and independent (a
function of Point 15), but also because the yin also has the yang within and
vice versa (Point 16). This point channels the energy necessary to see these
similarities and link them, thus uniting the two forms. It also pushes the yin
and the yang to reveal the similarities hidden by the differences.

Energy Form-Can be seen as the yin within the yang or the yang within the yin.

Communication Process-Links the yang and yin functions within each chakra or
energy point. Its energy enters every human chakra, specifically the spinal
column.

Problems-Any type of balance problem and the inability to make peace with
 qualities or natures of a similar sort inside or outside of ourselves. Being
 unable to recognize the similarities between ourselves and someone else, such
 as similarities in feelings, views, needs, experiences, and souls. When we fail
 to see or express these similarities, we may experience dis-ease within our
 physical, emotional, mental, or spiritual systems, such as denial, prejudices,
 war, spiritual judgmentalism, or any physical symptom that results from our
 rigidity. This energy could help heal the planet by erasing perceptions of
 differences.

Contains-Our perceptions regarding the interrelation between similar qualities.

Point 17: Harmony
Purpose-To completely align all that appears similar and different in order to
 achieve the oneness and unity necessary for health.

Function-To transform differences into similarities and similarities into
 differences in order to merge these two forces on all levels. This energy point
 is capable of working on all levels. Physically, it alleviates conditions caused
 by balance disorders, including those involving the breath, lungs, ears,
 headaches, migraines, eye problems, cranial issues, upper torso, spine, and
 bones in general. Emotionally, it soothes our internal relationship with
 ourselves and relationships with others by showing how we are one and the
 same; it shows that we all have had the same feelings, albeit for different
 reasons. Capable of rearranging the structure of our thoughts, the energy
 channeled through this chakra can unite even warring people. What others
 have done to us, we are capable of doing to them-knowing this is a great
 leveler. Spiritually, this center brings us back to the time when we knew we
 were all the Divine Source, yet still separate beings.

Energy Form-Opaque, it can call forth any energies necessary to achieve its
 ends.

Communication Process-Enters all oppositional and similar functions
simultaneously to perform its work. While this energy point speaks most often
through revelation, it can also shape experiences to illustrate its points.
Energy of harmony may also be channeled in its raw form, especially through
the seventh chakra, where it enters through the pineal gland, and results in the
production of mana and advanced psychic awarenesses.

Problems-Any and all problems resulting from lack of harmony or attunement
 within or between the environment and ourselves.

Contains-The perceptions required to internally unify and authentically express
ourselves in regard to the understanding of differences and similarities.

Point 18: Free Will and Freedom
Purpose-To align us with our abilities and our right to choose that which
 conforms to our higher purpose and essential needs.

Function-To set up situations that get us in touch with our deepest needs,
 helping us make decisions that align us with the heart of the Divine. Reveals
 our in-born right to live as we desire. It defines free will as the state of
 experience connected with responsibility to self and the Divine Source. It
 implies that freedom of choice involves choices that retain free will, but are
 also authentic (true to self and others, simultaneously). When existing in true
 accountability and self-power, we do not need cords; free-will energy can
 therefore correct relationships with self, others, and the world. It is helpful
 for healing emotional issues of any sort, especially those regarding blame,
 self-hatred, victimization, and betrayal. It enables mental processes that
 involve overor under-responsibility and abandonment. Spiritually, it forces us
 to understand our real needs and desires. Physically, it is often linked to the
 "freedom" organs, such as the lungs and heart.

Energy Form-Clear.

Communication Process-While physical, it most often results in intellectual or
intuitive struggles. A sure sign we are working at this level is any physical
discomfort in our heart or lung area.

Problems-Typically affects lungs or heart area. Produces mental problems,
 including indecision or the questioning of purpose, path, and relationship.
 Problematic feelings are often associated with loss or abandonment; spiritual
 issues evolve into struggles between responsibility and our own desires.

Contains-Answers to our most burning questions.

Point 19: Kundalini


Purpose-To provide us with the raw energy necessary to materialize the
 spiritual. (This statement primarily concerns the red kundalini, which is one
 of the three forms of kundalini presented in this book.)
Function-To channel the organic energy we need to perform any physical,
 mental, emotional, or spiritual function. Kundalini energy links our first
 chakra with our seventh, connecting our material center with our spiritual one.
 Thus aligned, we bring the material energy to the spiritual realm, allowing the
 spiritual to become real, solid, and tangible. Kundalini fuels the entire
 physical system by traveling up and around the spinal column. It cleanses,
 opens, and energizes the chakric system. It also activates our emotional and
 mental processes, ensuring that the energy continues to flow within our
 systems without getting stuck.

Energy Form-Raw, organic life energy. Often seen as red, it can also have an
 impact as cobalt blue. This primal form of kundalini could be called red or
 serpent kundalini. Other forms of kundalini are often psychically envisioned
 as gold and white.

Communication Process-In men, the red kundalini energy primarily enters
through the coccyx, then weaves its way to the pineal gland. Many men
initially experience a torrent of sexual desire or strong feelings culminating in
a "white light" or revolutionary experience. Women may undergo the same
process; however, I have found it just as likely that the woman's kundalini
will enter through the heart, then loop downward into the second or tenth
chakras, and upward to the seventh and the ninth. During this process, women
may experience intense grieving or connections to their ancestors, plus an
awareness of purpose and a full awakening of their psychic/higher intuitive
processes. When women's kundalini does strike the first chakra initially, it
typically rules her life until brought into the second chakra, from which it can
loop into the heart.

Problems-Lack of red kundalini affects every area of life. The significant word
 is "energy." Misperceptions can cause us to channel either not enough or too
 much kundalini energy. Lack in the first chakra can result in sexual inhibitions,
 low-iron blood, or a lack of money. Emphasizing the first chakra's need for
 kundalini over the needs of other chakras can create violence, work
 addictions, and growths. Any and all chakras and systems are affected by
 kundalini. You could say it is like a family; you can't feed only the father of a
family and expect everyone else to be nourished, too. However, starving the
father, even when providing for the others, might affect everyone, because
father will not then be able to be responsible in other areas.

     If golden kundalini isn't invoked, the red kundalini can be too intense.
    Where blocked, it will stimulate negative issues within the related chakra.
    The golden kundalini softens the red kundalini and provides balance.
    Paradoxically, radiant kundalini is always present, as it expressed from the
    center of each chakra, which contains our spiritual truths. We must
    recognize our wholeness and enlightenment, however, in order to fully
    access its effects.

Contains-The organic energy needed to create and maintain life and its
processes.

The other two forms of kundalini are the golden kundalini and radiant kundalini
(see figure 3.2). Golden kundalini guides spiritual energy in from the spiritual
realms through our top chakras to spiritualize our system. Once it has
integrated with the red kundalini, which rises upward from the first chakra
through the rest of the chakras, the two kundalini energies marry, as does our
ability to understand Divine Source and subsequent mental ideals and our
physical needs. Radiant kundalini is enlightenment energy. Upon accepting the
unconditional love and grace of Divine Source, it emanates from the center of
each chakra, appearing like radiating sun beams. Radiant kundalini usually first
opens in the heart upon full acceptance of the Divine's unconditional love. All
three forms of kundalini are further explored in my Advanced Chakra Healing
books.

Point 20: Mastery


Purpose-To achieve self-regulation, self-ownership, and the ability to rule
 one's own fate.

Function-To enable us to be our own sovereigns. Because each person is an
individual, each may choose mastery of different areas. One person may
choose to master physical reality, another to become professional at emotions,
making magic, or riding horses. Completely mastering one arena is training
ground for mastery of the self. To be our own master is to "know thyself," as
inscribed on the Oracle of Apollo at Delphi.

Energy Form-Linear and horizontal at the same time. Mastery teaches us to
 operate logically and inside a larger framework. Mastery helps us spiritualize
 the material. In the process of becoming masters, we derive the principles,
 skills, and judgments needed to understand our abilities and rights from our
 actual experiences and realworld knowledge.
                   Figure 3.2: Three Forms of Kundalini

Communication Process-Can be experienced as a feeling, yet primarily shapes
our mind and mental processes. You are what you believe you are.

Problems-Lack of mastery shows itself as a lack of belief in self or our own
worth and any conditions resulting from it. Mentally, it may be experienced as
low self-esteem. Emotionally, it may be experienced as depression or general
malaise. Spiritually, it may be experienced as the soul's refusal to take a risk
or be in the body. Physically, lack of mastery may show itself as lack of
success, disuse of muscles, and more.

Contains-The belief the universe holds about us, available for our internal
assimilation.

Point 21: Abundance


Purpose-To align with the natural ebb and flow of energies that we need to
 meet our highest purpose and essential needs.

Function-To channel the energies we need to attract situations, people, and
 resources that will help us achieve our purpose. Conversely, it also opens us
 to events and circumstances that will help us release that which we no longer
 need (resources that need to be recirculated).

Energy Form-Abundance is like a circle between the material and spiritual.
 While kundalini helps us materialize our spiritual desires, and mastery helps
 us derive spiritual ideals from our material experiences, Abundance ties these
 two together through the principle of giving and receiving. We allow the
 material resources we need to meet our purpose to come in, then we release
 our spiritual dreams into the world to attract their physical counterparts.

Communication Process-We attract the material through awareness of our
higher needs, and we meet our higher needs by releasing spiritual energy into
the physical. In other words, Abundance energy helps us think of our desires
through the top, inbody chakras; then, through the heart, it activates the
abilities of the lower in-body chakras to manifest these desires. This point
encourages the lower chakras to cleanse the energy, material goods, emotions,
and forms no longer needed. It then fills this empty space with dreams, so that
they may become real.
Problems-Any issues of lack or stockpiling. Physical impairments can include
 not having enough of anything or having so much of one thing that you are
 impeded. Mental aspects involve beliefs that inhibit free expression of self
 and energy, especially "I don't deserve..." issues. Emotional components can
 be felt as envy, greed, sorrow, jealousy, and loss. Spiritual problems usually
 result from beliefs about being inherently evil or bad, or not being loved by
 the Divine Source. This center is greatly affected by past-life experiences.
 For instance, if someone in a prior existence was hanged for living his
 purpose, he might be so afraid of similar treatment in his current life that he
 blocks awareness of his life purpose, refuses to accept help, clings to a job he
 hates, or lives in terror regarding risk.

Contains-The knowledge of cycles necessary to have all needs met.

Point 22: Clarity


Purpose -To enable us to see things as they really are, not how we might want
 them.

Function-To shed light on our inner and outer realities. It serves as a vehicle
 for discernment. Discernment allows us to ask the right questions, and also
 differentiate between what is imperative to know, do, feel, or be, and what
 isn't. Clarity then becomes the basis for making decisions on all levels.
 Physically, we can now decide whether to go to this doctor or that doctor.
 Mentally, we can see if we agree with someone else's conclusions about us or
 not. Emotionally, we can evaluate the basis of our feelings and how we want
 to express them. Spiritually, we can select opportunities for growth and
 decide how to operate within them.

Energy Form-Clarity is typically seen as a yellow-gold light because this point
 most frequently channels into our bodies through the third chakra (yellow), the
 heart operating at the highest level (gold), or the pineal gland (white).

Communication Process-Experienced most often as clear thinking and
emotional awareness. It can also cause events to align with our soul's
purpose, providing us with signs and knowledge about what actions to take in
everyday life.

Problems-Any area of life that is confusing, dissatisfying, non-resolved,
 unclear, murky, or cloudy. Such problems can involve anything from
 relationship questions and boundaries to an undiagnosed physical complaint.

Contains-The energy necessary to fully see all components of an issue or
situation.

Point 23: Knowledge of Good and Bad (the Tree of Life)


Purpose-To reveal the duality inherent in all processes in order to bring them
 into balance.

Function-To show us the depth of the universal knowledge. This point is
 connected to our inherent right to choose (free will), to channel energy at will
 (kundalini), to decide what to do with this energy (mastery), to use it to get
 what we want and get rid of what we don't want (abundance), to see our
 choices and their consequences clearly (clarity), and to use these choices to
 delve into the reasons behind them (knowledge). Through this center, we find
 out that our truest motivations may not be that godly, and that our basest, most
 shame-based motivations may be strivings for something not as bad as we
 thought.

Energy Form-Extreme light and dark energies. The light energy enters our
 darker, shadow self, where our shame lies, illuminating the love inside. The
 dark energy penetrates our lighter, godly aspects, causing us to question the
 motivations behind them.

Communication Process-Religion has highlighted this point's energy. The
stories of Adam and Eve, the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, and the idea of an all-
good God and an all-bad Satan are our cultural attempts to pare down
dualities such as good and bad to their essential elements.
Problems-Spiritual questions, moral dilemmas, judgments about our own or the
 other gender. Problem feelings include shame, guilt, grief, and blame.
 Problem beliefs are any regarding evil versus good. Physical problems result
 from self-flagellation of any sort or exposure to another's shame-based
 behaviors. This energy point directly links to addiction, violence, rape, and
 other harmful situations.

Contains-The seed of love hidden beneath our beliefs in good and bad.

Point 24: Creation


Purpose-To open us to the energies necessary to create what we truly desire.

Function-To help us process the desires or knowledge underlying our good and
 bad selves and other dualities, thus adding to the awareness achieved in the
 previous point. To create from scratch requires a full connection between the
 self and our dream/emotional lives. This awareness is our return to
 innocence, our regression back to the self who wants only love. Spiritually,
 this center relates to the self as it first emerged from the Divine Source, still
 pure and hopeful. Mentally, it pertains to our beliefs about our right to exist
 and create within existence. Emotionally, we reexperience and heal our fears
 and fantasies within this point. Physically, this center relates most directly to
 our second and fifth chakras and all the processes connected to them.

Energy Form-Similar to the energy available in and through the second chakra,
 which is emotive and sensual in nature. The energy of this point would be
 seen visually as light, felt in the physical body, or felt through feelings.

Communication Process-We experience this energy center sensually or
emotionally. It is linked with the nature of our inborn, inner child, the child of
the Divine Source, the child who we are underneath.

Problems-Difficulties in understanding or owning our dreams, desires,
 fantasies, feelings, or needs. Issues regarding the acceptance of our purity and
 innocence-impotence, frigidity, emotional imbalances, and lack of love for
self or in relationships-and the physical processes connected with these
issues) are associated with this chakra. These problems can lead to concerns
in our second and fifth chakras.

Contains-The gem of our innocence.

Point 25: Manifestation


Purpose-To add the dark, substantial energies necessary to protect or create
 what we want.

Function-To associate our innocence with our deeper, more substantial dark
 power. We need this darker, more protective energy to remain safe while we
 expose our vulnerable dreams to the world. This center channels our warrior
 energy-the ability to immediately tap into the power necessary to deal with
 any situation that arises. This dark power can be shaped and molded as we
 see fit. We can use it to protect ourselves-to make a sword to stop enemies, to
 shout stop, to shield ourselves emotionally, or to make the money necessary to
 employ a security guard. It is also the energy behind materializing physical
 resources and objects. We manifest our desires for money, houses,
 relationships, and other desires by channeling this energy of substance.

Energy Form-Dark power, the deep energy needed to protect, defend, buttress,
 and actualize physical objects.

Communication Process-Associated primarily with the first, fifth, sixth, and
eleventh chakras. Through the first chakra, we pull in the energy to preserve
our life and material goods. Through the fifth, we make statements of desires
and assign responsibilities. Through the sixth, we receive and project our
dreams and desires. Through the eleventh, we transmute energies for meeting
daily goals.

Problems-All issues relating to safety and protection, and to our ability to
 make good on desires. Symptoms of an incorrectly operating manifestation
 point can be similar to those affecting abundance. To determine which chakra
or energy point is affected, we can isolate the inner child available through
the creation point and ask questions. If there are issues that have to do with
feeling unsafe, we are dealing with the manifestation point. If these issues
have to do with not believing in meeting needs, we might work with the
abundance point.

Contains-The force necessary to defend our right to actualize our desires.

Point 26: Alignment with Highest Purpose


Purpose-To bring our dark and light, child and adult, material and spiritual
 selves into full alignment, allowing us to be an open channel for achievement
 of purpose and the energies required to fulfill it.

Function-To link our seemingly incompatible yet highly interdependent aspects
 of the self. Getting all parts of ourselves to work together is the key to
 receiving the assistance, energies, and situations necessary to know and live
 our purposes.

Energy Form-Both light, dark, and grey at the same time. An appropriate image
 is the spine. When all processes and chakras are in their right places, the
 spine becomes a lightning rod for the physical, mental, emotional, and
 spiritual energies that make us complete.

Communication Process-In the physical body, alignment energy works to line
up the crown chakra with the first chakra, and the tenth chakra with the ninth.
In our everyday lives, we know we are in alignment when everything flows
smoothly, and when, upon hitting obstacles, we can nurture the child aspect of
the self while calling upon the warrior self to direct us around or through the
problem.

Problems-Ultimately, an alignment issue involves dissatisfaction or lack of
 harmony. Absence of harmony should not be confused with the occurrence of
 problem issues. Because others have free will, they can try to sabotage us.
 Being in alignment doesn't mean we never get problems or have crises. It
means we can call on the powers and abilities we need to deal with them.

Contains-Respect for the process of alignment and the energies necessary to
flow with it.

Point 27: Peace


Purpose-To help us accept ourselves-our pasts, present, and desired future-
 with respect and honor.

Function-To allow us to unearth the unlovable aspects of our being and honor
 them. To do this, the center channels the Divine Source's acceptance of us and
 all we have been/done. To bring in this energy, we have to let go, or serenely
 accept all aspects of our own and others' beings. Letting go involves releasing
 the belief that we are in control, that somehow, we could have made it all
 different, or can make it all work out. By wrestling with the resultant feelings
 of hopelessness and powerlessness, we can open ourselves to enthusiasm and
 power.

Energy Form-Peace is a feeling of awareness rather than a physical substance.
 The energy channeled through this point is simultaneously static and dynamic,
 comparable to the stillness of a pond surface, life teeming underneath. Peace
 usually looks pink, which blends the different energies of white and red.

Communication Process-The energy behind this point can enter at any level at
any time, but is only completely utilized when all chakras and energy points
integrate it.

Problems-Any judgments or thought processes that keep us stuck prevent
 access to peace energy. Fundamentally, all physical diseases are symptoms of
 lack of peace or serenity because they disturb the flow of subtle and,
 therefore, physical energy. Clearing our resistance to peace energy doesn't
 eliminate feelings of sorrow, anger, or fear. Instead, we accept those feelings.
 These "negative feelings" don't turn into blocks if we don't resist them;
 instead, they flow through our bodies and frequently transform into higher
emotions. In peace, we may still experience self-doubt or criticism, but we
are capable of working through our false belief systems, using clarity to sort
through and form new conclusions. Spiritually, the acceptance of the peace
energy allows us to begin assuming our full place within the universe.

Contains-Acceptance of self, mirrored by the Divine Source's full acceptance
of us.

Point 28: Wisdom


Purpose-To enable us to claim the learning from our experiences, the definition
 of wisdom, while fully releasing the traumas and feelings associated with
 them.

Function-To enable us to define the growth, strengths, and knowledge gained
 on our path, and free us to make decisions about other ways to learn in the
 future. This point works by helping us reduce our experiences to core beliefs,
 and by breaking the patterns resulting from these experiences.

Energy Form-Similar to understanding, this center mainly works with the
 energies associated with our mental processes. However, it channels through
 the heart, because our heart is the true revolving door connecting our
 seemingly opposite selves.

Communication Process-Wisdom must be stored in the brain; therefore, this
energy point works on our higher brain functions.

Problems-The inability to learn from our past and our mistakes. This disability
 can result in any number of disorders, such as repetitive mistakes and
 relationship difficulties, exhibiting victim/victor patterns, and countless other
 situations.

Contains-The collected teachings of the ages, available for our own growth.

Point 29: Enjoyment
Purpose-Teaches that the boldest life lesson is that life is not about lessons, but
 about enjoyment. Having released our past through peace and having claimed
 our learning via wisdom, we can open to opportunities that will bring us real
 enjoyment. Following our purpose is always about following our bliss.

Function-To channel the energy fueling our enjoyment. This point is a direct
 link to the Divine Source and its wishes for us.

Energy Form-Feeling-based, this energy point is extremely potent. Powerful
 manifesting energies lurk behind the face of enthusiasm.

Communication Process-This energy enters when we believe we deserve it,
and manifests through feelings such as enthusiasm, the soul's desires for love,
and pleasurable physical experiences.

Problems-Anything-a situation, belief, reality, feeling, relationship, job, or
 endeavorthat fails to produce joy signifies a block in this center. Failing to
 own this joy results in these blocks; paradoxically, owning our joy can relieve
 them.

Contains-The knowledge that we deserve joy.

Point 30: Forgiveness


Purpose-To forgive or to give up our hold on process or outcome. We get hurt
 or hurt others because we try to be in control. When we give up this control to
 something greater, we are able to clear the blocks that keep all energy centers
 below this one from being fully active.

Function-To confront us with this single question: are we willing to fully
 surrender to higher spiritual energies? Most people think that forgiveness is a
 process. Getting to forgiveness is a process, but it is not forgiveness.
 Forgiveness is our decision to surrender.

Energy Form-Questioning in nature, decisive in effect.
Communication Process-The decision to be made comes from within. This
energy point, more than any before it, channels directly into the Divine Source
self, our essential self.

Problems-Non-specific, lack of surrender can lead to any and all difficulties.

Contains-The right for us to decide to become what we want to be or not.

Point 31: Faith


Purpose-To enable us to live completely in the faith that all we are already
 exists. By choosing to believe that we are something, we will truly become it.

Function-To erase our revolving doors once we have forgiven. We eliminate
 the perceptions that there are differences and similarities, that there is
 separation between our material and spiritual selves, that material and
 spiritual energies are different. This energy point is the key to allowing all
 that we want in Divine Source will, to simply manifest without effort.

Energy Form-This point channels all energies preceding it. After completely
 balancing them, it erases them. Faith energy seems invisible, made of
 substance, no more material than air.

Communication Process-This energy must be incorporated into every cell,
visible and invisible. If we believe it is incorporated into all parts of
ourselves, then it will be.

Problems-Contributes to the problems of all other chakras.

Contains-The self's ability to be itself.

Point 32: Grace and Divine Source Consciousness


Purpose-To channel miracle energy. This miracle energy flows from the Divine
Source, miracles occurring because we can tap into our divine ability to give
ourselves what we need without needing to believe that we deserve it.

Function-To call what we desire into our lives without effort or immediate
 knowledge of deserving it. Though it awakens all our powers, the energy
 coming through this point requires none of them to create our well-being.

Energy Form-None and all. Pure love energy.

Communication Process-Known by results, whether it be a feeling, thought,
physical sign, or spiritual awareness (either the appearance of a positive one
or disappearance of an undesired one).

Problems-All problems can be solved with this energy.

Contains-The meaning of life.


            EXERCISE: MEETING YOUR SPIRITUAL ENERGY CENTERS


It is time for you to meet your own spiritual energy points face-to-face. You
will need twenty-one sheets of paper, plus crayons or other drawing utensils.

A. Lead yourself through the intuitive process introduced in chapter 1. Stop at
the access point.

B. Now turn to your papers. Label each one with the title of one of the twenty
higher points. Allow yourself to freely draw whatever comes to your mind or
flows from your hand. You are describing the current relationship between
you and this energy.

C. When you finish this survey, take up the last piece of paper. Let yourself
draw a picture of what you will look/feel/be like once you have fully healed
your connection to these twenty points.

D. When you have finished this exercise, lead yourself through the closing
 process.


                            ALTERNATE EXERCISES


More concrete exercises spend time realizing the impact each of these spiritual
bodies can have on you.

1. Each day, decide that you want to experience how a connection with each
 particular spiritual point can have a positive effect on your life. Focus on one
 point each day. Record your observations at night.

    I recommend starting with the bottom of the list and working toward the
  top of the list, energy point 32. This approach gives you a foundation as each
  point becomes aligned on top of the next one.

II. Decide which concept, as reflected by these twenty energy points, could
 best help you solve a problem. Write or speak aloud the solution that comes
 to you from that point of view.

   For instance, if you are experiencing a problem with a male friend, think of
the concept of the fourteenth energy point, yang. From a yang, or male,
viewpoint, what is the real concern? What are the real questions to ask? What
are your choices?

  Then come at the issue from yet a higher perception. Move to the fifteenth
energy point, balance of polarities. If you could represent both female and
male perceptions on this issue, how would you do it? What would be the
opposing idea(s)? What do these seeming contrasts have in common? You can
move up the ladder of energy points until you finalize your response.
                  THE DEVELOPING SELF
The previous chapters provided a glimpse into the inner machinations of our
basic energy system. Each core unit, or energy center, operates as a single
entity while ever revolving within the greater whole. Still missing is an
explanation of the developmental process of these energy centers. To work
with the energy body, to heal our human selves, we must have this information.
Lacking it would be like trying to be a therapist with no knowledge of
psychology.

                           CHAKRA DEVELOPMENT


Though we are born with each in- and out-of-body chakra, or energy point,
intact, they are activated or fully awakened in an orderly manner. This is most
obvious in the seven in-body chakras. Our first chakra acts as the primary
energy center from womb to six months of age. Our heart, the fourth chakra,
awakens for the first time between four and six years of age. Our seventh
chakra kicks in during puberty, and our ninth during our later twenties.
Eventually, the process cycles around again, leading us back to our first chakra
during our later fifties. In short, there is a link between the child and adult
development processes and our chakra system.

  This process is comparable to the natural development of the physical body.
A newborn has a fully formed human body, equipped at birth with everything
necessary for an active and productive life. The organs, limbs, nerves, glands,
and muscles needed to talk, run, think, make love, or work are all in place.
Many of these functions lie dormant, however, until the appropriate moment
(which usually involves entering a stage of development). Within the ovaries
of an infant girl already lie all the ova she will ever produce; they will begin
to be released at puberty, then monthly thereafter. The glandular ability to
produce testosterone is already activated within an infant boy. In a healthy
child, the level required to produce a full beard and accentuated muscles will
begin to increase during adolescence.
   I believe that though our energy centers become active in a logical sequence,
we are linked to and can gain access to any of them at any time. In fact, this is
how some of us survived traumas in childhood. A survivor of very early abuse,
I remember receiving calm, comfort, and a reason to live from the "angels"
with whom I could see and talk. Christ talked to me often about faith, the truth I
now associate with the thirtyfirst energy point. The fact that I could see these
spiritual beings at all meant that I had awakened my sixth chakra (the
clairvoyant ability) earlier than might have been expected. Our energy centers
will do what needs to be done to provide for our greater well-being.

   In general, our centers are aligned and active just before conception, but go
to sleep after conception. Consider the top twenty spiritual centers, which I
believe play an active role during preconception. The beliefs carried by these
higher points are programmed into the developing body and even have a say in
what type of chromosomes and genes are selected to create the body for this
incarnation. Connected to our soul body, many of the spiritual centers go into
hibernation during the conception process so as to not interfere with the
development of the physical body.

   Chakras eight through twelve, the higher human chakras, may also be
neutralized during our very early years. Again, much of our childhood energy
during this time must be directed into the growth and development of our
physical body, awareness of emotions, formation of relationships, and
adaptation to our environment. These higher human chakras are quite active
during preconception, however, working to select physical traits, determine
relationship interactions, and set up life events. The Cherokee tradition
explains the process as lighting a fire with a purpose.'

  From conception onward, our early moments and years are most concerned
with the gradual awakening, programming, and use of our seven in-body
chakras. In general, they are activated in order from one to seven, from the
most basic, survival-oriented chakra to the higher-order ones.

Chakra One Two Three Four Five Six Seven Age Womb to 6 months 6 months
to 2'h years 2%2 to 4%z years 4%2 to 6%z years 6%z to 8%z years 8%z to 14
years 14 to 21 years

During the seven-year span of chakra seven, the last in-body chakra, we
process chakras one through seven again. This is one of the reasons that the
teenager years are so challenging. Our childhood issues are retriggered so that
we can readdress and heal them. This recycling prepares a youngster to occupy
a place in the community, having cleaned him- or herself of negative issues
while opening his or her talents. Unfortunately, modern society isn't equipped
to help teenagers through this process, and so the emotional and mental
vicissitudes exhibited by teenagers are usually considered bad or aberrant.
Consequently, teenagers are confused by their own feelings and end up thinking
that they are bad in some way. They arrive at age twenty-one unequipped for
life and unclear about their spiritual calling.

   Ancient cultures traditionally welcomed teenagers into the community
through initiation rites. Many indigenous communities still do. For instance,
many South and North American tribal cultures conducted vision quests for
boys at puberty. Respected elders would prepare a boy for manhood through a
structured, disciplined process, and then usually leave him for three days
unattended, in nature. Alone, the boy awaited contact from the spiritual realms,
often receiving it in the form of a dream, a vision, or a physical visitation from
an animal or bird. This omen from nature would then become a "power totem"
or spiritual guide. Girls might participate in an all-female ceremony upon
menstruating for the first time. The village women would welcome her to
womanhood, and she would now be encouraged to take a responsible role in
the village. Both genders were now ready to become apprentices, their roles in
society assured. (I once participated in a woman's rite of passage with an
Oshun, or African priestess. Naked, I bathed myself in flower water, replete
with petals and stems, while women chanted my soul fully into my body. These
are the types of rituals that purify and prepare us for adulthood or for any
change of life.)

   These are the chakras processed in our adolescence, from ages fourteen
through twenty-one, while we are also processing chakra seven for the first
time:
Chakra One Two Three Four Five Six Seven Age 14 to 15 years 15 to 16 years
16 to 17 years 17 to 18 years 18 to 19 years 19 to 20 years 20 to 21 years

The chakras now continue to awaken every seven years, as shown below:

Chakra Eight Nine Ten Eleven Twelve Age 21 to 28 years 28 to 35 years 35 to
42 years 42 to 49 years 49 to 56 years

  Within each seven-year span, chakras one through seven also continue to
recycle. After age fifty-six, we return to seven-year cycles that start again with
chakra one. We are also better able to fully embrace the spiritual points that
guide us into enlightenment.

Contemporary philosophy tells us that our twenties are a time for preparation,
laying the groundwork for later success and happiness. This is an energetic
truth, as well. During ages twenty-one to twenty-eight, we move into our eighth
chakra, the keeper of the past and time. These years might as well be called the
"years of karma," for during them, we are clearing blocks, changing
misperceptions, altering relationship patterns, and confronting spiritual
falsehoods that could inhibit future success. During these years, young people
unconsciously tap into past life issues, as the eighth chakra stores the Akashic
Records, the history of everything we have ever done. We might suddenly
discover gifts, ideas, or abilities previously unacknowledged, which might
originate in a prior incarnation. We meet someone and sense an inexplicable
attraction or repulsion; again, these reactions probably carry over from past
life experiences. For balance, the eighth chakra also contains our Book of Life,
a positive rendering of the Akashic Records, as well as our Shadow Records,
which illuminate everything not said, done, or thought. These three records are
first introduced in chapter 2.

   Chakra eight basically activates our unresolved issues-past lives and current
lifeand encourages choices that make us face them. The result is that many
early careers, youthful marriages, and mid-twenties lifestyle choices become
obsolete during our thirties. These eighth-chakra decisions were made to clear
up old patterns, not necessarily steer us through life.
  Sometimes we end up "undoing" the decisions made in our twenties. I
worked with a forty-five-year-old man who struggled with depression because
he wasn't in love with the woman he had married when he was twenty years
old. Neither was he satisfied with his career, although he was a successful
doctor. And he was unhappy with his lifestyle choices, despite living in a
grand house. He wanted to enter the seminary, become a pastor, and, "God
willing," meet a very different type of woman. The stress of living a false life
had already given him three heart attacks.

   My job wasn't to recommend a divorce or lifestyle change; it was to help my
client decide what he needed to do for himself. Over time, he decided to
separate from his wife and enter the seminary. His wife, after receiving a large
settlement, was actually happy with the outcome-she didn't want to be married
to a man who was "just a pastor." She married a wealthy man a year later. As
for my client, his heart condition completely cleared up when he entered
school. A few years later, he married a fellow student and they moved to
Africa to serve as missionaries.

   My client hadn't made a mistake in his twenties. His medical training
became the foundation of his later work in Africa. He and his first wife had
three lovely daughters, all of whom he loved. As is typical, my client
experienced an identity crisis in his forties; many so-called "midlife crises"
occur during the times of the tenth and eleventh chakras, as we move toward
the adulthood and mastery initiated at age fifty-six. These grounding and
leadership years make us question our alignment with spirit. I make this point
to remind us that the twenties are about clearing unresolved issues, not just
making mistakes, even if we undo some of the decisions at a later point.

   Chakra nine is omnipresent from ages twenty-eight to thirty-five. The "seat
of our soul," chakra nine encourages awareness of soul and life purpose. Most
often, individuals experience this time as one of questioning and questing. We
wonder, "Why am I here?" "Is there any meaning to my life?" "Is there
something I am uniquely supposed to accomplish?" This search for purpose
can be puzzling and confusing, yet if sufficiently embraced, ultimately
rewarding. We want to exit this time period with a sense of self and purpose.
   Moving into our mid-thirties, we experience the call to action; the impulse to
ground our purpose in reality. We have now entered the era of chakra ten, the
grounding chakra. Chakra ten, which was also active during preconception and
conception, is once again rooting our spiritual self in the material world.
During preconception, our soul channels through it to help us select the genes
necessary to learn our life lessons and achieve our soul purpose. From ages
thirty-five to forty-two, it enables us to manifest our views, values, and
purpose into real life. Now, we can actually get the job, start the company,
marry the companion, choose the lifestyle, or make that geographic jump that
will align us with our purpose.

   As to be expected, this time is often challenging. Our constant measure of
success must be internal-are we upholding our soul's integrity of purpose?
Because chakra ten also holds patterns and programs from our lineage and past
lives, we often find ourselves confronting the old, indoctrinated beliefs that
inhibit our growth. This time period is therefore often the springboard for the
stereotypical midlife crisis.

   Chakra eleven, everpresent but more overt during ages forty-two to forty-
nine, can help us transmute these old negativities and difficulties. The
transmutation chakra, this energy converts negative into positive and
challenges into opportunities. Character deficits, financial liabilities, and bad
relationships can now be converted to "positive currency," into learning,
lessons, and teachings that enhance our professional and personal lives. For
instance, years of suffering as a sexual abuse victim might now be transmuted
into a best-selling book on recovering from this abuse. The struggle with
depression may form the basis for compassion and the reason our clients work
with us rather than another person.

   Finally, in terms of the human chakras, we open to chakra twelve. Activated
from ages forty-nine to fifty-six, this chakra coaxes us into maturity. Many
cultures, including the Cherokee, believe that it is impossible to become an
adult before this age.' Unfortunately, many of us are children masquerading in
adult bodies. My youngest son, Gabriel, actually has a rule: "No kids disguised
as adults can come in my room." If only corporate boardrooms and government
institutions had the same rule.

   If we better understood the twelfth chakra, the challenges of maturity would
be more profitable. Encompassing the entire human body and energy system,
chakra twelve energetically connects the material and spiritual worlds. As we
realize that we truly are revolving doors between spirit and matter, we must
ask ourselves what we are to do with this knowledge and the power inherent in
having it. Are we going to reach to the sky, toward individual achievement, or
follow the path suggested by Buddha, which is to give back to humanity? The
hope is that we have successfully faced the challenges of our earlier chakric
stages and are ethically responsible enough to use our power for service.

   After age fifty-six, we are invited to fully realize the higher energy centers.
Energy centers thirteen through thirty-two may have awakened at many points
in our life, as we will see later in this chapter.

                           REASONS WITHIN REASONS


Knowing our chakric development process and awakening points of the
individual chakras can help in many ways. By working with this system, we
can:

1. Use physical symptoms to define the emotional, mental, and spiritual
 components of an illness.

2. Trace our emotional issues back to the development of a certain part of our
 body or to the age of origination. Emotions are the language of the body. If we
 can reexperience the feeling component and the physical reactions attached to
 a debilitating situation, we can reprogram self-destructive beliefs and chart a
 whole new course.

3. Isolate the mental or spiritual beliefs affecting us, thereby healing our
 emotional or physical issues.

4. Awaken repressed memories, including in utero and past-life memories, for
 the purpose of understanding, clearing, and healing.
5. Understand the origin of just about any physical, mental, emotional, or
 spiritual issue. If you can get to the root cause or formative age, you can
 unlock the circumstances causing the blocks and prepare to heal them.

6. Become knowledgeable parents to our own children, supporting them in
 and through each development stage.

7. Better parent our own inner child, that natural self within each of us waiting
 for his or her chance at life.

8. Make appropriate and wise decisions by pinpointing our current
 development stage.

9. Better understand where, how, and why other people are stuck.

  We are searching for two points of awareness when working with this
developmental process. First, we want to discover the wonderful aspects of
our being, some of which have already awakened and some of which have not.
Even if we know that we have positive traits, they might need recognition or
revitalization. Many times, we have buried our best qualities beneath a dirge
of conflict and misperceptions. That leads us to our second goal, which is to
uncover, understand, and change self-destructive beliefs, patterns, and
programs. After all, the gems at our core deserve to be dusted off and polished.

                           UNCOVERING THE GEMS


Healing-an uncovering or recovering process-is frequently unconscious, but
this unconscious process can trigger conscious healing. Healing occurs when
we suddenly discover a secret about our "self" and open to the gifts it
provides.

   Let's say you are a new parent doubting your ability to care for a crying
infant. Instead of leaving the baby to cry herself to sleep, you pull up the
wisdom and courage to provide comfort. The baby stops crying and becomes
happy or-the ultimate act of faith-falls asleep in your arms. You are amazed!
   Having experienced these spiritual values, you can now truly grow.
Following this "Eureka!" discovery, you allow yourself to explore further.
Perhaps you reflect upon your own basic needs, whether they are currently
getting met, or whether they were met when you were an infant. During this
reflection, you may uncover issues to heal and strengths previously unknown.
Caring for your three-month-old child has awakened your own first-chakra
connection to your past and to your own current primal self.

   When we are fortunate, life unfolds gently, allowing the abilities and healing
needs of our chakras and centers to unfold smoothly and unconsciously.
However, life isn't always so gentle. We must revert to a more direct approach
if our challenges are severe. The more difficult our life experiences, especially
our early ones, the more apt we are to secret our abilities and traits under a
blanket of protection.

  Two of my clients illustrate this point. Each carried the impact of events that
occurred between the ages of three and four, but one client, more severely
wounded than the other, had to address his issues on a much more conscious
level. As you read their stories, remember that age three relates to the third
chakra and our explorations of the world around us. During this time, the
messages and reactions we receive from others become fodder for our own
beliefs about ourselves, others, and the world at large. Positive messages will
substantiate our belief in the world being a safe and loving place, thus
encouraging high self-esteem. Negative messages will reflect on the self or in
other judgments, inhibiting our personal power.

            WORKING WITH THE CHAKRIC DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM


We may do a great deal of this salvage and repair work on our own by working
with the chakra system. I usually take one or both of the following approaches:

1. Looking for blocks.

2. Looking for truths.
Looking for Blocks


Blocks are points of resistance to our own well-being. A block is any physical
condition, belief, feeling, or spiritual misunderstanding that prevents us from
living our purpose. A block can be caused by a physical problem, false mental
belief, unresolved feeling, or spiritual misperception, and is a problem
because it inhibits the free flow of our natural energy and spiritual self.

   There are many types of blocks; the majority of them operate as strongholds,
or stuck beliefs or feelings. Strongholds are explored in the next section. We'll
take a look at the typical blocks, which are physical, mental, emotional, and
spiritual in nature, from the viewpoint of the problems they can create.




                               THE STRONGHOLD


ESSENTIALLY, A BLOCK keeps us from living as our authentic self. Usually
blocks are composed of strongholds, mental or emotional programs that keep
us stuck in a pattern that isn't good for us (see figure 4.1). There are two basic
types of strongholds. A mental stronghold is made of two or more beliefs that
join together but never come apart. For instance, we might touch a stove and
get burned. We now think "stoves can burn" and also "getting burned hurts."
These aren't bad thoughts. In fact, they can be helpful; we'll think twice before
we touch another hot stove. A problem arises if we keep these two thoughts
joined together to create a stronghold, or a belief that detracts from our life, or
even causes harm. A resulting, negative stronghold might be the conclusion that
because stoves burn and getting burned hurts, then stoves are bad. This idea
isn't all that traumatic-it might spare us a great deal of cooking-but what if we
formulate a mental stronghold like "anything that can burn is bad"? This type of
stronghold can lead to a full-blown paranoia and we might avoid anything from
sunlight to love, which can cause its own "burn."

   An emotional stronghold is formed from at least one thought and one feeling.
These underlie many of our most challenging life issues. For example, imagine
a sixteen-yearold who has just gone through his first relationship breakup. He
feels sad. He thinks, "Breaking up hurts." The feeling of sadness joins with the
belief that breaking up causes pain. There's nothing wrong with a temporary
merging of a feeling and a thought. We are constantly trying on different beliefs
and feelings; they instruct us on how to respond to a given situation. But what if
our sixteen-year-old would decide that a relationship, a necessary prerequisite
to a breakup, is itself dangerous? To avoid the sadness of a breakup, he might
now avoid relationships altogether. Strongholds such as this one often underlie
lifestyle and relationship issues.

   There are also spiritual strongholds, which are similar to mental and
emotional strongholds. These are composed of beliefs or feelings that bond
together and relate specifically to spiritual issues. Examples involve ideas
relating to deservedness of divine love or acceptance of universal abundance.
                      Figure 4.1: Stronghold Programming

   A stronghold becomes a block when it fails to release when we're through
with it. Strongholds are ultimately programmed into our energetic system,
primarily into the external wheel of a related chakra. First-chakra programs,
for instance, occur during the womb to six months, the activation time for that
chakra. The first chakra will also accept new programs as time goes on, under
"first chakra" duress, such as in response to a rape, financial disaster, or a life-
threatening illness. These circumstances "run" at the same frequency as does
the first chakra, and our conclusions about them will therefore be recorded in
the first chakra. Events corresponding to other chakras, and our conclusions
about them, will create strongholds in their respective chakras.
  A program or set of instructions (or group of programs) composes a pattern,
a ritualistic way of responding to stimulation. Programs and patterns aren't
always bad; they can save time and energy. We set our radio alarm clock
because we know it will wake us up; this is an example of a healthy and
helpful patterned response. Programs that become locked into strongholds and
block our free expression, however, formulate patterns that can hurt us. If we
run the other way every time we see someone we're attracted to, or avoid
medical help because it frightens us, or think we're bad just because we're sad,
we're stuck in patterns that can severely limit joy and abundance.

   Programs don't always originate in this life. Our souls carry them from
lifetime to lifetime and download them through our minds, which in turn,
record them in our bodies, just like a software package gets loaded onto a
computer. In general, our soul programs encode our subconscious, the deepest
and most powerful aspect of our mind. The subconscious runs our reptilian
brain, the part of our brain that manages our flightor-flight responses. Our
soul's life-enhancing ideas mix into the center of the chakras and are dharmic
in nature; its fear-based programs are deposited in the outer wheels of the
chakras and are karmic in nature. Past- and this-life mental strongholds are
most frequently programmed into our unconscious, which instructs the
mammalian brain or the emotional-mental aspect of the "self," as well as our
thinking. Past- and this-life emotional strongholds are usually associated with
our conscious self or higher learning centers, and are then integrated into our
bodies through the central nervous system.




Physical Blocks-We all know what physical blocks are. They are usually
experienced as physical problems, ailments, disease, or pains. Obviously,
physical blocks can prevent full utilization of our physical bodies. A broken
leg can block a professional athlete; until the cast comes off, he or she is
prevented from fully performing as an athlete. A singer can be blocked by a
cold. If the illness is severe, it can hold up a concert tour. Being tired can also
block our mental capacities, distorting our perspective and inhibiting our
effectiveness.

   Physical blocks can also affect our feeling state, causing us to be cranky,
fatigued, and impatient. In turn, these feelings and other feeling states can
greatly affect the health and nature of our relationships and work life. Physical
blocks can also impede our spiritual life, causing us to devote more time and
attention to material endeavors than conceptual concerns.

   Clearing physical blocks may involve doing something physical, such as
resting if we are ill or taking an aspirin for a headache. However, it could just
as easily require changing a belief system, releasing a blocked feeling, or
talking with our highest form of guidance. The general rule of thumb is that if
an impairing physical condition doesn't respond to a physical cure, then we
must seek solutions in the other areas. We must be willing to look under the
covers, to peer under the symptoms.

  I had a rather interesting experience regarding the holistic nature of physical
concerns with one of my clients, a fifty-year-old woman. She came to me
complaining that for two years she had experienced one physical problem after
another, including the flu, aches, pains, heart constrictions, and leg numbness.
The doctors finally decided she must be a hypochondriac because they had
been unable to decipher any organic cause.

   Upon further probing, she relayed that these problems had started at the
beginning of her marriage, which had taken place two years earlier. Rather
reluctantly, she admitted that before their marriage, her husband's health had
been poor while hers had been fine. Psychically, I perceived immense cords or
energy connections between each of her affected chakras and those of her
husband. I also saw a graver theme, an incomplete separation between her
mother's second chakra and her own.

  This client worked with me three times. When we dissociated her from her
husband, she reported feeling better, though he felt worse.

Mental Blocks-Mental blocks are beliefs that prevent us from actualizing our
inner self. Once they form a stronghold, they can cripple us both moderately
and severely. These strongholds might be mental in nature, involving the
adverse bonding of two or more beliefs, or emotional, characterized by the
destructive linkage of at least one belief and feeling.

  A mental belief usually impacts our thought processes through our soul,
which instructs the subconscious, or through our mind, which operates our
unconscious. The kahuna healers of Hawaii define belief as any idea that you
accept as true.' Believing that you are a bad person can leave you feeling first
unlikable, then unhappy, and finally afraid to take advantage of opportunities.

   Ted Andrews, in his book Imagick, speaks of the power of our thoughts.
"The mental body has one of the most subtle and powerful effects upon man in
the physical ... It is our mental body and its action in the form of our thoughts
and words upon the mental plane that most strongly sets the pattern for what we
experience in the physical. It forms the matrix or blueprint of what is to
manifest within our lives."' Long-held negative or untrue beliefs produce long-
term damage to our psyches and outward, physical lives.

   We've all heard of the placebo effect, a positive outcome created by a
positive belief. Negative beliefs are just as powerful through a process called
the nocebo effect. One study showed that women who believed they were
susceptible to heart disease were four times more likely to develop heart
problems, in contrast to women with the same risk factors with a positive
attitude.'

   For example, we might, as do many of my clients, believe that we are the
wrong sex, which occurs if our parents wanted a child of the opposite gender.
This belief can inhibit our sexual expression and our enjoyment of day-to-day
physical processes. A belief that we don't deserve to have money can keep us
from being financially prosperous. A belief we don't deserve to be alive can
make us physically sick by shutting down our physical system or preventing us
from getting necessary health care. The list can go on and on. To heal, we must
become willing to follow the path of the kahuna healer, which is "to help
people change their beliefs from unhealthy ones to healthy ones."6
   Although we might experience stuck mental beliefs and their ensuing patterns
as obsessive thoughts, attitude problems, or problematic thinking, they may
also be clothed as chronic dissociation or physical patterns, even as physical
symptoms such as a nervous stomach or a racing heart. We might just as likely
find our mental beliefs coded within recurring feelings, reactions, or
behaviors. Whether they compose mental or emotional strongholds, every
aspect of our health improves when we free our thoughts from bondage.




                        CONSTRUCTS OF MENTAL BLOCKS


I USUALLY FIND that all negative beliefs reduce to the following six primary
beliefs:

• I am bad (or evil).

• I am powerless.

• I have no value.

• I don't deserve.

• I am worthless.

• I am unlovable.

   These beliefs all come from one single belief, "I am separate." When we
believe that we are separate from Divine Source, we are prone to these six
secondary negative beliefs, and a plethora of others spring from these. We will
consistently make decisions that reinforce the original storyline or experiences
that caused us to believe ourselves separate. We can also reverse the effects of
subsequent disorders by tracking the negative storyline.
   I worked with a client named Bertha who was crippled with severe arthritis.
During a regression, Bertha returned psychically to her first experience as a
soul separating from the Divine Source. At the time, she decided that the
Source had thrown her out of heaven because there was something wrong with
her. Deciding that she was bad, Bertha began to interject others' problems and
pains into her own soul body, as a way to "earn" love. The absorbed energy
was transferred into her first chakra, creating inflammation within her own
body, laying the conditions for arthritis. During our healing, Bertha received
assurance from the Divine. She was and had always been loved. The Divine
had always perceived her as "good" Assured, Bertha released the belief that
she is bad and within five minutes, began to shake. Waves of others' energies
rippled out of her, as she released the energies that were not her own. She
called a day later; the arthritis was completely gone.




Feeling Blocks-Healing often involves searching for ways we have been
emotionally hurt in the past. By themselves, feelings are good. Feelings are the
messengers of the body, telling us how we're reacting to our internal thoughts
and external environment. As we'll explore in chapter 14, feelings can also
communicate for our spirit. When we respect, accept, interpret, and express
them with ease and care for self and others, feelings link our spirit with the
physical universe. They become a problem when one of two things happen:

• We fail to completely acknowledge or express a feeling.

• We mislabel the issue, inhibit the situationally correct feeling, and then
 express the wrong one.

   Numerous studies are proving that repressed emotions lead to all sorts of
adverse conditions, including fatigue, weight issues, constipation, migraines,
back pain, colds, and more. Labeled psychogenic or emotion-caused illnesses,
illnesses stemming from unresolved emotional upheavals are now thought to
cause a large percentage of physician visits. For instance, Dr. Mona Lisa
Schulz, an author and expert on intuition, points to studies showing that back
pain is related to emotional struggles at work. Specific emotional states are
also linked to diseases, including Grave's disease, multiple sclerosis,
Parkinson's disease, and intestinal disorders. Yet another medically trained
professional, Dr. John Sarno, has determined that back pain often relates to
undetected rage. Dr. Sarno's patients have significantly improved after dealing
with their repressed anger.7

   Why would we repress our feelings to the point of making ourselves sick?
Some families only affirm certain feelings. My family didn't like anger,
although my parents constantly fought. My sisters and I would listen to their
"Friday night fights" from the vantage point of my bedroom, while we tried to
pretend that everything was fine. We weren't allowed to talk about the fights or
to get angry ourselves. Consequently, we grew up thinking that anger was bad
and wrong. Later in life, I developed a heart arrhythmia, which healed once I
discovered how to own and express my anger.

   My heart condition evolved from an emotional stronghold, a feeling (anger)
partnered with a belief (anger is bad). Sometimes it is bad to get angry; we
don't want to yell at our teacher or scream at our child. Anger also has the
potential to be empowering. We only get into trouble if we permanently partner
a feeling and a belief, and keep living ourselves as if the past is repeating.

   Another common problem involves mislabeling an issue or feeling to the
extent that we attempt to solve a challenge by expressing an inappropriate
feeling. Many of us grew up with parents or in institutions that failed to help us
recognize or accurately label our feelings. For instance, I worked with a client
named Abdul who grew up in Morocco. His family didn't believe that boys
should feel sad. Whenever he was sad, his parents would encourage him to be
bold and powerful, and attack the problem. When Abdul learned that his best
friend had been killed in a terrorist skirmish, he started to cry. His father told
him that his tears were wasted water and that he truly felt angry. Encouraged to
"insure justice," Abdul joined a religious terrorist group and counterattacked
the one that had killed his friend. By the time he came to see me, he had lived
in America for twenty years, become a successful businessman, and left his
violent days behind. He was also experiencing severe migraines, chronic
indigestion, and recurring nightmares. After we unleashed and correctly
labeled Abdul's long-held sorrow and grief, his physical symptoms cleared up,
and he was able to share his deeper feelings with his loved ones.

  The easiest way to work with feelings is to reduce them to a constellation,
or the appropriate family of feelings. This process is covered in chapter 14,
"Understanding Emotions."

Spiritual Blocks-Spiritual blocks are misperceptions about the universe and
our place within it. To me, spiritual blocks are perhaps the most powerful and
the most important because they underlie every other issue. They can be caused
by anything that happens to us, for us, or around us.

   I feel the word "spiritual" means just that-spirit-filled. The bravest and most
worthy desire we can have as a human being is to be filled with the spirit, the
true essence, of ourselves. As this self is really an aspect of the Divine Source,
I believe that life is about learning how to accept that we are of the Divine
Source (the All, the Great Spirit), and that we deserve to fully express this
truth. Living on purpose is about expressing this spirit self.

   This spirit self or essence constantly attempts to bring our body, mind, and
soul to this understanding. Certain people, such as Fools Crow, a now-
deceased Lakota medicine man, understood this quest. Known for being able to
heal anyone of anything, he asserted that this ability came from being able to
become like a "hollow bone," or empty vessel, through which Wakan-Tanka,
the Great Spirit, could pour. One of my own healing teachers, Echo Bodine,
who has written many healing books, always insisted that she healed no one of
anything; she just got out of the way. These people illustrate the power of
spirit-our own and that of a greater force-and suggest that any physical, mental,
or emotional problems may be caused by something that prevents our own or a
greater spirit from entering or being fully present.

  Often, these spiritual blocks or confusions about our own true goodness lie
within our soul. Remember, our soul carries everything we experience from
life to life, from chakra to chakra, from cell to cell. The soul registers
experiences such as being shamed or praised, judged or supported, rejected or
nurtured, or being loved, hated, or killed. It records what we learned in Sunday
school, and it is affected by the false and true beliefs involving our higher,
spiritual energy points. The soul itself imprints these beliefs about life, death,
others, ourselves-everything within our temporal being. The downside of this
reality is that even if we didn't begin this life with many spiritual issues, by the
time we are adults, we probably acquired a lot of them anyway. The upside is
that whatever we heal on the soul level becomes healed on all levels.

   We can address our spiritual issues through any chakra or energy point.
Holism, at its most consequential, is apparent here. Again, one way to
effectively find the spiritual issue underneath a problem is to apply the chakric
development system, starting by isolating the chakra affected by a negative or
traumatic experience. With clients, I typically help them uncover and
understand first the physical, mental, and emotional effects of an experience,
then turn to spiritual reflection. I always steer them into addressing the deeper,
spiritual issue. Unless we address the soul issue, the soul may carry the
negative perception through to another level, perhaps affecting a relationship,
career, or lifestyle, or, of course, a body part.

   Probing for the spiritual issue often frightens people, because it usually
requires dealing with questions involving goodness and evil, life and death.
Many people think this work lies in the realm of the religious institutions.
However, I believe that working with spiritual issues need not be a strictly
religious undertaking, though the task can be adversely or positively affected
by our religious beliefs.

   Spirituality differs from religion in that spirituality has to do with our
essence-our essential self and our essential needs. Religion provides a
structural approach to living, one that is hopefully in accordance with our
essential needs. We might have been raised in a religious atmosphere that
supports our essence and its expression; we might just as easily have been
exposed to a dogmatic structure that has crushed, molded, or repressed our
essence. Anything that prevents the soul from living in and through us is a
spiritual issue. Ultimately, we need to acknowledge our soul, our invisible
self, and the universe for wanting this self to be happy and satisfied. Spiritual
blocks are resistance points to accepting this grace.

   I have learned to be rather bold when working with clients on spiritual
issues. I often use shamanistic tools and techniques I learned in Peru, Japan,
Costa Rica, Wales, Morocco, and from several other cultures which account
for the presence of a soul. Whether the technique involves helping a client
journey into his or her subconscious, talk to an invisible spiritual guide or
angel, or picture his or her own soul and talk to it, I have yet to find a client
who disbelieves what he or she sees, hears, or feels. I believe that people
inherently believe in the invisible, spiritual part of themselves.

   Working with a spiritual issue usually involves uncovering the soul's major
misperception and understanding the consequences that result from the
misperception. For instance, one of my clients had engaged in a series of
extramarital affairs, as well as the serious abuse of crack and cocaine. Despite
his high intelligence, he had not achieved his financial potential, either. We
discovered that his soul had actually fragmented, or split into two parts, at
birth. He was scared of his parents; his mother was a sexual addict, and his
father was a hit man in the Mafia. The part of his soul comfortable with this
family constellation incarnated, but his more spiritual side remained in the
Netherlands. Through our work, my client recemented his soul and brought it
fully into his body. He then had the courage and strength to enter a drug
rehabilitation program. He also stopped having affairs, started a master's
program, and actually began to enjoy his life and responsibilities. He took the
practical steps necessary to live as a spiritual being in real life.

   Spiritual blocks are commonly caused by mental beliefs or strongholds, as
well as emotional strongholds. In all cases, once we illuminate the truth of
being one with the Divine, we heal-even if the physical body continues to
reflect symptoms, we will know ourselves as whole.
                         THE DEEPEST FORM OF BONDAGE


SPIRITUAL BLOCKS ARE sometimes packaged as spiritual strongholds.
These strongholds are forged from two or more beliefs or at least one feeling
and belief that relate to our Divine nature-or rather, a false judgment about our
innate purity. Most common are strongholds that leave us feeling disconnected
from the Divine or from our own innate spirit.

   Spiritual beliefs are mental in nature, but they affect every part of our being.
The feelings connected with spiritual misperceptions might seem normal, but
they impact us much more severely when bonded with a spiritual
misperception rather than the more everyday garden variety. As with all
misinformed beliefs, spiritual inaccuracies reduce to the assumption that we
are separate: separate from the Divine, from our essence, from other people, or
from the world. They leave us feeling worthless, undeserving, powerless,
devalued, bad, or unlovable. They go a step further, however, in that they strike
at our core self, reducing us to believing not only that we act badly or feel bad
(or worthless or undeserving), but that we actually are the epitome of these
negative beliefs. Essentially, spiritual strongholds produce shame, the sense of
being wrong.

   Most of us think that shame is a feeling; it isn't. In the energetic world, it's an
energy that appears like a gray blob. It fills our cells, organs, systems, chakras,
and all other energetic structures with a thick, viscous liquid that stops the
flow of mana, or life energy. It surrounds us with an impenetrable goop that
locks us into being solitary. The more shame in or around us the more alone
and lonely we feel. The more isolated we perceive ourselves, the worse we
feel about ourselves.

  Ritual abuse survivors exemplify the bondage resulting from spiritual
strongholds and shame. Ritual abuse involves treatment that destroys our sense
of divinity or the belief that we are connected to the Divine. I've worked with
many people who have lived through-and nearly been destroyed by-ritual
abuse. Many were exposed to Satanic occults. Some viewed the sacrifice of
animals, babies, and loved ones at the altar of the dark. Others were
themselves cut or castrated so that their blood would provide power for the
abusers. These crippling experiences were inevitably accompanied by
messages that left the abused feeling like they were evil, rather than the victims
of evil.

   Ceremonial abuse is only one form of spiritual abuse, however. Any
fanatical set of beliefs can be used to hurt or injure our innate sense of
worthiness. I've worked with many clients who were exposed to "born again"
Christianity-the type that insists that anyone who doesn't perform a certain way
is evil, a spawn of the Devil, and going to go to hell. This type of spiritual
pressure is a form of shaming and leaves the victim unable to access or call
forth his or her unique spiritual essence or gifts. Likewise, any religion,
institution, or school that professes to be the "only way" can lead to spiritual
bondage and strongholds that leave the victim hating oneself and even the
Divine.

   A spiritual stronghold can be extraordinarily hard to heal, as by the time
most people realize they are suffering from this, they have successfully
convinced themselves that if there is a God, a Creator, an Almighty-an Allah, a
Christ, a Kwan Yin-that being cannot love them. I have found that the only way
to really recover from a spiritual stronghold is to release the shame, perceived
as a real and solid energy, to the Divine Source, and to then feel the feelings
that underlie the events constituting the abuse. Feeling our feelings frees us to
reexamine our ideas and to correct the ones that aren't right.




Looking for Truths
In addition to a block-oriented approach to diagnosing issues using the chakric
development system, we may also heal by uncovering the truths hidden beneath
our issues. Truths are either the opposite or a reflection of the misperceptions
causing us difficulty. "Whether one is aware of it or not," says Ywahoo in
Voices of Our Ancestors, "the ways in which we think and speak about
ourselves attract results and become self-fulfilling prophecies."'

   An oppositional truth is apparent in the following situation. Sandy was a
client who had gone from one bad relationship to another. Working together
revealed an array of her blocks. In her second chakra lay the belief that she
didn't deserve to be loved by a man. In her sixth chakra, she held the idea that
she was ugly. Rather than fixate on these blocks, Sandy chose to short-circuit
the blocks by deciding to adopt the opposite beliefs. Instead of dwelling on the
negative belief "I am ugly," she started to tell herself that she was beautiful.

   Working with a truth's reflection requires that we address the secondary
effects of the causal problem. Rather than do positive affirmations, Sandy
could have made herself aware of all the ways she was acting out (or
reflecting) the belief that she was ugly. I immediately noticed that she wore
unappealing clothes and slumped her shoulders. I might have asked her to alter
these reflections by dressing more attractively or standing up straight. This
way, she could have tried on a new truth until she was ready to wear it.

   More often than not, the block and the truth approaches work hand in hand.
In order to get to the truth, we might need to feel the feelings not originally
expressed, claim the false beliefs, remember the original body memories, and
unearth the spiritual issues. Understanding all facets of an issue often makes it
easier to face the truth, which though always positive, usually challenges us to
make further changes in our lives. A woman with relationship problems may,
for instance, have to alter her entire approach to meeting people. She may have
to change how she dresses, or she may have to do without a relationship for a
while. She may need to give herself new messages and might also have to
work on her soul or childhood issues. She might need to work on all of these
changes at the same time. When we do what needs to be done and trust our own
sense of it, healing can happen.
                  THE FULL CHAKRIC DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM


Using the child development/chakra system helps clarify the holistic aspects of
our issues and difficulties. The following is a more complete outline of the in-
body chakras and what they affect.



                                    Cycle One


Chakra One


Age-Womb to 6 months.

Mental Beliefs-Affects those beliefs relating to inherited attitudes, gender
legacies, safety, and survival.

Feeling Component-Origin of feelings about self and the world, the right to
 exist, and primal feelings such as guilt, terror, rage, joy, and shame.

Physical Processes-Body and structure development; affects all processes
 governing survival.

Spiritual Perceptions-Relates to commitment to life, acceptance of spiritual
 help and our basic intuitive abilities. Relates to trust in others and awareness
 of basic needs. Core of self-worth issues.

Our first chakra locks in everything that happens to our parents or ourselves
while we are in utero and newly born. During this time, we experience the
world through our parents' perceptions and our own physical body. If we
perceive a threat to ourselves or to our parents, we might question our right or
ability to survive. Threats can include anything from not being fed when hungry
to our parents going through bankruptcy. Endangerment can activate rage, pain,
grief, terror, and other primal feelings. Unless acknowledged, allowed, and
expressed in some manner, these feelings will continue to haunt us for the rest
of our lives. Beliefs that could spring out of these experiences include "The
world is dangerous" or "I don't deserve to live." However, if these feelings
and awarenesses are processed by our parents or ourselves, we will create
beliefs that support our existence and the right to have our needs met. We then
become stronger for being able to tap into our primal feelings.

   The first chakra also serves as the fundamental point for opening to spiritual
guidance. If for some reason we close ourselves off to spiritual guidance at
this young age, we become much more vulnerable to experiences of trauma and
abuse.

   In a nutshell, this chakra holds core issues regarding emotional insecurity
and physical security, as well as spiritual perceptions that relate to our right to
exist and have our needs met. These core issues become issues regarding
career, money, primal feelings, addictions, family of origin, and sexuality at
later dates.

Chakra Two


Age-6 months to 2'h years.

Mental Beliefs-Awareness of feelings and the right to express them;
world/family views about gender roles and sensuality issues. Beliefs about
expression and creativity.

Feeling Component-Development of subtle feelings, choices about which
 feelings to feel and which to repress.

Physical Processes-Growth, motor skills, owning of our own body and its
 subtle needs; ability to motivate our own body; development of sensuality.

Spiritual Perceptions-Development of trust in self and our own feelings, plus
 empathy and beliefs about the right to express and feel. Root of the right to be
 creative and expressive.
From age six months to two-and-a-half years, we separate from our mother.
Our emotional health and creative expressiveness are contingent on her ability
to separate with love and our father's capacity to support her responsiveness.
This separation and our emerging sense of self and relationship can bring up
feelings such as sadness, calm, fear, hope, or enthusiasm. Our feeling bodies
will be affected by the messages we receive regarding our right to have and
express these feelings.

  Feeling bodies are energetic constructs located within the second chakra.
Each feeling operates like an individual entity. Sadness, fear, anger, joy, or
disgust-each feeling is an individual identity, arranged next to each other like
colors in a rainbow. Like colors, feeling bodies blur into each other. Sadness,
for instance, may flow into grief; contentment slide into happiness. Like colors,
individual feelings are gradated. The feeling body of anger can intensify into
rage or dissipate into frustration.

  When healthy, each feeling body appears full and ready for activation and
expression. If a loved one dies, our sadness feeling body will vibrate. We will
feel sad until that feeling has been appropriately dissipated. The feeling body
will then return to a calmer state.

   This system works if we were raised in a healthy emotional environment.
Something internal or external stimulates a feeling-based reaction. One or
more feeling bodies vibrate, and we respond. Our internal or external
environment shifts. Quickly or gradually, the feeling bodies deactivate. We
return to equilibrium.

  The key word is "if"-if we were raised in a healthy emotional environment.
How many families are really functional? Expert opinions insist that anywhere
between 70 and 95 percent of families are dysfunctional. Most of us received
incorrect messages regarding feelings, resulting in the repression,
overstimulation, or actual injury of one or more feeling bodies.

  It's easiest to repair recent or short-term injuries. Perhaps one of your high-
school teachers shamed you for failing a test. Embarrassed, you repressed your
instinctive response, which was disappointment in yourself. A discussion with
a loving parent would alleviate the shame and help you express the
disappointment, thus enabling a releaseeven though it's a bit late. Your
disappointment-feeling body would probably not suffer long-term injury.

   Chronic or severely acute damage, however, often results in a more
permanent state of disease. Sexual, physical, emotional, or verbal abuse can
cripple one or many of our feeling bodies. Here is a picture of how this works.

   A healthy sadness-feeling body could figuratively be described as a perfect
circle. Let's say that your dad doesn't think it is okay to feel sadness; instead of
getting sad, he gets angry. Remember, sadness is an actual energy-a frequency
in motion. In his desperation to not feel sad, Dad cuts out a section of his
sadness-feeling body. Where does it go? You pick it up; it has become
displaced in you. Now your circular sadness-feeling body is misshapen. You
have spent most of your life trying to shake off an extreme state of sadness or
depression, but to no avail. Depressed, you try therapy, Prozac, vitamins. You
attract lovers who hurt you in an attempt to stimulate the sadness away. Nothing
works, and you feel even more sad-and helpless.

  In chapter 14, we will further explore how damaged feeling bodies and the
misperceptions or experiences that caused them affect our material and
spiritual well-being. Ultimately, they handicap our entire second chakra.

Chakra Three


Age-2'h to 4'/2 years.

Mental Beliefs-Affects beliefs relating to cognitive development, self and the
world, and formative beliefs about the world and our place in it. Holds
beliefs about power, abilities, and how we affect the environment.

Feeling Component-Origin of fears and self-esteem.

Physical Processes-Gaining control of physical functions and developing the
mind/ body connection.

Spiritual Perceptions-Relates to the soul's ability to make an impact on the
 world and achieve success. Origin of issues regarding interplay between life
 energy and the world.

At age two and a half, we begin to actively explore the world. We are naturally
curious and want to understand the way things work, how people react to us,
and how powerful we are. Based on the responses we receive from our
immediate relationships and the world at large, we form opinions about self
and others, especially with regard to personal power. If these responses are
supportive, we will adopt beliefs about the world such as "I am effective" or
"My personality is all right." If the responses judge or shunt our behavior, we
might conclude "I am wrong" or "I don't know anything." The third chakra
stores and implements biases, judgments, and prejudices about others and
ourselves.

   As the "mind of the body," the third chakra affects thinking processes,
attitudes, and the intuitive process of mental empathy. Also linked to the
physical body, the third chakra completes the formation of our mind/body
connection. This chakra can now pass judgments down to the second chakra,
resulting in emotions (the combination of feeling and thought). Given that the
third chakra regulates our digestive and regulatory functions, our self-esteem
will continue to affect not only these physical processes but also our ability to
use life energy to achieve our desires.

  Spiritually, we lock our deserving issues in place at this age. If we think we
can make an impact on the world and that we deserve to do so, we will be
ready to meet and master any challenges. If we don't believe in ourselves-
mainly because the important people in our life don't believe in us-our lives
may play out differently.

Chakra Four
Age-4'h to 6'h years.

Mental Beliefs-Contains beliefs about relationships, love, heart's desires, and
universal principles such as giving and receiving.

Feeling Component-Origin of feelings such as compassion and love.

Physical Processes-Time for refining all physical functions and systems. The
 initial time for distinguishing girl/boyhood differentiations.

Spiritual Perceptions-Issues regarding self-love, love for others, and the
 overall role of love in life. Here, the soul "heartily" deals with issues about
 having a body and using it to achieve desires.

The heart chakra is the integration point for the seven in-body chakras. While
we've been busy developing our way up the chakric ladder, our spiritual
center, the seventh chakra, has been sending energy down, initially through the
baby's soft spot. If spiritual energy has played an important and healthy role in
our life, we will naturally understand relationships and love ourselves. We
will know when to give, to receive, to be compassionate, to be firm, and/or to
be self-protective. Our relationships will be inhibited, however, by
experiences and beliefs that disturb this natural give-and-take cycle. Our
desires, dreams, and needs may then become stunted, as might our ability to
accept love. One aspect of being loved involves learning how to accept our
purpose and our spiritual needs. If we allow our heart's desires to be met, we
often find that the dreams of our body, mind, soul, essence, and the Divine
Source are all the same. This invites the heart to support our fantasies.

Chakra Five


Age-6'h to 8'h years.

Mental Beliefs-Contains issues of self-worth, responsibility, the expression of
desires, and our right to manifest and communicate our needs and beliefs. The
entry point for positive and negative guidance.
Feeling Component-Stored frustrations, pride, disillusionment, and grandeur,
 and the mature expression of needs and feelings.

Physical Processes-Development of self-control, completion of the childhood
 body, and preparation for adulthood.

Spiritual Perceptions-Contact point for communication between the soul, mind,
 and body. The place where the soul articulates its desires.

Chakra five is awakened during our mid-childhood years. At this time, the
beliefs, experiences, and training of our early and most critical developmental
years come to fruition. We begin to clearly articulate what we really want or
do not want. If we are aware of our needs, know we deserve to have them met,
and have a desire to interact with the world, our words will become vehicles
for expressing and creating from our inner being. Communication problems or
disorders will arise from previous blocks or inhibitions, as well as the forces
currently repressing our self-expression Being told, for instance, that "Good
girls/boys are to be seen, not heard" can create a severe block in this chakra. If
our culture is modeling behavior that perpetuates codependency or
perfectionism, or that supports under- or over-responsibility, our fifth chakra's
ability to state who we are and what we want, and to defend these statements,
will be affected.

  Spiritually, this chakra is the center of manifesting what we want in life. Any
misperceptions about our rights or abilities regarding this manifesting,
especially those originating in our soul body, will prevent us from being strong
enough to create the life we desire.

Chakra Six


Age-8'h to 14 years.

Mental Beliefs-Development of beliefs that form body image, self-image,
gender potentials, and plans for the future.
Feeling Component-Contains feelings about the self and self-image, plus
 feelings about our gender and its capabilities.

Physical Processes-Era of sexual development and of our masculine or
 feminine nature.

Spiritual Perceptions-Origin of the abilities to register and establish the soul's
 vision of our life.

The sixth chakra oversees the development of our self-image, as well it might,
for it opens during puberty. While our bodies are beginning to mature sexually,
this chakra is busy recording the familial and societal standards set for men
and women. We are emotionally vulnerable during this developmental period
and tend to personalize these messages. If we feel good about ourselves,
especially in relation to gender, later in life we will be able to select visions
and goals that serve our highest potential. If the views around us are gender-
biased and hostile to our essential self, we will have low standards for the self
in areas such as relationships, schoolwork, and goals.

  During this time period, we develop our clairvoyance, the ability to see
clearly. If we can see ourselves clearly, to see how loving and beautiful we
are, we will be able to set goals and solve problems from our truths rather than
our blocks. If the opposite occurs, we will have problems the rest of our life
with imagining ourselves as worthy of the good things in life.

Chakra Seven


Age-14 to 21 years.

Mental Beliefs-Beliefs about registering our place in the world and in the
systems around us; our roles, capabilities, and career expectations.

Feeling Component-Can be the origin of confusion between self and parts of
 self setting goals. Linked to all feelings that relate to the sense of belonging
 and the choices about what groups or systems to join.
Physical Processes-Maturation of the adult body and the outward completion
 of inner traits.

Spiritual Perceptions-Awareness of purpose and our own guiding principles.

Chakra seven is actually one of the few in-body chakras fully activated at birth.
The spiritual energy emanating from our higher, out-of-body chakras enters our
body and the chakra system through the baby's soft spot, the initial crown entry
point. Here lies our ability to claim our divinity right from the start. The
physical closing of this center symbolizes the need for us to develop as
planned, to live the life set forth for us by our human self and our parents.

   Our body completes itself during our middle puberty ages. This is the time to
make peace with our past, open to others, and define and accept our spiritual
plan. These years become difficult, however, because of the blocks forged on
our life journey. Contemporary family and societal beliefs might also fail to
support our purpose, creating confusing and painful circumstances, rather than
exciting and purposeful. Many of the decisions young people make during this
time are unfortunately made out of programmed beliefs about how to fit in,
rather than an emerging sense of individuality.

   During the seven years that chakra seven spans, we reprocess chakras one
through seven again.




We then begin processing the next five chakras in seven-year cycles.
Age Chakra Eight 21 to 28 years 28 to 35 years Nine Key Concept Karma Soul
purpose




Chakra Eight


Age-21 to 28 years.

Mental Beliefs-All karmic beliefs are now activated, as are issues regarding
time and timing of our past life.

Feeling Component-Past-life feelings come to surface, most significantly about
 karmic relationships and events needing to be cleared.

Physical Processes-Fully mature body may take on past-life characteristics.

Spiritual Perceptions-Karmic struggles. Evolution of soul to greater
 awareness.

Almost all of the choices we make between ages twenty-one and twenty-eight
are karmic. A bold statement, but often true. At this age, individuals, believing
that they are acting independently, draw to themselves a second tier of karmic
relationships (the first tier having been chosen by the tenth chakra during
preconception). Choices made about life-partners, career, lifestyle, schooling,
and other choices made during this time period often relate to undiagnosed and
incomplete karmic patterns. Our soul's challenge is to reach beyond the levels
achieved in previous lifetimes and to make new or more effective decisions.

Chakra Nine


Age-28 to 35 years.
Mental Beliefs-Major soul beliefs awaken regarding life purpose and life
tasks. Family programs may be rerun for a second look.

Feeling Component-Feelings arise from our inner desires, needs, and purpose,
 as do conflicts between feelings that support and don't support our life
 purpose.

Physical Processes-Spiritual body may now completely enter physical form.

Spiritual Perceptions-Completion of spirit into form and acceptance of
 purpose on this plane.

During this time period, we are challenged to open to our spiritual purpose.
Our soul may be called completely into our body, and we may begin our life
work. This stage often begins with or is accompanied by major life changes,
such as divorce, changes in career, and giving birth to children. These events
occur because the opening of this chakra brings with it the potential knowledge
of our true self. This knowledge is available to any and all who are willing to
experience the feelings that inhibit true expression of purpose, address the
beliefs that do not support the true self, and make the life changes necessary to
move forward.

Chakra Ten


Age-Preconception and conception; 35 to 42 years.

Mental Beliefs-Carries and stores past-life and generational beliefs.

Feeling Component-Holds unexpressed feelings of self, parents, legacy, and
 past lives.

Physical Processes-During preconception years, changes spiritual self into a
 material form. At a later age, allows us to fully ground our spiritual self into a
 purposeful lifestyle.
Spiritual Perceptions-Helps move our spirit into form (we are really just a
 materialized spirit). Relates to the grounding of our soul and the ability to
 provide the elemental energy needed to manifest our bodies, dreams, and
 desires.

Our soul activates our tenth chakra before conception. Even as our parents
consider having a child, our tenth chakra is grounding into the earth and
channeling energy for our physical existence. During this preconception stage,
our tenth chakra gathers energies from our past lives, our parents' existence,
and our heritage to shape the nature of our physical body. These energies
enable it to select the chromosomes that will help us achieve our life goals.
Will we need to be strong? Will we need to be studious, beautiful, or
physically challenged? Imagine that we need to learn how to stop being a
victim. Our tenth chakra may gather soul memories of being victimized in past
lives and mix them with situations of abuse suffered by our forebears to select
the right body and events to work out our victim issues. In a nutshell, the tenth
chakra provides the incoming soul with an initial umbilical cord to the
physical plane.

   One of my students was tackling her "I'm not deserving" issues, which had
been recently triggered by negotiations during her divorce. She had
experienced overriding feelings of loss and emptiness her entire life, even
when in a relationship. She had also struggled to discover her life purpose,
expressing the sense that she didn't "deserve" to have one. And from
childhood, she had experienced long-suppressed issues about wanting to be a
boy. Knowing these issues were probably related, she conducted a meditative
exercise she had learned in my class, which regressed her to the time she was
a fetus. Even as a tiny being, she had felt an overwhelming sense of loss.
Continuing to dig, she had another sensation-there was a presence with her in
the womb: a twin. Unable to go any further on her own, she went to a therapist,
who was able to help her regress to that womb period and the time before it.

  The answers she received validate my belief that the tenth chakra selects the
genes and even gender necessary to carry out the individual's life purpose.
Working with her therapist, my student realized that she indeed had been
conceived with a fraternal twin. Some twin bodies contain two different souls.
Some twins, usually identical, are a single soul, which chooses to experience
life through two bodies. My student had originally planned to incarnate with
another soul, but she had first desired to be the boy. For spiritual reasons, my
student's soul changed its mind and decided to occupy the girl body. The other
soul left. Although the other soul wasn't angry, my student felt guilty-and also a
sense of loss, of being the "wrong sex," and the feeling of being undeserving of
goodness, because she had "killed" the other body. After embracing the
choices, she connected with the twin soul, who committed to serving as a
guide. My student next dove into her life's mission with dedication and
enthusiasm, more fully eager to actualize her feminine energy. Within a month
of this discovery, she began to seriously pursue her lifelong dream of being a
writer and started her own freelance business as an editor.

   Sometimes the events, feelings, and energies we are connected to through
our tenth chakra are so painful that we cut off this lifeline when in-body. We
only experience life from the "knees up." Lacking rooting in our tenth chakra
leaves us ungrounded, open to victimization, and missing the physical and
emotional strength we need to deal with scary situations and life in general.
Instead of drawing upon our tenth chakra's hidden power and wisdom, we
instead stuff it with negative feelings and experiences, closing the channels
even farther. This can result in repressed memories, dissociation, lack of
personal power, low energy, or abusive relationships. We can only be our true
selves if we completely reopen this channel.

   This process is sometimes called uncovering our shadow self, the part of
our being we have judged and repressed. The shadow self isn't bad; rather, it is
full of powers, gifts, and wisdom.

   Chakra ten reactivates during middle adulthood, between ages thirty-five to
forty-two. We are challenged to fully ground or realize our true identity through
our life work, relationships, and lifestyle. Integrity is the operative concept-
ethical integration of all true components of our self. I believe that the reason
so many people have middle-age crises during this time period or shortly
thereafter is due to this calling for truth in our life.
Chakras Eleven and Twelve


I have not outlined chakras eleven and twelve but will address their activities
here. The function of the eleventh chakra is simple. A pink energy wrapped
around our feet and hands, it transmutes energy external to our body into usable
energy and releases energy no longer needed by our body into the atmosphere.
When used with purposeful intention, chakra eleven also enables command of
natural and supernatural forces. I'll provide examples.

  A few years ago, I was researching shamanism in Mexico. A shaman in one
area directed me to a small city northwest of the Yucatan where a British
professor had been interviewing local shamans. I pulled into the village and
found the professor without any problem. She was in town square-with a huge,
bloody gash on her cheek. Appalled, I asked her what had happened, and she
said that she had been struck by lightning just the day before. Apparently, she
had decided to mention only one of the two local weather shamans-healers
able to command rain, thunder, and lightning-in her book. The other had cursed
her, telling her he would send lightning as a punishment. The day after he had
angrily uttered this statement, she was struck by a lightning bolt-on a perfectly
clear day.

   The eleventh chakra permits us to summon and steer supernatural forces, as
well as natural forces including lightning, air, fire, earth, and water. I once
studied with a Siberian shaman who was able to produce coins and other small
objects, such as toothpicks, out of the air. His explanation was that he was able
to command paranormal forces. (I would suggest he was able to journey on one
of the four pathways of reality, called the power pathway, which is the subject
of my Advanced Chakra Healing series.)

   Critical malfunctions may arise if the eleventh chakra is inactive or injured.
If it is unable to filter others' negativity, our own body may become a toxic
waste site. Inability to release unnecessary energetic wastes through our feet
can fill up the lower part of our body with toxins, causing us to disassociate
into our higher chakras. The resulting spaciness-missing safety signals, such as
traffic signs-can be more than annoying; it can be dangerous.
   Chakra twelve is too complex to graph. As the energy center surrounding the
human body, it connects into each of the thirty-two secondary chakra points.
Chakra twelve therefore affects and is affected by just about everything in our
spiritual and material selves. After activation, chakra twelve propels us into
mastery, our ability to generate our spiritual nature and truth in everything we
do. Many clients report it as the key to inviting miracles. I taught a class in
which we animated everyone's twelfth chakra. The next month, one of the men
attending the class found himself negotiating a twentymillion-dollar business
deal. Another woman closed down her current company and started a different
one-more happily, I might add. Each person experienced a major change in his
or her life, all for the best.

Processing with the Higher Points


Our chakras continue to open in seven-year spans for the remainder of Cycle
One. Within these seven-year blocks of time, each lower chakra is again
reprocessed. The beauty of this eternal reprocessing is that during these seven
years, we can more effectively gain access to our higher energy points. We can
apply these higher truths to immediately make ethical changes and clear old
issues under spiritual principles.

   Consider a typical chakra ten midlife crisis. The challenge to live according
to our true needs could become an excuse for reneging on previous decisions
and to escape current responsibilities. In effect, we would be saying, "Oops! I
really don't like this job, want this husband/wife, or want to take care of these
children. I made those decisions out of family programs, not my true essence,
so I guess I'll just skip out."

   If we instead approach these realizations from a spiritual perspective, we
may still make many changes, but we will make them responsibly. Instead of
trying to escape our responsibilities, we might tap into the abundance point
when experiencing constriction. We may then attract new friends or learn about
new ways of being. These positive experiences may keep us from chucking our
job, marriage, or life goals quite so suddenly. We could also work with our yin
and yang points to gain insight into our own feminine and masculine selves.

   True wisdom can be gained by struggling to incorporate these higher truths,
rather than just living blindly. The reflections granted by these higher points
call us to not just react against our present reality, but to be responsible for it.

Cycling within the Cycle


Over time, I found that the chakric development process helped clients
diagnose issues, pinpoint the origins of issues, and, thus focused, clear the
issues. The process makes sense. Therapists began to integrate these ideas into
their practices; natural healers began to apply these concepts to locate the
origins of disease patterns. It seemed to be a system that needed no tampering,
as long as I remembered to assist people with the system rather than fit them
into the system.

  At this point, a new pattern emerged. I noticed that in individuals older than
twenty, there were shadow issues-issues that seemed localized in originating
chakras, but tied into another chakra as well. At first, I thought that this was
another example of holography, the theoretical assertion that the whole is
mirrored in its parts and vice versa. These shadow issues fit a pattern. Each
primary chakra stage seemed tied to a secondary chakra. These secondary
chakras evolved in the same seven-year sequence, as did the primary chakras.

   For instance, almost everyone making decisions during their chakra eight
developmental stage, or working through decisions made during that time
frame, were also struggling with what could only be called first chakra issues.
Chakra eight is the time of karma, and during this time period, individuals are
working through age-old patterns toward the goal of clarifying their soul
purpose. Chakra one is about life and survival needs-career, money, primary
relationship, and lifestyle. When living within chakra eight, individuals were
clearly living out (and sometimes actually working through) old patterns, using
firs-chakra issues as the base.
   I saw a similar pattern in clients in their early thirties. While almost all of
them were questioning their purpose and the value of their life and gifts, they
were primarily feeling this push emotionally. The purpose quest is a clear
indicator of chakra nine, the age placement associated with Cycle One.
However, the emphasis on feelings throughout this time period is reflected in
chakra two, the feeling and creativity chakra.

   I found that the best way to assist clients through their Cycle One
development was to communicate through the language of one of the in-body
chakras. This meant that when assisting clients in chakra eight, I emphasized
chakra one needs. When helping clients located in chakra nine, I spoke to their
feelings (chakra two). Clients based in chakra ten required chakra three
support, involving assistance with personal power and success issues. Clients
associated with chakra eleven were often heavily involved in personal
relationship issues, often originating in chakra four.

  As an example, I worked with a forty-year-old man who was starting his
own business. A successful accountant, he felt that his gifts would be better
used supporting small business owners rather than corporate giants. He wanted
assistance with determining how to communicate his changing desires to his
loved ones and to his potential clients.

   From a chakric development point of view, the accountant was easy to slot.
His seven-year cycle was notched at chakra ten, the time period for grounding
purpose. His needs corresponded to chakra ten concerns. He was attempting to
package his skills and gifts in a way meaningful to him and to others. Within
this seven-year span of chakra ten, he was also cycling between the fifth and
sixth chakras. (Remember, we annually replay the seven in-body chakras
within the larger framework.) His desire to communicate his self-image
showed concerns addressed by both of these chakras. However, his major
concentration was about success and work-related concerns, which were
thirdchakra issues.

 After detecting the pattern just illustrated, I did some informal research.
Most of the intuitive and healing experts I talked with said that they had always
been taught that the chakras recycled from one to seven throughout someone's
life. Cycle One seemed to exist, but so did what I now call Cycle Two, the
recycling of chakras one through seven every seven years.

   As I worked with both cycles, I found that my work and my client's success
at dealing with problems were enhanced. Though complex, working with this
additional layer expanded our understanding of the issues and concerns. The
additional data caused additional reflection and subsequently greater
breakthroughs.



                                     Cycle Two


As explained, Cycle One involves a developmental progression through the
twelve human chakras. Basically, we work our way from the first to the twelfth
chakras in linear fashion. Beginning at the seventh chakra, which activates at
age fourteen, we leap from chakra to chakra every seven years. Within each
seven-year block of time, we annually reactivate our first seven in-body
chakras.

Age 14 to 21 21 to 28 28 to 35 35 to 42 42 to 49 49 to 56 Cycle Two Cycle
One Chakra Seven Chakra Seven Chakra One Chakra Eight Chakra Two
Chakra Nine Chakra Three Chakra Ten Chakra Four Chakra Eleven Chakra
Five Chakra Twelve

At age fifty-six, Cycle One returns; Cycle Two continues upward.

Age 56 to 63 63 to 70 70 to 77 77 to 84 Cycle Two Cycle One Chakra Six
Chakra One Chakra Seven Chakra Two Chakra One Chakra Three Chakra Two
Chakra Four

As we progress in age, we obviously have more issues to process and more
chakras through which to process them. I believe, however, that the complexity
is not meant to cause confusion; rather, it is to further link our material with our
spiritual selves. The beauty of the system is that we are constantly provided
opportunity to heal wounds from the past, and to transmute them into gifts for
our future.

   We can illustrate this if we examine how the two cycles might fit together, if
we show how the two chakras, when merged or meshed, can lift our awareness
to a new level. For instance:




Seven/Purpose, 63 to 70 Two/Creativity Spirit One/Awareness 70 to 77
Three/Success Two/Creativity 77 to 84 Four/Relationship (Love) Life
definition Life review Spiritual connectedness

Our ability and need to connect with the higher chakras becomes greater during
our second chakric development cycle. Optimally, our chakric openings will
expand as we move closer to age 100. In Cycle One, we will reopen chakra
five between ages 84 and 91, chakra six between ages 91 and 98, and chakra
seven between ages 98 and 105. Because most of us won't live this long, we
group our chakras together to fit them into our life span whenever possible.


             EXERCISE: EXPLORING YOUR CHAKRIC DEVELOPMENT
1. Guide yourself into a meditative state. As you focus on one of your chakras,
 allow yourself to complete these statements:

   A. The experience that most affected me at this age was ...

   B. The major belief locked in this chakra that is keeping me from being my
   full self is ...

   C. The feelings I've repressed and must now claim are ...

   D. The part of my body connected to this chakra needs to tell me ...

   E. The soul belief at this level that needs to be changed is ...

   F. The most appropriate new soul belief would be ...

   G. When fully healed, this chakra will enable me to ...
      Diagram for the Exploring Your Chakric Development Exercise

II. What area in your body causes you the most pain or difficulty? See if you
 can apply the chakric development system to uncover the reasons for this
 discomfort.
   A. First, look up what age tends to relate to that part of your body. Now,
   see if you can recall any outstanding events, feelings, or experiences from
   that time period. What was happening? How were you affected? If you
   can't remember anything, ask your parents, siblings, or relatives to help.

   B. Put the pieces together by listing the physical, mental, emotional, and
   spiritual decisions you made during this time. What picture now emerges?

III. Using the picture on the previous page, in each circle on the left, indicate
 which blocks relate to the corresponding chakra. The blocks can include
 physical (an illness), mental (a belief or attitude), emotional (a feeling about
 something that happened at that age), or spiritual (the idea you have about
 your relationship to the Divine Source). In the right circles, write the
 contrasting truths.

   Take these truths and rewrite them on index cards. Challenge yourself to
 read these twice a day.
                  FROM FRONT TO BACK:
                  WORKING WITH YOUR
                    IN-BODY CENTERS
Most references to the human energy system concentrate on the front side of the
chakras, which would be sufficient if we were only two-dimensional beings.
However, just as our bodies have a front side and a back side, so does our
chakric system.

                     BODIES ON THE BACK OF OUR BODIES


Most of our in-body chakras are conical-shaped masses of swirling energy.
Each chakra has a front and a back. Both the front and the back attach to the
spine or the point within the body from which the chakra emanates. In the front,
the chakra whirls clockwise. In the back, it whirls counterclockwise. In
general, the front side of the chakric system relates to our conscious self, our
day-to-day reality. It contains information and imprints from this life. The back
side of the chakric system pertains to our unconscious self, or our extended
reality. It includes information and imprints from past lives, alternative
dimensions, and other worlds.

   When we work with the front-side chakras, we gain access to experiences
from this life. Contained within each front-side energy center are memories,
beliefs, feelings, awarenesses, and needs that affect us right now. Our healing
goal is to pinpoint experiences, relationships, and beliefs that adversely affect
us. Upon uncovering the causal situation, we then go about processing and
clearing it. Clearing a front-side chakra issue usually involves taking an action
of some sort, such as thinking new thoughts, adopting new attitudes, or
performing in new ways.

   When working with the back-side energy centers, we must open to a
completely different set of energies. We might unearth experiences from a
different time period. We might become aware of a self that is connected to a
different dimension. We might tune in to beings from other planets, dimensions,
or realities. While we experience our front-side chakras via reality-based
memories, feelings, actions, or experiences, we usually experience the back-
side chakras through dreams, mystical experiences, inexplicable awarenesses,
or unexplainable physical sensations. These back-side chakras contain the data
stored in our unconscious or shadow self. Although this data could originate in
this-life experiences, it is not limited to that. There is an entire world available
to us through our back-side energy system. Therefore, healing or manifesting
through our back-side centers can change reality without a response-stimulus,
cause-and-effect basis. Our world, beliefs, feelings, processes, and goals may
literally rearrange themselves. Such is the power of the unconscious.




                          BENEFITS OF THE BACK SIDE


Working with the back-side chakric system can be extremely beneficial for
many reasons. First, while our front side relates to our conscious issues, the
back side relates to our unconscious issues. We can work and work and work
on our conscious issues, but never uncover the roots of our concerns, which
frequently lie in our unconscious. If we can heal the physical, mental,
emotional, or spiritual issues hidden in or caused by our unconscious, our
conscious reality will respond accordingly.

   A second reason for working with the back side is that it opens us to
alternative realities rather than just apparent ones. The front side of each
chakra connects to concrete reality, which is regulated by the everyday world,
whereas the back side of each chakra links us to dimensions and energies that
stretch far beyond the day-to-day world. Energy pouring through our front sides
must obey the laws of the physical universe. If you want to lift a box, you will
have to pick up the box. Energy applied through the back-side chakras is
nonconforming. The back-side chakras, each in its own way, can literally bend
or shape reality according to nonphysical principles. If you want to lift a box
by applying back-side principles, anything can happen. Someone else may
come along and lift up the box. A sudden earthquake may shift the box for you.
The box may just move itself. You never know.

   The third reason it is important to work with the chakric back side is that so
few people do it. By and large, most metaphysical healing communities
overlook a significant aspect of human nature by ignoring one-half of the human
energy system-the back side, the hidden, occult, shadow side. The back is the
side of us that contains our denied feelings, awarenesses, powers, dreams,
premonitions, and beliefs. It is the side that hides our repressed memories,
unacknowledged knowledge, long-held secrets, and unrealized desires.
Because we have hidden these aspects of our nature in the dark for so long,
they frighten us. All that is unknown haunts us, which in turn, gives us more
reason to deny our shadow side.

  The problem is that the more we ignore the unconscious truths which align
with our back-side energy centers, the more noise and trouble these repressed
aspects of ourselves make. Isn't it better to face these demons head-on? We can
do this by working with our chakric back sides.

The Power of the Back Side
Time and time again, I have been impressed by the power of these back-side
chakras. I have seen clients clear significant emotional issues, heal long-term
physical problems, and become aware of long-buried memories, all because
we were working on their back-side energy centers rather than their front-side
energy centers.

   I remember one client in particular. Jamie was struggling with chronic back
pain and low-performance issues. Try as she might, she could never get her
career going. She was also one step shy of agreeing to surgery to correct her
history of back disorders. We used guided imagery, transpersonal psychology,
and regression work to walk her into and through each of her back-side
chakras. Within each, she uncovered and talked to an aspect of herself that had
been repressed since childhood. As she brought these personality aspects to
the surface, she asked if they could think of a way to meet their needs, a way
that wouldn't result in back pain or poverty. They did, and Jamie's pain
disappeared during the session. I encouraged her to go home and continue to do
guided meditation and affirmation work with her back-side chakras. I didn't
hear from her for another six months, at which point she called and raved, "My
back pain never did come back! I kept going through the back chakras, just like
you said, and the most interesting things happened!" Jamie went on to recount
an unexpected job promotion, an opportunity to attend a select seminar, a
fantastic new beau, and a great deal she had just received from an insurance
company. She was experiencing the power of the unconscious; although it can
cause all kinds of problems, it can also introduce many unexpected, miraculous
solutions.

   Yet another client, Ramon, came to me for help with lung cancer, for which
he was also receiving chemotherapy. We actually ended up working on his
spine, as he had repressed his sense of power and purpose since childhood.
Lacking a full flow of the red first-chakra energy, Ramon didn't have enough
strength to battle the cancer or assert his needs in everyday situations, much
less to his doctors. The next week, Ramon returned. His back had hurt so badly
the night after our session that he hadn't been able to sleep. He arose to find
that his clothes didn't fit. He was two inches taller! He also reported that he
had been experiencing "unexplainable bouts of happiness" since our session.
By working with Ramon's back set of chakras, we had shifted his back-and his
sense of well-being. As for the cancer, that went into remission, which could
have been due to the chemotherapy, as well. I have found, however, that
working energetically clears the way for increasingly effective medical
treatment.

   Not every experience with the chakric back side results in such dramatic
changes. However, the inherent power of these units is underscored for me
every time I introduce them to students. After providing information regarding
the individual and joint functions of the back-side chakras, I typically pair up
students to exchange healings. During these exchanges, students help each other
explore the feelings, awarenesses, needs, and problems in each other's energy
systems and lives. Without exception, students inform me that the energies felt,
healings received, and information gathered is far more powerful from the
back side than the front side.

   Personally, I believe the front and back sides are equally important and
powerful. The difference is that the back sides have been lying dormant,
unrecognized, and untouched for so long. The first time someone works with
them, it is comparable to opening the door of a long-caged tiger. Any tiger is
going to leap forth, fierce and ferocious.

   So far, I have explained the nature of the seven in-body and the five out-of-
body chakras, in addition to the twenty higher plane energy points. As I
introduce the seven back-side, in-body chakras, I want to note that there are
back sides to the other centers. However, because so little is known about
these other twenty-five energy centers, trying to discuss the parallel but
opposite sides of these centers would only add layers of confusion.

                   FUNCTIONS OF THE BACK-SIDE CHAKRAS


Just like the front-side chakras, the back-side chakras are specific in function.
Each has a physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual purpose. Each also
interconnects with the others. True health exists when each independent back-
side chakra (as well as each front-side one) functions as a healthy individual
unit and operates in a consistent manner with the other centers. While much
research must still be done in regard to these back-side chakras, understanding
and working with them is a critical component to creating a healthy, balanced,
and happy life.

Chakra One


The back side of the first chakra is located in a lower-frequency dimension. It
contains all the beliefs and experiences we have ever held regarding our rights
to manifest, create, and flourish on the physical plane. Through this point, we
can tap into core belief systems that affect the nature of our being. The energy
we ideally want to channel consists of red (or serpent) kundalini energy. We
ignite this "life flame" through our first backside chakra and open ourselves to
our passions, drives, and desires. When this back-side chakra is healed, we
can receive all the energies needed to actualize our physical dreams and needs,
because we realize that we are physical models of the Divine Source's
expression. Here, we can heal our physical issues, including addictions, blood
diseases, and inherited problems. Even more important, this center allows us
to open to abundance, worthiness, complete health, and a belief in our own
sacredness.

Location-Lower-frequency dimension. Based in the universal pool of physical
 matter from which all life springs.

Physical Attributes-Programs DNA. Regulates the body's chemical balance in
 reaction to beliefs about being deserving and worthy. Coordinates the genetic
 passage of the collective past (which technically is passed in from chakra
 ten). Functions as the access point to the globe of humanity and the human
 drive for procreation.

Mental Attributes-Holds the key to our beliefs about deserving physical life
and wellbeing. Ideally, it will lead us to the necessary realization that we are
a manifestation of Divine Source energy, and we deserve all that our essential
self requires for full expression.

Feeling Attributes-Allows universal love energy to enter through the back side
 of this chakra, which is the basis for the primary feelings shown through the
 front side of the first chakra. If we disbelieve our own goodness, we will stop
 up the flow and experience rage, hurt, pain, fear, and more.

Spiritual Attributes-Serves as the physical meeting ground of the sacred. All of
 life is sacred, from the cellular to the nebulous. Our true essence is breathed
 into this chakra, where it is shaped for physical experiences.

Healing Applications-The back side of the first chakra is shaped by all of our
prior experiences and beliefs, and those of our fellow human beings. We
basically want to eliminate the clogs in this chakra, and erase or transform the
beliefs that say "I don't deserve a fully happy life." When we become willing
to open to the Divine Source's belief system rather than our own, we find a
template that allows unlimited amounts of manifestation energy into our first
chakra and spinal system. We can apply this raw energy to heal physical,
mental, emotional, or spiritual issues.

Symbols-The colors black, red, and white. Cultural death and life symbols,
 including the scythe, blood, the ankh, the cross, fertility signs, and natural
 produce such as corn and grain.

         Chakra one serves as the foundation for our life experience.


Chakra Two


The back side of the second chakra contains our feelings about ourselves in
relation to the holistic universe. The front side contains our feeling bodies,
which operate as entities unto themselves. The model or template for these
feeling bodies is found in the back chakra. The back side channels feeling
frequencies from beyond or outside of us which feed a full feeling or heal
incomplete ones. We can psychically see and experientially know each feeling
as a whole and complete unit or, conversely, as fragmented and dissociated
pieces. Our goal is to weave these frequencies into our feeling bodies, either
to complete our incomplete feelings or strip away feelings that are not ours. By
opening to the vibrations that we need, we allow ourselves to analyze
situations in light of their emotional complexities. This leaves us able to work
within the dualities of the physical universe-to understand the good in the bad,
the meaning in the meaningless, and the truth within the falsehoods.

Location-Originates in the lower back area.

Physical Attributes-Holds the templates of the front side's feeling bodies.
 Feeling bodies are material bodies. All physical issues relate, at least at some
 level, to our feeling bodies. Problems such emotionalism, stress,
 compulsions, relationship ills, creative blocks, and small back pains can be
 symptoms of a second-chakra back side that is not completely open or that is
 unprotected. This back-side center can also transform feelings into energy,
 powers, beliefs, colors, and tones. We can heal our feelings by working with
 beliefs, colors, tones, and the like.

Mental Attributes-Receives the healing and adaptation energy needed to cope
with life's changes. Blocks in the back side prevent us from receiving this
energy. Judging the acceptability of or denying expression of certain feelings
causes blocks in the back side of the chakra or in the center meeting point
between the front and back sides.

Feeling Attributes-Serves as our feelings template. If we consider all feelings
 to be equal and good, our feeling bodies will be whole and complete. These
 feelings can then encourage or discourage, construct or destruct, or solidify or
 change our behaviors so that we can adapt to life's natural rhythms and life
 crises. The back side of this energy center will therefore be open to the
 vibrations and energies necessary for creativity and experience. In addition, it
 will enable us to obtain and acknowledge the supernatural help necessary to
 flow with the twists and turns of life.

Spiritual Attributes-Gives the soul the support and fluidity necessary to adapt
and thrive in life. The back side of the second chakra is in turn affected by our
soul's beliefs about life's meaning and meaninglessness, hope and
hopelessness, good and bad, emptiness and existence, the self and the All, and
other dualities of existence as they are experienced on the physical plane.

Healing Applications-The back side of chakra two is a prime starting point for
healing emotional distress; birth, rebirth, and reproductive concerns;
codependency tendencies; general compulsions; small back pain; and our
reactions to life's just and unjust occurrences. Here, we can open to the
energies necessary to soothe and heal feelings like rejection, disillusionment,
apathy, resentments, and feelings that result from death and loss, grief and
pain. When we bring our feelings into balance, releasing others' feelings and
accepting our own, we open to the power of creation itself. We allow
ourselves to manifest the mana that sustains us through life's ups and downs.

Symbols-Cross-cultural forms indicative of feelings, emotions, release, and
 rebirth, including the moon, water, the Jewish mikvah cleansing pool, natural
 cycles and the seasons, and a naked woman on a crescent moon with her hand
 on her abdomen.

                  Chakra two serves as our feeling template.


Chakra Three


The back side of chakra three is really an intellectual template. Through this
side of the chakra we gain knowledge of things seen and unseen and, based
upon our belief systems, tap into the energies we need to make effective life
decisions. The front side expresses our will in the world, and our back side
accesses energy for achievement. Here, we can heal judgments, falsehoods,
and incorrect assumptions and allow our drive for success (however we define
success) to work for us rather than against us.

Location-Middle of the back.
Physical Attributes-Connects into the metabolic center of the body; affects our
 general energy level and drive. Symptoms of problems include decreased life
 energy, confusion, digestive conditions, and an inability to focus or
 concentrate. We need to remember that decision making, goal setting, and goal
 achievement require intellectual energy, which is a material energy.

Mental Attributes-Serves as the intellectual template through which all
judgments are processed, accepted, changed, or rejected. Space where we
pattern thought forms (collections of beliefs that form ideals), as well as
beliefs regarding success, assertion of will and drive, and our relationship
with the external world.

Feeling Attributes-Leads us to totally accept ourselves, purpose, and drives.
 When we're healthy in this back side, we can achieve higher feelings,
 including acceptance, peace, and faith. When completely open and healthy, we
 would not participate in violence or war, because the basis for war is
 prejudice and fear. When acting out of self-confidence and authenticity, there
 is simply no room for violence.

Spiritual Attributes-Provides knowledge of the seen and unseen, and, if we
 have faith in our abilities, invites the ideas necessary to set and implement our
 goals. Erases spiritual doubt. Allows our soul to serve as spiritual director,
 supplying concepts and impetus for self-expression.

Healing Applications-Work on this center when experiencing energy issues,
whether they be physical, mental, or emotional. Blocks in this center stem
from doubt, a lack of faith in our own higher good and goals. Here, we can
address and heal judgments, prejudices, incorrect assumptions, painful
behaviors, and success issues. One way to approach this healing process is to
remember how the first three chakras work together. We add the raw emotions
of the first chakra to the intellectual awarenesses of the third to create the
emotions located in the second chakra. By changing the directives entering
through our third chakra's back side, we can change our feelings and
perceptions about the world itself.
Symbols-Typical symbols will relate to the intellect and learning endeavors,
 including the sun, a book, and words.

                Chakra three serves as our intellectual template.


Chakra Four


The back side of chakra four serves as a portal to the wonderful playground of
our soul. All of us, even people who consider themselves to be "old souls," in
truth have souls that are childlike. No matter what our age, our soul is youthful,
because we are all children of the Divine Source. As children, our soul's job is
to explore, learn, develop, test, try, and have fun. The back side of our heart,
when free, opens us to our spirit's true desires. Most of these desires are
childlike in nature and include fantasies like going skinny-dipping, basking in
the sun, eating ice cream, or lazing around the pool.

   Through this aspect of the heart chakra, we can merge our personhood
completely with the divine light of the universe. It is the great space that the
Divine Source, the Master Planner, has built for simple pleasures. In this
place, love is conditional. The condition is free expression of our total being.
When completely open to Divine Source, we might experience radiant
kundalini. Introduced in chapter 3, radiant kundalini signifies the beginning of
true enlightenment and the acceptance of unconditional love. Once we receive
this love from the Divine, we're able to share it with others.

Location-Upper back.

Physical Attributes-Serves as the entry point for all physical actions we feel
 called to do. The physical focus of these desires synchronizes with our
 heartbeat. Beat, rest, beat, rest-do, be, do, be. Obviously, any heart-related
 issues would indicate an imbalance in the back side of the heart chakra, as
 would resistance to following our true calling or desires.

Mental Attributes-Receives love without judgment, and functions as an access
point for mental energies that are pure and simple. Through the back side of
the heart chakra, we can receive the type of support we longed to get as a
child. Here, the conditional belief system of the lower chakras meets the
unconditional belief system of the upper chakras. Our conditional needs,
reduced to the simple requirement to be and to express our true self, merges
with the unconditional love and support of the universe.

Feeling Attributes-Connects our physically based essence, and attaches to our
 Divine Source-based essence. This chakra back side needs to be fully
 connected to the Divine Source. The feelings experienced through a fully open
 and healed heart chakra back side will be related to unqualified love and
 encouragement for being.

Spiritual Attributes-Keeps us continually open to the needs of our soul as it
 progresses in its growth and development. The back side of this chakra
 connects to the Divine Source and our Divine Source self. Here, we
 experience the call of the child we are. Upon experiencing the power of the
 back side of the heart chakra, one of my students said, "A soul pauses here and
 is born, waiting to be born again."

Healing Applications-All heart, circulatory, and blood issues relate to this
center on the physical front side. We could also examine the back side of this
chakra if we are experiencing constrictions of any sort; dealing with
childhood abuse issues; or disbelieving in our own purity and innocence.
Often, this center will speak to us through dreams, out-of-body experiences,
or guides such as angels who seek to steer us toward our true self and true
purpose.

Symbols-Signs regarding the back side of this chakra may be very personal,
 consisting of images we hold dear and important. General symbols include
 any portraits of the heart, butterflies, hummingbirds, or anything childlike and
 innocent.

                 Chakra four is the seat of our heart's desires.
Chakra Five


No one would know that you exist without the back side of the fifth chakra.
Here, truths are made known via the Divine Source, our own spirit, and higher
guides. As we express these truths, others learn about them, too. The back side
of the fifth chakra is the center through which we channel thoughts, ideas, and
concepts from other beings, other dimensions, and other aspects of ourselves.
We receive information through the back of the neck, and then pass it along
through our conscious, vocal front side. Here, we own what guidance we want
and reject that which does not apply to us. In a way, this chakra is the fate
center. We constantly select and then voice what we want to create versus what
we do not.

Location-Back of the neck.

Physical Attributes-Serves as an access point or a doorway. If we leave our
 doors wide open, anything can come in and probably will. All sorts of people
 and beings can set up shop, potentially causing all sorts of problems. Without
 filters, we may receive guidance from people or beings that don't mean us
 well. Opening to guidance from twisted sources leaves us vulnerable to
 making decisions that could cause financial, relationship, and physical
 distress. On the other hand, being open yet wise with regard to information
 and guidance can help us create the life that we desire.

Mental Attributes-Channels thoughts, ideas, and concepts from other beings
and various parts of the self. Affected by the beliefs others hold about us, as
well as our past-life beliefs. One of the most common problems in this chakra
is the presence of cords, energetic contracts between the self (or selves) and
other beings. Because they are so common, I now always check for cords in
the back of the neck. Usually, I find Mom's beliefs entering through the left
side of the client's neck and another legacy from Dad planted in the right side.
It is important to weed through these old beliefs or old tapes in order to gain
control of this center.

Feeling Attributes-Serves as an entry point for any and all feelings that we
need to express. Through techniques such as guided imagery, we can exit
through this chakra and seek guidance in relation to our feelings. Often, we
must rely upon our feelingbased reaction to the guidance received through this
back chakra to access the motivation and accuracy of a source.

Spiritual Attributes-Operates as an access point for outside spirits and
 messages from our spiritual self. Full transmediums use this point as a
 gateway to leave their bodies and allow other beings to enter. We can achieve
 as much clarity by remaining in our bodies and listening to the guidance
 coming in through the back side of this chakra. After all, it is really our own
 spirit or soul we want to completely incorporate, not another's. A general rule
 of thumb when healing or applying this chakra is to speak what we know and
 release resistance to learning what we must know. Ultimately, we want to
 channel words (tones or music) from our Divine Source self.

Healing Applications-As the major entry point for old tapes, this chakric back
side provides access to ideas for healing just about anything. Here, we
experience the similarities between healing and manifesting. To heal a
problem, we must usually open to a new idea and then say what we are
willing to do differently. Once we state our intention, we open ourselves to
manifesting something new. This chakra back side is also the center to check
for unusual problems such as spirit possession or demonic influence.

Symbols-Any relating to spinning, such as a loom, spinning wheel, or spider.
 Through the back side of this chakra, we collect the raw material needed to
 spin our own truths, and therefore spin our own realities.

             Chakra five serves as the center of self-directed fate.


Chakra Six


Considered the sight chakra, the back side of the sixth chakra reflects all our
potentials, while the front side envisions our one, truest path. The meeting
point between the front and back of the sixth chakra-the pituitary gland-serves
as a prism that receives all our potential visions and evaluates them according
to our highest purpose. Our life's strategic plan can be on or off. If our central
sixth-chakra belief systems are self-affirming, our visions of self will be
constructive. If our central sixth-chakra belief system is self-destructive, our
self-image will be negative, and our goals will be the same.

  This chakra is a path chakra. A fully healed sixth chakra back side helps us
visualize not only what could happen, but what will happen if we stay true to
form. During my teaching sessions, I explain this back-side chakra to students
poetically:




Location-Back of the head.

Physical Attributes-Affects both our inner and outer vision. As the center for
creative visualization, what we envision becomes materialized in physical
reality in this chakra. People often experience the healing or opening of this
chakra first as a whitelight experience. Upon viewing the intense white light,
their lives are never the same. What happens is that they are opening to the
path that the Divine Source and their own Divine Source self visualizes for
them. If they commit to following it, life truly isn't ever the same.

Mental Attributes-Shows us the beliefs we hold about our true potential. As
described in chapter 2, self-concept is actually lodged in the middle of the
pituitary. When blind to our divine nature, our visions may be immature,
incomplete, or be unobtainable. Extreme self-negativity leaves us in the dark,
susceptible to brainwashing or cult influence. When we lack a clear picture of
self, we might adopt others' visions for our life rather than our own. The
converse is also true. By affirming our Divine Source self, we automatically
receive and select visions that will enable us to reach our highest potential.

Feeling Attributes-Influences and reflects how we feel about ourselves. The
 more open the back side of this chakra is, the better we feel about ourselves.
 Lack of self-acceptance, poor self-image, and the like are often directly
 attributable to a partially shutdown sixth-chakra back side. Feelings of low
 self-worth can shut down this chakra; an inhibited back sixth chakra can also
 produce depressive feelings. Conversely, the better we feel about ourselves,
 the more responsive this chakra will be to producing positive feelings.

Spiritual Attributes-Shows our soul what it has created and what it wants to
 create. A pure back side opens to a higher guiding light so we might envision
 our true desires and attract opportunities that will manifest them.

Healing Applications-Here, we can address problems with low self-image or
bodyimage concerns; confusion about our path, choices, and potential futures;
and a general disbelief in a future. During any death and dying process,
including those involving transformations or loss, there is typically a
necessary and predictable shutting down in this area. We lose sight of clarity
as our self-perceptions and choices rearrange.
Symbols-All visual images; story images regarding a river, a path, or a
 journey; representations of light, including the sun, rainbows, and prisms.

                     Chakra six is the seat of self-creation.


Chakra Seven


The back side of the seventh chakra is simultaneously located nowhere and
everywhere. Here we open to and realize the divine spark of consciousness.
The back side is the access point by which we can connect with all beings of
the Divine Source, whether they are physically alive or not. Here is the lifeline
to all existence and the truth of our own existence. Through this back-side
chakra, we channel golden kundalini, the lifeblood of our spiritual existence.
One of my clients shared this poem after being introduced to this side of her
seventh chakra:




Location-The higher planes, where all dimensions/time zones become one.

Physical Attributes-Has no physical attributes because of its complete non-
 judgmen- talism. While problems in the front side can manifest as physical
 concerns, the back side cannot physically affect us. However, opening to
 energies available through this back-side chakra can lead to physical healing.
 Any sense of disharmony or incompleteness in our lives could indicate an
 injured seventh chakra back side.

Mental Attributes-Opens us to the divine spark of consciousness and the
universe's positive beliefs about ourselves. When we believe that we are
unworthy or when we fear losing our individuality to the greater All, we can
close down the back of the seventh chakra. To keep this portal open, we must
be willing to change these beliefs or let them be transformed.

Feeling Attributes-Brings us a feeling of being perfectly still, yet blissful. The
 feeling is comparable to that which we experience when praying, meditating,
 or praising at our own personal place of worship.

Spiritual Attributes-Helps us realize that all spirits are equal. Our
 individuality remains intact, yet we realize that unity is of key importance.
 Most people describe the state of awareness achieved at this level as feeling
 "at home."

Healing Applications-Anyone would benefit from the peace and stillness
experienced at this level. At its most basic level, working with the back side
of this chakra opens us to a fundamental shift in consciousness. Because its
access point to the body is located in the higher mind, working with the
energies available in this chakra back side can dramatically alter our
perceptions and thinking.

Symbols-Any symbol of completion or wholeness-the white light, the circle,
 the spiral, the halo.

                     Chakra seven is the seat of wholeness.
                          THE BACK SIDES IN ACTION


We're human. Most of us won't live to see the day when all our chakras,
especially our back-side chakras, are fully functioning.

  The good news is that we don't have to wait. Every time we open or heal
one of our back-side chakras, even partially, we create change within the
remaining chakras, both back and front.

   Every chakra interrelates with every other chakra. For example, the first
chakra channels energy that keeps us alive and secure. Its back side funnels
material from the sea of matter. The midpoint connection passes this energy
through to our front side, which determines our action. The amount of available
energy and its direction are regulated by our belief systems. Do we believe
that we deserve abundance and love, or are we constricted by beliefs
imprinted during our in-utero existence? Do these beliefs insist that we are not
wanted, that we do not deserve to have our needs met? The amount of openness
or constriction experienced through this overall chakra will be translated into
our second chakra. If we screen the energies taken in through our first-chakra
back side, we inhibit the in-body energies available to our second-chakra
feeling bodies. Therefore, it will be difficult for us to process the energies
taken in through the second-chakra back side, which will in turn further damage
our feeling bodies.

  Let's track an issue through our back-side and front-side system. Pretend that
you meet someone with whom you would like to have a relationship. You meet
an attractive man or woman at a party. Through the back-side first chakra, you
receive the energy needed to fuel your attraction and desire. If you are
completely open to these feelings, this back-side energy feeds your front-side
behavior. You take action-you approach this person.

   This action kicks energy up to the second chakra, stimulating certain feeling
bodies. First, you might get excited, a version of happiness. The back side of
this chakra kicks in energy to both fuel and temper this excitement. It may, for
instance, use the excitement to heal your mistrust. You might next feel self-trust,
yet another type of happiness. Because the front side of the second chakra is a
personal, receptive chakra (rather than an outward movement one), the front-
side reaction is openness to this person.

   This energy of openness surges then into the third chakra. The back side
provides ideas about how to interact with your object of desire. You sift and
weigh these ideas, filtering them through the acquired and innate belief systems
that separate the front- and back-side chakras. Eventually, you decide that it is
okay to move forward; you trust that you will successfully present yourself.

   Having decided to interact, your energy moves upward into the heart. Your
backside soul and heart fantasies enter through the back side of the fourth
chakra. How do you sense yourself interfacing with this person? Again, you
are working in a personal, receptive chakra. You sense out this person's
reaction to you. Your energy adjusts to your heart-felt sense of potentials, and
then sends energy to the fifth chakra.

   Now you are standing in front of this person. It is time to say something.
Through the back side of this chakra, you gather guidance from your spirit and
perhaps other guides. If this chakra is clear, this guidance will be appropriate.
If you hook into old tapes, you could screw it up. Given that you are relatively
healed and receptive, you put all the senses, feelings, and guidance into words
that project outward. You speak to the person. One of your heart's desires has
been to go skiing, so you ask this person if he or she likes to ski.

   He or she responds yes! Your energy surges into the sixth chakra. Through
the back of the sixth, we see all of the possible visions of what might happen.
Do you picture downhill or cross-country skiing? A rustic cabin in the Rockies
or a chalet in the Swiss Alps? These visions filter through your programmed
self-images, fed greatly by the energy of your second chakra, which is
streaming excitement through the back side of the sixth chakra. You finally
select a desired outcome, which is then projected outward through the front
side of the sixth chakra. All chakras below this one are now activated, so you
can decide how to proceed. Will you concentrate on your heart and offer a
heartbased hug? Will you continue to converse, connecting with words? Will
you take further action, employing more of your first chakra?

   Whatever you do ideally will be chosen and regulated by your last in-body
chakra, the seventh, which is seeking purpose and unity. The back side of this
chakra attaches not only to the body of spirits eternally surrounding you, but to
the higher spirit of the person you are facing. You know that if you allow full
expression based on your higher sense of self, whatever you choose to do or
say will be on purpose for you and the potential relationship.

   Of course, this scenario is a very simplified form of how the chakric back
side and front side interact. Misperceptions, judgments, repressed desires,
denied feelings, others' issues and energies are not just stored in the revolving
point between the front sides and back sides. They can also be found within the
auric body, within the soul, and just about anywhere else. If we keep in mind
that the back side functions according to our unconscious programming and the
front side according to our conscious programming, we can get a pretty clear
picture of how we process energy and make decisions.

   Most importantly, we can hold on to the fact that all of us have been given
the opportunity to experience life, not to avoid it. We are continually given the
choices, chances, and means we need to clarify, heal, and transform.

                           DETECTING THE CHAKRAS


The front and back sides of the chakras meet in the spine, with the exception of
the seventh chakra, which links into the cranium. Physical tools can measure
the presence of all these chakras. Scientific and medical communities are
testing the presence of these chakras through sound, color, and effect.

  You can find your own chakras with a pendulum. A pendulum is made by
putting a weight, such as a stone or a ring, on a chain or cord. A pendulum held
over the chakra area will begin to swing with the whirling of the chakra itself
on the front or the back side (see figure 5.1).
   With this method, you can see the flow of all of your in-body chakras, except
the back side of the first and the back side of the seventh chakras. The back
side of chakra one is located in a lower dimension. You cannot place it with a
pendulum; most people cannot even see it psychically. The back side of chakra
seven opens to a higher dimension, which vibrates too quickly to be found
using physical techniques. In fact, this chakra isn't really even located in a
physical place. Because it connects us to our higher self and the higher selves
of others, it is outside of the time/space continuum. The only way to know or
understand the back sides of chakras one or seven is to experience them.




              Figure 5.1: Detecting the Chakras with a Pendulum
              EXERCISE: WORKING WITH YOUR IN-BODY CHAKRAS


Ask a partner to help you with this exercise.

A. Lying on your stomach, have your partner guide you into a meditative state.
Allow him or her to place a hand on each back-side chakra area. Concentrate
on one area at a time.

    As you feel each point, respond to the following questions:

   • What can I receive by opening or healing this chakra?

   • What is preventing this chakra from fully functioning?

B. Then ask this individual chakra to act as if it is healed. Experience what
you would feel like if it were really healed. Share your observations with
your partner.
                   THE You AROUND YOU:
                    YOUR ENERGY FIELD
Your clothes are always vibrating. The energy particles in the air we breathe
and water we drink are in constant flux. The cells in our skin, glands, brain,
and eyes-as well as ourselves in relation to our job, car, relationships, and
other concerns-are eternally performing the "duty dance with death," as Kurt
Vonnegut likes to define life.

   Life is movement. Life is a dance. This constant dynamism produces
constant change. Even if we were able to cry out, "Hold it!" and convince
matter to stop its unending waltz, we would not create stillness. Long after an
object has stopped moving, it continues to vibrate, to adapt to the change it has
just made. I am reminded of an observation my kindergarten-age son made
during a field trip to a nature park. He and his fellow classmates raved for
days about a dead salamander they had come across. "Mommy, it was still
moving!" he shared in awe. "Even though its guts had been plucked out!"

   Every component of our energy field is constantly in flux. Our first chakra
pulsates to its own rhythms while our second chakra keeps time to its own
beat. Particles from physical and psychic matter dart here and there. Our
feelings bounce off our thoughts, which in turn react to our needs. With all of
these different tunes and fluctuations, it is a wonder we can interact as an intact
entity at all, but we can.

   In this chapter, we'll concentrate on the auric field, the human energy field
that interpenetrates and surrounds the body. In the next chapter, we'll introduce
several other energy fields or related energy bodies, providing you a full
picture of the "you around you."

                                    THE AURA


One of the reasons that we are intact is that an energy field emanates from and
around us. Often called the human energy field, or aura, it is the primary field
of energy that separates us from and links us to the environment.

   Every animate object has an aura; some people believe inanimate objects
also have them. An aura has been described as everything from a light emitting
from the body, to a force field, to a universal energy field. Whichever the case,
the aura is an esoteric body composed of material energy. The aura is as much
a revolving door as our chakras.

  The auric body itself comprises many planes. Some auric planes vibrate at a
high frequency, and are consequently responsive to our spiritual needs. Some
auric planes vibrate at a low frequency, and are therefore responsible for our
material needs. These lower frequency ones are the most easily seen or felt
outside of our physical body. In reference to Einstein's theory of relativity,
Barbara Ann Brennan feels matter and energy are interchangeable and that
"matter is simply slowed down or crystallized energy."1

  Both the lower and higher auric planes interact with their opposites. In many
ways, the true job of the lower frequency layers is to convert spiritual mana to
physical matter; the function of the higher frequency layers is to transmute
physical matter into spiritual energy.

   Many psychics differentiate the esoteric bodies this way: the aura is on the
outside of the body; the chakras are on the inside. Though this theory can
conceptually help us, it does not tell us the entire story. Nature doesn't really
differentiate between the insides and outsides of things. The chakras are
holistic units that tie into, interact with, and help form the auric layers. These
auric layers are also holistic units. The aura as a whole includes the chakras
and every other aspect of our being. It is also a sub-unit of our energetic self
because its major functions enable us to interact with our external environment
and the physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual dimensions that are
constantly at play with our being (see figure 6.1).

The Aura as a Matrix
Rather than consider the aura to be bands or layers of energy, it is more
appropriate to think of it as a matrix system. The lines on the matrix intersect to
form a grid. This grid could be seen as a completely different energy body, one
that incorporates our physical body while locking into points within our
physical body. It could also be seen as an extension or sub-unit of a much
larger grid, the grid of energy that connects everyone in humanity to each other,
to nature, and to the universe itself.
                     Figure 6.1: The Layers of the Aura

  When we remember that we are constantly fluctuating, as is every aspect of
our being and those of everyone and everything else, we may wonder why we
don't disintegrate from all that change.
   "All that change" is precisely why we have an aura. This energy field
establishes our individual entity while linking us to greater forces. It provides
form and substance while helping us remain flexible and adaptable. The matrix
lines composing the auric body work like a dot-to-dot puzzle, connecting this
subatomic particle to that organ, that organ to our brain, our brain to our skin,
our skin to climactic conditions, the immediate environment to the sun, the sun
to its planetary brothers and sisters. The aura works like a skin to protect us
from being over-influenced by the change outside of us. It also works like a
computer to regulate our energy system, so that we can respond to the change
around us. Our aura notices what is happening millions of miles away and
what is occurring in the tiniest particles of our cells.

The Four Roles of the Aura


Usually, our auric energy matrix, or field, performs its roles automatically.
However, we would all benefit from a conscious understanding of our aura and
the four major types of roles it performs:

• Predictive

• Adaptive

• Responsive

• Protective

  The predictive response of the aura relates to its ability to pick up on
possible problems or opportunities. By noting the aura's adaptive functions, we
can take note of what affects us and make decisions about how to
"shapechange" and thus fit in. Through its responsive nature, we locate and
address disease, mental problems, inappropriate belief systems, overextended
or denied feelings, family-of-origin issues, relationship ills, career concerns,
and spiritual misperceptions. By working with the protective role of the aura,
we can better learn to take care of ourselves.
    Figure 6.2: Aura of a Person Suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

   The work I've done with chronic fatigue sufferers best illustrates all four
roles of the aura. Using intuitive vision, I can spot chronic fatigue sufferers by
their aura, because they almost have none. On the average, auras of healthy
individuals can spread two to six feet out from the body. The aura of a person
with chronic fatigue is plastered next to his or her skin. In these individuals, I
typically see a thin, red band on, in, or right on top of the skin, then a thin band
of white, then a thicker (two- to three-inch) band of dark black on top (see
figure 6.2). This black band seems to work like a black hole. It absorbs
external energy, but holds it fast, providing no stimulation or sustenance to the
physical self. The white band, I've come to believe, represents a serious
misunderstanding about spirituality. This misunderstanding, I've found, has
almost always been carried forth from a past life or from a current-life
ancestor, and replayed in early childhood. The red band is the victim's life
force energy. For some reason, life has been perceived as too painful to allow
this energy to flow through the body.

  Chronic fatigue sufferers lack the auric protection they need to combat stress
because their entire auric field becomes constricted to the three bands of
energy. Whereas persons with healthy auras would repel negativity and allow
toxins to be carried out through the various auric layers, the black layer of a
chronic fatigue sufferer absorbs all negativity, holding it as would a black
hole. In a healthy system, red energy is primarily retained inside one's body,
boosting the physical stamina and response ability. Chronic fatigue sufferers,
as an attempt to protect or armor themselves, paint the outsides of themselves
with this red energy. They are therefore unable to summon inner strength when
needed.

   A normal aura also provides for adaptability and flexibility. With chronic
fatigue, the auric layering is rigid, so that external or internal stressors cannot
flow around. The chronic fatigue victim finds him/herself constantly doing
energetic battle and therefore, constantly exhausted. Finally, the chronic fatigue
sufferer lacks the auric gift of predicting. The healthy aura encompasses the
self and can foretell future possibilities because certain of its layers stretch
into other dimensions. Other layers dip into the chakras, our reservoirs of
experience, to pull up the wisdom needed to make adjustments based on
potential events. Chronic fatigue sufferers, being confined to a very narrow
shell, simply cannot sense these future potentials. Hence, they become
exhausted by life's series of unexpected twists. (See chapter 17 for how the
energy bodies appear when various medical conditions are present.)

  Obviously, having a healthy aura is important, and allowing it to fulfill all
four roles is vital. So what exactly is this aura, and how is it constructed?

                               THE AURIC LAYERS
The aura is a matrix that interlocks us into the larger matrices of our inner and
outer environments. An energy field, the aura comprises various units, usually
called auric layers, which interlace with the chakras, energy points, and the
body itself. Each of these layers or matrix units has a physical, mental,
emotional, and spiritual dimension and purpose. Understanding each of these
layers can assist us in living the lives we want to live.

   There are many esoteric names associated with the auric layers. There are
also many auric experts and auric systems, which lead to disagreement about
how many layers of auric bands there are. The ideas perpetuated by this system
will be in line with others, but will differ because I will present each layer in
a simplified fashion, emphasizing the connection between the auric layer and
the chakra most associated with it.

  I believe there are nine basic layers or matrix patterns in the auric system,
two somewhat intangible layers atop these, and a twelfth layer, which is
equivalent to our twelfth chakra. When working with clients, I typically work
with the nine basic auric layers. To describe these first nine layers, I simply
use numbers, and then provide a label consistent with other metaphysical
systems.

FirstAuric Layer


I associate the first auric layer with the first chakra; therefore, its functions are
similar to those of the first chakra. It protects, identifies, and solidifies our
physical awareness.

   Most metaphysicians affiliate the primal auric layer with the etheric body,
which they envision as right next to the skin. I believe the first auric layer is the
skin. Any time one of my clients is dealing with basic security or safety issues,
protection and boundary issues, life and death issues, or skin or appearance
issues, I work with the first auric layer or encourage this person to work with
someone who, directly or indirectly, does the same. This professional group
can include chiropractors, medical doctors, acupuncturists, hands-on healers,
massage therapists, personal trainers or other exercise specialists, or anyone
who interacts with the body.

   Our skin both holds our insides on our inside and keeps our outsides on our
outside. It also regulates the interaction between these two. The energetic
matrix associated with this auric layer has a similar function. It creates a form
in which to house our spirit while we are on this plane, and helps us reflect the
truth of our spirit to the world. It does the latter by helping our skin register our
life experiences, reflect our feelings, and hold physical space.

   Remember that the aura is not separate from the body. This association is
most clearly illustrated by the workings of the first auric layer. The first auric
layer is the skin and aspects of the physical body. I see the matrix pattern that
connects to the front side of the chakra as the same as our physical skin. The
matrix pattern associated with the back side of the chakra attaches or loops
into a lower frequency of matter, from which it draws material energy to
sustain the boundaries necessary for everyday living and for life itself.

   Considering the skin to be an auric layer was relevant to my work with a
psoriasis patient. His psoriasis was all over his body, and he had tried all
available medical and clinical therapeutic approaches. In providing him with
insight, the only image I could get was that of an infant who longed to be held
by his mother. He confirmed that, to his knowledge, his mother had seldom
held him, and that even now she never hugged him. I believe that lacking this
protective nurturing from a maternal role model, my client's first auric layer
had failed to receive a template it needed.

   Moody and often emotional, my client fit the thin-skinned reactive profile.
His skin got better every time he began to direct his issues and feelings toward
this childhood issue. Unfortunately, just when his skin condition had almost
cleared, he decided he didn't need to face these issues any more and instead
began focusing on past romantic experiences. His skin condition immediately
flared up again.

Location-The skin (see figure 6.3).
Physical Attributes-Regulates all physical requirements for the skin, the largest
 organ in the body. All issues or diseases affecting the skin or our basic
 physical survival needs may indicate a first chakra and first auric layer
 concern. These include career and money issues, and other security-related
 functions.

Mental Attributes-May reflect beliefs about one's deservedness, safety,
identity, sexuality, and other issues.

Feeling Attributes-Registers primal feelings on the skin and through concrete,
 firstchakra-related realities such as the bodily needs for housing,
 relationships, and sustenance. These feelings include anger, hurt, rage, terror,
 joy, pain, guilt, and shame. Physical anomalies such as acne, psoriasis, and
 shingles may indicate a first-chakra issue (often emotionally based) reflected
 on this first auric layer.

Spiritual Attributes-Links to our concrete reality through the front side of the
 first chakra. The back side of the first chakra connects into the first auric
 matrix and draws forth our hidden or learned beliefs about the Divine Source
 and our relationship to it. If we link our first auric matrix with a spiritual
 template, such as the etheric template described in the next chapter, our
 immediate life concerns would be greatly enhanced.
         Figure 6.3: The First, Second, and Integrative Auric Layers

Healing Applications-It is wise to remember that the first chakra contains our
basic programming, including those of our family-of-origin belief system.
Skin diseases or problems may have a root cause in our family system.
Problems in the material world, a rash of life and death issues, security and
safety concerns, or sexuality questions and issues may suggest the same. These
events may also indicate that the auric matrix connected to the back side of
our first chakra is being affected by fundamental spiritual beliefs. While we
can use negative symptoms to assist us in locating causal issues and
addressing them, we can also take a preventive approach. By being willing to
honestly search, own, and transform our core identity and beliefs, the auric
field can encourage success, health, and happiness because it connects to the
physical and material universes.

     Another key situation that can affect or be healed through the first layer
    concerns childhood abuse issues. Emotional, physical, spiritual, or mental
    victimization or damage maybe reflected in the skin or through a person's
    physical appearance (with problems such as weight issues or
    slovenliness). Remember, though, that this auric layer has a nonmaterial as
    well as material matrix pattern. Abuse patterns may also be aurically
    reflected in external ways such as lifestyle, choice of clothing, career, and
    money, and other aspects of survival.

Second Auric Layer


The second auric matrix connects our internal feeling reality with the events,
experiences, or people on the outside of us that are encouraging or triggering
our feeling states.

   Most esoteric experts call this second layer the emotional body. We might be
playing a semantics game, but I think it is critical to define emotion. Emotions
are produced when a thought form joins with a feeling body or part of a feeling
body. Other cultures hold this belief, such as the Hawaiian kahuna culture,
described by Serge King. "To the kahunas, emotion is more than just feeling; it
is the movement of mana (energy) in the body accompanied by a specific
thought."' A thought form is just that-an idea, concept, or original thought.
Usually, they are composed of a conglomerate of beliefs that join together to
create an ideal. By themselves, thought forms are pure energies that leave our
psyches once they have registered. A feeling body, on the other hand, is an
amoebalike form. Each form encapsulates one feeling. We should be born with
intact feeling bodies.

   I began working with feeling bodies by spending time with a healer in Japan.
He had approached me on the street and tapped my abdomen. My husband and
our guide were not around; I was pregnant and felt rather scared and
vulnerable. The man proceeded to form a small circle with his thumb and
index finger, all the while tapping my stomach. With one circle came a smile;
another would be accompanied by a frown. Yet another circle, with eyes big in
fright. After a time, I began to understand-he was talking about my baby's
feelings. Gradually, I began to be able to see or picture these feeling bodies.
Since then, I have seen many of my students and clients work with this idea to
their advantage.

   At its purest, the second auric matrix is innocent of thought forms, which are
often related to judgments, beliefs, and prejudices. The colors or reflections of
our feelings can and should be expressed through this auric body. I know many
healers and psychics who examine this auric layer to assess their client's
emotional state. Carol Dryer, a Los Angeles-based psychic, says that she can
tell a client's reaction by how the colors in the auric field change. She says,
"For instance, if their field becomes foggy, I know they're not understanding
what I'm telling them."3

  In general, the job of this auric layer is to both protect us from external
energies that could harm our feelings, and to register external realities by
awakening or deadening certain feelings.

   I often compare the second auric matrix with a musical composition. Our
feeling bodies lie latent within us, each like a colored note. When we perceive
a threat, the auric feeling layer intersecting with our front-side chakra strikes
the fear feeling. The second auric layer may then strike a different note within
our back-side second chakra, bringing in energies that reestablish our system's
equilibrium. This auric layer plays the notes that need to be played, inside and
outside of us, to creatively and emotionally express ourselves in ways
consistent with our basic nature.

  This auric layer is often dysfunctional due to the many holes, unfelt feelings,
absorbed feelings, or other anomalies in our system.

Location-Roughly follows the contour of the body atop the tenth auric field,
 intersecting in the front and the back with each chakra and bulging around the
 second chakra. The color of this layer varies from person to person and
 depends on the composition of our basic nature and our programming. When
 healed, this auric field tends to be fluid and watery, and it shimmers when we
 are happy and content (see figure 6.3). It also sparkles in a woman who is
 newly pregnant or highly fertile.

Physical Attributes-Links us to energies that stoke our feelings and carry away
 waste products. Feelings fuel us. They provide energy for appropriate
 response and action. Feelings also tell us what is happening in our lives.
 Anger can empower us; sadness can point to the causes of loss. If our chakras,
 behavior, and auric field are doing their jobs, we will feel "in the flow" and
 energized. If they're not, all sorts of physical problems can abound, especially
 those associated with the second chakra. I also examine my own or a client's
 second chakra layers if there are difficulties with codependency, stress-
 related illnesses, poor relationships, and creativity issues such as writer's
 block.

Mental Attributes-Nearly everyone carries misperceptions about the validity,
or "okayness," of certain feelings. These prejudices can warp the feeling auric
field, leaving us susceptible to imbalances and negative situations or just
plain confused and lacking in energy. Affirming feelings in others helps to
keep the second auric field in shape and operational.

Feeling Attributes-Connects to each and every feeling that we have ever had or
 that lies dormant within us. The second auric field feeds and heals our feeling
 bodies and protects us from feelings that are not ours. Holes in this auric layer
 can leave us vulnerable to damage by others' feelings or cause us to hold onto
 feelings that enter us. Judgments about feelings can cause us to repress our
feelings. Built-up feelings form walls in the second auric field. We think these
walls protect us, but they really prevent us from allowing our feelings to
protect us.

Spiritual Attributes-Keeps us alive and connected to our honest reactions,
 because feelings express our truths and cleanse our auric field.

Healing Applications-Many people are aware of the link between feelings and
illness. Stored, denied, or stuffed feelings and awarenesses build up within
the physical body. Discolorations, abnormal bulges, or a misshapen
appearance in the second field can indicate either an overabundance or
underrepresentation of certain feelings. These problems may help diagnose a
current physical anomaly or predict a potential one. Abusive situations can
also greatly affect this auric field. Sexual, verbal, physical, or emotional
abuse or neglect often injures or tears the second auric field.

     Sometimes an intuitively sensitive person can diagnose abuse issues by
    reading the second auric field. A safer approach is to actually work with
    problems apparent in this field through techniques such as hands-on
    healing, allowing clients to recall, remember, or diagnose their own
    issues. Therapists and other mental health professionals often help clients
    label and understand their feelings, clear blocked feelings, release feelings
    that are not theirs, and renew and lighten the second auric layer. The
    effectiveness of their work usually depends upon the breadth of
    involvement they have reached with their own feelings.

Third Auric Layer


Most commonly called the mental body, the third auric layer relates to the third
chakra. Its form is much more defined than the feeling auric layer. Psychically,
the matrix lines are usually quite apparent.

  The patterns within our third auric matrix are determined by our unique
inborn and acquired intellectual abilities and gifts; our educational experience;
and our innate and modeled judgments and prejudices. The mental auric body
actually expands outward from our third chakra. It culminates as a wall or
mind field around us. This personal mind field links with the mind fields of
others, creating a holistic network of data that stretches beyond our current
time/space continuum. This may explain the "hundredth monkey" effect. It
seems that behaviors or understandings will suddenly become commonplace
when enough animals or people start performing the same actions or thinking
similar thoughts. Perhaps this syndrome occurs when enough individuals
connect via the third auric layer. Through this auric field, we can tap into a
cross-dimensional body of knowledge that can feed our body, mind, and soul
with the ideas necessary to generate well-being and success.

   Grasping the idea that we have a mind-not just a brain-is important. Through
our third chakra and its associated auric layer, we can tap into constructs and
data as needed. We are much more than we appear on the physical surface.
Deepak Chopra, a noted holistic physician, describes the self as "our
conscious intelligence" and explains that "intelligence is not simply in the
head." Chopra says that the expression of intelligence occurs at the cellular
level, with the hormonal systems and antibodies that regulate the body's
essential functions. "Although these expressions of intelligence can be located,
intelligence itself cannot. It permeates each level of its expression; it is all-
pervasive in us and universal in nature. Intelligence is mind ... and its scope
embraces the Cosmos."' Typically, the mental auric layer is yellowish, although
its colorations, brightness, and patterns change from circumstance to
circumstance. For instance, certain strands of the third auric matrix glow more
when someone is thinking hard. Likewise, there will be a tendency for this
layer to strengthen when in use.

  During my travels, I have noticed significant differences in the general color
of this auric field from culture to culture. Many Caucasian American, northern
European, and Jewish cultures appear to have predominantly yellow third
auric layers. Yellow is the color of rationality, thinking, and clarity, attributes
of value to these nationalities. The mind field in several Indian and Pakistani
nations has a bluish or sometimes purplish tinge. In Peru, the shamans I met
glowed with bright reds and greens. While watching North American Indian
ceremonies, I detected more turquoise, gold, white, or muddy red, depending
on the tribes. In all cases, shades of these colors lingered long afterward. In
Japan, I detected particles of silver. Different ethnic groups, different cultures
probably tap into different points of consciousness in the group mind. Learning
how to communicate with consciousness points, through reading, learning, and
travel, can only expand our own awarenesses.

   When we are sleeping, the front aspect of the matrix seems to switch off, and
the back part begins to glow. When sleeping, our mind begins reaching into our
unconscious lessons. We are tapping into that universal body of knowledge and
learning. The auric field connecting to the back-side third chakra feeds the
back sides of all our chakras, helping to clear misperceptions and reveal
necessary information. Some of the ideas that we get while sleeping come from
the openness we might experience while our conscious reality is on hold.

Location-Emanates primarily from the front and back side of the third chakra. It
 looks like a matrix or network pattern running atop and through the second
 auric layer, connecting to the cross-dimensional mind field around us (see
 figure 6.4).

Physical Attributes-Assists in opening us to energy, ideas, concepts, and
 notions that affect our physical lives, specifically our digestive and metabolic
 systems. It can provide us with the ideas and clarity we need to be successful
 at work and play.
                      Figure 6.4: The Third Auric Layer

Mental Attributes-Potentially links us to infinite storage and processes of data,
information, and concepts. This auric layer is the primary point of operation.
By psychically observing this field, we can see how extensive our subject's
knowledge base is and determine his or her comfort level with receiving
learning and information. Prejudices, biases, and misperceptions will show
up as torn matrix points, discolorations on or in-between matrix lines,
incomplete patterning, and other such anomalies.

Feeling Attributes-Actually interconnects with the first auric layer through the
 second auric layer. This intersplicing with the feeling auric layer contributes
 to the creation of an emotion, which is a thought plus a feeling. When a thought
 and a feeling are joined, we are propelled into motion-e-motion.

Spiritual Attributes-Helps us open to structures, ideas, explanations, and
 assistance for achieving our soul purpose. "You are what you think" may not
 be completely true, but our thoughts do define our concepts and images of life.

Healing Applications-By working with the third auric layer, we can isolate
thought processes and beliefs that are harming us. After diagnosing them, we
can change them. Likewise, we can work with the first, second, and third
layers simultaneously to break emotions into their subcomponents, helping us
change self-destructive behaviors, mental patterns, and overwhelming
feelings. This auric layer can also be used to diagnose and work with
intellectual problems or learning difficulties. We can also deliberately tap
into the back-side auric layer in order to find the answers to informational
questions that we have.

Fourth Auric Layer


I concur with most other metaphysicians' view that this heart-associated auric
layer is the astral body. Our astral body links us to the astral plane, which is a
dimension upon which many guiding spirits and earth student spirits dwell. In
Women's Psychic Lives, Diane Stein says that our physical body and etheric
(aura) body is connected by a "silver cord." During astral projection, she says,
"the dense physical and psychic bodies separate, sending the etheric ...'flying'
while the body remains at home. The silver cord stretches infinite distances,
connecting the physical [to] psychic bodies"s
   Technically, the silver cord links with the fifth chakra, or in some people, the
eighth chakra, which links to the body through the thymus gland. Via the silver
cord, this plane is the most frequently visited by our souls when we are
children, undergoing transition, or sleeping. These out-of-body experiences
often increase during times of greatest need, when we require help beyond the
physical. Through this auric field, we return home for advice, help, and
nurturing. Through our astral body, we can also visit with people who are in-
body (alive). Physical distance has no bearing in this plane, only time does.
Here, we can meet up with a long-deceased relative or a potential future life
partner, work through a few of our issues, or receive whatever lessons we
need.

   When I was young, I actively engaged in relationships with positive beings
through this astral plane. Guardians, angels, and teachers were very real to me.
I still remember one of the more critical of these experiences, which occurred
when I was twenty-one. In a vision/dream, I was being reviewed by a panel
for my abilities to materialize objects. They stuck me in an empty room and
told me to fill it with objects. I tried, and then cried.

   When the "reviewers" came in, I became angry. I asked them how they could
give me this test when I'd never received instructions. Staring at me, they said
they would consider that point. I then awoke from my dream. A few days later,
I received a book in the mail from nowhere; it was about manifesting. I was
suddenly swamped by flyers on subjects such as "creating your own
happiness."

   Typically, this field surrounds our entire physical body. Through the back
side, it connects us to the Divine Source. Through the front side, it connects us
to people with whom we are in relationships. The malleable nature of this
energetic layer is one of the reasons it often contains, holds, or forms cords or
contractual agreements between people.

   A healthy fourth auric layer can have many different colors, widths, and
shapes reflected within it. I most often see it with a rose glow, though it can
frequently reflect silver, blue, or green. We tend to see rose when we are
feeling loving, blue when we are in a place of understanding, and silver when
we are in communication with guides. This layer will tend to be about a foot in
width, though the presence or absence of loved ones, love itself, or cords will
greatly affect its dimensions. Of course, our natural disposition will shape this
layer to suit our personality and needs.

   During sleep or deep meditation, this layer can open and invite us to
experience the astral plane. When we leave our bodies at night or through
astral projection, we are simply following the matrix lines connecting us to our
astral-based self, held by the silver cord. Much learning and healing can occur
during these visits. I remember a very clear dream in which I became
connected to an Indian shaman in the Southwest. For several evenings, I held
conversations with him around his fire. He looked, seemed, and felt very real
to me. Finally, I asked him why we needed to be connected. He said he had
known me before and had a piece of my soul he needed to return. I accepted it
back and the visits stopped.

  We can astrally project for other reasons. Two or three times, I have been
drawn out of my body. Once, I was thrown into a mouse and physically
experienced that way of being. I formed a similar relationship with an eagle.
Another time, I actually experienced having my etheric self turn into a white
jaguar.

   Many of my clients-nice, normal, mainstream people-relay similar stories to
me. One woman called me at 4 AM terrified because for three hours she had
been taken into one animal after another. Another woman called because her
recently deceased father had just visited her. One man called after he had
suddenly projected himself into a friend's room and said hi. His friend had just
called and asked him what he'd been doing in her bedroom. These critical
experiences can provide learning and insight, but we must be careful. The
astral plane can also open us to malicious and evil energies and beings. That is
why I insist that clients first learn how to protect themselves, then connect to
the Divine Source, before further explorations in this realm.

  All of these experiences indicate only one thing: we are revolving doors. We
are more than that which we are trained to perceive or to believe.

Location-Lies atop the mental auric layer, surrounding the physical body with
 an approximately one-foot-thick glow. Through the back-side heart chakra, it
 connects in a stream of energy to the Divine Source; through the front side, it
 interacts with our environment and with our relationships (see figure 6.5).

Physical Attributes-Can help us pinpoint past, current, or projected
 cardiovascular issues; can also provide further information or healings
 regarding general physical issues.

Mental Attributes-Governs ideas about relationships and our beliefs regarding
deservedness. Positive relationships depend on connecting fully to the Divine
Source through the back-side planes.
                     Figure 6.5: The Fourth Auric Layer

Feeling Attributes-Connects our lower astral bodies with our higher ones,
 melding physically oriented feelings and awarenesses with spiritually adept
 feelings and awarenesses. Through our feelings, which indicate our highest
needs and desires, the fourth auric layer provides us the opportunity to
experience and manifest all we dream about.

Spiritual Attributes-Invites our soul to meet with other souls on the astral
 plane. Here, we learn from each other, exchange data and information, and
 work through our life's lesson plans. Ultimately, we allow Divine Source
 energy to support us.

Healing Applications-Through this auric layer, we can diagnosis current or
potential heart problems, and relationship issues (past, present, or future). We
can also "read" our heart's desires in this field.

     This is the layer on which cords are easiest to perceive. All cords have a
    negative impact, because they limit current relationships or re-create
    relationship patterns. They also dampen the awareness of and realizations
    about how to achieve our heart's desires.

Fifth Auric Layer


Also called the parallel field, the fifth field opens to all planes and
dimensions, but in a rather interesting way. It reverses a parallel dimension's
form and shape, projecting it into us through a mirror rather than as a straight-
forward image. Our fifth chakra, working in tandem with other chakras, must
reverse this image so we can understand it.

   The front-side, more physically apparent aspect of the fifth auric field has a
hard, smooth surface and lies more or less on top of the fourth auric layer. It
works somewhat like a convex lens. Images, forms, ideas, and messages from
other planes, transferred via the back-side aspect of the fifth auric layer, are
reversed when entering the third dimension. They then project onto the front-
side lens or screen of the layer and are integrated within our system. We can
receive both information and healing energy through this method.

  Though the fifth auric layer opens us to other dimensions, know that at some
level, we already reside within these other planes. The guidance transposed
through this layer might be from other beings and planes, but also from another
aspect of us. These alternative selves coexist in parallel realities and can
reflect choices not taken, generations not born, planets not conceived in our
reality.

Location-Begins about two to two-and-one-half feet out from our body. It links
 into parallel universes, skimming along the grid points of all other dimensions
 (see figure 6.6).
                       Figure 6.6: The Fifth Auric Layer

Physical Attributes-Can potentially re-create that which has been established
 in another plane or dimension. This auric field links to these possibilities and
 to beings with wisdom representing them. Because the basic connecting
chakra is the fifth, it is commonly believed that the fifth chakra is the
manifesting chakra or sometimes, the place the soul connects to the body. By
working with the parallel auric layer, we gain access to the data and energies
available to acknowledge or speak the truths of our being and wishes, a very
important step in manifesting the physical. Because we can also tap into
negative spirits, we need to apply spiritual safeguards as protection.

Mental Attributes-Connects us to the realms of possibilities so that we can
select the beliefs, truths, and realities that most authentically reflect us.
Because there are a thousand ways to state one truth, "Which is the right one
for me?" is an important question, and this layer helps us answer it.
Otherwise, we may experience consequences of self or other judgments,
critical messages, or demonic/negative manipulations.

Feeling Attributes-Can open to us parallel opportunities and realities, or
 different ways to feel and to express. We can often dissolve feeling blocks
 and problems by working with this auric field.

Spiritual Attributes-Allows the soul to explore its options. It can test the
 waters before making decisions or experience the outcome of the choices it
 has made.

Healing Applications-Through this field, we can become conscious of our
decisions and their potential outcomes. We can also gain access to the worlds
or actions that created our current conditions. The opportunities for change
and transformation are limitless.

Sixth Auric Layer


This auric layer is composed almost exclusively of light, earning it the label
"celestial body" from other metaphysicians. I call it the light-body auric field,
because its matrix patterns are spun of actual light fibers. In The Holographic
Universe, Michael Talbot writes that many religious traditions believe that a
spiritually advanced individual often will have an aura so bright that it is
visible to the naked eye. He suggests that this belief is why saints and holy
beings are depicted with halos around their head. He also makes note of a Sufi
mystic, Hazrat Inayat Khan, who died in 1927, who "is said to have sometimes
given off so much light that people could actually read by it"6

   This auric layer meshes together the more-structured fifth auric field and the
lessformed seventh auric field. It combines the necessities of choice and
consequence with the truth of universal love and support. When working with
this energy layer, we are tapping into higher truths for creating images that can
be actualized in physical reality.

   I became highly sensitized to this auric layer while working with shamans
and healers in Peru, the Yucatan, and Costa Rica. At certain times, I could
clearly see with my physical eyes the strands of this layer. While the strands
obviously connected these healers to the ceremonial participants or to their
patients at hand, I could also see them extending far away-countries away-to
subjects who had requested healing. I would later relay my pictures of whom
they had been healing from such a distance, only to find out, by a photo or
offered description, that my visions had been accurate.

  Many other tribal cultures I have studied, including the American Indian
culture and cultures in Brazil, Bolivia, Siberia, and Hawaii, stress the
importance of vision, the importance of seeing what is true versus what is not.
We can examine reality for its truth by scanning along the sixth auric layer.

Location-Appears to be a glow of light about three feet or so around the body,
 because the matrix pattern is so interlaced and fine. In many people, this
 energy is concentrated around the head; ideally, it should be spread out around
 the entire physical body and appear spiky, with strands of light connecting it
 to visible and invisible realities (see figure 6.7).

Physical Attributes-Enables physical manifesting and healing when we achieve
 a link between the light body auric layer and the white light of the Divine
 Source.
Mental Attributes-Reflects thoughts and thought patterns we hold about
ourselves. These thoughts are more like attitudes than they are separate
thoughts, and they reflect the achieved level of self-acceptance. When
deciphering the meaning of the various discolorations, smudge spots, holes, or
lackluster images, it is helpful to request a psychic picture for clarity.

Feeling Attributes-Attaches us to a higher order of feelings than those
 encapsulated in our physical bodies, which operate almost like separate
 ruling identities. When searching for this level of connection to the higher
 feeling bodies, we follow the strands of light beyond the physical body. When
 healthy connections exist, I visualize the higher feelings as egglike fluid
 beings, and the sixth auric layer folding into them like waves of cloth.
                      Figure 6.7: The Sixth Auric Layer

Spiritual Attributes-Gives us access to the higher qualities of feelings,
 thoughts, and manifesting possibilities. Energies received through this auric
 matrix feed all aspects of ourselves, including our soul.
Healing Applications-The light-body auric field is an interesting one with
which to work. One fantastic healing application is to first conduct healing
work on this aura, as if preparing a template for the desired change, then to
pull this template down into the physical body. This field can also be
examined for problems that might suggest a disturbed state of self-acceptance.

Seventh Auric Layer


This auric field is usually considered to be the last one framing the physical
body. Also called the ketheric auric layer, to most people it appears in egg
form, extending about three-and-one-half feet beyond the physical self. It is
distinct from the energy egg described in chapter 7, although the two
interrelate. In The Holographic Universe, Talbot mentions several ancient
traditions that experienced this field, including the Kabbalah, a Jewish
mystical philosophy, which called this emanation nefish. The Kabbalah
"teaches that an egg-shaped bubble of iridescence surrounds every human
body."7

  This auric layer also penetrates the tenth or grounding chakra, assuring that
our spiritual connections to the outer world are grounded in the material
manifestation of our existence.

   I work with this auric layer in two major ways. The first is more
psychological, if not mystical. Connected to the ketheric realm, this auric layer
avails us of the actual or symbolic self associated with our spiritual purpose. I
can best explain this notion by speaking of the kachina, an American Indian
demi-god. Each of the hundreds of kachina gods are associated with a
particular cause or truth; they are literally "agents of the gods"-gods with
human traits. One, for instance, may bring spring rains. Another represents the
truth of love and harmony. Often, I explain that when working with the seventh
auric layer, I am helping clients view their kachina self-the self who left the
Divine Source with a purpose or truth to carry forth.

  Another application is healing. I sometimes scan the seventh auric layer to
preview potential cancer or other serious diseases, and to check on the
conditions of current major illnesses. Of course, these types of psychic scans
are questionable at best; however, I believe that as we become more
disillusioned with what technology can provide we will be increasingly forced
to trust our own intuition or gut senses in regard to our personal health. We
will also increase our reliance on helping each other with our various intuitive
gifts.

   Given that, I believe that many cancers enter the auric field before they show
up in the body. In our society, the seventh auric layer is the easiest of the outer
layers to read. It is also one of the most vulnerable, because spirituality is so
little respected. This energy layer is ultimately related to spirituality. Often,
this layer is pierced or damaged by the conditions that cause cancer long
before these conditions actually manifest.

   In general, I have found, as have many of my colleagues, that cancer is often
a disease related to repression of power. This fear of power usually causes or
is caused by feeling blocks and spiritual issues. For instance, if we were
abused or witnessed the violent use of anger, we might conclude that use of
power is bad and hurts people (like it hurt us). If raised in a fundamental,
legalistic, or fanatic religion, we must think we should be overly meek or
overly judgmental.

  Power is just directed energy. Our immune system, sense of safety, and well-
being in the world are founded upon our ability to realize and direct energy for
protection and manifesting. If we don't know how to properly fight or deflect
disease, abusive or poorly intentioned people, criticism, and the like, we
certainly cannot fight off the thousands of viruses and conditions that cause
cancer and other major diseases.

  A judgment against power inhibits the performance of both the emotional
auric layer and the seventh auric layer. I can frequently see a hole in the
seventh auric layer of people who already have cancer. Usually, this hole or
mottled spot lines up perpendicularly to the actualized cancer. To me,
actualized cancer appears in the body as a dark spot with red and white dots or
hazy shapes around it or as a funny bluish color. However, potential cancer
often starts as a hole in the seventh auric layer, and then bleeds through
underneath auric layers. The closer the damage to the physical body, the more
complete the manifestation of the condition. Sometimes, the integrative auric
layer will hold a major disease for several years before it actually dumps it
into the physical body.

   I think back to a client with breast cancer in her history. She was
experiencing a great deal of pain in one of her breasts, as well as fibrous
tissue. We saw a hole in her seventh chakra, but the line of darkness did not
penetrate to her breast. I didn't think she had cancer, but it seemed she could at
some point develop it. Medical professionals verified that she did not have
cancer, as far as they could tell. She did, however, take precautions, such as
changing her diet, working through her emotional issues, boosting her immune
and endocrine systems, and addressing her spiritual dissatisfactions. Her
fibrous condition disappeared, as did the pain. (See chapter 17 for an
illustration of the aura of a person with breast cancer.)

   The seventh auric field extends into both the conscious and unconscious
planes, as does the first auric field. It affects the pineal gland and the cerebral
cortex, thus broadening the scope and abilities of our thinking processes. It
carries forward to link into all major avatar entities (ascended human beings)
and figures, and to link into Shamballah, the mystical, high-frequency heaven
located on earth. This is a place I have sometimes seen in very powerful
visions, but have yet to fully actualize. Through the back side, this layer
connects us to the spiritual aspect of absolutely everything and everyone, and
is ruled only by one principle: we are one.

  This aura interlocks with all others, gluing itself into the spine. In this way, it
constantly delivers spiritual mana to our physical self.

Location-Shaped like an egg around the physical body. It extends to avatars
 and "Sham- ballah," a mystical city symbolizing heaven on earth, and links us
 to every other being that has achieved a complete and humble love for the
 Divine Source (see figure 6.8).
Physical Attributes-Affects our entire existence, because it is intricately tied to
 both the brain and the spine, which regulate all of life's functions. Training
 ourselves to feel, see, or hear this auric layer can greatly speed both diagnosis
 and information gathering.

Mental Attributes-Enables us to tie into correct thought processes, and to seek
advice from the ancients and the avatars for earthly concerns and from the
saints for spiritual matters-all positive interactions if they guide us toward the
Divine Source.

Feeling Attributes-Is the place where feelings meld together like a rainbow
 melting into one great white light. The resultant feeling is more an awareness
 of bliss than a single noteworthy emotion.

Spiritual Attributes-Is the place where all that is spirit connects, whether it
 categorically relates to the physical, mental, emotional, or other concern.

Healing Applications-It would be wise to investigate how to personally tap
into this auric field. Because it connects our physical self to all of life and all
that is good about life, its potential for drawing healing and abundance to us is
immeasurable.
                     Figure 6.8: The Seventh Auric Layer

  Because the next two auric fields, along with the integrative field, affect the
physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual so completely, I will provide only
broad descriptions of these energy bodies. Much of this information comes
from my own work, and so can only be substantiated experientially.

Eighth Auric Layer


The eighth auric layer relates to the eighth chakra, which concerns itself with
past, present, and future time and all our experiences within time. This energy
field connects in through the top of our head, and then spreads around our body,
attaching to the primary and secondary chakras, front and back. It keeps us
grounded in the moment and provides the present time with a context.

   This layer is a lattice of moon-colored strands backed by a void or black
energy. We could press on any point within this matrix and re-experience
something that we or those close to us have gone through or might go through.
This implies that we could use this auric layer for prediction, memory recall,
and transformation in regard to both the past and the future. When working with
the auric field, it is important not to get too detailed when trying to recall
history or predict the future. This energy field, more than any other, is a
complete system unto itself. It tells the story of who we are right now. Too
much tampering with the evidence will shift the present, perhaps in ways we
don't foresee and may not want to.

   One way to work with this auric layer is to access the Akashic or Shadow
Records through the eighth chakra, as well as the Book of Life, also found in
this chakra. Described in chapter 2, these records enable us to diagnosis issues
and find solutions, which can be transferred into the body through the eighth
auric field. My favorite way of performing this activity is to meditate and
journey into the center of the eighth chakra and then intuitively enter the
appropriate record. I enter the Akashic Records if I want to get exact
information, the Shadow Records if working with regret or another issue
stemming from the "path not taken," and the Book of Life to engineer hope and
connect with the Divine. Once I gain information for myself or another person,
I ask to see, sense, hear, or know the solution. Having obtained it, I journey
back into my body via the eighth auric field, which locks into the body in the
thymus, as does the eighth chakra. For purpose of conducting this journey, I
often perceive the eighth auric field as a spider web that traverses across all
time and space, surrounded by body but also interpenetrating the thymus.

   Another way to perform healing through the eighth auric field is to use it-and
its spiderlike filaments-to intuitively travel to the zones of existence. These
planes, which are accessed by the soul at various times in pre-, in, and post-
incarnation, are amazing sites for enabling transformation.




                            SOUL SITES FOR HEALING


THERE ARE FOUR zones, or planes of existence, that the soul visits before
birth, during a lifetime, and after death. We go to these sites for several healthy
reasons, but each also has an inherent downside. We will explore both sides of
the zones in this section.

   I often check these zones to see if they are the source of critical, terminal, or
chronic issues, traversing to them through the eighth chakra. From the middle of
this chakra, I envision the eighth auric field filaments that emanate from its
center and surround it. I then ask the Divine to show me which thread will lead
to the zone that contains the origin of the presenting issue. Journeying along the
filament, I enter the zone and ask to see or re-experience the event that caused
a stronghold or any other issue that has continued to adversely affect me.

 Following are descriptions of these zones, how they assist the soul, and
what types of problems can be found within them.

The White Zone


Our soul enters this dimension before a lifetime to engineer a soul contract.
This soul contract highlights our destiny points, the "must do's" that will occur
when we're alive. We usually arrive at this contract with the help of the
Divine, a guide, and the souls of the people we will eventually meet.

   We might select our parents, schools, certain relationships, and career
moves. We might also choose challenging or even life-threatening events, if we
believe that they are necessary for our soul learning. There is evidence
substantiating the existence of this zone. Dr. Joel Whitton, a professor of
psychiatry at the University of Toronto Medical School, was mentioned in
chapter 1. He conducted research that revealed that more than 90 percent of all
hypnotizable individuals could recall past-life memories.' Moreover, many
people remembered a space between lives, which was filled with light. Here
they formed plans for their upcoming lives, drawing upon a sense of heightened
morality and ethics.9

   When regressed into this state, the individuals were given a choice to keep
their lives the same or to make different plans. Nearly every person who now
understood the rationale for his or her situations decided to maintain the status
quo. Those who desired change experienced nearly immediate alterations in
their lives, upon coming out of the trance.1° Life problems often occur because
of our soul contracts.

  There are three circumstances that might cause trouble. While incarnating,
many souls change their minds, discovering that parts of the soul contract are
too constrictive, not suitable, or unnecessary. This leads to frustration,
inhibition, anger, and rebelliousness, and the issues pertaining to this
reactivity.

   A second situation results from others' alterations of their soul contracts. I
see this problem a lot in my work. Most common are relationship issues that
occur because the would-be mate or child changes his or her mind and never
arrives. Sometimes the parents we were supposed to have don't even meet;
their souls jettison to different paths. I struggled for years with this situation, as
I remembered that I was supposed to have a different mother. I could never
bond with the mother I had. Finally, my dad told me that he was engaged to
another woman before he met my mother. I instantly knew that she was
supposed to be my mother, and in fact, had probably been pregnant when my
father and she broke up. This knowledge helped me release judgments about
my actual birth mother, and we have achieved a peace in our relationship.

   The third white zone issue is that we outgrow our soul contract. We have
learned what we want to and now have a choice: Should we leave or stay? If
we stay, what should we now do? This stage is often plagued by major illness,
accidents, or life changes, including divorce, job loss, or a major move. A
friend went through a similar stage a few years ago, and I knew that he could
live through a car accident. I saw the car coming, and in a flash, he made a
decision to stay. He made major life shifts the next two years but was also ill a
great deal of the time, while consciously developing a new soul plan. It's good
to visit the white zone for any sort of chronic issue that can't seem to be
resolved through practical means.

The Grey Zone


Our soul departs from the white zone and passes through the grey zone, which
is made of nearly void energy. Past-life memories, as well as knowledge of the
soul contract details are erased, while our soul hurls through space toward its
embryonic body. There are many issues that might arise during life, depending
upon our experience of this zone.

   Sometimes a soul forgets too much. We are allowed by the Divine to keep
data and abilities necessary for the upcoming incarnation, but a soul can pass
through a deadened space within the grey zone and leave too much behind. On
the most severe scale, this situation can manifest as autism, low consciousness,
and underachievement.

   Some souls don't forget enough and are plagued by unconscious or even
consciously known ideas and experiences that intrude on the new life. This
situation is often the basis for childhood nightmares, paranoia, hallucinations,
schizophrenia, multiple personality disorder, bipolar traits, and lingering fears
and anxiety. I often take clients through the grey zone into an earlier incarnation
to see if they have carried a trauma forward and must make peace with it.

   Still other souls cord, or "hook into," an entity or consciousness within the
grey zone. There are helpful but also harmful grey zone inhabitants. Negatively
inspired entities often float about in this zone looking for a way back into life.
Unwilling to actually incarnate, they might attach to the traveling soul and try to
live through them after the incarnation. Some go so far as to actually incite the
mother's fallopian tubes into releasing multiple eggs so that they can inhabit a
body. Lacking a soul contract, they don't have enough life energy to stay. This
is sometimes the behind-the-scenes cause of a "disappearing twin." Many of
my clients believe that they were originally part of a twin conception but that
their mother partially miscarried. Some report that the other soul plagues and
terrifies them, leading to sleeplessness, paranoia, guilt, and psychic
interference.

The Red Zone


The red zone is like an energy body that runs alongside the physical body. It is
really an etheric dimension that holds the emotions that we didn't deal with
during a lifetime. Our attachment to the red zone, which occurs via our soul
and once we're alive, through our first chakra, transfers from one lifetime to
another. I guide clients into the red zone when they are overemotional or stuck
in emotional strongholds that don't seem to clear, no matter what. As well, I
work in the red zone for pain control and management, as releasing built-up
emotions will often alleviate pain.

The Black Zone


Most souls pass through the black zone upon death. Operating like its own
emotion, it is as close to a "Judgment Day" as we can receive. Here our souls
meet with souls we met when alive. Many of the souls passed before us and
have lingered in order to make peace with us, or to complete an incomplete
part of a soul contract. Souls from the living, however, often journey into the
black zone in order to accomplish the same goals.

   We can see the obvious benefit of clearing relationship issues through the
black zone, but unfortunately, not every soul wants to create peace treaties.
Many that have passed remain permanently in the black zone, seeking revenge
or holding their "enemy souls" prisoners. Some of these intrude in the everyday
lives of the living, encouraging violence or cruelty, or even taunting them
toward suicide. I often incorporate the black zone into healings associated with
the drive to hurt or punish others, or in cases where my clients feel like they
are being unduly persecuted, by the living or the dead.




Ninth Auric Layer


This auric layer relates to the ninth chakra. It actually occupies a very small,
almost nonexistent, space on the physical plane. I see it almost as a pinprick
located above the head. It need not occupy much space because it operates
under the laws of limitlessness and abundance and can, I believe, motivate
energy to move beyond the speed of light.

   Working with this auric layer entails guiding oneself or being guided into
this small portal. Having a facilitator is very helpful. Short of that, you can
work with guides and visualize that you are attached to a lifeline of sorts by
which you can haul yourself back to this reality. You are not really in any
danger because you are descending into a part of yourself. However, you may
learn some surprising things about yourself.

   Most people experience a world of wonders on the other side of this portal.
The actual ninth auric field is both a boundary for and the content of the world
of our soul, the heaven we are trying to achieve on this planet, or any other, for
that matter. It can be beneficial to travel here to meditate, to peruse ideas, to
problem solve, or to heal. This aspect of ourselves is so peaceful, it is a
wonder we don't journey here more often.
   My journeys here often connect me to a feeling rather than a place. Some
might call this place heaven, nirvana, or Shamballah. It opens me to the
experience of metato- nia-a state of bliss and enlightenment-for which we so
often search.

   I believe that this field is the one to which Barbara Ann Brennan refers in
Hands of Light when she describes the cosmic fields which "relate to who we
are beyond this lifetime." She also describes the delivery of miraculous
healings through this auric layer. "As I watch guides working from this level, it
appears to me as if they simply remove a whole side of a person's energy
bodies (and all fields with it) and put in a new set," she says. "This ... has the
effect of healing the patient very rapidly."" Obviously, this auric layer has
tremendous impact.

The Integrative Auric Layer


The integrative auric layer is an extremely important auric field, as it relates to
the tenth chakra. Many people call it the etheric body and see it as the layer
next to the skin (see figure 6.3). To me, this auric layer, which is next to the
skin, plugs into both the tenth chakra and the ground. It is the auric layer of
form, and so could also be called the tenth auric layer. When we feel secure,
this layer can extend up to three feet away from our skin. When we are feeling
threatened, it may cling skintight.

   I sometimes think that this integrative layer is a traveling path for the double
that so many sorcerers and shamans speak of, that second self able to separate
from the physical body. Carlos Castaneda, trained by the Yaqui Indian don
Juan, experienced this doubling. These out-of-body experiences are not
unknown to Western experience either. Many of us can relate to feelings of
separating from our bodies, jerking away during the night, suddenly feeling we
are somewhere else. According to researcher Charles Tate, there are five
features related to out-of-body experiences:

1. A floating feeling.
2. Seeing one's own body.

3. Suddenly being at a place of which you just thought.

4. The belief of having a nonphysical body.

5. Absolute certainty that the experience was not a dream.12

   The integrative layer can serve as a pathway between the physical world
and the spiritual world. Sometimes, this layer itself can form the double that
travels.

   I have also found that this auric layer, programmed by our genetic and soul
heritage, can be read or probed for primal and soul-based information. This
layer incorporates all the experiences we have had in-body, whether in this life
or any other. This practical data is registered in the physical matter that
composes half of our energy body system. Also keyed in are the energy
imprints relating to our soul purpose and path. This auric layer actually
integrates our physical matter (prana) with spiritual matter (mana). It connects
our chakric energy centers with our spiritual energy points. In addition, this
energy body provides our physical, emotional, and mental aspects with a
blueprint for growth, development, and change. Many hands-on healers work
with the etheric body, because altering it can make both physical and spiritual
change.

Other Auric Layers


There is a lot of research that substantiates the existence of these ten auric
layers, including studies at UCLA and Duke University, German and Russian
government research, and probably a great deal of unpublished American
government research. There are also phenomena like Kirlian photography, a
type of photography that takes pictures of auric layers. As each auric layer
ultimately connects to a different dimension, modern physics could even be
stretched to show the existence of these auric layers. The modern,
scientifically based string theory can "prove" that there are ten dimensions. Of
course, there are also thousands of years worth of mystical and practical
experiences that sustain the idea that auras exist. However, there is little data
to support my theory that there are two auric layers on top of these major ten
layers.

   I do believe that there are eleventh and twelfth auric layers. The eleventh
auric layer, in my work, is simply an extension of the eleventh chakra. It differs
in that it is not limited to the space around the hands and feet; rather, it extends
beyond, touching the energy of the top twenty spiritual energy points, among
other spaces.

   I came up with this theory while working with the eleventh chakra in
healing. One of my clients had carpal tunnel syndrome. We tried and tried to
clear it with "regular" intuitive or spiritual healing methods, to no avail. Then I
had her flow out on her eleventh chakra. She pictured waving energy that
washed out of this plane and connected to other feelings. To my surprise, these
feelings were conceptual states-the same ones represented in the top twenty
spiritual chakras. She could palpably feel the wavy energy from these chakras
through her hands and feet. Her carpal tunnel became significantly better when
she worked with the creation point (point 24). I believe, though, that the
connection between this chakra and her syndrome was unique to her and the
causal reasons for her condition.

   Over time, I have assisted clients with becoming more directive regarding
what energy they are bringing in and out of their feet and hands. When
grounding, I often have them work with what I now call this eleventh auric
layer, pulling energy up from the very depths of the earth or the very tips of the
heavens. Sometimes, the shock is so great that some clients have a difficult
time moving afterward! Remember, the eleventh chakra and therefore the
eleventh auric layer, is about transmutation-our bodies will physically
experience that which we are pulling in.

  I also believe that there is a twelfth auric layer; in fact, I see this layer as the
glue for the twelfth chakra. As you recall, the twelfth chakra is a collection of
secondary chakra points. Though these points connect outside the body through
a series of psychically apparent fibers, I perceive another body around these
fibers. This glowing energy looks like a vibrating mesh of atoms that form a net
cast far, far beyond our human sphere. I have sometimes worked with this net,
which I call the twelfth auric layer, to call spiritual energy in for people with
serious and traumatic conditions, such as postaccident victims. I almost always
see an instant relaxation in the body, for through this auric layer, you can work
on all the secondary chakras at once.

   For example, I witnessed a seminar participant, who had a history of near-
fatal injuries, hit her head and nearly die. Surrounded by a group, she received
a lot of spiritual attention. For my part, I could see her soul leaving. It had
already unplugged from her chest and was trying to release its connection to
the silver cord, one of the secondary chakra points. It was also cutting into the
mesh that I consider to be the twelfth auric layer. I instantly knew that if her
soul completed its "surgical warfare" with this aura, this woman would be
dead.

   Telling her soul that this was not its time to leave (seldom am I that
intrusive, but in this case, it felt appropriate), I forced the twelfth auric layer
closed again and yanked her back into her body along the silver cord. Against
all odds, this woman recovered very quickly.




                      ELEVENTH AND TWELFTH CHAKRAS


WHAT WAS REALLY happening when Jesus walked on water or calmed a
storm with a command, as described in the Christian New Testament? What's
behind the Chinese stories of the hsien, avatars who ascend to the heavens
without really dying? These just might be the product of the eleventh and
twelfth chakras and auric layers at work.
   The eleventh auric field is a film around our body, but if we were to slice it
open, we would perceive a field of blinking lights. The streams of energy from
these lights link into our brain, higher and lower chakras, and our hands and
feet. For the trained and initiated, we can use this field to command and direct
energies in a way so powerful that we, too, could walk on water, make a tumor
disappear, or pull a coin out of the air.

  The eleventh chakra is our connection into a level of existence that deals
with powers and forces. (It is described in my series Advanced Chakra
Healing as the power pathway.) Through mental command, we can call forth
and shift natural and supernatural energies to do our will. Natural energies
include elemental forces, such as those of the air, water, fire, and more.
Supernatural energies include the rays and cosmic, star, interdimensional, and
spiritual forces.

  The twelfth chakra is used differently by each of us. It really represents our
individual self and potential for excellence. Through it, we can summon
spiritual, human, and physical help and assistance supportive of our spiritual
mission. When we become really good at something, we are involving our
twelfth chakra in everything we do. We are all programmed for success.




                          WORKING WITH THE AURA


There are so many ways to work with the aura; we could devote an entire book
to this topic alone. I'll discuss a few of the ways that I approach the aura.

   When working with auric fields, I first select an intuitive technique. Do I
want to visualize the aura and the pertaining chakras? Do I want to use my
intuitive auditory skills and listen to information about them? Do I want to
apply my kinesthetic abilities to interact with them? Do I want to incorporate
all three approaches?

  Having selected an approach, I then decide if I want to picture the overall
auric body or immediately center on individual layers. Generally, I check out
the overall field as I scan the chakras, then I isolate a few particular layers.
Sometimes, I scan the overall field by examining each layer, one at a time.
When I do this, I usually begin with the integrative layer and move upward and
outward toward the ninth. I used this method, for instance, with a woman who
was worrying about whether she had breast cancer or not. I first clarified three
points with her:

1. To work with me, she needed to continue working with her medical doctor.

2. I was not going to diagnose in any way, only share senses and pictures, and
 help her get the same type of information.

3. I would not judge the course nor the outcome of her disease process as
 good or bad, but I would encourage her to open fully to the Divine Source
 during our interactions.

   I relayed my pictures to her after doing a complete scan of her aura and
chakras, then centered in on two chakras and two auric fields. The
discolorations in the auric field around her breast and abdomen were in the
second and seventh fields. As we discussed these discolorations, the emotional
and spiritual causes of her problems became obvious. Among other things, her
father had told her that her mother's death was her fault, at which time the
breast problems had started. We did quite a bit more probing and work, but my
client's breast pain disappeared and her medical test results were normal. Of
course, we can't prove that our work cured her, but I tend to agree with the
sentiments expressed by Ywahoo in Voices of Our Ancestors, which I
summarize. We must recognize ourselves as vibrations of life. If we can
remove our obstructing thought forms, we can positively, rather than
negatively, affect the stream of life.13

   If I am using visual techniques, as I did with the above-mentioned client, I
typically search for discolorations, abnormal shapes, bulges or weak spots,
frays, or funny colors. The presence of any of these details points to a current
or potential problem. I use my mind as much as my intuition when doing
diagnostic work on the aura. I recall what this aura layer is about, and I begin
to tick off possible problems in my head. If I am working with someone, I may
ask them pertinent questions. I may even have them picture their own aura and
tell me what they see.

   When using auditory intuition, I ask questions of guides or of my own
intuition regarding the health or needs of a particular auric band. Typical
questions may include:

1. What is the overall condition of this auric layer?

2. Are there any problems I/we need to know about?

3. What are they about?

4. What are the consequences of healing this issue?

5. What are the consequences of leaving it the way that it is?

6. How can we best work with any difficulties?

   When using my kinesthetic senses, I may work many different ways. With
hands-on healing or therapeutic-touch techniques, I may feel for hot or cold
spots or for irregularities in the energy field or on the skin. Usually, heat means
that there is too much energy in one spot, which could reflect the presence of
stored or unfelt feelings or an unprocessed belief or issue. It might be a
collection point or drop-off for another's issues or feelings. Heat found during
a scan means something different than heat felt during an energy exchange.
When doing a healing, my hands often grow hot as an indication that I am
sending energy into the client.

   A cold spot usually indicates an absence of feeling, awareness, or
consciousness. It might also reflect a hole in the auric field. Holes can cause
the dissipation or loss of energy, and also leave one susceptible to the energies
of others. When my hands are cold during a healing, however, energy is being
released or pulled out. Often, clients who let go of powerful feelings, beliefs,
memories, or misperceptions become extremely cold. They may get the chills
for up to an hour, or experience hot and cold flashes for days. One of my
clients had a longtime knee injury that operations couldn't fix. Her knee
actually moved permanently, three inches, immediately after a session, and she
experienced these types of flashes for two to three days. The physical healing
of her knee also released many long-stored energies and emotions.

   Yet another kinesthetic technique involves using the simple intuitive ability
to sense or tune in to the auric field. We all have the ability to sense issues,
feelings, abnormalities, or sensitivities in ourselves and in others. The key to
applying this ability is to trust our perceptions and to encourage others to do
the same. Sometimes, tuning in requires that I allow myself to feel my client's
issues or symptoms as my own. I have been trained in several countries in
shamanism, so I am fairly comfortable with this method; however, I caution
most people against it. It is not your job to take on your clients', friends', or
relatives' problems or issues. If you find that you naturally involve yourself
this way, I encourage you to immediately learn about boundaries and
protection, and get training from someone who understands the issues and
ethics involved in this healing style.

   While visualizing the auric layers, I may also ask questions of myself, my
client, our guides, or the Divine Source. If I sense an abnormality when
scanning with my hands, I may guide my client into that part of his or her body,
requesting that they visualize the problem or a representation of it. There are
countless ways to blend kinesthetic, visual, and auditory intuition. I usually
integrate all three approaches. I have found it more than worthwhile to practice
using all three separately and individually so that I am capable and confident,
able to draw on all my abilities when they are called for to manage this
investigative process.

   Ultimately, the productivity of a scan or a healing directly correlates to how
willing I am to open to (and get out of the way for) the Divine Source. I see
myself simply as a vehicle or channel for divine healing. As a human, I
constantly work like a hollow bone, an imperfect vehicle that must be stripped
to be a conduit for love. As a healer who must remain nonjudgmental regarding
my clients' particular and individual beliefs and processes, I ask that they
receive the highest form of guidance possible at that time. The bottom line is
that all the techniques, teachings, and knowledge in the world matter little
compared to our attitude.

Healing Auric Problems


We can also use any of these styles to actually make alterations to the auric
field. Visualization is a powerful tool. If there is a cord, for instance, we can
first visualize it, and then use guided imagery to understand the nature of the
relationship connection. (See chapter 11 for more information on working with
cords.) Finally, we can use visual techniques to remove the cord and heal the
remaining hole. Visualization, in the form of guided meditation, trance,
regression, and hypnotherapy work, is extremely useful. It enables us to guide
ourselves or another person into the heart of the issue.

   Auditory skills assist us in calling on internal and external sources of
wisdom. I often facilitate a discussion between a client and a part of
themselves. I may have them talk to that hole in the aura or speak to the person
whose issues they are holding. I also speak with my own and the client's guides
during most healing processes and encourage my clients to do the same.
Frequently, I ask these invisible guides to actually conduct a healing for me; for
myself, I call on angelic beings or Christ. Others may call on their own
traditions.

   There are innumerable kinesthetic healing techniques. They include
channeling energy into someone or removing energy from his or her field.
These techniques might involve soothing the energy field or zapping it with a
needed bolt of energy. Usually, I integrate all three approaches. When doing
this, I commonly seek answers to the following questions:

1. Are there any immediate or potential physical concerns?

2. Are there any belief systems or patterns negatively affecting this auric
 layer?

3. Are there any feelings that need to be freed, expressed, or claimed?

4. Is the soul trying to say something to me through this auric layer?

5. Are there any guides attached to this auric layer that have a message for
 me?

6. Are there any positive, current, or potential life experiences this auric layer
 is blocking or trying to draw to me?

7. Are there any inherent family-of-origin issues that are negatively affecting
 this auric field?

8. Are there any relationships affecting this auric layer, negatively or
 positively? What do I need to do about it?

9. Is there anything I can do to help this auric field right now?

  Responses to these questions will usually tell me what I need to do.

   In general, I have found that the technique used is the least important part of
any healing procedure, whether we are working with the aura or any other part
of the energy system. Keeping our own and our clients' best interests
uppermost in our minds is the most important part of any healing. Holding good
intent protects both the healer and the client from any potential damage.

            THE OTHER DIMENSION: THE MIDDLE ENERGETIC LAYER


There is another systemic layer that lies interspliced between our chakric and
auric systems. I use it to provide clients with a description of their soul imprint
or personality characteristics. Learning how to perceive this layer can help you
provide yourself and others with critical input for relationship or career
decisions. We are, after all, happiest when a relationship or job involves all of
our being, not just part. This layer can give you snapshots of the traits you need
to have to become fully engaged on a personal or professional level.

   I read this middle layer just as I do a television screen. First, I check out a
client's auric bodies, then scan the chakras. Next, I move my inner eye to a
space between the two and blank out the aura and chakras. Now I am at the
middle energetic layer.

  Typically, I experience this layer with my inner vision and in color. Since I
have not read about this technique or this layer in any other sources, I can tell
you only that for me and my students this visual approach seems to be the
clearest way to reach into this layer. I often use and teach auditory and
kinesthetic means of interpreting the data, but in this discussion I will
concentrate on the visual.

   Basically, I read the middle energy layer by looking at the energy layers on
top of the chakras. It is actually a series of layers, each a different color. The
colors themselves and the width of their bands are usually different than those
of the chakras themselves.

   Let me give an example. When scanning one client, I saw a swirl of purple
around her feet, a piling of blue on her thighs and abdomen, a pink band in
front of her heart, and an orange band going around her head.

   From this picture, I determined factors about her basic personality. I
informed this person that, according to my system, I would guess that she is
most comfortable when she is in a state of change or transformation or
associated with people who are. She may want to work in a field that helps
people undergo transformational processes. I actually received pictures of
possibilities, but they followed after I'd noted this general information. I drew
these conclusions from the purple around her feet. I know that purple, as
defined by my description of the sixth chakra, relates to transformation and
intuitive vision. The feet relate to the tenth, or the grounding, chakra. Anything
relating to the feet or underneath the feet has to do with where that person
places themselves in dayto-day reality. As I continued with the session, I
suggested that this client is naturally a compassionate and understanding
person, and that her emotional state is probably quite affected by others. I also
suggested that she consider applying her compassion in a professional
capacity, then I expanded upon this information.

   These latter comments I made because I knew the following: blue relates to
the fifth chakra and has to do with understanding and learning. Thighs relate to
inherited functions; my client probably inherited a great deal of compassion
and understanding from her family. The blue over the first chakra told me that
she would be good at professions involving some sort of emotional clarifying
and compassion, and that in major relationships, communication would be a
primary need. The blue over her second chakra told me that she needed to have
her feelings understood.

  I went on with this assessment, making sure that I checked for validity with
my client and that I gave her practical applications of this general information.
Although I gave her a number of career suggestions, I was careful to not tell
her what she should do. At the time, she was employed as a loan officer in the
banking industry. Given our assessment, that profession didn't seem to fit, but it
was important that she reach this conclusion for herself.

  One year later, she returned-ecstatic! She had just completed her application
for a master's degree in divinity, concentrating on spiritual counseling. She had
connected her compassionate nature and association of transformation with
spiritual work. Rarely have I seen such a glow on someone's face. Every client
who has experienced this technique has been amazed at its applicability and
helpfulness.

                   COLORS, BODY PARTS, AND THEIR MEANINGS


The following is a brief synopsis of the colors and body parts as they apply to
the magnetic layer. I would encourage you to try to read them and see how
accurate you can be.

Colors and Their Meanings
Red: Life, passion, energy, motivation linked to providing basic needs for self
or others.

Orange: Creativity, feelings, attracted to that which is newly emerging.

Yellow: Intellectual, mental, indicates organizational, categorical, management
 skills.

Green: Healing skills; likes to see people or projects moving from point A to
point B.

Blue: Compassionate, understanding, communicable; likes learning and
understanding.

Purple: Deeply intuitive, humanly spiritual, color of transformation.

White: Relates to principles, concepts, and purpose.

Silver: Transmission; can transmit data from one point to another.

Gold: Color of universal love.

Pink: Color of human love-combines white of spirit and purpose with red
 which protects/provides life.

Brown: Earthy and earth-bound; indicates a connection to nature or natural
processes.

Black: Can indicate a strong ability, hidden power, or a need or skill in
protecting oneself or others; may also cover a hidden or understood ability
that needs to come forth.

Body Parts and Their Significance


Feet: Relates to grounding; where one would prosper in regard to living
 environment; type of work atmosphere needed.
Knees: Concerns style of mobility; how person changes and shifts with life's
ups and downs.

Thighs: Relates to inherited traits and tendencies; masculine and feminine
 programming; and stored, unprocessed emotions about masculine and
 feminine nature.

Hips: Relates to first-chakra issues; look here to understand fundamental
career and job needs/skills/industries.

Abdomen: Relates to second-chakra issues; this area can provide insight into
person's basic feeling nature and creative gifts.

Stomach: Relates to third chakra; indicates a person's mental gifts and success
 drives.

Heart: Relates to relationship needs, behaviors, and personality.

Thymus: Relates to the connection between someone and their spiritual
 identity, and beliefs about the right to be strong and safe.

Throat: Relates to person's communication style and abilities.

Face: Shows how someone sees the world; what they need to see when they
 wake up in the morning.

Forehead: Relates to someone's sense of body and self-image; his or her goals
 and predictions for the future.

Top of Head: Relates to important and innate principles; what is important to
 this person.

Remember that issues in the right side of the body concern stereotypically male
regards-action, behavior, relationship with the world. Issues in the left side of
the body relate to stereotypical female concerns-receptivity, emotions,
guidance, and relationship with the inner self.
                            EXERCISES: READING AURAS


1. Reading Your Own Aura


A. Take a piece of paper and some crayons or colored pencils. Draw a body
shape on the paper. This shape is you. After bringing yourself into a
meditative state, pinpoint an issue you are having in your body. Are you
having pain anywhere? Do you have fear in your gut? Is there a place you feel
shut down? Make an X in the corresponding chakra.

B. Now decide to which auric layer that chakra, and therefore that issue,
relates. Draw this aura on your sheet. Now pretend you're the intuitive
doctor. What color or discolorations are in this layer? What needs to be
changed? As you draw, be creative.

C. When you are done drawing, see if you can picture this aura in your head.
Play around with it. See if you can make changes. Do you feel any shifts in or
around you?

D. What have you learned about yourself?

II. Reading Someone Else's Aura


  There are three ways to read another person's aura: visually, verbally, and
kinesthetically.

A. Visual-Ask your partner to stand next to a blank wall. Turn off all room
lights except one; if possible, illuminate or backlight your partner with this
light. Focus your eyes on the outside of your partner's form, then blur your
focus. Look for shapes, energy bands, colors, or any representative visuals.
Record your observations and interpret them for your partner, asking for
validation on what fits and what does not.
B. Verbal-Ask your partner to share a problem, concern, or question. Take a
few moments for reflection and ask your intuitive mind to tell you what auric
layer is most affected by this issue or which one holds the key or solution.
Write down or verbally share information that comes to mind. Continue to
question your intuition to find out additional information.

C. Kinesthetic-Ask your partner to lie down. Rub your hands together until
you feel energy flowing between them. Run them along the outside of the
person's body, checking for hot or cold spots, funny feelings, emotional
reactions, bumps, or indentations of the energy body. See if you can
distinguish one auric layer from another, differentiating them based on their
frequency and your partner's reactions.

III. Reading a Partner's Personality Imprint


   Working with any of the methods above, scan for the personality layer rather
than the chakra or auric layer. Share your reactions and reasoning with your
partner.
                 IN YOUR FIELD:
           MORE OF WHAT'S AROUND YOU
The auric field is only one of the many fields that compose or impact us.
Hundreds of energy fields and bodies interrelate with us and support the "self
around the self." Some of these fields, however, can create physical and life
challenges-and are probably doing so even as you read this chapter. If we
humans are to shift the world into peace and goodness, we absolutely must
address the way we interact in the natural world. Our use of energy fields is
now creating geo- and human stress that is threatening the performance and
even existence of life.

  Fields are one of the three main energetic structures that create the human
body as well as the earth's body. This chapter examines a few of the natural
and human-made energy fields that impact us, some of the subtle fields that
surround us, and some of the energetic bodies that interface with our fields.
The goal is to really understand how expansive we are as human beings. As
broad as our stretch is, as widespread our effectiveness can be.

                               NATURAL FIELDS


Two primary fields sustain and affect life: electromagnetic fields (EMFs) and
sound fields, or sound waves. Electromagnetic fields are part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Our physical selves need parts of this spectrum for
physical, emotional, mental, and even spiritual health.

  Our in-body chakras occupy the visible light portion of the overall EMF
spectrum (see figure 7.1). Part of chakra seven, as well as chakras eight and
above, are located in the ultraviolet and higher frequencies. Part of chakra one
and all of chakra ten are infrared and lead to the lower frequencies. If chakras
are to function optimally, the appropriate amount of light-based stimulation
needs to feed each one.

  The other fundamental field is sound, which is composed of sound or solar
waves or fields. Sound is considered a mechanical wave, or lower in
vibration than most light waves. Sound waves are present in all aspects of
creation, penetrating our body and the world in general. Sounds sustain or heal
us when they operate at the same vibration as that which they are hitting.
Sounds can hurt or even kill if their frequencies are too extreme.

   Dozens if not hundreds of other natural fields that we might be sensitive to,
positively or negatively, exist. Some of us react whenever a certain planet
enters the heavens at a specific angle. Still others become ill when the
barometric pressure rises or falls. I try and track a client's sensitivities to
natural fields if the symptoms involve periodic or seasonal shifts in energy,
sudden bodily or emotional reactions that emerge without seeming cause-and
then disappear as quickly, or if they appear environmental in any way.

                             HUMAN-MADE FIELDS


A couple of new terms refer to the fallout we're experiencing from
electromagnetic and other field-based poisoning. One is geopathic stress and
the other is electromagnetic spectrum pollution.

   Geopathic stress refers to the sometimes-lethal effects of human and natural
fields. Researchers are discovering that exposure to certain levels of energetic
stressors can create everything from body pain and insomnia to cancer and
heart disease. One researcher, Dr. Hans Nieper, determined that 92 percent of
his cancer patients were geopathically stressed.'

   Electromagnetic spectrum pollution is on the rise-dangerously so. It includes
radioactive poisoning, electropollution, magnetic-field pollution, and other
forms of toxic exposures. High frequency magnetic fields, for instance, disturb
our body's natural magnetism and make us vulnerable to certain diseases.
Power lines and electrical devices, which emit extremely low frequency
radiation, can result in electropollution and actual disease. For instance,
studies indicate that people who live near power lines have higher rates of
childhood and adult leukemia. Radio waves or microwaves, such as those
emanating from cell phones, can cause cancer.2
        Figure 7.1: The Electromagnetic Field (EMF) and the Chakras

  I think it's important to recognize that human-generated energetic pollution
creates energetic, not only physical disorders. Chakras are electromagnetic in
nature. Our aura is fundamentally magnetic. When we upset the natural balance
of these frequency-based energy structures, we disturb the physical, mental,
emotional, and spiritual functions of each. How can we shield or protect
ourselves? Here are a few ideas:

• Strengthen our chakras and auric layers in general through the techniques in
 this book, as well as other books devoted to the subject.

• Monitor the appliances in your personal environment. Unplug appliances
 when they aren't in use. Up to 70 percent of the energy they emit occurs when
 they are plugged in but not in use.

• Get outside-away from power lines. Nature refuels and cleanses our subtle
 structures.

• Use protective devices or substances at work, around office equipment, or at
 home when using the computer, cell phone, or other technology. I have
 discovered that pink flannel, when placed over the third chakra or on a
 technological device, deflects electromagnetic pollution. Pink stones, such as
 pink quartz, also absorb negative fields. These can be placed in strategic
 spots or even kept in your pocket, and then cleansed through prayer or by
 saturating them in saline water for a couple of hours. I also recommend at
 least one fountain in your house, which will help balance the ions in the air.
 Many products on the market deflect or neutralize EMF pollution; search for
 these over the Internet through terms like electropollution or EMF devices.

• Use energetic techniques to cleanse and balance, such as visualizing a
 waterfall of energy washing through your field, top to bottom.

• Consider using techniques such as feng shui or those available through bau-
 biolo- gie to establish a safe environment. These outline ways to place
 objects, such as the bed, to decrease the negative effects of EMF pollution.

                               SUBTLE FIELDS


Beyond the aura, many subtle fields, usually immeasurable, affect everything
we do. These include morphological, miasmic, subtle geo- and universal light
fields. (All are further described in my book The Subtle Body.)

   Morphological fields surround a person, a group of people, and even other
individual and grouped animate life forms, keeping them connected together for
purposes of the exchange of information. They effectively transfer learning and
ideas from one generation to another, but also one living family member to
another. I often work with a client's morphological field to assess the source of
long-term addictions, chronic illnesses, or genetic issues, such as cancers or
heart disease that run in the family. By altering the destructive information in a
morphological field, we can free ourselves from illnesses, ideas, and issues
that hurt us.

   The term miasm was first coined by Dr. Samuel Hahnemann, the founder of
homeopathic medicine. Homeopathy involves treating diseases with substances
that are diluted and then prepared to match the frequencies of a disease. Based
on his ideas, many modern energy practitioners think of miasms as vibrational
patterns that pass disease from generation to generation, from one family
member to another or from our soul to our body.

   The earth and cosmos generate subtle geofields of energies that affect the
electromagnetic frequencies in our body. A few of these are the Hartmann
Grid, the Benker Cubical System, and ley lines. The Hartmann Grid is a set of
grid lines that are higher in radiation than the land between the lines. The
Benker Cubical System is a different set of lines that are oriented toward the
earth's poles. Ley lines are energies emanating from the earth that affect
electrical and magnetic natural energies.' Usually an overexposure to any of
these lines results in an imbalance in our EMF, and some researchers believe
this can lead to chronic and even terminal illnesses.

   The universal light field, also called the "zero-point field," is comprised of
photons or wave-particles of light that interpenetrate all of reality. Because our
DNA is made of light, our health is regulated by our association with this
field.'

                    ADDITIONAL HUMAN FIELDS AND BODIES
If we were to fall through the looking glass, as did Alice when journeying to
Wonderland, we'd be able to see energy bodies that seemingly magically
interrelate with our auric field, as well as other parts of ourselves. I love
working with these various structures, as they afford healing beyond the
capabilities of the auric field.

  Some of the human fields and bodies available to a Complete Chakra healer
are the physical etheric body, soul etheric body, Vivaxis, etheric mirror, light
body, and energy egg.

Physical Etheric Body


Peer through an energetic microscope and there-right next to your skin-is an
etheric film that holds the energy programs related to your health and physical
well-being. The physical etheric body is identical to your tenth auric or
integrative layer. When accessed intentionally for healing, it accesses other
dimensions, planes of existence, antiworlds, and parallel worlds. We can visit
these intuitively to pull in energies for physical healing.

   Each aspect of our physical body is also incorporated within a physical
etheric body, including our cells, organs, and organ systems. At these levels,
the physical etheric layer actually holds not only past-life but also generational
memories. From a scientific perspective, this assertion is substantiated by an
observation called epigenetics. tion in our own environment, but also in
situations that affected our forebears, will stimulate these chemicals, which in
turn, toggle our genes.5 I relate the performance and affects of the DNA and
cellular physical etheric layer to the epigenetic affects.

   Epigenetics is based on the thought that there is an energy that turns our
genes on and off. Scientists have observed that certain chemicals, such as
proteins and methyl molecules, act like switches that tell the genes how to
operate, and when. But-there are energies behind these physical ones that
instruct them. As shown in research, many of the commanding forces are
actually emotional and intergenerational in nature. Altera-
Soul Etheric Body


The soul etheric body wraps around our soul and holds our lifetime memories,
experiences, desires, and conclusions. It travels with us from one lifetime to
another so we can access prior knowledge. We can also use it to intuitively
journey, as do shamans, when meditating or upon entering a trance state.

Vivaxis


The Vivaxis is a term coined by Judy Jacka (and her teacher, Frances Nixon) in
Jacka's book The Vivaxis Connection. It is an energetic sphere that develops
within us as a fetus and then forever links us to our place of birth. Through this
umbilical cord, energy continues to flow between our place of origin and us
throughout our life. When major shifts occur in the land, caused by natural or
human alterations, we might experience similar effects in our own bodies.' The
Vivaxis is therefore an ideal energy body to check for symptoms that include
fatigue, chronic inflammation, sudden-onset autoimmune disorders, or severe
environmental allergies.

Etheric Mirror


The etheric mirror is a highly refined and shiny energy field that surrounds the
human body and is located right next to the integrative auric layer. It holds the
templates and clues for our optimum physical health. By observing an illness
or condition in this mirror, we can see if it's something we can fix or not. Some
problems are "meant to be" and uphold a significant soul lesson. If there is a
significant difference between our current physical condition and that revealed
in the mirror, we can use intention to transfer the desired state into our bodies
and therefore support our physical structure in aligning with this higher
standard.
             Figure 7.2: One Light Body

Light Body
The light body is actually a series of vibrating energy bands that emanate from
the inner wheels of the chakras (see figure 7.2). They must be consciously
activated, although experiences invoking higher awareness can also open them.

   Upon activation, a light body radiates from the center of a chakra like a
rainbow bubble. Each light body can be intuitively perceived as unique in
color, shape, and function, but all serve a protective function. Therefore, they
filter out undesirable energies, situations, people, and entities and let in only
positive ones, working with the auric layers to accomplish these tasks.

  Each light body occupies its own space around our physical self. If each
were to unfold, we would experience ourselves as surrounded by ever-
expanding circles of light.

  I often help pregnant women open these light bodies for their unborn
children, providing them protection yet a continued link with the Divine upon
birth. This can be accomplished through prayer and meditation.

Energy Egg


The energy egg is an electromagnetic field that surrounds all layers of the aura
(see figure 7.3). 1 see it as an oscillating, luminescent band of energy
composed of three layers.

   The third and outermost layer opens to spiritual realms, as well as the
spiritual points. Through it we can call in spiritual assistance and energies not
yet available on this planet. The second and middle layers open to
possibilities. They are actually composed of the same material as is the "zero-
point field" discussed in chapter 1. Through intention and divine grace, we can
access healing energy from the antiworlds and parallel universes. The first and
innermost layer is located next to the twelfth auric field. It interacts with a
number of auric layers, including the twelfth and the seventh, to relay
information between our physical body and our environment. When all three
layers of the egg are operational and oscillating rhythmically, they help us
bring energies from the very heavens into our physical bodies for manifesting
and healing.




                         Figure 7.3: The Energy Egg
                GETTING INTO THE FLOW:
                   RAYS OF ENERGY
Rays are universal energies that are available to us all. Tapping into them is a
perk for being human, because they can assist us with anything and everything
that meets, greets, or beats on us during our life journey.

  Some metaphysicians theorize that each ray is linked to a particular figure or
being. Metaphysicians following the group called the Great White Brotherhood
believe in this type of link. According to them, there are seven rays and seven
advanced beings that act as guardians and administrators of each ray.

  I believe that humankind is gifted with advanced guidance and that humans
are supported by the energy of rays. I feel the use of any and all of the rays is
available to each of us. We may choose to go through a gatekeeper or not.
However, in my practice, I haven't found any practical reasons to associate a
universal ray with one and only one being.

   The other application of rays that has found favor is assigning rays a role in
discovering our basic personality. Jack Schwarz, a recent proponent of this
theory, believes that we can determine our basic personality or purpose based
on which rays enter our bodies. Alice Bailey, an early theosophist and
contemporary of C. W. Leadbeater, also worked with rays in this way.

  There is a popular metaphysical belief that each soul is attuned to a certain
ray and uses its energies to complete its purpose. I make amendments to this
belief. We very well might use certain rays more than others, either because
we are more comfortable with a particular energy, or because we need a
certain ray to balance ourselves. However, I do not believe it is true that a soul
runs on only one or two rays. Each person has a unique personality. Our souls,
which seek balance and completion, will need certain energies at one time and
other energies at another time. The Cherokee tradition seems to support this
view, as Ywahoo emphasizes in Voices of Our Ancestors, that at some point in
our lives, we will reflect each of these rays.' While we might draw more
consistently on one energy source or ray than others, it would only be because
it suits our soul purpose. We do not, however, revise our soul purpose
according to an incoming ray. I find that we merely use power from it, as we
do from other sources.

   My statement may make more sense if I explain my view of the rays. A ray is
a stream of consciousness, and the complete energetic rays are emitted from
the Divine Source. These rays vibrate at rates that are safe, powerful, and
uplifting. The rays are more than simple bands of light that splay forth like the
sun's rays. In my view, they flow in a circular pattern, moving outward from
the Divine Source to us, then back to the Source.

   One of the most important paradoxes to understand in relation to rays is that
a ray, or stream of Divine Source consciousness, never actually leaves the
Divine Source. Rays feed our Divine Source self, the aspect of ourselves that
knows it is one with the Divine Source and has never left it. Our human self is
intimately linked to this Divine Source self. In fact, it is a reflection, or some
would say, a projection of it.

   It is as if part of us created a dream-world called Life in which to explore,
play, and learn. It then projected itself into this playground and began to
experiment with different beliefs, feelings, and modalities. The in-body self
has never really been any different than the Divine Source-based self; it is just
an extension of it. The Divine Source self is always anchoring our human self.
However, for various reasons, most selves began to believe that there was a
split. I think this belief stems from a sense of guilt for wanting to experiment in
the first place. This chasm of guilt and shame is what we must bridge to evolve
our human self, not to some unknown point of achievement, but back to the
realization that it is and always has been within the Divine Source.

   I think that rays feed the Divine Source self. They provide the knowing,
learned part of us with the rich nutrients that are necessary to maintain and
strengthen our essence. As an in-body person, we must realize that our Divine
Source self is our human self. The job of the rays is to loop us back into the
fold, to help us remember our Divine Source self.
   I perceive six major rays and a seventh energy stream that interact with our
inner Divine Source self. I see each of these major six rays entering at a
particular point in the body and exiting through another. When they enter and
exit, they do so from both sides of the body. Of course, this statement in itself
is a paradox, for each of the rays really moves from the inside of our body to
the outside. Establishing a conscious relationship with each of these energies
is easier if we first concentrate on these entry and exit points.

   Many of you probably realize that I reduced the typical number of the rays
from seven to six. I perceive the seventh ray to be the Divine Source self. After
opening to the first six rays, we must see and acknowledge ourselves as
children of the Divine Source. Conversely, if we were to realize ourselves as
part of the Divine Source right now, we wouldn't need to understand the other
rays.

                             THE SIX MAJOR RAYS




The qualities of the rays themselves are similar to those mentioned in other
texts. Here's a synopsis:

First Ray


Key Aspect-Will power.

Entry Point Significance-Establishes the Divine Source self's existence on a
physical level.

Exit Point Significance-Reconnects the human self's existence to the Divine
 Source.

Second Ray


Key Aspect-Love and kindness.

Entry Point Significance-Allows human self to see self through the eyes of the
 Divine Source a lens of infinite kindness and love.

Exit Point Significance-Returns our feeling states, both the difficult and
 positive, to the Divine Source for healing and completion.

Third Ray


Key Aspect-Intelligence.

Entry Point Significance-Brings Divine Source ideas to human self for
 consideration. Allows human self to consider what to activate.

Exit Point Significance-Returns decisions, consequences, or learning back to
 the Divine Source.

Fourth Ray


Key Aspect-Unity.

Entry Point Significance-Reinforces the fact that the Divine Source will bring
 heart's desires to the human self through concrete reality.

Exit Point Significance-Reflects harmonies and disharmonies back to the
 Divine Source for reflection and healing.
Fifth Ray


Key Aspect-Knowledge.

Entry Point Significance-Awakens all past and potential future knowledge of
 the human self and other human selves, making this knowledge available for
 everyday use.

Exit Point Significance-Grounds this knowledge into the human self's current
 material reality.

Sixth Ray


Key Aspect-Idealism.

Entry Point Significance-Grants the human self the clean and pure
 unconditional acceptance, love, and principled support that only the Divine
 Source self can provide.

Exit Point Significance-After awakening the soul's essential nature, loops back
 into the Divine Source self, closing the circle between the two.

Seventh (Final) Ray


I don't consider this energy to be a ray. Rather, it is an awareness that comes
when we realize that we are in the Divine Source, that we are nourished by the
white light that is, contains, and includes everything.

                          WORKING WITH THE RAYS


We can choose to work deliberately or unconsciously with the rays. In a
deliberate approach, we assess what is missing in our lives or what type of
energy might be helpful. For instance, one of my clients, James, was
experiencing financial problems. Because he was already deeply interested in
the concept of the rays, I asked him to begin working with first ray energy.
While money issues could reflect any of the rays, I knew that basic security
issues originate in the first chakra, and that the first ray enters through the first
chakra. I also know that money is tied to the grander issue of purpose, being on
our right career path. My decision was underscored by the fact that the first ray
exits at the pineal gland or seventh chakra, which pertains to purpose. Finally,
the first ray has to do with will power. Break this term down, and we have
"will" plus "power"-what we want, plus the power to achieve it. Thus, I
blended my rationality with my own intuition to make a suggestion to James.

  For his part, James meditated on the first ray and his Divine Source
connection three times a day, imagining the ray entering through the coccyx and
exiting through the pineal gland. He focused on each twist undertaken by this
ray. During the course of two months, he worked through several issues
pertaining to money, including beliefs that he didn't deserve any, confusion
about how to make it, and anger toward his father, who focused solely on
money.

  With James, I did something a bit different. About one month into our work, I
suggested that he begin to concurrently use the abundance energy point, which
sped up his progress in actively working through his issues. Within two
months, he had taken a new, better-paying job. Within six months, he was well
on his way to saving enough money for a down payment on a house.

   Certain issues may also call for mixing the rays. When playing chemist, it is
helpful to spend some time determining all sides of an issue before dabbling.
Let's say you have pinpointed the first ray for your money issues, but sense that
you need something more. A little bit of meditation may help you remember
that you didn't have troublesome money issues until you got divorced. Knowing
that the heart (fourth) chakra deals with relationships, you may try on the idea
that the fourth ray may also hold healing for you.

   I underwent a rather unusual experience with the rays shortly after separating
from my husband. Since I was the one forced to move, I found myself with
$500, two futons, and a small child. I went to bed one night asking that the
Divine Source send me whatever ray energy I needed to help me get on my
feet. I will never forget that night.

   At first, I was aware of red energy, that of the first ray. A voice in my head
said, "This may hurt." That was an understatement. The sharpness of the pain,
the creak of bones moving-I was terrified, not sure what I had unleashed. At
that moment, I was a firm believer in the old maxim of the cure being worse
than the illness. On rolled the evening, with each color illuminating different
aspects of my personality and altering me in different ways. I experienced the
presence of beings, but more than one to a ray. I found them comforting and
reassuring.

   Within a year and a half, I was living in a comfortable suburb, had bought
land outside of the city, paid all my debts, and had 700 clients. I believe a lot
of it had to do with that night; the ray clearing and some prior and subsequent
work I did with the higher energy centers, plus my old-fashioned Puritan work
ethic.

   Even more recently, I tapped into the fifth ray to write a 400-page
manuscript (single spaced) in three months. I don't remember much of the time
period, but I was able to pull from a source of knowledge much deeper than my
own. I also connected with three field experts, whose assistance shortened my
research time by hundreds of hours. The rays stand ready for us to use them to
the highest ends.

                           METHODS FOR RAY WORK


There are several methods for working with the rays. A psychically visual
person may tune in to themselves or another person and scan for the presence
and absence of the rays by using color. Psychics often interpret the colors of
the rays in the following way:
Aside from searching for missing or incomplete ray connections, it can be
helpful to determine which rays we (or another) are most heavily drawing
upon. This information can tell us about our own or another's current, primary
needs. If we are tapping into a lot of second ray energy, chances are that we
are, at least at the moment, concentrating on feelings and the expression of them
in our life. If we are pulling in third and fourth ray energy, we are using
intellectual and relationship energy. Perhaps we are considering how our ideas
about a relationship stack up against the reality of a particular relationship.

   Because the list of possibilities and their interpretations are endless, it is
important to trust our intuitive senses in regard to our usage of the rays. If
someone tells us we are a third ray person, and we don't think so, we don't
need to accept that information as valid. If we perceive a lot of third ray
energy in ourselves, however, we have options about how to use this
knowledge. We can seek to further understand our familiarity with the third ray,
the ray of intelligence. Perhaps we can challenge ourselves to make even more
use of our brightness, or to establish new ways to relay it.

                               USING RAY ENERGY


There are many ways to actually tap into or pull in ray energy. The first method
is probably the easiest, but the most difficult to describe. We simply pull it in.
We ask for it, sense the ray's presence, and bring it into our bodies. If you take
this approach, remember to check both the entrance and exit points. Are they
clear and unclogged? Are the rays flowing completely through these points, or
are some of them getting stuck? We know that we have succeeded when we
feel different.

   Another method is the visual approach. We can psychically scan the entry
and exit points and search for the rays. We want to check for colors and
discolorations, the strength and intensity of the rays entering and exiting, and if
the ray is trying to illuminate anything for us.

  Another scanning method involves the auditory approach. We can always
ask our own self or a guide to simply explain to us what is happening with the
rays. We can listen for responses or write them down.

  Good questions to ask about any specific ray can include:

1. Can I locate the ray in or around me?

2. Is the ray entering the entrance point?

3. If not, why? Is the entrance point blocked? With what is it blocked? Is it an
 emotional, physical, mental, or spiritual issue? What do I need to do or
 believe to open up this entrance point?

4. What effect is the ray having inside my body?

5. Is there anything I need to do or know to use this ray so it better serves my
 needs?

6. Is the ray exiting my body?

7. If not, why? Is the exit point blocked? With what is the exit point blocked?
 What do I need to do or believe to open up this exit point?

8. How does the ray look (or feel) when it leaves my body?

9. Is it appropriate that it looks (or feels) like this? If not, what do I need to do
 or know?
10. Does the ray loop back completely to the Divine Source? If not, how am I
 preventing its full return?

11. Are all my rays in balance? If yes, how can I assure they will remain that
 way? If no, what must I do or know to bring them into balance?

   If we were to distill this information and all other ray information down to
its fundamentals, we would eventually arrive at this conclusion: rays are there
to help us love ourselves better. If we are willing to love ourselves, we will
automatically reach for the right star.


                    EXERCISES: WORKING WITH YOUR RAYS


1. Select a scanning method and search your own field for the rays. Draw or
 document your findings (include a picture of a body). Then, guiding yourself
 into a meditative state, ask yourself the eleven scanning questions outlined at
 the end of this chapter. Record your answers. What do they tell you about
 your current state of affairs?

II. Select one ray to work with for a week. Every morning and evening,
 picture or feel this ray coming into your body, emerging from the exit point,
 and connecting you to the Divine Source. At the end of the week, evaluate
 what happened in relation to that ray's primary focus.

III. The following set of questions is designed to help you determine which
 ray(s) you are currently using. Knowing this information can give you clues
 about the professional or personal focus you may need to keep at this time.

   A. What color seems to best explain your personality at this time?

 1. Red

 2. Orange

 3. Yellow
4. Green

5. Silver

6. Gold

7. White

  B. What would best describe your nature under the following conditions?
  When working

1. Forceful: It's important to get things done.

2. Considerate: What matters is doing things in a good way.

3. Pondering: It's important to consider options so as to make the best
 decision.

4. Team-oriented: The best work is done when each person is doing his or
 her best.

5. Learned: Knowledge-knowing what to know-will reflect in the final
 outcome.

6. Idealistic: You can't reach the stars unless you set out for the stars.

7. On-purpose: If I stay connected to my Divine Source, what I do will be
 perfect.

   In relationships

1. Powerful: Let's be real with each other.

2. Kind: I believe in loving my neighbor as myself.

3. Thoughtful and intentional: There are consequences to actions; let's think
 things through.

4. Harmonious: It's important that we operate as a unit, supporting each other.

5. Understanding: If we know where each other is coming from and why, we
 will get along.

6. Connected: We are striving to be one.

7. Accepting: People are who and what they are supposed to be-at all times.

   At leisure

1. Physical and self-determining: I like to keep moving.

2. Reflective: This is the time to achieve a higher understanding of matters.

3. Studious: I need time for research, study, and thinking if I am to be at my
 best when it counts.

4. Open: By staying open to and following my desires, I become a better
 person.

5. Curious: I want to learn everything there is to learn.

6. Dedicated: When I'm doing something, I want to do it as well as I can,
 even if it's play.

7. No different: Always, I am being myself, held in the Divine Source.

  C. What qualities do you use most in your daily life?

1. Determination

2. Consideration of others

3. Reason
 4. Compassion and harmony

 5. Understanding, relating what you know

 6. Adherence to beliefs

 7. Conscious awareness

    D. The following is a list of famous people and a quality that helped make
    them great. If you had to choose a hero or heroine from this list, who
    would you choose?

 1. Mickey Mantle (a great baseball star): He took a natural talent and pushed
  himself to make it better.

 2. Mother Teresa (humanitarian): She shared love regardless of someone's
  race, color, age, or creed.

 3. Albert Einstein (physics mastermind): He was a brilliant man who strived
  to interrelate science and spirituality.

 4. Martin Luther King, Jr. (civil rights leader): He told us we were all the
  same and lived that principle.

 5. Madame Marie Curie (scientist): She tirelessly dedicated herself to
  research and to sharing this knowledge to help humanity.

 6. St. Clare or St. Francis of Assisi (religious-order leaders): Both believed
  that people were capable of living a spiritual life, and they taught others
  how to do that.

 7. Spiritual prophets: Those people whose lives and work led others to
  connect with the Divine Source.

To decipher:
Count the number of times you selected each number. Use the following chart
to graph how many times you choose each ray:

    5 = Fifth Ray

1 = First Ray

2 = Second Ray

    6 = Sixth Ray

3 = Third Ray

    7 = Integrative Ray

    4 = Fourth Ray

Most of us draw on one or perhaps two rays more often than the others. Use the
following breakdown to determine what you tend to do:

Five choices in one ray group-You are a strong proponent of this ray. Probably,
 your soul purpose relies on a solid application of the energy available to you
 from this ray. Your friends would probably describe you as someone with the
 personality qualities most often relegated to this ray. Knowing this, draw on
 the strengths of this Divine Source energy but stay open to the fact that other
 people may see life a different way. You will need to form partnerships with
 others in some endeavors to ensure balance in your projects and life.

Four choices in one ray group-You strongly adhere to the traits inherent in this
 ray, drawing on them and probably expressing them to achieve your goals.
 While not as strident as someone with five choices in your ray group, you
 need to be careful to respect others' methods and insights. Using the ray that
 won the single vote can alleviate the intensity of the other four rays and add
 balance to your personality.

Three choices in one ray group; two in another-You probably draw equally on
two different types of ray energy, marking you as fairly adaptable and
balanced. In your work, you tend to apply qualities from both categories. You
are the ideal bridge personsomeone who can help glue two seemingly
different points of view or approaches together. Having two strong suits can
sometimes be difficult. The jewel in the center is this: when stuck in a
particular issue, you can switch your approach to the problem. For instance, if
you can't determine a way out of a dilemma via one of your tendencies, flip
into a different "ray" of thinking.

An array of ray choices-If no strong inclination emerges, you are more of a
generalist than a specialist. In relationship, you could easily learn to see more
than one point of view, and might need to be careful to represent your own
strongest viewpoints. Sometimes it's important to be one way more than
another; take care not to be wishy- washy. As a natural peacemaker and
mediator, use your gifts wisely and thoughtfully.
               THE GUARDIAN PRINCIPLES
All major religions, sciences, industries, medical approaches, and disciplines
are ruled by established principles, or guidelines. Principles may be drawn
from any number of sources. Some are deduced from practical experience,
such as the notion of gravity developed by Newton. Some are created from
empirical investigation, such as the laws of thermodynamics. Some are
delivered from on high, such as the Ten Commandments or the teachings of the
Buddha. Some stem from plain old common sense, such as the wisdom found in
old wives' tales. Whatever their origin, all principles have one thing in
common: they define the culture that creates them or adapts to them.

   Principles are important. They provide continuity and define boundaries,
thereby ensuring a level of safety. They can unite people under a common
intent, thus furthering a cause or movement. They also set standards, encourage
research, and help people understand each other.

   Principles can also be used toward less desirable ends. They can separate
people, for instance. The caste system in India is upheld by religious
principles that divide the deserving from the undeserving, leaving the latter
hungry, sick, and unfulfilled. The principles applied by the Nazi regime
directly resulted in the deaths of millions of people who didn't fit the "divinely
inspired" Aryan regulations. Many Americans' ancestors were chased out of
their birth nations because of principle; unable to ascribe to the rules of the
time, they chose different standards and were either forced to leave their birth
nations or chose to do so to escape further persecution.

   Besides causing rifts between people, rigid principles can also limit the
growth and development of ideas, science, progress, change, and goodness.
Throughout history, certain religious beliefs prevented or delayed the
development of science. Imagine where society would now be if Copernicus's
theory that the earth is round would have been accepted by his peers instead of
left dormant. Ironically, scientific standards themselves have been used to
prohibit personal development. We now see such a situation where some
American governmental and business institutions are trying to stop people from
using color therapy, herbal tonics, and hands-on healing. Even the use of
vitamins has come under fire in recent years.

   Principles are often misapplied. The fault usually doesn't lie with the
principles themselves, but rather in the perception and application of them.
People are people. When we hold misperceptions, such as the belief that
others are out to get us or that we have to lie to get ahead, we might twist the
truth to escape perceived threats or the dangers of self-disclosure. When
considering the existence of principles, we must pay close attention to the
applications of them. It is not enough to say, "The world would work better if
everyone loved each other." We should consider how to personally apply this
principle in an ethical way.

   There are many universal principles governing our planet, our nations, our
states, our businesses, our family, and our daily lives. Many of these principles
cross ethnic, socio-economic, geographical, and political boundaries. Many
peoples hold several principles in common. Even my son, upon hearing the
Golden Rule for the first time at age five, could relate to it. In his own words,
"That means if I give Bobby a toy, he will have to give one back!" Principles
such as "Love they neighbor as thyself" show up in most cultures one way or
another. The idea that "God is love" is commonly shared by many religious
groups.

   If so many of our principles are the same, then why do we all seem so
different? There are several possible answers to this question. Although we
may share similar principles with another person or group, we may differ on
our interpretations of common principles, we may apply common principles
differently, or we may also hold dissimilar principles that cause conflicting
understandings of our common principles. Yet despite these problems,
humanity continues to create and uphold principles. We create them because
we need them.

  When working with the human energy system, we are faced with a
comparable need for principles. The question is, what are the principles under
which we can work with the full human energy system? Underneath that
question lies an even more important one: how can we ethically work with this
system? How are we to assure ourselves that this information doesn't become
fodder for misapplication and unethical practices? We have myriad facts,
systems, and treatments that can be applied in our esoteric, spiritual
relationships and everyday lives. We are not trying to build yet another reason
to criticize or judge ourselves or others. I am not trying to build yet another
system that results in manipulation or fantasy.

   As I've noted, principles can be derived from several origins. We could
create a whole set of principles to regulate work with our human energy
system, and inevitably, anyone working with this information will do so. What
we really need is a set of guidelines under which to develop our own
individual values and principles. We need guidelines that are principled but
also universal in nature. We need guidelines that don't exclude anyone, yet
imply ethical standards. We need guidelines that validate everyone's point of
view but do not imply that one set of experiences is better than others. We need
guidelines that are steps rather than rules. These guidelines, in turn, must
encourage us to reach for our highest set of principles, in concept and
application.

   The following principles are the guidelines I have developed for myself. I
believe that they are universal in origin but need to be personally shaped and
applied. They are suggestions, not rules. They conform to most doctrines, sets
of principles, concepts, and ideals, yet have a practical application. They can
be helpful to follow when working with your own or another's human energy
system. They have been developed to specifically apply to the human energy
system, because they align to the holistic nature of the centers themselves.
While they are practical, they are also conceptual. I would encourage you to
use them or at least create your own guidelines, always keeping in mind that
their applicability is contingent upon your intent. These principles can help us
all open the revolving doors between the material and spiritual within each of
us and within humanity as a whole.

                PRINCIPLES FOR THE HUMAN ENERGY PROCESS
Principle One


The human energy system is designed for two activities-healing and
manifesting. Ultimately, we are:

1. Seeking to heal that which is preventing us from manifesting our heart's
 desires, in a manner consistent with the needs of others.

2. Seeking to manifest that which we require to heal damage to our true
 selves, thereby becoming better able to love others as they truly are.

  Our heart's desires come from our essence. Our essence is both the spiritual
and physical manifestation of what the Divine Source wants for us. Our
essence desires to be its full self on the physical and all other planes. The
human energy system, because it works like a revolving door between the
spiritual and the physical, is the optimum vehicle for both healing the issues
preventing full self-expression and the manifestation of our essence's true
desires.

Principle Two


Healing and manifesting are one and the same activity.

   On the physical plane, healing occurs when we channel, change, or
rearrange matter. Healing allows us to fully manifest ourselves. Manifesting
involves channeling, changing, or rearranging spiritual energy. It allows us to
heal damages to our true selves. When we are involved in a healing process,
we are either trying to repair damage in order to return to a more complete
state, or we are opening to changes in order to achieve a desired new state. To
accomplish healing, we must learn how to manifest; to manifest, we must be
willing to heal whatever is in the way of having what we want. Both processes
share the same end. They assist us in knowing and actualizing our true selves.

Principle Three
True healing, and therefore true manifesting, depends on being willing to
change.

   This concept sounds simple, and it is. Our resistance, however, sometimes
makes its application difficult. For instance, if we require healing or are living
in a state of need, at some level we are resisting the manifestation of our
desires. We might be doing this for any number of reasons. We don't believe
we really deserve the things we want. We aren't finished learning from the
current experience. We want something different than we think we do, or we
are just plain scared to take a chance. Perhaps we don't want to get hurt or be
let down again.

   Change is a frightening concept to most of us. Even when our minds seem
comfortable with the idea, sometimes our feelings or bodies resist. When we
fight our resistance, our resistance fights back. What we must do then is
become willing to change. Short of that, we can become willing to become
willing to change. When we stop fighting our resistance, we open the revolving
doors to different opportunities for healing or manifesting.

Principle Four


To change, we must be willing to let go.

  To let go is to surrender. To achieve our heart's desires, we must let go of
everything that is not a heart's desire or anything that does not align with the
Divine Source. We must be willing to release everything that is not of, from, or
for our essence. We must surrender to the Divine Source anything that is not of
us.

Principle Five


Letting go requires a full acceptance of our current state, a willingness to love
ourselves completely, and a willingness to be loved completely.
  We can only let go of something we fully accept. For reasons known or
unknown to us, we often resist the healing or manifesting of our heart's desires.
We must accept the wisdom of our hidden knowledge; we need to accept the
resistance. Only from a place of self-love can we allow change and thus risk
loving ourselves more. Because we are turning our resistance over to the
Divine Source, we must also be willing to allow the Divine Source to help us
or to love us. Letting go symbolizes the state of perfect self-love.

Principle Six


The norm is what we perceive it to be. If we change our standards, the norm
changes as well.

   Our current state of existence is always the state we consider normal.
Illness, money limitations, career or relationship dissatisfactions, and other
uncomfortable states come from our standards and really reflect that which we
find normal. The job of our physical energy system is to maintain our
standards. The job of our spiritually based energy system is to help us create
the reality of our optimum or essential standards. If we allow our essence to
establish our physical, mental, emotional, or mental standards, our energy
system will change its idea of normal. We will then heal and manifest our
heart's desires.

Principle Seven


The more we align our healing and manifesting standards with those of the
Divine Source and our Divine Source self, the happier we will be.

  The Divine Source and our essence, or Divine Source self, are composed of
pure love energy. Everything of the Divine Source seeks pure self-expression.
When we are being and acting from our total selves, we are self-fulfilled and
happy.

                           APPLYING THE PRINCIPLES
These principles are meant to be the foundation for guidelines that individuals
or groups define for themselves. They are not principles unto themselves. Just
about any system of principles could apply to them, including the twelve-step
principles, religious doctrines, even the Hippocratic oath.

  Even though these guidelines sound conceptual, I apply them in practical
matters. One way that I do this for myself or clients is to go through each
guideline one by one. For instance:

    Principle One: What is the heart desire I am working on right now?

   Principle Two: What do I need to heal in order to manifest what I want?
   What do I need to manifest in order to heal what is in my way?

    Principle Three: Am I truly willing to change what is preventing my
   success, or allow the Divine Source to change me?

    Principle Four: Am I truly willing to let go of what is preventing my
   success?

    Principle Five: Am I willing to love myself exactly as I am, to love
   myself enough to change, and to be loved enough to get the help that I
   need?

    Principle Six: Am I willing to change my perceptions of normal so that
   they include fully living in/with the desired change?

    Principle Seven: Am I willing to be happy (in relation to this issue)?

  We can walk just about any issue through these seven principles. We can
even use this model to diagnose what is really going on with us.

   Another way that I use these questions is to fully incorporate my seven in-
body chakras into the process. I bring my awareness into my first chakra and
ask myself the first question, then I bring myself into the second chakra to ask
the second question, and so on. You will notice that each principle reflects the
basic nature of the chakra of the same number. Through this method, we gain a
complete understanding of our issue with its healing and manifesting
repercussions, and open our entire bodies to the change process. This opening
greatly speeds up our healing/manifesting process.

  These principles boil down to this: we are our essence-our Divine Source
self-and deserve to have our lives reflect this truth. That means that our
physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual realities can be in alignment with our
heart's desires. We can be happy.

   We will explore these principles in more depth in relation to our physical,
mental, emotional, and spiritual well-being throughout the rest of this book.
The following exercise will help you practice these principles in a concrete
fashion.


                    EXERCISE: PRACTICING THE PRINCIPLES


I guide my classes through this exercise and encourage you to have a
companion do the same for you.

A. Bring yourself into a meditative state. Pinpoint an important issue or
problem. Take a few moments and let yourself experience all your sensations
about this issue. How do you perceive this issue in your body? How does it
affect your life? How does it affect the lives of those around you? How long
have you been aware of this issue?

B. You are now going to spend a few minutes reflecting on this issue. Create a
bubble of red, attach it to your first energy center, and enter this world of red.
Ask yourself the question pertaining to the first guideline: What is the heart
desire I am working on right now?

    Remind yourself that underneath your problem lies a desire, a dream, or a
  need. What is it? As you see or sense what is lacking or missing, ask
  yourself what you are striving to achieve. While surrounded by this red
 color, let your body experience what it would be like to have what you want.

C. Now create an orange bubble. Attach it to your second chakra. Enter this
world and respond to the questions relating to the second guideline: What do
I need to heal in order to manifest what I want? What do I need to manifest in
order to heal what is in my way?

   As you ponder these questions, let your creativity run wild. Envision
 pictures, think thoughts, and imagine stories that provide insight.

D. Next, fashion a yellow bubble and connect it to your third chakra. Here,
ask the question: Am I truly willing to change what is preventing my success?

   Don't answer too quickly. Are you really willing to change what is
 preventing the achievement of your heart's desire, to heal or manifest that
 which you need? Only move forward when you sense that you could
 wholeheartedly respond with a yes.

E. Now there is a green bubble connected to your heart. Enter it and ask
 yourself the following question: Am I truly willing to let go of what is
 preventing my success?

   Let yourself pause, and feel your reactions to this idea. Are there any
 fears? Inhibitions? Questions? Be honest. Then dig deeper. Are you really
 happy hanging on to this problem and everything associated with it? If you
 can say and feel a no, you are probably willing to let go.

F. Now form a blue bubble and attach it to your throat. Inside this bubble, ask
 yourself the next series of questions: Am I willing to love myself exactly as I
 am, to love myself enough to change, and to be loved enough to get the help
 that I need?

   Here we must speak our truth. We must stake a claim for ourselves.
 Discuss resistance with yourself; ask the blue color to help you find the truth
 in any negative judgments you hold about yourself and to release the
 negativity. When you can say that you are a fully deserving person, move on.
G. You approach a shining purple bubble emanating from your forehead. This
purple bubble is the center of your self-image. Ask yourself: Am I willing to
change my perceptions of normal so they include fully living in/with the
desired change?

   Allow yourself to picture your current self-image. It is this self who is
 creating your current reality. Does this person look satisfied? Happy? Like
 he or she feels good about themselves? If not, seek another level of
 understanding. What does the self under this self look like? Where is the self
 with the low self-image? Feel your compassion toward this figure, and ask
 how he or she would like to appear. Would that individual be willing to
 accept a new standard for him- or herself, and therefore for his or her
 reality?

   Actually visualize the change process upon this aspect of yourself. See
 yourself altering your perceptions by changing the image. Then move on.

H. You enter a white bubble floating from the top of your head and ask the
question: Am I willing to be happy (in relation to this issue)?

   At this level, you may open yourself up to feeling and experiencing what
 happiness is like in relation to this issue. Bathe yourself in the white light.
 Surround your issue, your image of it, your feelings about it, in white light.
 Then ask the Divine Source to transform the issue and the energy of it. When
 you feel complete and whole, return to your heart.

1. At the heart level, pull the colors from the bubbles back into their
 respective energy centers. Leave behind everything you are ready to release-
 all the false beliefs, low self-images, dark spots, and discolorations. When
 you are ready, release these bubbles into the atmosphere, asking the Divine
 Source to break them down to their substance and recycle the energy.

J. Breathe deeply and return to a conscious state.
                     THE SPIRIT'S DESIGN
So far, I have outlined the basic components of our energy system and
established the patterns of development and guidelines by which they operate.
It is now time to flesh out the practical healing and manifesting applications of
this system. You would think we ought to begin with a physical orientation,
because most of our concerns are physical. Most of our worries focus on jobs,
money, homes, relationships, health, and belongings. We often believe that if
we alter our physical reality or just do something different, we can improve
our total well-being.

  Although this approach is logical, we are exploring dimensions that present
us with additional possibilities. There are two ways to make changes. First,
we can alter physical energy, and we frequently do. Because we are revolving
doors, altering physical energy will change first our physical reality, then our
spiritual reality. The twelve-step programs are based on this theory. If we quit
drinking, stop smoking, cease obsessing, our belief systems and feelings will
clear. We will be able to better reach our spiritual self and our higher power.

  However, because we are revolving doors, the opposite is true as well. If
we affect our spiritual self or subtle energies, our physical, mental, and
emotional selves will react. The catch is, the subsequent reactions are not
equal to the physical change. They are greater-exponentially greater. Our
spiritual self and system do not have to rely on physical laws such as time,
cause and effect, and stimulus/response.

   The foundation of all my human energy-system guidelines is the knowledge
that there is a Divine Source and that we have/are a Divine Source self. All
energy emanates from the Divine Source, which means that all the matter that
forms our universe, our houses, our physical bodies, and even our feelings
comes from the Divine Source. It takes a lot more energy to rearrange matter
once it is established and patterned than to appropriately form it in the first
place. Think about how much more difficult it is to lose those last stubborn ten
pounds than to stay at our ideal weight. Think about how much more effort it
takes to reupholster a chair than it did to have the factory make the original.
Think about how much more difficult it is to have to get well than to stay well.
Think about how much easier, in the long run, it would be to first change our
spiritual self and allow that change to rearrange the rest of us.

  There are many other reasons why working with the higher frequency
spiritual energies is the most effective way to heal and manifest. To fully
understand this idea, however, we must understand a little bit more about how
our human energy system is organized and how it originated.

                WHY SPIRITUAL HEALING CAN EFFECT CHANGE


To best make use of our subtle bodies, including our spiritual energy points,
we need to understand a few basics about the human energy system in relation
to spiritual development. All aspects of the human system can be organized
into three major physical components of self: the body, the mind, and the soul.

   My description of our generic spiritual development is echoed by Zachary
Lansdowne, who says, "The viewpoint here is that the soul exists prior to
physical incarnation and then acquires a personality of the mental, emotional,
and physical bodies."' Like Lansdowne, I believe the soul is that aspect of us
that has been around the longest. In effect, our soul body is the framework for
the spark of the Divine Source that we are. It is the self that was projected
from the Divine Source when our Divine Source self decided to experiment
with physical reality.

   Every soul carries a mission, a purpose. This purpose is related to what the
Divine Source self wanted to learn or experience on the physical plane. Every
soul has a different purpose, because every Divine Source self is unique. One
soul's purpose may be to learn how to be happy; another may desire to be of
service and to heal. Energetically, purpose is carried as a divine truth and
integrates harmonically in the body. A harmonic is a note with over- and under-
tones. We are vibrating energy, each a unique song in the composition of the
greater universe.
   At some point in our soul's development, it added a consciousness, or an
awareness of being. The soul learned that it is an "I am." This self-
consciousness created a second aspect of our self-our mind. The mind aspect
of ourselves is expressed through and records within itself lessons, teaching,
and knowledge. Our mind is that part of ourselves that performs comparisons
and contrasts. Our individual mind holds the beliefs and intellectual
understandings that we have gleaned through all our soul's experiences. Its job
is to help guide us through reason, to make the choices that will allow us to
accomplish our soul's overall purpose. To guide us, our mind holds our
individual knowledge but also connects into the mind bodies of all other
beings. Jung called this vast network the "collective unconscious."

   Unfortunately, by the time we develop a somewhat functional soul and mind,
our experiences of the physical plane are beginning to tarnish us. We
experience pain and suffering and do not know what to do about it. Our soul
might have confronted difficulties in actualizing our purpose, while our mind
may have compared us to others and decided we were wanting. Any number of
difficulties might have bogged down our creative and evolutionary processes.

   In reaction, we added a body, which helped us to more fully experience the
physical plane. Through our body, we were supposed to actualize our soul
purpose and heal any blocks we had to fulfilling this mission. The trouble was,
our body experienced excruciating pain and blamed itself and was probably
blamed by both the soul and mind in the process. Our unhealthy patterns locked
in and became the fodder for many return trips to this physical plane. One life
followed another. In each, seeking to dig ourselves out of the trench, our soul
carefully prepared its lesson plans before the next incarnation.

  However, our soul consistently forgot one important fact-the body has
feelings. It does not like to be hurt or to suffer. Here originated a basic conflict
between the soul and the body: the soul would choose lifetime experiences that
exposed us to more pain and more difficulties so we could get our lessons right
and make amends to those we wronged in previous lives.' Because it hurt so
much, the body would rebel. We have never gotten our lessons right, because
getting them right is just too painful and too difficult.
   As with our other lives, our current incarnation is an attempt to clear
unhealthy patterns and to achieve our soul purpose. Because our body
remembers and holds every experience within it, however, the failures,
disappointments, abuses, and dysfunctional patterns we experienced before
this lifetime have probably been re-created during this lifetime.

   Most of us can probably sense that our mind, body, and soul are not unified.
They have learned to mistrust each other. Our soul has made decisions that
have harmed the body; our body has rejected parts of our soul purpose. Our
mind has stored judgments that have solidified self-destructive patterns. The
rift between these three aspects of ourselves has grown over time and exists
today.

  Using this scenario, healing involves sewing up the rifts between our body,
mind, and soul. Only when these three aspects of self unite can acts such as
manifesting be accomplished. Unless all three aspects of us act in concert, the
soul will undermine the body, which can undermine the mind, and so on.

   Spiritual healing might be one of the only means for accomplishing this
healing task, because spiritual healing works with the invisible energy that
resides between these disattached aspects. Our essence, or Divine Source self,
when on the physical plane, is composed of spiritualized matter. We begin to
heal the split between our three "selves" when we realize that this Divine
Source essence is the core energy, or flame, connecting the body, mind, and
soul (see figure 10.1). All three "selves" actually reside within our essence, or
Divine Source self. Whatever their individual issues, they are interconnected
by invisible threads of spiritual energy to each other and to the Divine Source.
Everything is made of Divine Source energy, including the empty space
between our split aspects. Barbara Ann Brennan describes this belief in Hands
of Light: "The whole universe appears as a dynamic web of inseparable energy
patterns ... Thus we are not separated parts of a whole. We are a Whole."'

  Essence energy works two ways. It exists in a balled-up form within the
center of each chakra and is strongest within the heart energy center, ready and
waiting to be energized. This inner self, the one I usually call the spirit or
essence, is imprinted with information about our essential purpose, essential
needs, and essential personality. We could say that our real selves are walled
up within our hearts, waiting to break free. Our real selves are waiting for the
day that our body, mind, and soul start working together instead of separately.




               Figure 10.1: Most Soul/Mind/Body Connections
Figure 10.2: Intermediate Healing Stage Involving Expression of Essence
                    (Similar to Living Our Purpose)
                    Figure 10.3: Advanced Healing Stage

  The other way our essential, or spirit, self works is by enveloping and
surrounding us. It draws us outward. Remember, one of the reasons we are
here is to create. We want to evolve, to try new things, to expand, to become
more aware. These urges are our essential energy guiding us to a completion
not yet achieved on the physical plane.

  Spiritual healing involves helping our true spirit break free, which means
recognizing that it is already free. Once freed, our spirit can reconnect our
body, mind, and soul, so we can work in a harmonious fashion to achieve our
purpose. This step brings us into our intermediate and advanced healing stages
(see figures 10.2 and 10.3). Spiritual healing also involves manifesting our
desires so we can become more than we have ever become before. To truly
accomplish our purpose, we must be willing to be who we really are, and we
must be willing to become who we must become.
                         WORK, MAGIC, AND MIRACLES


Work


Being who we really are can be an arduous task. We all know this, because we
all have already worked hard to accomplish this goal. One of the reasons we
have worked so hard, yet accomplished so little, is that working hard goes
against the spirit's design. Spiritual healing and manifesting our Divine Source
self is supposed to be easy. The trouble is, most of us are programmed to make
things difficult.

   In his book Illusions, Richard Bach conveys a story that illustrates our
natural attraction toward selecting difficult over easy. Don Shimoda, the
Christlike figure in the book, once asked a group what they would be willing to
do in order to be enlightened. "If I told you to become enlightened you needed
to work hard, to suffer, to be punished, would you be willing to do it?" he
asked. They responded with a chorus of yes.

  "And what if I told you that, in order to be enlightened, you had to be
happy?" he asked. The people looked puzzled. Many become angry. If
enlightenment was easy and made one happy, it could not work.

  We are each programmed with the hard-work ideal. It is reflected in the
American dream, the Puritan work ethic, and the Catholic emphasis on guilt
and shame. It runs the leaders of our countries, who can't quite see their way to
creating easy ways to conserve energy or forge peace treaties. Every culture
has its own set of standards, and most of them perpetuate the notion that to
become enlightened, successful, accomplished, or even good enough, you must
work hard.

  Work is one way to create healing and manifesting. Working requires the
generation and movement of physical matter to effect change. Healing by work
could involve getting an operation, taking pills, changing our diets, or going to
a health club. Manifesting by work could involve holding down a job, writing
resumes, building the business we want to work within, or implementing our
strategic plans.

   Working hard is very much a front-side, in-body chakra phenomenon. Our
frontside first chakra enables us to lift, move, carry, and do all of the physical
actions so important to creating change. Our second chakra provides us with
the feelings that motivate our decisions and actions. Our third chakra generates
the ideas behind our hard work. Our fourth chakra makes us establish and work
on the relationships that make us productive. Our fifth chakra speaks the words
that solidify our viewpoints. Our sixth chakra makes us see the reality we need
to change. Our seventh chakra controls our thinking. Our eighth chakra
provides us the karma or lesson-filled experiences we need to work through in
order to grow. Our ninth chakra feeds us our soul's lesson plans. Our tenth
chakra establishes the body through which we are to work. Our eleventh
chakra boosts our leadership potential, and our twelfth helps us recognize
ourselves as masters of our mission.

   Work is a part of every change process. Because we are on the physical
plane, we simply have to, at one point or another, pick up the phone, go to the
doctor, write a letter, eat, sleep, bathe-do what we need to do to heal or
manifest. The problem is, we believe so obsessively in the effectiveness of
work that we forget or don't even realize that there are two other highly
effective vehicles for creating change: magic and miracles.

Magic


Magic involves allowing other people to help us. Miracles are created when
we allow spiritual energy to do the energy work for us. While all three
avenues of change-work, magic, and miracles-siphon energy from the spiritual
to the physical levels, work emanates from primarily physical and only
incidental spiritual energies. Miracles work almost entirely with the invisible
higher-frequency energy, such as the higher domains.

  Magic stems from equal shares of spiritual and physical energy, or a mixing
of the higher and the physical domains. Zachary Lansdowne's outline of magic
parallels my suggestion that work plus serendipity produces magic. His
"working of magic" includes five steps: intuitively receiving an idea,
constructing a clear mental picture, adding emotional desire, adding vitality,
and finally putting in dense physical matter.4 My explorations of magic are
similar, except that I connect them to relationships.

   Spiritual healing and manifesting is easier than any other variety because it
involves allowing ourselves to become agents for magic and miracles. Magic
and miracles are not associated with occult or even religious processes. They
are natural forms of creation. We are all gifted with the inner knowledge of
them-and the outer rights, too. To allow magic to happen, we must understand
that not only are we revolving doors between the material and the spiritual
worlds but that other people are also revolving doors. If we allow ourselves to
trust other people, they can become mediums for channeling spiritual energy to
us.

   As I see it, magic can appear in many forms, but it always comes through
other people. It is operating when, out of the blue, a long-lost friend calls up
just at the moment we needed to speak to him or her. It occurs when that
telemarketer coincidentally shares information that we have been seeking.
Magic exists when a friend says exactly what we needed to hear or our boss
gives us an unexpected but much-needed raise.

   Magic may also be present in situations that do not immediately seem to
benefit us. I remember three incidents of magical fate regarding one of my cars.
I had asked the Divine Source to help me get rid of my old blue Plymouth,
which kept breaking down. I had also requested that somehow, I be able to
earn enough from the car to pay for a sizable down payment on a new one (I
didn't have any extra funds). Within the next month, I was involved in three
accidents. In each case, the other party was at fault and no one was hurt; in
each case, the only damage was to my car. The final blow totaled the car. My
insurers not only took my old blue Plymouth but paid me enough to buy a
brand-new vehicle, which, incidentally, has only required $50 in repair bills in
three years.
   Magic is a spiritual healing force, even though it uses people as delivery
vehicles. The key to magic is to trust people. I am not talking about being naive
or ignorant; it is important to know who is trustworthy and who is not. The best
way to engineer magic is to be clear about the healing or manifesting need, be
responsible, and then be open to allowing the Divine Source to work through
the appropriate, safe person.

Miracles


Miracles are obviously connected with the Divine Source. The trouble is, few
of us recognize the presence of miracles in our current lives. Unless we open
to them, believe in them, and notice them when they occur, we will probably
experience few miracles. My theory is that most of us manifest and heal
backwards. We make gains from 90 percent work, 9.9 percent magic, and if we
are lucky, 0.1 percent miracles. I think it is supposed to be the other way
around-90 percent miracles, 9.9 percent magic and 0.1 percent work.

   The key to opening ourselves to miracles is to appropriately define them. A
miracle is any occurrence that furthers us on our path to purpose or completion,
and that is engineered by the Divine Source energy. For a miracle to occur, our
will must be out of the way. We must stop insisting that our goal must be met a
certain way or through a certain person. We cannot afford to believe that our
long-term mate must be that great-looking woman or man we met at the last
party. We cannot inform the universe that our book must be published by this or
that publisher. Remember, people have free will. If you are counting on a
certain company to hire you so that through it you can fulfill your goals, you
may be seriously disappointed. Because each and every person within that
company has free will, they could turn you down, or they may hire you, or you
find you hate the job.

   If we block our spirit by being attached to the "how," we may not let our
spirit design a situation that will really work for us. We can-in fact, we must-
state our dreams and desires. However, holding on to a certain path, person, or
process only limits the maneuvering ability of our spiritual self, energies,
guides, and the Divine Source itself. When we state our needs and then,
following our principles, surrender the "how" to the universe, we move into a
state of letting go. When we stop trying to make it happen and instead let it
happen, we create an enormous potential for miracles.

  These miracles, or gifts of grace, as some people call them, may appear
minuscule or gigantic. I have seen miracles ranging from finding the fifty cents
needed for that muchdesired can of soda pop to someone recovering from
cancer before my very eyes. Noticing miracles builds our faith in them. The
more faith we have, the more miracles we get. Faith is about trusting other
people, the Divine Source, and the self that wants to give us what we desire.
Seen this way, miracles are something you can train yourself to get.

  I had one of my classes try an experiment. The participants were to write
down any dreams or wishes they would like manifested within the next month.
We then set these lists aside. The next assignment was to forget these goals and
concentrate instead on what miracles occurred in their lives during the next
month. They were to keep a miracle journal in which to record each day's
miracles.

   After their first week, most class participants reported similar findings.
They were surprised at how many small miracles occurred daily. These
miracles ranged from having a squirrel perch near them when they were feeling
lonely to having a car break down right in front of the neighborhood service
station. Normally, they would not have noticed these miracles. Becoming more
conscious allowed them to recognize these slices of reality for what they really
were.

  I suggested that during the next week they should broaden their horizons by
actually requesting a miracle every morning upon rising. They were not yet to
determine the nature of the miracle. The list of miracles reported the following
week was at least ten times longer than that of the previous week. These
miracles included an array of small assistances, but also included some
miracles of note. A gust of wind, for instance, drove one woman inside a
restaurant right before a gang of kids began shooting down the street.
  Finally, we turned back to our lists of dreams and wishes. I asked the
miracle makers to review their requests under the following guidelines:

1. Will getting this wish help my body, mind, and soul integrate?

2. Will getting this wish help me to love myself and others more?

3. Am I willing to not get this wish if achieving it injures my relationship with
 the Divine Source/my Divine Source self?

  After the participants retooled their wishes, I then walked them through an
adaptation of the Universal Guardian Principles. I had them ask themselves as
honestly as possible the following:

1. Am I willing to manifest the healing I need in order to have what I desire,
 and to heal through the manifestation of this desire?

2. Am I willing to change what needs to be changed to allow this desire to
 come true? (This is the work component of the request.)

3. Am I willing to let go of my images and ideas about how this desire should
 manifest, and allow it to happen?

4. Am I willing to hold myself in a state of surrender and openness?

5. Am I willing to have my perceptions of myself change so I can further love
 myself?

6. Am I willing to be happy even before I am graced with this wish?

   I neither saw nor heard from the participants for a full two weeks. Was I
surprised when they bounded in for our last class session! Their reports were
amazing. During the previous two weeks, one woman had been offered a
medical practice in a different city and had accepted it. Her request had been
to find a more meaningful work environment in another town. Another student
had made peace with long-term abuse issues following a series of dreams and
revelations. Her request was to heal from her childhood abuse. Another
woman had made the decision to quit her job after receiving in the mail an
unsolicited information packet about a school. She had wanted career
direction. The list went on and on.




THERE ARE MANY forms of miracles. These include:

• The unexpected things that we don't ask for but are given to us.

• The gifts we request and receive.

• The grace that requires a little work on our part.

My son Michael was once provided an unexpected but delightful miracle. We
were driving to the dentist. He was scheduled to get his first cavity filled, and
he didn't want any part of it. I could hardly hear the radio for his yelling. He
insisted that we turn around and go home, heading off what was sure to be
excruciating torture. Finally, I shared my first experience with getting a filling,
ending my soliloquy with the phrase, "So you see, Michael, I understand."

  Replied Michael, "No, you don't. You're too old to remember."

  I thought for a moment and said, "Well, God understands."

  "No, he doesn't," replied Michael. "He doesn't even have teeth."

   I had no reply-but the Divine did. A bus pulled right next to Michael's side
of the car. Imprinted on it, in huge letters, were the words I UNDERSTAND.

 Sometimes miracles come because we ask and then receive. I had a client
who decided to ask for three miracles a day and to expect them. He started to
write them down. They included everything from having clients call him up to
being gifted free cups of coffee when there were no coins in his pockets. After
a while, he noticed that he was receiving far more than three miracles a day.
There is no limit to divine abundance.

  There is grace that requires a response. I experienced such a miracle when
my youngest son, Gabriel, was only a year and a half old. Gabriel's soul
visited me, in angelic form, when I was five months pregnant. A glowing being,
he predicted three events. Two were to occur within a month and one after his
birth, at age one and a half.

   The first two events were fairly mundane, but the third was in reference to
death. I was given the vision of a flash of lightning and a storm and then told
that in about two years, he and his father could be killed because of this storm.
This angel-my son-then presented me with his "real" name, which became his
middle name, and I went on with my life.

  The first two events happened exactly as had been predicted, which made
me wary about the unfolding of the third. Then one day-a perfectly nice, sunny
day-I had a funny feeling. Gabe was one and a half years old, and his father
was driving home with him from daycare. The funny feeling grew. Without
knowing why, I called his father and asked him to drive slower. Gabe's father
called me back a few minutes later. A huge tree had fallen onto the road,
directly in front of them. If he hadn't slowed down, both he and Gabriel would
have been instantly killed. Apparently, the summer storms of the last week had
loosened the mighty giant of a tree, which had been felled, as predicted to me.

  To receive this last miracle, I had to stay in touch with my intuition and my
sense of the Divine Source. Sometimes we must honor the senses, voices,
visions, and knowledge we are given in order to open to a miracle.




 DIRECT SPIRITUAL ENERGY TECHNIQUES: THE BODY AND SPIRITUAL HEALING
We can apply the idea of work, magic, and miracles in direct spiritual energy
manipulations. The first and most obvious transmission vehicle for spiritual
energies is the physical body itself. When working with the body, we are
basically involving ourselves with meeting the body's needs. The primary body
needs are:

1. Food

2. Shelter

3. Clothing

4. Air and water

5. Touch/love

  Spiritual energy can be transmitted through any of these vehicles, to heal
problems or manifest desires not only of the body, but also those of the mind
and soul.

Food


Food has frequently played a dual physical and spiritual role. Consider how
many cultural rules there are regarding food. The Jewish tradition forbids
eating pork, the Hindu forbids eating beef, and many Native American tribes
prohibit foods that are not sacred. Conversely, there are foods that bestow
spiritual power. Ethnic ceremonies are often based on stringent rules regarding
what foods to serve. While conducting two weeks of shamanic ceremony in
Peru, I was put on an icaro, or medicine man's, purification diet. Refraining
from salt, sugar, and heavy meats, I was given foods known for creating a
healthy body and open psyche. Before participating in Native American sweat
lodges, I was instructed to fast. A Costa Rican shaman told me to refrain from
all meats and always eat yams before giving a healing. On the other hand,
Moroccan magical beliefs involve a concept known as kimia, which multiplies
food.
  Every culture has spiritual food traditions. Who could imagine an Easter
without ham or a Thanksgiving without turkey? It's a standard American
practice to pray over food before eating.

  I have often had clients address physical concerns spiritualizing their
approach to food. This technique is particularly helpful for issues centered on
weight, body image, diabetes, or terminal illnesses that affect the appetite or
physical body weight. Often, I have encouraged them to choose one of the
spiritual energy points as a focus and to assign particular foods with that value.

   For instance, I had one client who was significantly overweight. Since
childhood, she had eaten to deny her fears. Though I didn't tell her we were
working with an actual energy point, I suggested that faith might help her
balance her fears. She worked out ways to eat in faith, saying affirmations such
as "I'll always have what I need" and "I can trust that this food will nurture my
ability to be strong" She also decided to start eating foods that would put her in
touch with her faith in herself rather than food that would "space her out." With
time, she began eating less compulsively, lost some weight, and eventually
joined an eating disorder program, prepared to address her emotional issues.




You CAN STRENGTHEN a chakra by eating the foods associated with it,
provided you aren't allergic or go to extremes. All foods carry frequency-
based messages and change vibration. Here are examples of chakra-based
foods and the energetic messages they provide.
Shelter


Since humankind emerged, shelter has been a vehicle for spiritual growth. I
have been in sanctuaries all over the world and can testify to their power.
There are the Indian kivas, underground shelters in which people cleanse, heal,
pray, and communicate with ancestors. Japanese monasteries and temples hold
energies capable of salving and renewing one's spirit. I have worshiped in
Jewish temples, German cathedrals, and Norwegian staves. I have walked the
grounds of ancient ruins that, after centuries, still speak of the sacred ways.
There are the aboriginal burial mounds in the British Isles, houses of the dead
in which prayers were answered. There are the temples in Greece through
which oracles channeled prophecies. There are the Mayan caves in which the
gods of the underworld connected with the people of the physical world. There
are the burial mounds throughout Europe, and the pyramids in Egypt and
Central America.

   Then there is the most sacred dwelling place of all-the home. I have seen
clients, friends, and myself physically benefit by considering the sacred in their
surroundings. Gerald was a professor who complained of being too stressed
out at work to do his job well. He brought spiritual objects into his workspace,
including rocks and a bear rug, and he reported a significant improvement in
his work life and attitude. Mary, a mother of three young children, was beside
herself with daily stress. She formed a "Mom's Place," a spot in one corner of
the family room where she could meditate. When she was there, she was to be
left alone. Using it made her stress levels go down. Another client created a
sanctuary of plants, beautiful rocks, and a small water fountain to establish a
natural sacred space in her home and provide a grounded, peaceful air to her
entire home.

   Again, I often encourage the connection between the concepts represented by
the spiritual energy points and the environment. According to the feng shui
system, an Asian approach to energy management, whatever you put in the left,
back corner of the room will be accentuated in your life. I encourage clients
who have abundance issues to hang a representation or symbol of what they
want in this corner, such as a picture of a loving relationship or a coin. I have
experienced fast and real results from this method and others.

  By spiritualizing food and shelter, especially in conjunction with the
spiritual energy points, we can encourage both manifesting and healing. In a
direct fashion, we can change our diet and improve our immune system. We
can eliminate a toxic substance and improve our health. More metaphysically,
when we nourish ourselves with food that is spiritual, our physical bodies can
transform. When we make our living place an altar space, all that we think and
do within our own walls becomes a reflection of peace.

Clothing, Air, and Water


Clothing, air, and water are material substances that can also hold spiritual
properties and potentials. I am hard-pressed to find a woman who wouldn't
admit that she is what she wears, or at least that her clothes can determine her
mood. Apparel and accessories have always been a part of ceremony and
meaning, from initiation and funeral rites to weddings and births. Air and
water, too, join the elemental forces of fire, earth, and in some cultures, wood
and iron, as spiritualized forms of matter. Of course, having decent air and
water can affect our health and well-being.

Touch/Love


The most ambiguous need of the body is touch. Though many of us still struggle
to believe that touch is a need, we typically think of touch-related professions
when we think of spiritual healing. Hands-on healers use touch as a spiritual
transmission vehicle all the time. So do MariEl, Reiki, or Kofutu healers, many
of whom use mind symbols to link with spiritual energy. Chiropractors,
acupuncturists, shamans, and witch doctors use touch as well. Even AMA-
approved medical practitioners rely on touch; notice this the next time you get
an annual exam.

  The most beneficial touch-related healing occurs when the healer,
consciously or unconsciously, runs spiritual energy into the physical body and
back again. I have seen physical, mental, and emotional issues clear up,
evaporate, or transform, in response to simple touch techniques. However, to
be an effective spiritual healing tool, this touch must be employed as a channel
for the Divine Source.

  Touch can also be a necessary ingredient for manifesting the needs of the
body, as well as the mind, soul, and Divine Source self. An artist touches stone
to fashion a sculpture. A business person touches the computer to prepare a
report. Nearly all of us interact with the physical components of our
environment to construct, build, or make the objects, forms, or materials that
we need.

   Some people worry that physical touch will cause further injury.
Psychiatrists, for instance, are not legally allowed to touch their clients. Often,
sexual or physical abuse victims shy away from touch to avoid further traumas.
Conversely, I have seen that appropriate touch can legitimately heal emotional
and physical wounds. Through hands-on healing, I have helped clients shrink
growths, reduce swelling, and eliminate pain. I have seen clients recall painful
memories upon pressure-point stimulation, thus allowing themselves to work
through their issues.

   I remember one of my most bizarre experiences that enabled touch to heal
me. I was receiving an acupuncture treatment in Belize, and the healer's room
was located on the site of a Mayan ruin. Jenkins, the healer, stuck me full of
needles, then lit a tobacco-like substance to help the purification process. He
placed this substance between my toes. As I lay there "smoking," I remembered
an incident in which I had been burned by a cigarette as a child. As I recalled,
relived, and released this experience, I literally felt the subsequent tension in
my body lift. It has been gone ever since that day.

   I like to remind my students that touch is not only a physical function.
Because we are revolving doors, our energy also touches other people. Our
auras often interact with each other, as do our chakras. Because our spiritual
energy points exist outside of the time/space continuum, they are always
interrelating with those of others. Often, I perform healings while seated across
the room from a client. In fact, I work on the phone each week with five to ten
clients who live in other states. Much to their amazement, I can read their
energy as clearly as if they were right next to me, because I can touch the
spiritual energy points and work from that level.

  Food, shelter, clothing, air, water, and touch fulfill our body's basic needs,
but have even more impact if we open to the spiritual values and energies that
can be channeled through the body's physical processes.

                      THE MIND AND SPIRITUAL HEALING


The mind also responds to spiritual energy and can serve as a vehicle for
spiritual healing. When we think of our mind's needs, we think of a different
list than that associated with the body. Our mind requires the following:

1. Learning

2. Stimulation

3. Thought

4. Appropriate attitude

5. Functional beliefs to serve as a framework for the above

  Learning is an obvious human need. As children, we were born with the
drive to learn. We only have to look at the intense growth cycles of children to
see that, if provided a supportive, stimulating environment and solid learning
opportunities, a child will eagerly fulfill this innate drive to grow and learn.

   From learning comes thought. As children, we formed ideas, opinions, and
constructs as glasses or filters through which to understand the world and our
place within it. These thoughts were partly determined by our own internal
world and partly from our perceptions of the world around us. The interaction
between our internal and exter nal worlds determined our attitudes. Underneath
all of these mind-related components lay our beliefs, our philosophical
understandings of others, the universe, and ourselves.

   To grow correctly, our maturing mind required an input of information that
would lead to health and well-being. It also needed a process for assimilating,
interpreting, and disseminating data. While we probably received data and
support that were healthy and helpful, most of us were probably also exposed
to information and systems that left us feeling bad or confused about ourselves.

   Changing this condition in adulthood can be a slow and arduous process. We
could undo all that has been done by peeling back the learning layers. Step by
step, we could reanalyze, reassess, reassemble, and reformulate every single
thought, attitude, idea, or learning we have ever digested and start from
scratch. We could also bypass most of this hard work by turning to magic-
opening to relationships that will help us from this point on. People such as
friends, therapists, and educators often qualify as the magicians in this healing
and manifesting process.

   Even better, we could open to spiritual data and energies and let the Divine
Source energy do the work for us. When we open this way, positive thinking,
attitude, and knowledge are ours. We are led to information sources that will
meet our needs.

                      THE SOUL AND SPIRITUAL HEALING


The soul is the most obvious vehicle for channeling spiritual energy. In my
view, the basic idea behind soul work is that illness or lack stems from
discordance within the soul. In Dreamtime and Inner Space, Holger Kalweit
says that most shaman-based societies believe that "the cause of illnesses
reside in the soul body. Healing must therefore concentrate on harmonizing this
soul body."s As shared by a little girl whom I know, the soul is "bigger than the
heart or the mind"; in other words, it is the most powerful aspect of ourselves,
besides our spirit.

  Many spiritual healers believe that our soul should perform all of our
healing or manifesting work for us. Many indigenous cultures work directly
with the soul, applying spiritual healing principles. Most of my lessons in these
cultures relate to shamanism. I have been amazed at the changes that have
occurred when I have applied some of the cross-cultural soul techniques I have
seen demonstrated. I've been fortunate enough to visit real shamans in other
countries; on a day-to-day basis, however, working with these shamans isn't a
possibility. That is why I believe we need to become our own shaman.
   Spiritual healing can be about being our own shaman or assisting another
person in this capacity. A shaman walks between the physical and spiritual
worlds in order to help individuals heal physical and spiritual issues. We can
all serve this function if we are willing to talk with the soul-our own or
someone else's-and to become its therapist or witness. We must ask the soul
what it needs in order to repair itself after trauma, or from the pain of
separation from the body, mind, or Divine Source. We might also need to
negotiate new working relationships between these various components of self.

   I think that most of our souls hold misunderstandings about their places in the
universe, doubt their deservedness of material wealth and health, and have
mixed feelings about inhabiting a body in the first place. Therefore, I believe
that the soul itself needs energy for spiritual healing and manifesting.

   Typically, I have found that soul injuries result from trauma, fear, or mistrust.
The soul may respond to these traumas in many ways. It may fragment,
weakening and debilitating itself. Fragments can remain within the physical
self, or become stuck, lost, or glued into past lives, previous experiences, or
other realities. When fragments leave the body, the physical self is left
unprotected. If a fragment hides within a part of the body, the unfilled part of
the body is left unguarded. If a fragment becomes stuck in another time period
or in another person or object, the "you" in your current life may feel
inexplicably drawn to the time period, person, or object holding the soul piece.

   A trauma can also cause a soul to partially or fully leave the body. I find this
often in clients who have been abused. Energetically, I perceive voids in the
body or aura. For instance, schizophrenics look void from the neck down.
Typically, I see the soul of a schizophrenic as a milky-colored form, attached
from the neck up and sometimes broken into two or more distinct shapes over
the head. Sometimes the soul remains this way in the body until it is hooked by
an experience familiar to what caused the original trauma. At this point, it often
dissociates or completely flies out of the body until calm is restored.

  The first step in the shamanistic work of soul healing is determining the
current state of the soul. When acting as a shaman for myself or someone else, I
usually check to see if the soul is:

1. Stuck in a pocket within the body.

2. Dissociated from the body, perhaps still attached by a cord.

3. Fragmented, with different pieces in different places.

4. Hiding in a past life or childhood experience.

5. Projected into the future.

6. Only partially connected to the body.

7. Fully intact within the body.

   When locating a soul, our shaman self may experience the soul in visual
form or sense inaudible words. Sometimes communication takes place by
writing or by simply experiencing feelings. These same practices can be used
to repair or recognize the relationships among the body, mind, soul, and the
Divine Source.

   Sometimes, I have clients check for the location of their souls, especially if
they are experiencing a lot of fear, indecisiveness, frustration, or working
through childhood issues. I clearly recall the effect reported by one woman
who found part of her soul dangling by a cord in the universe. Knowing life
would be scary, it had refused to enter her body. After she convinced it that she
needed it inside her body in order to be better connected to the power of
Spirit, she reeled it in. She shook for two or three days, then told me, "I finally
began to learn who I was! I've never been so happy or so strong!"

   Once the state of the soul is diagnosed, the job of the shaman begins. When
the soul is ill, cursed, or unable to operate, the shamans of most indigenous
groups respond with soul healing, either for the community or the individuals
within it. Sometimes individuals are even healed within the community. This is
true in many tribal cultures, such as the Australian aborigines, African Zulus,
and African Kung. The latter group, for instance, holds group dances. A dancer
dances to reach kia, a trancelike state that enables him or her to pull num, the
boiling snake energy of healing, up their spine. In Boiling Energy: Community
Healing Among the Kalahari Kung, Richard Katz tells of Kung who can control
this energy to "apply the num to healing." They pull twe, or heal, while in the
state of kia, because they can then "see things you must pull out, like the death
thing the god has put in people. You see people properly, just as they are"6 The
healers see the soul issues and sometimes must even leave their bodies to fetch
the errant or sick soul. Hence, shamans reflect the part of us that can walk both
worlds, something we must all do to achieve true completion.

  I often do similar group work for clients. I recently conducted a group
shamanic healing for a woman who was suicidal. Within the presence of warm
and supportive people, she left her body and searched for her soul, which she
found huddled near the Divine Source, too scared to come into her body. She
convinced the soul to come into her. The next thing we knew, she jerked
violently, and her neck reddened. Previous aches and pains disappeared, as
did her desire to die.

   The final step in soul work is to assign the body, mind, and soul a project
through which they can iron out their differences. I have given assignments
such as harvest abundance, build a solid marriage, heal a broken leg, or make a
decision. Ultimately, I want these three entities to integrate, meaning that I want
the whole to have integrity. I have found that when each of these three aspects
feels listened to, heard, noticed, and important, our decisions automatically
create our highest good, because they have more integrity.

   As these three aspects become more and more blended, it becomes more
difficult to distinguish between their voices. At this point, many of my clients
report hearing a new voice, one that is often quite wise, or they begin to have
white-light experiences, in which they see or feel the amazing power of the
Divine Source's white light. Whatever the case, these symptoms mean that the
essence is slowly beginning to emerge as the primary self. This is what we
want.
                      ORIGINS OF SPIRITUAL HEALING ENERGY


At any point during a spiritual healing or manifesting process, I may encourage
a client to work directly with one of the spiritual energy bodies. It is often
helpful to focus a spiritual energy point on a particular chakra, ray, principle,
auric layer, and, always, the Divine Source, in response to a specific concern.
This focus can illuminate the root cause of an issue or concern, and thus shed
light on a solution. It can also move us from the level of work to the level of
magic and miracles.

   These top energy points can be very powerful. Personally, I use great care
when I work with them, because I greatly respect their intensity. A few years
ago, when I was first experimenting with the thirty-two-energy-center system, I
went through an experience that firmly convinced me of the power latent within
these higher energy points.

   During the middle of a summer day, I decided to take a walk. Many people
were around until I reached a bend near the river close to my home. I was
attacked. I desperately called upon the power of the Divine Source through the
thirty-second energy point, grace. My attacker suddenly looked out over the
water. Through his eyes, I saw a wicked, horrible-looking woman scolding
him. With my own sight, I saw Christ. The man ran off. There was no flesh and
blood person in sight. I hobbled home, and when I arrived, a nurse was ringing
at my door. She had gotten my name from someone and "coincidentally"
decided to stop by to check out my work. As she attended to me, I called the
police. There was a squad car in the vicinity. The police officer who arrived
told me that he was a healer on the side and gave me a "shot" of energy. I
worked further with the thirty-second energy point that day, and my wounds,
which a doctor had said would take weeks to heal, were gone within two days.
While I can't prove that this energy really saved me, this experience alone
showed me the power of calling upon spiritual energy.

Spiritual Energy and the Chakras
The greatest impact can be achieved by bringing energy through the top
spiritual chakras and energy points into our lower chakras. One client reported
success by tapping into these spiritual points to alleviate a work matter. For
years, Dora's relationship with her boss had been strained. She had finally
arrived at the conclusion she needed to "get out from under." We perceived that
her core resistance was affiliated with her heart; she felt guilty and scared
whenever she asserted herself. When she drew faith and wisdom into her heart,
it seemed to me that the room literally glowed. A week later, she was offered a
new position within the company, reporting to a different boss.

Spiritual Energy and the Auric Layers


Working with the auric layers is similar to working with the energy center
system. Again, we can do it the hard way by searching for holes, blocks, and
resistance points. We can become magical by seeking assistance and help, and
requesting that relationships help us heal the problem areas. We can also move
to the level of miracles. Remember, the outer layers of the aura interface with
the spiritual, and the inner layers connect with the concrete. The three layers of
the energy egg also interact with several layers of the auric field. By linking
the outer with the inner layers, either directly or through the energy egg, and
connecting both with the desire to receive the correct Divine Source
information or energies, we can alter our energy systems, and therefore alter
situations.

   I performed such a feat in Wales. At the time, I was afflicted with a skin
disorder. I decided that I was willing to allow the Divine Source energy to
help me, so I simply made that statement and let it go. For two days, I was
plagued by what I perceived to be fairies. A bridge seemed to disappear, as
did two hours of one of my journeys. Out of the blue, my headlights would
flash. I would get lost in fog, circling around and around the same point. The
situation culminated in a little town called Castletown. There, I linked my first
auric layer with the outer auric layer, and using guided imagery, switched the
polarities, asking that the two share their understanding with each other.
  Suddenly I found I had grown a cyst about an inch and a half long. When I
went home, the physicians could not determine what it was. I was about to
have the cyst surgically removed, when I realized that if I could trigger its
original growth, I could also trigger its reduction. I linked both first and outer
auric layers to the Divine Source and switched their polarities back. The cyst
disappeared within thirty minutes, as did my initial skin condition.

   The other opportunity for healing through the aura lies in opening the light
body. These independent and concentric circles of light, when opened around
the body, supplement the individual layer's powers.

Spiritual Energy and Rays


Yet another means for spiritual healing is to utilize the powerful energies of the
rays. Harnessing the power and influence of these energies can provide us with
the energy necessary to clear out the spiritual blocks that prevent our full
access to spiritual energies. We have already discussed the various properties
of the rays. Suffice it to say that at any time during the day we can request
assistance from any one or all of the rays for any form of spiritual guidance.
The stronger our request, the greater our need, the clearer we are regarding our
need, the swifter the response.

   These and other methods are available for healing and manifesting. They
may all take place by following the Universal Guardian Principles, or steps for
transformation. What exactly can we heal or manifest through spiritual work?
Just good feelings or a better connection to our higher self? No. We can open
ourselves to healing and manifesting anything by working with these higher
frequency energies-better relationships, a good job, a healthier body, a new
home. How about a few good times?



                      EXERCISE: KEEPING A MIRACLE JOURNAL


A. Write a one-week wish list. Within one week, what would you like to see
healed or manifested within your life? Go over the list of questions contained
in this chapter to help you define and refine these wishes, so that you know
they speak to your highest good. Set these wishes aside.

B. Create a "miracle journal" for yourself. Every evening, record the miracles
that you saw or felt took place. Every morning, request miracles to help you
gain your wishes.

C. At the end of the week, review your wish list and your miracle journal.
What headway did you make, or what headway was made for you this week?
If your wishes have not been completely fulfilled, review them. Are they too
broad, too narrow? Do they really describe a heart's desire, or are they just
something you think you should want?

D. Go through the Universal Guardian Principles and move to a place of
acceptance. Rewrite any wishes that haven't come true and, without putting a
time period on them, return to keeping your miracle journal until you
automatically request, notice, and feel grateful for the miracles present in
your life.
                OF SPIRITS AND HEALING:
                   CORDS AND OTHER
                  ENERGETIC BINDINGS
I believe that up to 80 percent of all issues do not originate with us. This isn't
to say that we aren't supposed to be responsible for addressing our problems;
the word responsibility really means "ability to respond." Because we are
spiritual beings, we innately have the ability to respond to our healing needs,
and sometimes, those of others. Accepting that we aren't the root cause of most
of our problems, however, frees us to release the shame and sense of
separation that so often keeps us from even looking at our issues, much less
facing and releasing them.

   One of the main ways that others' energies or issues transfer into us is
through energetic bonds. Energetic bonds are filaments or contracts forged in
the energetic domains-such as the etheric, astral, or mental layers of reality-
that impede our energetic structures and therefore limit our physical, mental,
emotional, and spiritual wellbeing. Think of the word "binding" and you get a
sense of why we don't want them, even if we might think that they help us. Any
limitation on our spiritual self results in a deficit in prosperity, relationship
satisfaction, health, or the enjoyment of our career.

   In this chapter, we're going to examine the main components of energetic
bindings, including their sources and reasons for existence, as well as the
various types of energetic bindings. The final exercise will assist you in the
types of spiritual sources that assure happiness, health, and joy rather than
bondage and a breaking of our spirit.

                             A MATTER OF SOURCE


A psychic source is the origin of psychic material. There are many types of
energies and beings that can contact or communicate with you. They might be
alive or not, and can include the following:
Entities (or spirits): beings with a soul but not a body or form.

Ghosts: souls of deceased people or animals that linger in this world.

Phantoms: beings that project a form onto this world from another plane.

Energies: the charges that compose anything inanimate or animate and make it
 recognizable.

Consciousness beings: beings without a body, only intelligence.

Demons: energies, entities, or beings that prey upon others to serve their own
ends.

Angels: a class of beings that have spirits but no souls, unless they choose to
incarnate in a body. These represent divine truths.

Beings from the natural world: The spirits within living nature beings or those
existing in the supernatural realms.

Planetary beings: guides from-and in-the stars, other planets, and space itself
 that provide guidance and love.

Masters: living or dead beings that assist humans according to a certain
specialty or perform a specific type of service. They may or may not have
ever been alive.

Avatars: beings that retain their body but didn't die in order to keep it.

Aspects of the self: sub-parts to our personalities, including the spirit or
eternal and always-healthy self; the soul, the part of the self that accrues
learning-and injurythrough experiences, lifetime after lifetime; the mind, the
aspect of self that holds beliefs and thoughts; and the body, which is the
sensory self. Within the body are inner children, aspects of ourselves that are
usually still held within a traumatic situation and require rescue and healing;
innocent children, representing the childhood we would have had if we hadn't
been injured; the God self, the inner self that knows it is a child of God and
can live from that belief; the primal self, representing our basic physical
nature and survival needs; the ego, which reinforces our personal identity and
needs (also called the personality); the master self, which understands and has
already fully completed our soul mission; and the higher self, which links with
our spirit.

  We can "source," or connect with, these and many other types of beings or
entities. Most of us have spiritual guides, positively motivated entities that stay
with us our entire lives. We usually have a male and a female. Of these, one
has usually been alive, and one is from the ethereal or angelic realms. They
work with us intuitively to help us carry out our soul contract and also achieve
our spiritual purpose.

   We are also susceptible to negative influences, however. This is called
interference in that it interferes with the fulfillment of our spiritual mission.
Interference can come from the living or the dead or from any of the five
realms of existence, which are these:

The natural world is the world that works mainly with sensory energy, although
 the psychic still functions as a sped-up version of the sensory.

The spirit world is the Greater Spirit, the Divine, the All.

The world of spirits consists of dimensions, planes, and spaces or times within
 or outside of this time/space and houses entities, energies, consciousnesses,
 or other beings or forms that are animate and can communicate.

The antiworlds are the dimensional folds that oppose or hold what isn't found
 in the physical universe.

The energetic realm consists of planes or dimensions that operate only
 energetically and the beings or consciousnesses that dwell there. This reality
 interfaces with the larger world of spirits and at some levels, is a subset of it;
 however, there are energetic wave platforms that are void of conscious beings
and, in fact, might convert spirits to pure energy upon entering.

In addition to these five levels of reality, we each exist on four pathways, four
levels of awareness that add up to a greater reality in which heaven and earth
are the same. The four pathways encompass all five levels of reality. The four
pathways are the elemental, or physical; the power, or supernatural; the
imagination, or creative magical; and the Divine, or heavenly.

   At any given time, we might be intuitively picking up on something our
mother is thinking (the world of the natural), a song being sung to us by an
angel (the world of spirits), and a self in a parallel universe (the antiworlds).
We want to make sure that we're filtering positive from negative input, helpful
from harmful energies, and good from bad entities.

             ENERGETIC BINDINGS: INTERFERENCE AT ITS WORST


Sometimes we create short-term energetic connections to others (living or
dead, from any level of reality) in order to accomplish a goal. Mothers form a
cord, or a two-way flow of energy, to their children naturally. Through this
cord, they sense their child's needs and send love. This cord dissipates over
time, first at six months, then at eighteen months, and then finishes dissolving
when the child is three years old. Sometimes, however, the cord involves an
unhealthy exchange of energy.

   Imagine that the child is unwanted. The mother might subconsciously agree
to send the minimum of life energy to her child in exchange for the entirety of
the child's life energy, or perhaps the child's loyalty, eternal devotion, or
spiritual gifts. This cord is never dissolved because both parties feel
dependent upon the other for survival. It therefore evolves into a codependent
cord and causes injury to both. A codependent cord will remain throughout life
and death and become the model for all the child's major relationships,
including friendships, love affairs, and even work-related relationships.

  Cords and codependent cords exist between the living and the dead. Our
soul can carry them from one lifetime to another, and even forge them with
spirits or entities when alive. I worked with one client who had created a
codependent cord with a demon when she was a child. Her parents were
extremely abusive, and she had no friends. A demon visited her and promised
to be her friend, remaining with her forever, if she would give it life energy.
The cord entered her first chakra, from which it pulled and transferred life
energy to the demon, which now had the material strength it needed to stay in
the physical realm. In exchange, it gave her advice. And not good advice,
either. Any time my client met a nice person or became close to someone, the
demon would whisper warnings and send her dreams depicting the other
person as violent. As soon as we released the cord, disconnecting it from the
demon and linking it instead to the Divine, who gradually dissolved it
completely with unconditional love, her attachment to the being ceased-as did
the voices and her unhappiness.

  There are many other bindings, or cordlike restrictions, that might be carried
by our soul, mind, or body, but which almost always lock into one or more
chakras. There they inhibit the full function of that chakra. These bindings
include the following:

1. Cords-Energetic connections that limit relationships and cause patterns.
 Cords operate like a contract between two or more people.

2. Curses-Energetic limitations put on one soul (or set of souls) by another
 soul to reduce a soul's power and effectiveness and attract damaging
 circumstances. Curses often limit abundance, repel positive relationships,
 and create illness and tragedies. Curses are frequently the territory of black
 witches and voodoo experts and can be passed down from one generation to
 another and carried into new lives. I worked with a woman who carried a
 generational curse from a great-grandmother, in which every man who
 entered the family would die a violent death. She had lost three husbands.
 Her daughters had each lost two husbands, and one of them had a sick third
 husband. We lifted the curse given by a jilted lover in the earlier generation,
 and the ill man survived. As well, the other two females of the family have
 since remarried successfully.
3. Codependent bargains-Agreements that make a soul ignore its own needs in
 favor of pleasing someone else.

4. Life cord-First chakra-based cords related to a part of ourselves. These
 usually carry from one lifetime to another and keep us replaying the trauma of
 a past life through a drama of today. For instance, I had a client who was
 violently killed by a lover in a past life. Every time she got close to a lover
 in this lifetime, she experienced the same physical symptoms as she did when
 previously dying, including stabbing pain, bleeding nostrils, and tachycardia.
 We released her from the past, brought her soul entirely into the present, and
 all the problems stopped. I often perceive life cords present in relationship
 issues, but also autistic and schizophrenic disorders, as part of the self is
 trapped elsewhere, so it is impossible to fully function in the present.

5. Mental and emotional strongholds-A mental stronghold is an unhealthy bond
 between two or more beliefs; an emotional stronghold is an unhealthy union
 between at least one feeling and a belief. These have been described
 throughout this book and can operate like bindings in that they are inner
 restrictions.

6. Energy markers-An energy marker looks like a black or red X over a
 chakra area. This Xis also reflected in the corresponding auric field. It
 energetically tells others to treat us a certain way, such as worthless or
 undeserving of money, love, or affection.

   These circumstances can lead to the following disturbances, many of which
relate to the concept of soul fragmentation or damage, explained in chapter 10:

• Possession-Being overtaken by another entity or another energy.

• Recession-Something or someone else has captured a part of our energy.

• Obsession-Someone else's thoughts or feelings are stuck inside and
 "obsessing" inside us.

• Depression-A part of our energy is inaccessible, trapped inside or outside of
 us.

• Repression-Someone else's energy (or an entity) is suppressing us.

• Concession-We keep giving up what's important to us (or exchanging energy
 with someone else) in order to get our needs met.

                           THE ROLE OF FORGIVENESS


Ultimately, we hang on to old situations because we won't forgive others or
ourselves for decisions. Forgiveness is the release of what was not, in order to
open to what can be. To release energetic bindings, I encourage clients to
intuitively track the cord, marker, stronghold, or bargain to the originating
source. Once here, it's important to feel any feelings that weren't originally felt
and to then remember the conclusions made about self, others, the world, or the
Divine. I now invoke the Divine, which provides a different way of seeing the
situation, a release from the bondage, and a life-enhancing set of beliefs.

   Energetically, a binding can be released by sending pure white light or
unconditional love through it to the source. For instance, many people carry
bindings to their mothers and fathers through the back side of the fifth chakra.
Mother's messages enter in the left, father's come in through the neck. Sending
forgiveness, or white light, back to them frees us all. It's then important to open
to new messages, so as to fill the space. The Divine can always do this, if
asked.

         GATEKEEPERS: PREVENTING INTERFERENCE, ASSURING LOVE


A gatekeeper is a being sent from and appointed by the Divine to protect and
guide you. A gatekeeper might be the Divine or any other divinely sanctified
being that guards your boundaries and psyche and invites in only that which is
good for you. A gatekeeper undertakes many tasks. These include:

• Regulating the flow of psychic information inside and outside of us.

• Deciding which entities and spirits might communicate with us.
• Selecting which personal prayers and questions should be directed to which
 external sources.

• Helping us pay attention to necessary messages or energies from both
 psychic and sensory sources.

• Building our self-esteem and capabilities.

• Helping us learn our lessons in a gentle way.

• Attracting and summoning help, energies, and entities that are supportive.

• Protecting us from harmful energies, information, and sources.

• Overriding us if we might harm ourselves or someone else.

• Connecting us with the Divine.

• Encouraging us to heal our issues.

   In qualifying a gatekeeper or other psychic contact, sometimes we search for
intuitive inspiration; other times, it simply comes to us. How can you tell what
is worth paying attention to or not? Even more importantly, what is dangerous
versus helpful? The key is to qualify the source. We can determine the validity
of a potential gatekeeper or any psychic source by first analyzing it completely.
This will tell us if we are compatible. Use the following exercises to find and
qualify a gatekeeper or other psychic source.


   EXERCISES: FINDING AND QUALIFYING A GATEKEEPER OR OTHER PSYCHIC
                                SOURCE


1. Getting a Gatekeeper


A. Seclude yourself in a quiet place, and make sure you won't be disturbed for
the duration of this exercise. Now breathe deeply, ground, and center.
 Establish psychic boundaries and fully open your chakras, setting the
 intention for meeting a gatekeeper. Bring your concentration to your fifth, or
 throat, chakra, and ask the Divine to connect you with a gatekeeper, or
 spiritual guide, who can serve as your celestial filter and psychic information
 interpreter. You can make this request through your thoughts, aloud, or through
 your chosen form of prayer.

B. Now ask the Divine to introduce you to this appointed gatekeeper, helping
you to intuitively see, hear, and sense it.

C. If you are absolutely confident in this being's ability to represent the Divine
and your own needs and interests, continue this communication with
questions of your own, ending the connection by deciding if you would like to
employ this being as a gatekeeper in everyday life. If so, discuss the various
ways you can further this spiritual relationship and then close. If you have any
concerns, however, conduct Part II of these exercises to qualify the
gatekeeper before cementing the agreement.

II. Qualifying a Gatekeeper and Other Psychic Contacts


  In a meditative state, ground and center. Then open your chakras in order to
ask your own spirit or the Divine questions that reveal the source's basic
nature and credibility. You can use the questions listed below to start your
discussion.

A. You can begin this part of the process by asking your own spirit or the
Divine these questions in a meditative state.

    a. What is the nature and origin of this source?

    b. Is this source internal or external (from inside or outside of me)?

    c. Is it animate or inanimate?

    d. Which level of reality does the input come from?
   e. What type of being or source is this revelation?

   f. Can this source show that it is from the Divine?

B. Ask any other questions that enable you to establish a sense of the source's
personality, way of working, and origins, and then continue to ask questions
that might reveal its credibility, ethics, and effectiveness, such as:

   a. What does this source want to show, tell, reveal, or become to me?

   b. Do I trust or believe its intention?

   c. Can I trust it short-term, long-term, or both?

   d. If I follow its advice, what might be the most likely outcomes?

   e. If the Divine were to show me the nature of this source, what would I
    perceive?

   f. Does this source meet the requirements as laid out in this chapter?
              WORKING WITH THE BODY:
                 THE KEY POINTS
When healing or manifesting, one of the most beneficial physical techniques to
use is to focus on the spine. All of our fundamental energy bodies connect to
the spine. The backs and the fronts of the in-body energy centers link to the
spine. The rays enter through spinal contacts, and the auric layers connect to
the chakras, which align on the spine. The spine tracks with our childhood
development issues. The spine is the literal backbone of any and all physical
healing.

  The spine is also a central point for connecting our physical and spiritual
energy bodies. I have uncovered and practiced with a system that does this
very well. I call it the Key Point System. The idea behind this system is that
each of the thirty-two energy centers is linked to a specific vertebra, with an
additional energy connecting to the top vertebra.

   The basis for the Key Point System is the idea that the spine serves as the
staff of life for our entire energy system. The structure of the spine supports
this point of view. From a front view, the spine looks like two pyramids joined
together at their bases. The upper section is formed by the vertebrae from the
second cervical to the last lumbar, and the lower section is formed by the
sacrum and coccyx. Gray's Anatomy says the upper pyramid is constructed of
three smaller pyramids. Physically, the pyramidal structure is one of the most
solid on earth. Metaphysically, the pyramid is often considered to be a magical
construct, a form through which we are able to channel and ground energies.
Our spine makes use of both these physical and metaphysical abilities as it
connects matter and spirit. What better unit upon which to work, both for
healing and manifesting reasons, than the spine itself?
             Figure 12.1: The Thirty-Two Chakras and the Spine

   In general, I believe the energy centers link to the following vertebrae (see
figure 12.1):
We can work the spine in a general or abstract fashion, such as laying hands on
the inbody chakric areas or concentrating on the particular vertebra to clear a
specific issue. We can also work on a vertebral group, and thus affect a certain
type of issue. To better understand this system and therefore our entire human
energy system, we need to comprehend each vertebral group.

The Coccygeal Vertebrae


These four vertebrae form within us at an early age, differentiating while we
are still within the womb. When we are young, the coccygeal vertebrae and the
sacral vertebrae consist of nine separate pieces. When we become an adult,
these bones unite to form two larger bones, five of which enter the sacrum and
four that form the coccyx itself (see figure 12.2).

   The coccyx is the most rudimentary part of our spine. It is composed of four
segments, or vertebrae, the first, or top, piece being the largest and the last, or
fourth, being the smallest. The coccyx, commonly called the tailbone, performs
critical physical and metaphysical functions. Most biologists assign it the
function of providing us balance and protection. Metaphysically, I believe it
relates to our most basic self and is associated with our reproductive
capacities.

  The tail end of the vertebrae, the first coccygeal vertebra, relates to our tenth
chakra. It grounds us into this reality and serves as the access point for the red
kundalini energy.

   Red or serpent kundalini is fundamental with the coccyx. It is also available
through the nineteenth spiritual energy center of kundalini, through which we
receive the undiluted form of raw life energy. Kundalini is a necessary
component of all developmental life stages. It jumpstarts us upon conception,
and it keeps us alive during our early years. It awakens our sexuality, and it
energizes our body to achieve our purpose. Through the tenth and first chakras,
we receive one aspect of the total kundalini-the red kundalini, which feeds our
material self.

   Men and women process red kundalini differently, even though the entry
point of this energy is the same for both. I have found that the male energy
system is usually geared toward first-chakra achievement. As they mature,
most men center their identity in achievements related to physical will, which
includes sexual, material, and physical prowess. Typically, the call to
transcend this first-chakra focus occurs after the completion of grounding,
which happens from ages thirty-five to forty-two during the tenth-chakra
concentration. I believe this transcendence is completed in men when the first
chakra cycles back again at age fifty-six.
    Figure 12.2: The Coccygeal and Sacral Vertebrae and Their Chakric
                              Connections

The coccygeal and sacral sequencing mirrors those of the auric field, with the
  tenth chakra interspaced between the first and the second; these chakras and
corresponding vertebrae regulate earthy and concrete issues; the ninth chakra is
   part of the lumbar system and signifies a switch to more spiritual energies

  This Western society first-chakra bias partially stems from cultural
prejudices, but it is also incorporated within souls that choose to be male.
First-chakra energy is extremely important; it builds families, cities, and
countries. It also lends itself to violence and abusive behaviors. Time and time
again, my male clients aged forty-plus talk about how scared they are of
maturing, for to mature, they will have to face their own feelings of being hurt,
or worse, of hurting someone.

   I think it is this fear, combined with cultural and familial blocks, which
cause so many mystics to bemoan the dangers of allowing the kundalini to rise.
In fact, there is a widespread idea that if not properly controlled, kundalini
initiation can injure the psyche or soul, or even kill someone. Leadbeater
sternly advises that "no one should experiment with it [kundalini] without
definite instruction from a teacher ... for the dangers connected with it are very
real and terribly serious."'

   This belief makes sense if we remember that the majority of these mystics
are men, and that they are speaking to men. Therefore, most warnings relate to
men's experiences of the kundalini awakening. As kundalini passes through the
tenth chakra and into the base of the coccyx, it stimulates the entire first-chakra
region. Any unresolved primal, maternal, sexual, or success issues become
stimulated, and the effect can be explosive in first chakra-centered individuals.

   Ultimately, men need to move their center of power and kundalini processing
from the coccyx to the third chakra, which is regulated by the dorsal (thoracic)
region. This shift would involve processing kundalini in the eighth dorsal
vertebra, through which spiritual, not just physical, kundalini may be
channeled. The eighth dorsal, or thoracic, vertebra is the lock-in point for the
kundalini spiritual energy center. This transference would also enable men to
positively address any ego or low self-esteem issues stored in their third
chakra. Through the appropriate use of kundalini power, true personal power
can be realized.

   I have been present with men who have tapped into their kundalini. In fact, I
witnessed three such awakenings in one day. Each man literally went berserk
with the rising of the energy. As a woman, I felt frightened by their intense
screaming, sexual innuendoes, and shaking. As a healer, I forced them to carry
the snake energy straight into their third chakras, where I assisted them with
opening to the kundalini energy point. I then guided them to a different form of
kundalini-the golden kundalini-which was accessible through the overhead
chakras and enter the body through the seventh chakra. (See "The Cervical
Vertebrae" section in this chapter.) Essentially, I helped them loop the red and
golden kundalinis together. Immediately, these men calmed down. During the
next few weeks, they reported increased energy, awareness of gifts and goals,
and a new sense of calm.

   Women can also tap into red kundalini through their base coccyx vertebrae,
but many women fail to ever completely open to this energy. This is partly due
to strong societal judgments about women's sexuality and cultural conditioning
that represses women's drive for material success. Religious views that
emphasize that women's basic nature is evil certainly do not help matters.
When a woman does allow her red kundalini to enter, I have found that she
needs to use this energy differently than a man does. If she doesn't, she runs a
risk experienced by one of my clients.

   A young mother of three, Beth had for years represented herself as a
stereotypical good girl. Her husband, a successful lawyer, spent very little time
at home, and she was lonely. Two events precipitated the opening of her
kundalini. First, she began recalling sexual-abuse memories. After two years
of working with me and a licensed professional, she began to feel more whole
in relation to these traumas. She continually expressed to me, her friends, and
her husband an increased desire for companionship, but her husband paid no
attention. Then she met a motorcycle racer, and every single sexual cell in her
body sprang to life. The kundalini was rising and driving her crazy. She went
so far as to leave in the middle of the night one time to seek this man hundreds
of miles away.
   A male approach to this rise in kundalini would not have helped Beth. To
have her try and leapfrog this energy to her third chakra would have prevented
her from finding her true power, the creative power that all women have. This
power lies latent in a woman's uterus, or second chakra. To have had her
simply enjoy her awakened first chakra would have endangered her social
standing and legal rights as a mother. Beth has since learned to handle her
energy in a mature fashion, although she still struggles with it. She has begun to
write a book, a task which appropriately directs and uses this awkward first-
chakra energy.

   While the second chakra is obviously critical to men, it is the ultimate center
for women. As explained to Carlos Castaneda by la Gorda, a fellow student of
sorcerer don Juan, a woman's method of power "Has to come from her womb,
because that's her center."' Don Juan, in Castaneda's books, frequently makes
reference to women as potentially more powerful than men because of the
magnitude of the womb as a power center. Also, because the secret of
warriorism is invisibility or selflessness, women have another advantage. As
another of don Juan's students, Florinda, says, "I'm a woman, and that gives me
a splendid advantage. I'm not accountable."' Women's social invisibility
liberates them to walk the path of power.

   A woman's kundalini must ultimately mold and meld more completely into
her body than a man's. I believe this idea is supported by the fact that as a
woman ages, her coccygeal vertebrae tend to merge with her sacrum. This
fusion focuses her center of gravity and identity on her birthing center from
which she must constantly draw the energy she needs for daily life. As the
natural cycles of menstruation add to this need for constant energy renewal, the
need for a strong energy source seems obvious. Red kundalini must feed this
process; perhaps this is the purpose for which kundalini was even conceived.
In Uncoiling the Snake, Janet Balaskas says kundalini energy belongs to
women "through our biological processes of bleeding and birthing." Her
statement that "kundalini is the foundation for our strength, courage, psychic
power, and creativity" furthers the case that kundalini must stoke women's
second chakra.4
  As the red kundalini or life energy passes through its four initial stages,
symbolized by the four coccygeal vertebrae, we complete the initial entrance
path of our own and the Divine Source's material energy.

The Sacral Vertebrae


We now move on to the next stage of growth, represented by the sacral spinal
area. For women, this is the area of power. For men, this is the area of
feelings.

   The sacrum or hipbone is formed by the union of five vertebrae (see figure
12.2). In general, this vertebral area covers the second chakra area of the body.
It forms the chalice that holds the chi, or life energy, that is poured in from the
first chakra. In different ways, this area is physically and metaphysically
important to women and to men. For women, this spinal area regulates their
life energy and serves as the pool from which they draw life energy for others,
including babies, children, and life-purpose tasks. In men, this is the center for
refining and maturing their physical energies. Here, feelings spill into passion,
thus tempering drive, will, and action. In both sexes, this bone takes until age
thirty to develop. At completion, it is shorter and wider in women than in men,
underscoring that its function is different from gender to gender.

   According to the Key Point System, the sacral vertebrae allow integration of
chakras four through eight into this, the creative center of the body. I apply this
information in many ways. First, it tells me that if a client is experiencing
second-chakra issues, such as low back pain, colitis, the flu, kidney or ovarian
problems, he or she may also be reflecting issues related to one of the chakras
integrating within that area. For instance, a client's colitis may relate to
feelings being denied about a relationship (fourth-chakra vertebrae). Another
client's ovarian cysts could pertain to repressed self-expression (fifth-chakra
vertebrae). Low back pain might be a way for another client to keep himself
from being physically active and looking fit, healthy, and attractive (a sixth-
chakra vertebrae, self-image issue). Perhaps another client's kidney stones
reflect childhood beliefs that it is not okay to do what she wants to do
(seventh-chakra vertebrae), or the stones might relate to a past-life issue
(eighth-chakra vertebrae).

   Being able to differentiate issues to such a minute level is what makes this
procedure helpful. If I am working on a client who seems to be experiencing
second-chakra versus fourth-chakra difficulties, I can isolate the pertinent
vertebrae. Yes, it can be difficult to actually pinpoint the correct vertebrae. I
may have the client picture these vertebrae in his or her own mind, either
realistically or pictorially, or I may lay my hands over the entire chakra and
energetically feel for the critical vertebrae. Typically, I like to have clients
picture, touch, or diagnose their own issues. Healing, especially when
conducted on the lower chakras, which often hold abuse or victimization
issues, must be a selfempowering process.

   I once worked with a female client, Marcy, who was suicidal. Yet another
relationship had bit the dust, and she didn't want to go on. She experienced
considerable low back pain and had been menstruating for a week longer than
usual. In addition, she was unable to control her intense mood swings.

   I asked Marcy to look within and find the root of her issues. She gasped,
informing me that there was an incredible wound in her second chakra. She had
been severely abused and rejected by her father at an early age. Without
prompting she listed occurrences that correlated to each of the vertebrae within
the sacral system. Her issues were relationship-based (fourth chakra), caused
her to swallow her feelings and needs (fifth chakra), created an extremely low
body image (sixth chakra), created confusion about whether she was spiritually
supposed to have a relationship or not (seventh chakra), and had past-life
cords with at least the current flame (eighth chakra). To heal her wound, Marcy
had to face each of these painful areas. Her body immediately responded by
feeling better, and the back pain eventually disappeared.

The Lumbar Vertebrae


The vertebrae in the lumbar system are some of the largest in the spine. In
general, they are also broader and have fewer features than other vertebrae
(see figure 12.3). In relation to our chakric system, this means that they are
good conductors of energy and add stability to the overall energetic system.
These vertebrae overlay part of our secondchakra system and connect the
second to the third. Because the individual vertebrae link our ninth chakra (at
the lowest point) to the fourteenth energy point, yang (at the highest point), they
lock our purpose and male and female issues into our feeling state.

   The attachment of these chakras to the second chakra area links spiritual
qualities to our feelings. With regard to the ninth chakra connection, these
vertebrae lock our purpose into our feelings. We can and should be able to
"feel out" situations to distinguish if they are on purpose or not.

   The tenth-chakra connection enables us to ground our spiritual and material
self in our feelings. The eleventh-chakra relationship allows us to draw
elemental and supernatural energies into our feeling body, and vice versa. The
attachment between our twelfth chakra and the lumbar vertebrae bonds our
feelings to each and every part of our physical body. As human beings, we may
not actually be our feelings, but our feelings can tell us who we are.

   The thirteenth and fourteenth energy point connections explain why many of
our gender issues, especially those relating to our femininity or masculinity,
affect our feeling state, and conversely, why our feelings can affect our views
of our own femininity or masculinity. In general, the lumbar vertebrae connect
our feelings to all aspects of our human condition, assisting us in healing
through our feelings, and helping us heal our feelings through broader
principles.

  I believe that the principles associated with this vertebral system are critical
to healing our own unique masculine/feminine issues, and can provide
assistance in helping men and women love and like each other. Though I cannot
prove this assertion, a special case comes to mind.
     Figure 12.3: The Lumbar Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections

Chakra ten is located in the coccygeal vertebrae, as its placement follows the
                             flow of the auric field
   I was asked to visit a friend's mother in the hospital. I went to support my
friend, not to serve professionally. Her mother had broken her back in the
lumbar area. Expecting to find her angry, despairing, or unhappy, I was
surprised to find the mother smiling, with her husband by her side holding her
hand. After a few minutes of small talk, her husband told me that in some ways,
this accident was the best thing that could have happened. "It saved our
marriage," he said. "I never knew how much I really cared-I had just been
taking her for granted." In breaking open these vertebrae, this woman had
broken herself open to the opportunity for true connection with her loved one.

The Thoracic (Dorsal) Vertebrae


The thoracic or dorsal vertebrae are intermediate in size, larger than the
cervical vertebrae atop them, and smaller than the lumbar ones beneath them.
They decrease in size as they progress up the spine. These vertebrae are
located in the same region as the ribs, which place them in connection with the
solar plexus and heart chakras, and in contact with the thymus (see figure
12.4). Their most distinguishing characteristic is their heart shape.
Esoterically, this region's major function involves interlocking the higher
energies related to heart's desires with our ability to manifest the success and
relationships needed to breathe life into our dreams.

  With regard to the particular energy connections, these vertebrae, from the
bottom up, relate to the fifteenth through twenty-sixth energy centers. In
general, those vertebrae that interface with the third chakra relate to balance,
harmony, and free will; they interconnect with the heart itself via the kundalini
spiritual point (point 19), and completely lock into the heart chakra through the
energy of mastery (point 20). When men achieve focus in the third-chakra
section of this area, they are then automatically raised to compassion, the gift
of the heart. Freed from the guilt and shame typically associated with the first
chakra's basic drives, third-chakra-based men can actually be more, not less,
successful than their counterparts.

  As I've said, our third chakra is responsible for the input of ideas,
intellectual knowledge, clairsentience (or clear knowing), and our relationship
with worldly success. Because higher spiritual energies are attached to these
concerns, through these vertebrae, we can all achieve the balance necessary to
apply (free) will toward meeting our purpose.

   When our ideas align with our purpose, we receive an additional zap of
energy through the nineteenth energy center, kundalini, located within this
vertebral area. This kundalini point is critical. It connects the red kundalini
coccygeal access point to the primary access point of golden kundalini, the
crown. This entry point may also parallel the heart-based kundalini center
referred to by several Indian yogic traditions. Leadbeater, in The Chakras, says
this center is feminine and called the "home of the world's mother."5 Male or
female, this centerpoint is both fertile and fueling. Thus, kundalini fuels our
breath with life energy, imbuing us with the warm support of the Divine
Source. We can now uplift our worldly goals to their highest level, through
mastery of the task at hand.
Figure 12.4: The Thoracic (Dorsal) Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections

  Healing these vertebrae can be particularly helpful when we are
experiencing doubt, confusion, or fears; when we seem stuck in regard to
defining or achieving success; when we are experiencing low self-esteem, low
energy, or metabolic problems. Often, the issue can relate to balance. We need
to distinguish our ideas or our skills from those of others. This kind of self-
appraisal, done through the eyes of our spiritual identity, brings us to a closer
level of harmony with our true self. Once we grasp the idea that we really have
free will and can choose what to believe or not, we can break the barrier of
low self-esteem. Low self-esteem, more than any other issue, blocks our
access to energy. When we energize ourselves with purpose and self-respect,
we finally begin to master our own fates.

   The lines of distinction between energy centers blur, of course, as one
vertebra folds into another. Roughly, however, as we go from being energized
through kundalini to realizing that we can master our own identities, we can
recognize that we deserve abundance simply because we are who we are. The
abundance center vertebra is locked fully into the heart chakra. Just think of
everything that relates to abundance. We want abundantly wonderful
relationships. We desire abundance in regard to fun, fortune, and fame. We
want abundant health. Believing in abundance is a heart's desire.

   The thoracic vertebrae also assist the flow of abundance into our physical
bodies. The trick is to realize that we desire and deserve abundance, and then
receive clarity about how to achieve it. Clarity, in particular, relates to the
lungs, one of the organs sharing the pericardial cavity with the heart. Clear
thinking and clear breathing seem to go together, a truth understood by many
yoga masters. Clarity as a reality braces us to make peace with our dual human
nature-good and bad, light and dark, enlightened and unenlightened. Only by
drawing fully on all the energies available to us-the dark as well as the light-
can we go about creating and manifesting our heart's and soul's desires-all
under the protection of the top thoracic vertebra, alignment (with higher
purpose, point 26).

   Working with the thoracic vertebrae can be enlightening for anyone seeking
relationship and manifesting assistance. Our heart is the meeting ground, a
revolving door unto itself. It is the space in which our upper spiritual aspects
meet our lower material aspects. Dhyani Ywahoo says that the energy of the
earth and energy of heaven join in the heart, "expanding, radiating outward."'
All of the heart-shaped thoracic vertebrae are concerned with helping us
achieve what is truly best for us during this life.

The Cervical Vertebrae


The cervical vertebrae crown the spinal system. These individual vertebrae
are generally smaller than those in other regions, yet each of them performs
very important physical and metaphysical functions (see figure 12.5).

   The cervical vertebrae compose the top upper back and the neck. These
vertebrae cover the throat chakra and its connection to our heart chakra. They
also attach the spine to the higher in-body centers or points; these points
parallel the spine even though they are located outside the cranium. The seven
vertebrae in the cervical system take us from the twenty-seventh energy point
through the principle of the thirty-third.

  The twenty-seventh energy point is peace. Serenity follows alignment with
our purpose, which rounds out the heart's connection with the thymus. To
achieve serenity, we must know that we are on track with our purpose. This
vertebra, one of the odd-shaped cervical vertebrae, ties into our immune
system. When experiencing immune deficiencies or disorders, we can use the
spiritual energy of peace to achieve the calm we need to regulate our physical
and chemical reactions. The connection between the peace center and the
lower neck area can help us achieve the balanced state we need to express
ourselves appropriately and fairly.

   The wisdom center (point 28) locks into the throat chakra. One of the higher
goals of the throat chakra is to channel, know, and speak only wisdom. Atop
this, and still aligned with the throat, we link to enjoyment and forgiveness
(points 29 and 30). How many of our problems stem from having stifled our
joy and life energy, or from not having spoken those difficult truths? The
forgiveness center is also well placed. When we can say that we forgive others
and ourselves, we break the cords or old tapes that enter all too often through
the throat.
     Figure 12.5: The Cervical Vertebrae and Their Chakric Connections

  The cervical vertebrae complete at the axis, or the second cervical vertebra,
which joins with the atlas, or first cervical vertebra. These two vertebrae are
extremely important, because they top off the spine, cradling our head. The axis
forms a pivot upon which the atlas holds the head. This pivot allows the head
to swivel. Along the back side of the body, the axis rises in a toothlike form.
The rest of the body looks almost like a bed that stretches out from a
headboard. The axis and atlas also complete the spinal chakric system, and
open us to life's higher principles.

   The axis links with our thirty-second energy point, the grace and Divine
Source consciousness center. Supporting the globe of the head, it has a ringlike
shape with a front and back arch. I often call it the "shaman's portal" because it
is similar in form to the archways perceived by shamans when they journey out
of their bodies into various dimensions. As a journey or soul traveling point, it
operates in concert with the atlas to open us to other worlds. Together, these
vertebrae are shaped like a Celtic dolman, or grave entrance. This portal is a
logical door through which tribal healers venture to perform healings or gather
knowledge. One shaman with whom I studied said that during a trance he lifts
his soul to the heavens through his neck. It is there, he said, that the bones
"hollow into doors" so he can visit the "seven layers of reality." We can all
reach these levels of higher consciousness, because these doorways are built
into our own physical systems.

   Problems in this area might indicate difficulties in leaving the body when
sleeping or dreaming, pulling positive energy in when needed, or soul
fragmentation; perhaps a part of the soul is stuck outside of the body, therefore,
the axis itself is stuck. This second cervical vertebra is also the window for
channeling or transmediumship. External guidance, from the living, dead, or
other esoteric sources, enters through this vertebra. Negative messages, carried
by our soul or related to childhood, can clog this vertebra, causing physical
disorders as well as psychic problems. Regarding the latter, we might, for
instance, continually play childhood messages to our own detriment, reiterating
our dysfunctional beliefs. We might be too open to errant entities, which give
us inappropriate psychic advice. Or we might completely shut down this center
in order to protect ourselves from negative influences, and in doing so, shut out
divine guidance.

  The atlas, our first cervical vertebra, supports the globe of the head.
Metaphysically, it pertains to the principle of the thirty-third, which is a
protective energy that must be used to safely work with any of the higher
energy points. This principle is about Love. Not just love, the feeling we feel
when infatuated, but the energy of Love, the feeling the Divine Source has for
itself and for us.

  Love depends upon grace to support the higher centers. It is also the
doorway through which we journey to get to the higher planes of ourselves.
When we draw our life energy up according to the principles of Love, our
entire energy system automatically aligns.

   Together, the atlas and the axis serve as the spinal connection to golden
kundalini, the spiritual energy feeding our purpose. This form of energy,
referred to in works such as Ywahoo's Voices of Our Ancestors, based on
Cherokee tradition, may be formed from energy like the linga, an Indian
emblem of creative power that extends down from the heavens as well as up
through the earth. According to this tradition, the downward force ignites the
top half of our body. I have experienced golden kundalini this same way.
Entering through the crown chakra, it fuels the top half of our body, which
houses our in- and out-of-the-body spiritual centers. Golden kundalini is so
powerful and intense, metaphysical leaders such as Leadbeater have warned
about kundalini that enters from above rather than below. He believes that one
of the dangers of downward entering kundalini is that it can "excite the most
undesirable passions," turning men into "monsters of depravity."'

  I have found that the key to safely using golden kundalini is to bring it in with
Grace and Love. We must also continue to pull red kundalini up until both mix
with the spiritual kundalini in the heart. (See "The Coccygeal Vertebrae"
section in this chapter.) Thus, we blend our physical drive with the will of a
higher power, the Divine Source.

                    WORKING WITH THE KEY POINT SYSTEM


There are many ways to work with the Key Point System, several of which I
have already mentioned. I will categorize these and others to better illustrate
possible methods. There are three general approaches to working with this
system:

• Visual-Gathering pictures, images, or symbolic representations of an issue,
 belief, person, place, or thing.

• Verbal-Hearing words or sounds from an aspect of ourselves, or from a
 source of visible or invisible guidance.

• Kinesthetic-Feeling, sensing, or knowing information.

  There are two basic kinesthetic styles. Physical kinesthesia enables psychic
communication that is sensory in nature, meaning that it relates to the five basic
senses. Spiritual kinesthesia relates to understandings that are more
esoterically known or sensed.

  We access these various intuitive faculties through the chakras. The visual
center is chakra six; the verbal center is chakra five; the physical kinesthetic
centers are comprised of chakras ten, one, two, and three; and the spiritual
kinesthetic centers consist of chakras four, seven, nine, eleven, and twelve.
Chakra eight is primarily a spiritual kinesthetic center, but it can serve as a
conduit for all the other gifts, as well.

  The following Key Point System techniques may draw on any or all of the
above approaches:

Isolating One Vertebra


If it is possible to pinpoint a particular issue, it can be beneficial to work with
the vertebra relating to this issue.

Isolating a Chakric Area


When concentrating on the front-side, back-side, or combined energies of a
particular chakra, it can be helpful to analyze the problem in connection with
the vertebrae found in that chakric area.

Working with a Vertebral Area


This technique is especially beneficial if someone is complaining about a pain
or problem with his or her spine. For instance, if a client is experiencing low
back pain, I would work with the centers located in the entire sacral vertebral
area.

Working with Opposite Vertebrae, Chakras, or Spine Areas


Sometimes an issue associated with the physical dimension is mirrored in the
spiritual dimension or vice versa. Also, an issue in one vertebra will be
reflected in its direct spinal opposite. For instance, if a client is experiencing
difficulties with his or her tailbone, it can be beneficial to also work on the
cervical area. Our system is always attempting to achieve balance. Attacking
the issue in a different way can help swing it back into equilibrium.

Applying the Child Development System


Our chakras awaken and open in stages. Our higher centers link into this
process in stages via the vertebrae. Often, I will walk a client "up the spine,"
searching for repressed memories or issues at various ages. It can be helpful to
have him or her open to the spiritual energies available through the vertebral
connections. For instance, when someone is dealing with an issue that has
lingered since preteen years, tapping into the Peace center encourages a more
expansive interpretation of that issue and its role. Clients healing traumatic
issues can also benefit by opening to the higher spiritual energies available
through the corresponding higher center.

Using the Rays
There are two major ways to work with the rays under the Key Point System.
First, pinpoint the vertebrae that require healing, then select or intuit which
rays will help heal the issue. Focus these rays on the injured vertebrae.
Second, establish whether or not there is already a ray linked to the vertebrae
in question, either as an in-point or an outpoint. Use this ray energy to help fix
the issue. You can also use the ray energy nearest the vertebrae upon which you
are working.

Applying the Principles


Walking any issue through the Guardian Principles (see chapter 9) is an
effective and meaningful way to heal ourselves or manifest our desires. The
principles can also be blended with the child development system. After using
child development information to highlight the origin of an issue, we can walk
ourselves through a healing process via the principles.

Working with the Kundalini


The spine functions best when red kundalini from the coccyx meets and works
with the golden kundalini via the seventh chakra and the nineteenth-center
thoracic vertebra in the heart. This golden kundalini enters the spine through
the axis and atlas. Any healing or manifesting process can benefit from making
sure that the red and golden kundalini energy are mixing in the heart and/or in
the thoracic vertebrae. This blended energy, which consists of spiritualized
matter, can energize just about any process.

   I would like to provide an example of how the Key Point System has helped
someone heal. Bev, age forty-five, was referred to me by a chiropractor. She
had experienced intense back pain most of her life, ever since breaking her
tailbone when she was seven years old. During the past decade, she had also
suffered other chronic disorders, including headaches, fainting spells,
digestive problems, and premenstrual syndrome. She complained about two
other problems as well-she had never been able to get pregnant, and she often
had sore feet due to having flat feet.

   Bev and I worked together for about two months before we found a solution.
The core physical problem was her tailbone. Inherent in the tailbone are issues
relating to the first, second, third, and tenth chakras, and Bev showed physical
symptoms that could have stemmed from all of these chakras. Back problems,
headaches, and fainting spells were symptoms of first-chakra issues.
Premenstrual and pregnancy difficulties stemmed from the second chakra.
Digestive disorders were a product of a third-chakra issue, and flat feet were a
product of a tenth-chakra concern.

   The fact that all coccygeal vertebrae were affected gave me a clue. Bev's
difficulties might have originated before birth, though they might have been
aggravated at different points in this lifetime. I asked her if her physical
symptoms were mirrored or affected by any one particular family member, or
if they correlated with any problems experienced by family members as she
was growing up. Bev shared story after story about her mother. Her mother had
injured her own tailbone shortly before Bev had gotten hurt. Every time her
mother became sick, so did Bev.

   We followed these clues to the core issue. Several lifetimes ago, Bev and
her mother had created a soul contract. They had spiritually and physically tied
themselves together by knotting their first chakras energetically. The result was
that if one became sick, the other would provide her with life energy to help
keep her alive.

  To change this situation, Bev and I worked with the Divine Source. She
established a different type of bond with her mother, one in which they shared
love, but not life energy. Bev then connected her life energy with the Divine
Source, and asked her mother's soul to do the same. Two weeks later, Bev
came to see me. She had seen her chiropractor shortly after working with me.
The chiropractor had spent one hour with her, amazed at how easily her spine,
including her coccyx, adjusted. Three months later, Bev reported that her
headaches, digestive problems, back pains, and other ailments had
disappeared. Besides that, she said her relationship with her mother had never
been better.

  The moral of the story is not that working with the Key Point System can
heal everything. Maybe it will; maybe it will not. If it is the right system for
you or a client, if the timing is right, and if you are open to change, it might
help you heal yourself. There are many ways to feel good about yourself. If this
system feels right, use it.
                     ENERGY CHANNELS
There are three main subtle energy structures in the body: energy bodies, such
as the chakras; energy fields, including the aura; and energy channels, the
subject of this chapter. A Complete Chakra healer is well served by at least a
cursory overview of the two main energy channels, nadis and meridians, as
they interrelate with the chakras to enable health and happiness.

                     THE NADIS: CHANNELS OF THE GODS


According to the ancient Hindu, Mayan, Egyptian, and other civilizations, the
serpent kundalini flows upward from the first chakra to the seventh. There, it
activates higher consciousness, comes to rest in the sixth chakra, and sparks
our spiritual gifts. Part of this path is possible because there are energy
channels called the nadis that interconnect the physical and energetic body,
including the chakras.

   Nadis are energy channels that spread prana, or life energy, through the
body. Some traditions count 72,000 nadis, but the main ones weave around the
chakras, delivering and picking up energy from the chakras for dispersal to
other sites. The nadis are supportive of all in-body chakric functions, but also
of the material functions of the body.

                THE MERIDIANS: THE ASIAN CHANNELS OF CHI


Meridians are energy paths for chi, vital energy identical to mana. The
meridian system first developed almost 5,000 years ago in China, and then
spread throughout Asia. Traditional Chinese medicine is now considered
traditional health care in much of the world.

  Chi animates and sustains everything, operating at three levels, which can be
described as physical, spiritual, and mental. Chi is made of two opposite types
of energy. Yin is an earthly energy and symbolizes the feminine; yang is the
heavenly energy and represents the masculine energies. The meridians flow
through the body delivering this chi. Disease, unhappiness, and mental and
emotional conditions are considered caused by blocks preventing the proper
dispersment of chi or stagnant, stuck chi. Traditional Chinese medicine experts
first discovered the meridians intuitively, therefore it can be considered both a
medical and an energetic system.

        RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MERIDIANS, NADIS, AND CHAKRAS


Some experts compare the nadis to the meridians. As suggested by Dr. William
Tiller, the meridians and the chakras both operate like energy antennae, though
the meridians are more etheric. If the chi becomes blocked etherically in the
meridians, it does so in the physical body as well. This means that issues
within the chakras or auric layers, as well as any of the energy bodies,
eventually make their way into physical form, where they are usually reflected
as illness, financial difficulty, or some other life problem.

   Researcher Dr. Hiroshi Motoyama, a scientist and a Shinto priest, has
investigated the chakras and the nadis. He has concluded that the nadis provide
the chakras with energy from outside of the body. Together, these two energy
systems spread subtle energy throughout the physical self. Motoyama also
associates some of the nadi with the meridian system, as well as locates the
meridians in the body's connective tissue.' Yet other scientists believe that the
acupuncture points are comparable to the secondary chakras.3 Famous
researcher Dr. Bjorn Nordenstrom has revealed a link between the
cardiovascular system and the connective tissue, revealing a close
interconnection between our spinal reactivity and our other systems.'
Apparently, injuries to the body, such as a cut or other trauma, open the
connection between this secondary electrical system, which is associated with
the meridians, and the primary electrical system. We can speculate that blocks
in the energy systems will inhibit this link and stifle the body's ability to
respond to stimuli.

  Considerable research documents the existence of the meridians. Perhaps
most noteworthy is a study by Drs. Claude Darras and Pierre De Vernejoul,
who tracked the meridian system with radioactive tracers. Other research by
Dr. Liu YK located the acupuncture points on the motor nerves.' The meridians
are not only real, but the validation of their existence supports the reality of the
other "ancient" energy systems.
              UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONS
Many evolutionists assert that there are two traits distinguishing humans from
the rest of the animal kingdom-our hands and our upper brain. Philosophers
concur, but add that we are different because we can reason. Clergy insist that
the difference is that humans have souls. I disagree with them all. If there is a
determining factor, it is that humans have emotions. Feelings provide us great
pleasure, but they also cause us most of our difficulties.

                          THE ANATOMY OF EMOTIONS


I believe that an emotion is a feeling plus a thought. In general, feelings are the
language of the body, while thoughts are the language of the mind. In an
elevated state, feelings are also the messengers of our spirit, engaging our
mind, body, soul, and spirit in a dance of love. When the body and mind link a
feeling with a thought, we get an emotion-energy in motion. The result is
expression.

  Many scientific studies have underscored the idea that feelings truly are
expressions of our body, and that they exist separate from our thoughts. Antonio
R. Damasio, brain researcher and author of Descartes' Error, has found that
feelings come from our somatic, or body, reactions to events. These reactions,
based on past experiences and predictive responses, "offer us a glimpse of
what goes on in our flesh." Thus, feelings "let us mind the body."'

   Examined more metaphorically, feelings could be likened to pure essence. In
Water Bears No Scars, David Reynolds says that feelings are a "natural
phenomenon" over which we have no more control than we have "control over
earthquakes or summer breezes." Not only do we have no control over these
internal breezes, but we have a right to feel every feeling. We have a right to
fully experience all of our feelings. Thoughts in and of themselves are also
pure. We have a right to think every thought that forms. We have a right to fully
explore each of our thoughts.
   What exactly are thoughts? How do they relate to feelings? Thoughts, like
feelings, originate in the body. They differ from feelings, however, in that they
are stored and built from "images in the mind," as Damasio explains. These
images are originally laid down as "dispositional" representations of
knowledge, innate and experiential. New knowledge is achieved by
modification of these representations. Before these representations can be
turned into words, they exist as "auditory or visual images in our con-
sciousness"2

  Mind equals consciousness. Thoughts express for the mind just as feelings
express for the body. Damasio describes their relationship this way: as body
changes happen, you can monitor these changes. "That process of continuous
monitoring, that experience of what your body is doing while thoughts about
specific contents roll by, is the essence of what I call feeling," he says.
Therefore, an emotion is "a collection of changes in body state connected to
particular mental images."'

   Seen this way, emotions are natural and important vehicles for self-
awareness. Feelings tied to thoughts provide us a glimpse into our inner and
outer realities and needs. Together, they form the basis for our ability to
reason, according to Damasio. Obviously, it is therefore in our best interest to
allow both our feelings and thoughts to be freely felt.

   There are many, many types of feelings, each of which helps us discover
who we are, what we want, and how we should act. The next section,
"Anatomy of a Feeling," confirms that feelings are not just in our heads. The
section on the five feeling constellations (starting on page 318) explains the
meaning of the central feelings and what happens if we don't work with them in
a pure way.
FEELINGS ARE NOT just "in our head"; they are physiological in nature.
They are actually conceived as biochemicals that interact with the brain,
according to researcher Candace Pert, Ph.D., author of Molecules of Emotion.
Pert's research shows that chemicals in our body-neuropeptides and their
receptors-underlie our awareness of self and our environment, forming our
emotions, beliefs, and expectations.4

   Picture the membrane of a cell. Inside are molecules made of proteins that
bind to ligands, or chemicals that transmit nerve impulses. There are many
types of ligands, peptides being one. Peptides are made of chains of amino
acids or proteins and carry information, but also an electrical charge. Different
peptide chains have different vibrations, which "tell" a cell how to react. Our
brain interprets each set of vibration as a different feeling. Thus a certain
charge will be labeled as sadness and another as anger.'

  Certain cells become addicted to certain vibrations. If a group of cells is
used to absorbing "fear ligands," those cells will only receive or open to these
specific ligands. We'll do anything to remain scared, as that feeling becomes
comfortable to us. We can therefore become addicted to certain feelings and
adjust our behavior to keep stimulating them.'

   This is the basis for one type of a feeling block or stronghold, which can
force us into certain cravings, negative behaviors, destructive patterns, or even
illnesses, in order to fulfill our compulsion.

   We store our repressed feelings in the physical tissue associated with the
pertinent chakra. As Dr. Pert's research suggests, certain cells get used to
"feeling" certain feelings. Primary emotions, like shame and terror, are usually
associated with the first chakra; anger with the third chakra via the liver;
hopelessness with the seventh chakra. A Complete Chakra healer can
determine which chakra area to address-and even which chronological age to
examine-by labeling the feeling, the nature of the illness, and the physical site
that reacts to a feeling, and thereby determine the chakra to work with. A client
with heart disease is probably best served by work on the heart and issues that
incurred during certain ages, you might look for events that occurred during
ages fourand-a-half and six-and-a-half. You'll also want to address love and
relationship issues. What happens if we can't readily determine the chakra-
source of an issue, however? After feeling the feeling, we can physically track
it to a body source, determine the nearest chakra, and perform a regression
through that energy center. Using our intuition to perceive the original
wounding will help us clear the entrenched emotional stronghold.




                              STUCK EMOTIONS


What? Express all of our feelings, all of our thoughts? Does this mean that if
we are angry, it is okay to kill someone? Does this mean that if we think Polish
or AfricanAmerican or Caucasian people are stupid, we can be mean to them?
No, and no. Negative, self-destructive, or violent actions stem from stuck
emotions, not free-flowing feelings or thoughts. We may feel angry, but we only
get into trouble when we pair the feeling of anger with a destructive thought,
such as "Being angry is bad, so I must stuff my anger," or "Being angry is
macho; I better show how strong I am," and keep these feelings or thoughts
paired or stuck together.

   Stuck emotions are tightly glued; they prevent us from rearranging either our
feelings or thoughts to fit the circumstances presented to us. The truth is, any
feeling will naturally disperse if we express it in alignment with the situation
at hand. Any thought, even a negative one, will mature upon reflection if we
examine it in alignment with the situation at hand. When our energy system is
operating in alignment, we will always express our feelings and thoughts in a
constructive fashion. Each feeling and thought will receive the input, advice,
and healing it needs to be expressed authentically, because all our energy
centers, not just certain ones, will be in on the act.

   We are not fully open or aligned if we have cemented and failed to
disengage critical feelings and thoughts. We become rigid, and lose our ability
to adapt and be flexible. We easily allow ourselves to be triggered by external
stimuli. New situations will often feel like re-creations of prior events, events
that probably caused the emotion to form in the first place. Our emotional
responses have become habits or patterned reaction/ responses. Our feeling
and thought have become an enmeshed couple; they have grown too scared to
operate independently. Because they are so ensconced, they are unavail able to
pair up with other feelings and thoughts, the very feelings and thoughts that may
be needed to address a current concern.

  Healers train long and hard to deal with this problem. In Kahuna Healing,
Serge King says, "Part of kahuna healing is concerned with helping the
conscious mind learn how to perceive emotions without allowing the
subconscious to engage in habitual action"'

   Feelings and thoughts usually marry for a good reason. Perhaps we felt
threatened by someone during childhood. Certain feelings and thoughts bonded
to best handle the situation. We created emotions that we perceived would help
us through a dark experience. For example, maybe you were threatened by a
drunk father when you were five. You felt scared. Who wouldn't? Your thinking
self also reminded you that you were little and weak. The emotion that took
care of you could be something like, "I am scared. I am not strong, so when I'm
scared, I'd better be quiet."

   This emotional response may have been appropriate for the original
frightening situation. As an adult, however, you might be running into trouble if
this response or emotion has become the only one triggered whenever you're
scared. You're really not little anymore, but you may believe you are whenever
you're scared. Maybe you stay quiet when you're offered a promotion,
threatened by a barking dog, or asked out on a date. Your quietness may cost
you a raise, get you bit by a dog, or keep you sitting home alone on Friday
night.

  Given the obvious disadvantage to cementing emotions, we must wonder
why we would ever let them stay stuck together. Well, perhaps we don't know
any better. Maybe our mother did it this way. Maybe we were punished when
we did it differently. Maybe the original situation remained constant for so
long that we believed it could never be different. Remember, when it was
formed, our emotion helped us, but if it has become a patterned response, a
habit, we must change it. Holding on to an emotion that seemed to help us when
in trauma will not prohibit additional trauma. In fact, evidence suggests that the
opposite is true. The formation of strongholds, emotional or mental, lead to
patterns, which actually produce the opposite of what we desire.

  The feelings and thoughts composing the stuck emotions are unavailable for
bonding with other thoughts and feelings. Our reactions are thereby inhibited
and habitual. Because our situational responses have narrowed, we lose sight
of additional choices. We make the same choice, therefore reinforcing our old
habits.

  Following is an outline of feelings from a spiritual point of view, the main
message of that spiritualized feeling, and brief descriptions of feelings that
become distorted.




            HOW DO YOU KNOW WHEN YOUR FEELINGS ARE STUCK?


How DO You know if you are stuck in a feeling block or an emotional
stronghold? Think about your feelings. Are there any repetitive feelings? Are
there feelings you can't express, no matter what? Are certain feelings "too big"
for a current situation? Are you able to rationally decide how to respond to a
feeling, or does it get the better of you? Do you feel dead to your feelings or
like you are always overemotional? If you answer yes to any of these
questions, you have might have a feeling block. You must work through your
feelings, or feel them so that you can understand what they are trying to tell
you.

  In order to work through feelings, we have to recognize them. There are
really only five basic constellations, or families, of feelings. These are:

• Anger

• Sadness

. Joy

• Fear

• Disgust

   Each of these feeling constellations expresses a message for the body. If you
accept your feelings and are willing to understand what they are telling you,
they can also speak for your spirit. They can alert you intuitively to the bigger
picture and help you respond to the people, events, and opportunities around
you. For instance, a spiritualized feeling of fear might prompt you to yell but
only at an appropriate time, such as when a mugger is attacking and you need to
scare him off. Not only do spiritualized feelings fuel your spiritual purpose,
but they also enable you to receive true spiritual guidance and discern motives
in others.

  On the other hand, feelings can be distorted and harm us. This occurs when
we distort one of the five basic feelings through judgment of the feeling.
Distorted feelings make us act in inappropriate ways and usually make us hate
ourselves.



                             Spiritualized Feeling: Anger


Your boundaries have been violated, and you need to set better ones. With
love, you can establish physical or psychic parameters that work for you and
others.

Distorted Anger
  Rage: You are angry and hurt (which is made of anger and sadness). Your
boundaries have been violated and so you feel deeply sad. Rather than take
care of yourself or confront the original violator, you get angry with innocent
people in ways that are out of proportion. You don't want to accept the
responsibility of feeling your sadness and moving to forgiveness.


                           Spiritualized Feeling: Sadness


You recognize deep inside that love is at the core of this relationship or
situation. You need to own that love and allow it to heal you.

Distorted Sadness


  Sorrow or Grief: You have "frozen" a loved one or a positive situation or
memory in time and space and refuse to move on. If you keep sorrowing, you
don't have to get on with your life and accept new love.

  Despair: You think that you can move through sadness by giving up on love
or by holding on to your pain forever. You are not allowing yourself the healing
promise of love and the excitement of new adventures.

  Depression: You have imploded your sadness out of a sense of anger at
yourself or a perceived loss, and are refusing to move to recognition of the
love you need or that is involved in the situation.



                             Spiritualized Feeling: Joy


You are unified within yourself and the Divine. Keep doing what you are
doing.

Distorted Joy
   Bitterness: You are allowing someone else to control your happiness.
Something or someone has judged you as "bad" when you are happy. You have
been shamed into thinking that being your spiritual self is bad. You are afraid
to let go of that shamebased person, being, or belief and just be yourself.

    Cynicism: You have decided that it is too scary to become happy ever again.
After all, happiness might go away, and so you decide to chase it away before
it leaves.



                            Spiritualized Feeling: Fear


You need to move forward or move backward-or do something. This is not
working. You aren't just practicing for a life.

Distorted Fear


  Terror: You do not trust the Divine or your own spirit. You don't think you
have the energy, power, or right to be safe and happy.

   Fright: You are giving away your power to circumstances instead of
following your inner knowing. By judging an event or a person on external
phenomena, you are disconnecting from yourself.

  Abandonment: You are failing to recognize your connection with the Divine
and all things good. You are abandoning yourself and blaming someone else.



                           Spiritualized Feeling: Disgust


You must reject something or someone because it/he/she is bad for you.

Distorted Disgust
  Guilt (an aspect of disgust toward self): You have moved off your spiritual
path and need to move back on. Your actions, thoughts, or relationships need to
better reflect the spiritual principles you are designed to follow.

   Self-hatred: You are angry. Your boundaries have been violated. To spare
someone you love or to earn the love of another, you internalize your anger and
hurt. While the other person should feel guilty, not you, you feel their guilt for
them as a way to either keep them close or to keep from being rejected.

   Shame: You believe there is something wrong with you as a person and
therefore you do not deserve unconditional love. Because you are too scared to
reject what or who is bad for you, or because you are unable to do so, you
internalize your disgust and apply it to yourself.

  Blame: You feel worthless and bad about yourself and don't like this feeling,
so you project it on others or on situations outside of yourself.

When working energetically with feelings, it's imperative to check for the
source of a feeling. As stated previously in this book, I believe that at least 80
percent of all harmful issues don't originate with us. This means that up to 80
percent of our repressed or "extra" feelings-those that hold too much charge
and surface too often-may not be our own. Children typically pick up the
repressed or judged feelings from their parents and act them out. I still
remember the evening that I was on the phone with a client and I felt a sudden
sense of rage toward her. My client's husband had just sexually abused her
daughter, and my client, the mother, would not leave her husband. I was furious
at the mother's attitude but didn't let myself really feel it. I kept my rage intact
so that I could deal with the mother appropriately.

  After I got off the phone, my oldest son began to yell at me, calling me
names. I asked him why he was angry, and he didn't know. As soon as I told
him, "Mommy is angry, and you don't need to feel it for her," he immediately
settled down, and all was well.
               EMOTIONALISM VERSUS EMOTIONAL SENSITIVITY


I want to address another important issue regarding emotions. For years,
women have gotten a bad rap for being emotional. We need to distinguish
emotionalism from emotional sensitivity. Emotionalism occurs when our
feelings are trapped within our belief system. If each time we are threatened
we react the same way-if we cry no matter what, or if we get angry every time
someone confronts us-we are probably undergoing emotionalism. When this
happens, we need to unlock our feelings from our thoughts and free ourselves
from these imprisoning emotions.

  However, if we empathize with others' feelings, cry when it feels right, hold
back tears when it does not, or get angry when our rights are being violated,
we are being emotionally sensitive. Being emotionally sensitive, in contrast to
being emotional, means the following:
When defined this way, emotionalism is no longer a female problem, but a
human foible. Anyone who has experienced childhood dysfunction; who feels
locked into old ways of doing things; or who senses that they are living the
same situations, cycles, or relationships over and over again may be locked
into the old patterns and negativity associated with emotionalism. For a
complete overview on how childhood experiences can make us stuck, I would
recommend John Bradshaw's series on healing family dysfunctions, including
Bradshaw On: The Family and Healing the Shame that Binds You.

  Some of the problems that arise from emotionalism are obvious. Being
emotional makes us feel bad. We experience difficulties communicating or
bonding with others. I find that most people, but women especially, see this as
a problem within themselves. Unfortunately, the typical response is to try and
be cured of feelings, which is exactly the wrong approach. Feelings help us to
be more rational and reasonable, as mentioned in Descartes' Error. We need to
be free to feel our feelings and to think our thoughts, if for no other reason than
to keep ourselves physically healthy.

  Beliefs that cause us to repress our feelings, deny our passions, only take
care of other people, or ignore our own needs result in a feelings backlog.
Remember, feelings are real energies. They are composed of physical matter,
says the quanta theory. Therefore, these feelings backlogs not only jam our
responses and thinking processes, but can also build up in our body.

   This belief that emotionalism can damage our bodies-and conversely, that
positive thoughts and free feelings can heal it-is not new. One of my
acquaintances, a chiropractor, speaks to the reality of feelings causing physical
damage. Carla sees thousands of clients a year who primarily come because of
physical complaints or problems. Rather than concentrating on relieving their
physical symptoms, she tests the emotional basis of their problem, dividing it
into feeling and belief. The reason her client base is so high is because this
approach works. People get well.

  When I worked with her, I lost thirteen allergies, all of which I had
experienced since childhood. One vivid memory concerns a wheat allergy.
With Carla's help, I isolated the basis of the allergy. When I was a child, my
mother would give me a cookie every time I felt sad. Because the feeling
component of my allergy was sadness, every time I ate a cookie later in life, I
would feel despondent and "stuffed up." As soon as I uncovered this
knowledge, I cried for days-everywhere. I then changed some of my beliefs
about myself, and the allergy disappeared.

   Besides affecting our physical health, patterned emotional responses can
also inhibit our spiritual development. Thoughts such as "Good children
respect their parents" are not necessarily negative. However, let's say our
parents abused us when we were young, and we felt angry about it. Anger is a
healthy and appropriate response to being abused. If we were told, for
example, that our God doesn't love us when we don't listen to our parents and
especially when we're angry, we could grow to believe that because we get
angry when we were mistreated, God doesn't love us. How then could we let
our soul or God into our body? Without our soul, we experience extreme
difficulties in uncovering our purpose, allowing in abundance, and achieving
self-love.

  We need to free ourselves from our warped, rigid, or wrapped-up emotions,
and allow our feelings and thoughts to flow within us. We want to heal our
emotions, and by doing so, open to healing other aspects of ourselves and to
manifesting our true desires.

              THE IDEAL FEELING/THOUGHT CHAIN OF REACTION


Unhooking our feelings and thoughts (the subject of the next chapter) begins
with understanding how they became linked in the first place. Remember, it's
not bad to have emotions. We need them. We simply want them to form, then
"unform" when their work is complete. Let's look at this ideal passageway of
feeling-and-thought energy through our body. This description is based upon
my own internal and professional work, and I hope it will help you better
understand your own patterned responses.

  The physical energy for both feelings and thoughts originates in the lower
energy centers. I'll describe these steps via a real-life situation.

   During preconception, the tenth chakra programs the material body (with the
assistance of the ninth chakra) with fundamental beliefs and feelings. Let's say
that my soul wants to experience true love during this lifetime. Through my
tenth chakra, I may select genetic and psychic capabilities that will enhance
this goal. I might plant feelings such as excitement and passion within my first
chakra. I might make sure that my second-chakra feeling bodies are diverse and
intense. I might imbue my third chakra with beliefs such as "I deserve love."

  My tenth chakra might also select genes that will provide me the type of
body I need to be with to attract an ideal mate. Imagining that my eighth chakra
has karmically programmed this mate, I may make sure I'm blond (or russet or
brunette), if that will appeal to my potential mate. Thus prepared, I am born,
and I mature. The groundwork is laid. My life is in place. Then I meet
someone.

   My first chakra quickly assesses this situation. Is this situation or person
safe or not? Does my body need to invoke any security feelings, such as grief,
rage, terror, or joy? The conclusions are sent through my spine to my brain. My
brain, in turn, gives orders to my first chakra regarding what energy to send to
the second chakra, which holds the feeling bodies, and to the third chakra,
which operates like the brain of the body.

   The following occur simultaneously. My first chakra, responding to orders,
strikes the appropriate notes in my second chakra. Certain feeling bodies are
awakened; certain ones are overridden. The back of the second chakra opens
to balance these energies and create a unified feeling. Beliefs and attitudes are
passed down from the third chakra to the second chakra. (I remember this part
of the process by picturing the red from the first chakra and the yellow from the
third chakra mixing to make orange in the second chakra.)

   In the second chakra, thoughts and feelings are paired up. I now have an
emotion. More than one feeling or thought may be joined together. Remember,
in an ideal situation, these bondings occur with the input from the entire energy
system, under the advice of the spiritual energy points, and with the direction
of intuition (a force we will discuss in more detail). Recall that our original
response was sent up the spinal column, which means it received input,
healing, and assistance from every single in-body chakra and spiritual chakra
or energy point connected to the various higher energy centers. Returning from
the brain, the command re-registered with all energy centers. This twoway
process ensures that the entire system falls into alignment regarding a response.

 The resulting emotions are fully incorporated into my power center. As a
woman, this is my second chakra. If I were a man, it should be my third.
   My power center disperses emotions upward and downward. The emotion
acts like a message that, when interpreted by the other chakras, stimulates a
response. Because men and women have different power centers, our first
responses would differ from each other. In women, downward messages
register in the first chakra, resulting in a physical response, such as an action
or a primary feeling. In men, downward messages register in the second chakra
before passing to the first, resulting in a feeling or creative initial response. In
women, the upward messages trigger responses in the third chakra, initiating a
thought, belief, or act of personal power. In men, upward messages stimulate a
heart response, calling for a relationship-oriented or compassionate result.

   My responses continue on their upward and downward paths, eventually
registering in a verbal response (fifth chakra), strategic response (sixth
chakra), and philosophical response (seventh chakra). Even though this cycle
seems linear, it really isn't. Emotions radiate from the power center in spirals,
rather than straight lines.

  The process continues to spin through this cycle as long as necessary.
Emotions are formed, then evaporate. They should rotate freely, at least as long
as it takes to decide if Mr. Perfect is or isn't.

   In an advanced energy system, the power center shifts from the second or
third chakra to the heart. Coming from our heart speeds up this internal
processing, for we will be clear whether a stimulus meets a childlike desire or
not. Some people operate with two power centers, their gender-based center
and their heart center. In these cases, a twofold response may be felt.

   I have just outlined an ideal stimulus-response process. As you can see, by
the time we are finished processing or acting upon an issue, our formal
emotions have been disbanded. They have been acted upon and do not need to
exist any longer. Our system has returned to a balanced state in which feelings
and thoughts coexist separately, available at all times for us and for each other.

  For many of us, this process doesn't always go this smoothly. Rather than
responding to the situation at hand, we react out of long-held, stuck emotions.
We hook onto old emotions and patterns. We perceive all situations involving
anger as the same situation, or all situations involving confrontation as
dangerous to us. The best way to break our knee-jerk response is to understand
how emotions can become injurious and entrenched.

                    CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT OF EMOTIONS


Emotions and distorted feelings are formed when our feelings are judged and
we accept these judgments as true, and when we are exposed to lies and
believe the lies. While this process can occur at any time in our lives, we are
most vulnerable when we are children. Typically, the emotions formed during
our first swing through the chakra development cycle are the ones that replay
the rest of our lives, until we short-circuit the process.

  Let's walk through our development chart from start to finish again, this time
checking for problem points.

Preconception-Chakra Ten


Before conception, our soul selects a set of parents and develops a soul
contract. Drawing upon the elements and a swirling mass of visible and
invisible energy, our tenth chakra constructs the template for our physical form.
Overseen by our ninth chakra and our guides, it chooses our genes and psychic
traits. The chakra composes this template from our parent's genetic pools and
characteristics from our past lives.

   Unfortunately, emotional blockages and the tendency to distort certain
feelings can be programmed in even at this point. (Yes, we can get into trouble
even before we are born!) Let's say that, in a past life, we failed to work
through our anger issues with authority. Our soul knows that if we don't heal
this issue, we may not be able to fulfill our soul purpose. In its infinite
wisdom, our soul lifts this issue, part and parcel, and programs it into our
current-life energetic system, hoping to force us to deal with it. We are now
programmed to have anger issues with authorities-authorities we haven't even
met yet.

  Other emotional programs can stem from our genetic lineage. Perhaps most
of our forebears decided that in order to survive, they had to repress their
sadness. They believed that being sad would weaken them. Wanting to survive,
our body may have decided to incorporate this belief into our embryonic
energetic system. "If that's what kept our forebears alive, maybe it will help
us," might have been our reasoning.

   Sometimes emotional issues are scripted during the actual conception
process. Even while our body gathered together the threads of life, our soul
interacted with those of our parents. If either of our parents experienced strong
reactions to having a child, such as fear or resistance to getting pregnant, we
may have concluded that we are not wanted, that we are troublesome, or that
we don't deserve to be alive. These emotional conclusions could have locked
into our system.

  One of my students, Jill, is a good example of this. Jill always felt her
mother tried to punish her for being enthusiastic and passionate about life.
Later, in response to some questions that came up in therapy, Jill asked her
mother about what was going on at the time she was conceived. Her mother
replied that Jill was conceived out of passion; her mother threw caution to the
wind and had unprotected sex. She conceived, then later had many doubts
about having the child. It's no wonder Jill felt she was being punished for being
passionate. Each time she was enthusiastic, she re-experienced the idea that
being passionate can cause lifelong consequences.

   Another example concerns work I once did with a man who had dyslexia.
Though he had made peace with this problem, he came to me to find out why it
had afflicted him his entire life. During a regression, he remembered swirling
around while his parents were making love (right before he was conceived). In
a trance, he relayed that a guide had been in attendance during this conception
time. They had discussed whether he was willing to take this body. The guide
informed him that he would probably be learning disabled due to a genetic trait
and a soul predisposition to such a disability. Apparently, he had been a
teacher in a past life and was unable to understand students not capable of
scholastic achievement. My client had decided to enter this body. After
emerging from the regression, he seemed relieved to understand the cause of
the dyslexia.

Womb to 6 Months-Chakra One


At this time, our body is busy developing. Our soul is overseeing and busy
deciding when to enter (or pondering how long it can delay the process).
Unfortunately, the less available our soul is to our body, the less space it
occupies within our body. The resulting emptiness creates a vacuum waiting to
be filled. The feelings, thoughts, emotions, and awarenesses floating around us,
whether they are ours or not, may enter to fill this void. Because our mother is
currently our primary caregiver, we typically absorb more of her issues than
anyone else's.

   If she or other caregivers are worried about money, are disappointed about
our gender, or are blocked in regard to meeting our needs, we may swallow
these emotional issues whole, or create emotional issues of our own in
response. If our primary caregivers are denying certain feelings, memories, or
problems, they may also become ours. As we know, it is impossible to work
through an issue which is not ours.

   Womb and infantile regression has become an important therapeutic
methodology. I know two doctors who frequently regress clients back to in-
womb or infantile states. They have said that the deep dysfunctions exhibited
by many of their clients, from addictions to depression, clear up when early
issues are faced.

  I once experienced a spontaneous regression during a shamanic ceremony in
South America. I was suddenly back in the womb, and I could "see" the sounds
of my parents' arguments. I re-experienced the terror and the despair
associated with having this couple as my parents. To this day, I believe that the
hopelessness I've struggled to clear, and my disbelief in healthy relationships,
partly stem from those in-womb experiences and reactions.

6 Months to 2112 Years-Chakra Two


During this time, our feelings are awakening, as are our creative responses to
the people and situations surrounding us. Already intact, our feeling bodies are
coming alive. We each want to be stimulated, supported, and nourished by our
external environment, which assures that, as adults, we will have a well-
rounded emotional life. If we can pass through this time period being assured
that all our feelings are okay, we will have achieved a lot. The trouble is, few
of us experienced this ideal situation. It is doubtful that our parents grew up in
atmospheres that nurtured feelings. How could they have provided one for us?

  There are many scenarios that can damage these developing feeling bodies.
Our parents may teach us, inadvertently or directly, that certain feelings are not
okay. We might displace these dirty feelings somewhere inside or outside of
our body. Now our remaining, acceptable feelings will have to do double duty.

   In contrast, we may be exposed to extreme displays of emotion, which
frequently happens in alcoholic or dysfunctional families. We may decide that
certain feelings are bad, or we may decide that to survive, we will model our
own behavior after our parents' behavior. As perceptive as we are when
children, we might also become psychically or kinesthetically aware of free-
floating, unclaimed feelings. Children will do anything to bring balance to our
environment. Survival depends on it. Therefore, we absorb these rejected
feelings.

  Whatever the case, the end result is the same. Wounded, incomplete, or
overstimulated feeling bodies warp our energetic system. Now out of balance,
our system seeks to right itself. The only way it knows how to do this is to
compensate. Usually, our first and third chakras volunteer.

  If our first chakra fills the role, we will inevitably act out our feelings.
Addictions, crazy behavior, willfulness-there are any number of ways our
system will try and throw off these overstimulated feelings, and stimulate the
repressed or apathetic ones. Unfortunately, the cure hurts worse than the cause.
Our feelings become further damaged and strained. Furthermore, our own
actions make us feel worse. We heap self-induced guilt, shame, terror, and rage
upon the backlog already existing. The emotional attachments formed between
these types of feelings and thoughts tend to be highly self-critical, selfloathing,
and painful.

   If our third chakra tries to fill the gap, we will probably try to reason
through our feelings. We may attempt to dissociate ourselves from our feelings.
The beliefs that are available to bond with our feelings will probably
discredit, control, or discount them and us. Character traits usually include
living in our head, never losing our cool, or being rational at all costs. The
irony is, while we may not appear emotional, we are. It is just that in this
system, thoughts, rather than actions, rule our feelings.

  Sometimes people ask me, "How could a child make these kind of
decisions?" We must remember that we are much older than our age. Our
Divine Source self is eternal. Our soul is ancient. Our mind is old. Even though
our bodies look young, they are composed of cells that are as old as this
planet, if not the stars. As Deepak Chopra says in Creating Health, "You are
not absolute, static matter. The matter itself was once interstellar dust, and
nature has future uses for it in the cosmos."' Though our physical cells and in-
body energy centers are just developing, they are tapping into our higher
spiritual energy points, the rays, and the invisible realms that hold more
knowledge than we could possibly imagine. They are linked to purposes that
reach far beyond our imagination.

   Even so, when we are young, we are vulnerable. Our auras are incomplete.
Our crown chakra is still open. We are sponges. We absorb everything-good
and bad. It's a wonder, actually, that as children, we can look as young as we
are.

2~1 to 4i/ Years-Chakra Three
As we develop, we become more conscious of the world around us. Our
perceptions first crystallize into awarenesses, then thoughts, and finally
beliefs. Our third chakra is initially involved in this growth. During ages 21h
to 41h, we learn the power of saying no and yes. We have experienced our
feeling bodies, and we now add the other ingredient we need to make
emotional soup-thoughts. These thoughts come from other people, our own
experiences, and from our own perceptions. As we test our own power against
the power of others, we weigh the responses we get from the world. We draw
conclusions if the people around us react with consistency. This consistency is
the basis for beliefs.

   This is a critical age for us, especially because so few caregivers realize the
cognitive abilities present in a two- to four-year-old. They think we are just
emotional or throwing tantrums. What most fail to realize is that we are
creating thoughts left and right. From these thoughts, we are forming beliefs
that are then packaged into emotional states, strongholds, or distorted feelings.
We are asking ourselves, "What happens if I put this feeling together with this
thought?" or "How about this belief with this feeling?" If we are safely
supported throughout this process, we will learn two important facts:

1. Emotions are fluid. We can change our emotions to fit the situation.

2. Emotions can be released. We can unhook feelings from thoughts and bring
 ourselves back into balance.

   Of course, few parents know these truths, so most of us emerge from the
terrible twos with a basketful of feelings that are solidly linked with thoughts.
These emotions can greatly inhibit our further development in that they become
the foundation for our relationships (chakra four), our communication style and
ability to receive guidance (chakra five), our self-image (chakra six), and our
sense of purpose (chakra seven). They affect our twenties because they will
call forth certain karmic patterns over others (chakra eight), and they can force
our soul to create discordance in our lives in order to turn us to our path
(chakra nine).
  There are millions of emotions that can be formed during this time period.
Here are a few that I consistently see with my clients. The emotive responses
include the conclusions most often drawn from this environmental response,
and the typical ways these conclusions manifest.




Fear Desire There is nothing My fears are stupid. My fears to be afraid of. are
bigger than I am. (Can lead to repression of fear, increase in fears, attempts to
avoid scary situations at all costs, low or crazy risk-taking.) It is not okay to I
don't deserve to get what I want. (Can set us up for failure, want/demand/ask
for something. repression of will and success, or the opposite, an "I will
succeed no matter what" hero syndrome.)

4i/ to 6~1 Years-Chakra Four


As we move into our heart chakra, relationships become all-important. We
extend further into the world and seek bonding. Our circle of influence expands
beyond the family. We associate more and more frequently with peers, friends,
teachers, television action figures, book characters, and more.

   We bring some already-formed emotions to these relationships. While our
thirdchakra stage involved drawing conclusions related to our individuality,
fourth-chakra development encourages responses about "we" Some of the
emotions we drag up to this level may be invalidated. We think we should feel
guilty every time we have a need-but our friend Bobby doesn't think so.
Positive reflections such as these will break up stuck emotions. They can help
us loosen limiting strictures, teach us that all relationships are not the same,
and help us become more free-forming in regard to our feelings, thoughts, and
expressions.

   On the other hand, our relationship experiences may deepen our current
emotional issues. "See, even my teacher gets mad when I want something!" we
might conclude. "See, even my friends think I am stupid when I cry!"
Remember, people live within environments that mirror their own beliefs. Our
community will probably reflect many of the issues, perceptions, beliefs, and
attitudes that we experience within our own family unit. The programming
begun by our families will probably be continued by our external
environments.

   The emotions we accept as reality at this point will have an impact on our
relationship life later. During this stage, we select, learn, and practice the
emotions that regulate our behavior with other people. We will carry these
conclusions forward, using them to make adult choices about friends, lovers,
and life mate(s).

   One of my clients informed me, without prompting, that the reason she
married or dated the same type of man over and over was that her father had
severely wounded her heart. As she explained, he had convinced her that she
was only acceptable and lovable if she acted "nice," meaning she never
screamed, cried, or talked back. When she did show feelings about something
at age twelve, he told her he wouldn't talk with her again and pulled
completely back for six years. With an emotional belief and experience this
strong, it was little wonder she met men who upheld the core emotional belief
that she was only acceptable if silent.

6~1 to 8~1 Years-Chakra Five


We are communicating-talking, sharing, learning, stating the truth of ourselves.
In many ways, we are sensing others' reactions to the feelings, thoughts, and
emotions that we are putting forth. How will others respond? Will they like us
or not? Are these emotional jettisons effective or not? We are in another time
of testing.

   The unique aspect of this developmental stage, in regard to our emotions, is
that we are now capable of receiving even more spiritual guidance than ever
before. Through the back of the fifth chakra, we can hear this guidance. Ideally,
we are now able to receive the higher help we need to break down our
emotional blocks and shift from a feeling of distortion to a straightforward
expression of the natural feeling. I remember surviving as a child because at
this age I could hear voices "on the wind." I tried to be alone outside as often
as possible because of them. I needed their messages, which contrasted with
the life-threatening ones provided by my parents.

  Many of us, however, have a difficult time hearing our guidance, or even if
we do, the negative brainwashing is too strong to be overwhelmed. Still
seeking the validation and love we did not receive when younger, we might
make a dangerous sort of pact. Rather than take in higher wisdom, we lock into
our parents' old tapes. These tapes are laden with explosive emotional
conclusions, most of which relate to the thematic beliefs underlying our family
systems and our cultural milieu.

   These tapes lock in through the back of our neck. As we mature, they link us
to our family's way of working, learning, and thinking about the world. Our
manifesting abilities and needs succumb to the dreams and desires our parents
may have for us. If these emotionally charged contracts remain in place, our
emotions become more and more locked in. Our free feelings and thoughts may
be shamed into hiding, shamed by the inner critic now growing within us.

  It can be helpful to work with the back of the neck when seeking to heal
emotional patterns. When I say this in class, invariably one-third or more of the
participants complain that their neck has just started hurting. I ask them to
check if the pain locks in the left, right, or center: mom/female, dad/male, or
systemic, respectively. Short reflection almost always clarifies the exact
message causing the discomfort.

8112 to 14 Years-Chakra Six


Visions. Dreams. Possibilities. Fantasies. What do we want? What do we want
to be? How do we want to be? A rainbow of delights entices us to try new
things, act new ways, dress in wild clothes, and experiment with who we are.
"Potential" is our operating word.

  "Potential" should be our operating word. Stuck emotions not only prevent
us from reaching toward stars, but they also block our view of the skies.
Cultural beliefs carry considerable impact during this stage. Our internal
vision is so open, so fresh; it often lacks the protection necessary to properly
screen beneficial from destructive programs.

   These societal messages, garnered from the school system, religious
institutions, television, magazines, peer groups, and more, can be extremely
narrowing. For girls, these messages encapsulate beliefs that females must be
sexy, demure, contrite, and petite. For boys, these messages engineer them
toward becoming macho, strong, smart, and monetarily successful. When these
beliefs square off against our innate feelings and desires, we usually lack the
support and knowledge necessary to reject or alter them. Rather, we swallow
them whole. Inside us, they tangle with our natural feelings and dreams. It is
not feminine to have anger or rage or want to build a business. It is not
masculine to feel sad or scared or want to become a daddy. The remaining
emotional mess anchors our loyalty to societal standards, but drowns us in the
process.

   In many ways, feminism or any other kind of social movement "ism" are
attempts to uncover and dispel the programs instilled by society, the programs
affecting self-image, and therefore, achievement of potential. However, these
movements tend to turn into emotional tragedies. When you take a stand, you
immediately draw a battle line. Per haps it would be helpful to examine the
emotional (feeling plus thought) components of image issues-then, if necessary,
join a movement, not the other way around.

   I think a lot of adults suffer from emotions surviving from this developmental
stage. I often have clients look inside their third eye to see who they really are
inside. I then have them imagine their current self-concept. The difference is
typically drastic. When I had one client perceive such a difference, she didn't
recognize the self in the real picture. With time, she began to address the
feelings she had been stifling by living down to her mentally low standards.
When last I heard from her, she called to tell me I wouldn't recognize her. She
had cut her hair, changed its color, lost thirty pounds, and started wearing
bright colors instead of pastels.

14 to 21 Years-Chakra Seven


As we pass into adolescence, we enter the world of purpose. During this time
period, we are invited into the realm of our own spirit. Our soul and Divine
Source self will be encouraging us to individuate ourselves, even while we
learn how to bond with the visible and invisible supports around us.

   Any conflict between our soul purpose and our already established emotions
will arise or increase during this period. One reason is that as we progress
through the seven years in this stage, we recycle through each of our chakras.
At age fourteen, the feelings generated from preconception through six months
will resurface. At age fifteen, we will re-experience our second chakra feeling
life, and so on.

   The downside of this recycling is that our formed emotions are extremely
strong. They can feel and appear out of control; they can seem more powerful
than our inner wise self. This is because we are retesting our emotionally
based judgments about ourselves and the world by acting them out. Strong
emotions tend to scare other people. If we experience these emotions as true or
if others try to shut them down, we will probably swallow them once and for
all, resigning ourselves to our fate.

   The upside of this recycling is that we can change. Our emotions are
resurfacing to be healed, to be cleaved. At some level, we want our emotional
conclusions to be challenged by our loved ones. We want different training. We
want our beliefs to be transformed. We want our feelings to be acknowledged.
We want freedom-a cry often heard from teenagers. We do not really want
freedom from responsibility. We want freedom from our imprisoning belief
systems, from our imprisoning emotions.

   I have often noticed that my clients' emotion-based issues, even in
adulthood, fulfill this child development process. I once worked with a twenty-
year-old woman experiencing severe emotional pain and fear of abandonment.
She said they came from an experience with a boy she had known at age
fifteen. Interestingly enough, she had developed uterine polyps at this age,
which represented the second chakra in play (in the seventh chakra) at age
fifteen. Using psychic techniques, she determined that her fear-based feelings
originated at age three, the beliefs at age fifteen. She had put these together in
such a way that they still affected her.
                      EXERCISES: SKETCHING YOUR PAST


We all have emotional patterns that interfere with our success and happiness.
Let's take a walk down memory lane and uncover some of them.

1. You are going to make a timeline. Create or buy a sheet of paper about two
 feet long. Draw a line horizontally across the middle, then make eight marks
 on the line. Each mark will represent one of the chakras. (Number ten will be
 on the far left, and you will conclude with number seven.) Label each of these
 with the age associated with the chakra. Gather writing and drawing
 instruments.

   A. Settle into a meditative state. Taking each age group one at a time, begin
   with the latest age (chakra seven) and finish with the earliest (chakra ten),
   you are going to pinpoint the emotion originating during the stage that
   affects you the most.

    To do this, write or sketch the feeling associated with the emotion above
  the line; the belief associated with this emotion under the line; and the
  emotive response on the line.

   B. When you are done, take another sheet of paper. Analyzing each
   emotion, write down how it is currently affecting you and what you must
   do to heal it.

II. Select an emotional issue you are facing. Decide:

   • The primary feeling.

   • The primary thought or belief.

Use this checklist to see if you can decide at which chakra, and, therefore, at
which age this emotion may have originated, and heal from this point.
                FREEING YOUR EMOTIONS
Being emotionally stuck is no fun; it hurts. It keeps us trapped in obsolete, self-
destructive patterns. An imprisoning emotion prevents us from achieving our
heart's and soul's desires.

   Remember, though, we want feelings. We want thoughts. Feelings spice up
life. They keep it fluid. They are the stream in which we flow. Thoughts mark
our life events. We think them and know where we are and who we are being.
We remember them to know who we were and who we can become. When
feelings fuel us, we feel alive. When thoughts guide us, we are wise.

   Inevitably, the question arises-once our emotions become stuck, once we
become emotional, once our feelings become distorted rather than
spiritualized, once we're stuck in strongholds, once the patterns become
imprinted and impressed-can we heal ourselves? How can we ever return to
being and feeling free? How can our feelings and thoughts ever become free if
they never have been?

   The answer is simple. We must spring our feelings loose from our thoughts
and allow them to act again as free agents. That sounds simple, but only if we
understand the basic concept introduced in the last chapter. An emotion (and an
emotional stronghold) is created from a feeling and a thought, but it is not a
feeling and a thought. When we feel, we are experiencing a feeling; we are not
being the feeling itself. When we think, we are the thinker of the thought, not
the thought itself; a thought is not the same as the thinker. Emotions are a
projection of a feeling and a thought. The glue that keeps them together is the
energy we breathe into this projection.

   I believe that emotions, feelings, and thoughts work the same way that a
movie does. The image we see on the screen is created by projections from
two film reels. Each of these reels rolls film, upon which are inscribed images,
past a light. The interaction of these images with the light creates the picture
that we see on the screen. Alone, the unfolding images have no life. They don't
capture feelings or thoughts; they show pictures resulting from feelings and
thoughts. The reality of these images comes from us. We lend our energy to the
script, the play, and the pictures of light. The images only have life because we
send our own life energy into them.

   Now let's back up even more. Let's pretend that we are working with two
types of projectors. One contains imprints of feelings; the other is a soundtrack
upon which thoughts are recorded. Let's call the first one our second chakra,
and the second one our third chakra. The photographic material in the second-
chakra reel is really only snapshots taken of our feeling bodies. The stream of
thoughts on the third-chakra reel is only images solidifying our mind's musings.
Our body has mailed us the second-chakra reel as if to tell us, "Here-this is
what is going on with me." Our mind has shipped us the third-chakra reel,
saying, "This is the information I've been compiling." The feelings we
experience feel real because we give them that power. Thoughts seem right
because we decide we want to believe them.

   Once in a while, problems arise in the recording, observation, or
interpretation process. Maybe someone messes with our reels. They stick
feelings onto our second chakra reel that are not ours. They splice beliefs onto
our third-chakra reel that don't come from our own mind. Sometimes the two
projections, those of our feeling and those of our thoughts, conflict with each
other. We can't separate the feelings from the thoughts, what our body needs
from what our mind needs. Perhaps our "recording equipment" is damaged, or
the light doesn't work. What we see on the screen is confusing. The screen can
even look blank. Physical impediments, energy-system imbalances, and
traumatic emotions can all result from damaged hardware. Whatever the case,
there are many potential hazards to our feeling, thinking, and emotional
processes.

   Healing our emotions is now starting to look like a complicated process,
isn't it? Do we have hardware damage? An ailment in our liver can impair
third-chakra processing. Feelings convoluted from childhood dysfunction can
injure second-chakra feeling bodies. Are the original feelings and thoughts
recorded clearly? Beliefs drawn from an unhealthy system will be unhealthy in
and of themselves. Feelings twisted by our parents' reactions will mar the final
picture. Are we interpreting the final picture correctly? Our other energy
centers may see the scene differently than our body and mind intended it to be
seen. Our desires can alter our perceptions, causing us to blur the meaning of
the emotion.

   Most of us are older than twenty-one, and by now, we have experienced a
great many personal hardware, software, and programming disasters. Most of
us have probably already made inroads to healing these problems. Perhaps we
have seen a therapist, counselor, pastor, alternative healer, holistic-care
provider, or a psychic. Perhaps we have gone on vision quests, read self-help
books, or visited sacred sites. Maybe we have looked for assistance through
meditation, guided imagery, business seminars, Outward Bound courses, self-
reflection, or support groups. The list of healing avenues goes on and on. Yet,
here we are-still stuck. What are we supposed to do about it?

   All possibilities reduce to a primary healing strategy. The only way through
an emotional mess is to go through it. We can't jump over it, try and rationalize
it, or just feel our way through it. Sooner or later, like a good technician, we
must start checking each point for error and make corrections as we go. The
Guardian Principles may work in and of themselves. We can also walk
ourselves through our energetic system, building off the emotional development
process we described in the previous chapter.

   Sometimes, however, we need a more psychological approach-a more
emotive approach, if you will. We need to peel away the layers of a
problematic emotion or emotional pattern and follow the lights and lines back
to the participatory feeling and thought. It does help, of course, to conduct these
steps in a safe manner. I think the conditions covered by Carl Rogers in On
Becoming a Person most succinctly express the internal and external standards
necessary to do true healing work. Although he relates them as conditions for
constructive creativity, I think they apply to healing endeavors as well. His
three "inner conditions" are:

1. Openness to experience.
2. An internal locus of evaluation.

3. The ability to toy with elements and concepts.

His external conditions are:

1. Psychological safety.

2. Psychological freedom.

   My interpretation of these conditions is that as we press forward, we must
stay open to allowing our self-respect and imagination to teach us what we
need to know. To alleviate the fear of change, we must constantly reassure
ourselves, internally and externally. With this in mind, I suggest the following
four steps for freeing emotions.

               STEP ONE: PUT YOUR EMOTION AT CENTER STAGE


All emotional healing begins with recognizing where we are. Are we stuck in
an emotion, being emotionally sensitive, or just having a bad day? Are we
distorting a perfectly natural feeling, failing to read its spiritual message, or
avoiding our feelings altogether?

  We have explored the different indicators for being emotional versus being
emotionally sensitive. We know that we are probably emotional instead of
sensitive when our way of being is interfering with our good, when we can't
seem to cope, get what we want, feel understood, or understand others. We are
probably dealing with an emotional pattern when these or other conditions are
chronic, when we can't seem to get rid of them or out of them, no matter what
we do. We are distorting a feeling when a feeling isn't useful and we are
avoiding feelings when we can't feel anything.

  I have found that the simplest way to deal with emotional problems is to
reduce the analysis to two main points: Are we being overemotional or
underemotional? Said another way, are our feelings in overdrive or
underdrive? These two categories are defined as:
• Overdrive: the state of overexertion.

• Underdrive: the state of being pulled in and shut down.

Overdrive


When we are in overdrive, we feel like we are working all the time. Even in
our sleep, we seem to be constantly processing, thinking, feeling, moving, or
sensing. Overdrive is a state of overexertion. The overriding belief is that it is
our job to compensate for other people or for those parts of ourselves that are
not fulfilling their functions. The feelings associated with overdrive tend to be
overwhelming. When in overdrive, we will experience intense, passionate, or
painful feelings.

  When we are in an overdrive emotional pattern or stronghold, we may:

• Feel crazy or confused.

• Feel out of control.

• Often feel irrational or stuck in a patterned response.

• Have a hard time differentiating our reality or boundaries from someone
 else's.

• Have difficulty separating our issues, feelings, or desires from someone
 else's.

• Experience all our feelings intensely, which can confuse us when the
 situation does not seem to merit this strong response.

• Feel compelled to take care of someone else; make them feel a certain
 feeling or have them see things our way.

• Experience problems with physical or psychic boundaries.
• Have a hard time staying in the present situation; our mind or feelings stray
 to the past or to the future.

• Feel stuck in a reactive mode and seem unable to get out.

• Experience flashbacks.

• Experience mood swings, sometimes for no apparent reason.

• Often feel overstimulated or hyper.

• Experience waves of exhaustion; feel tired underneath all our activity.

   One of my most popular classes is called "Intuitive Development for Over-
Intuitors." In it, I meet hundreds of people who say they have lived their lives
feeling crazy, seemingly unable to differentiate themselves from other people.
Almost all have benefited from learning about the intuitive dimensions of
reality. By learning how to set psychic boundaries, they make significant
inroads on their psychological and physical well-being. In general, these
people have had to learn how to change their beliefs so as to better manage
their feelings.

Underdrive


When we are in underdrive, we operate robotically; our responses will seem
automated to ourselves or to other people. We might be unable to react to a
situation, respond emotionally, or come up with something to say.

  Sometimes, underdrive may appear as overintellectualism. Try as we might,
we cannot get to the feeling at hand, only a thought process. This process will
probably seem terribly familiar. Do we always play the same tapes over and
over? When in underdrive, our feelings may be difficult to reach, feel, or
sense. When we are in an underdrive emotional pattern, we might:

• Live in our head, responding out of rationality or logic.
• Feel disconnected from our feelings.

• Get stuck in one feeling or a set pattern of feelings over and over.

• Experience a sense of deadness, lethargy, or apathy.

• Have a hard time motivating ourselves to do something new or creative.

• Receive feedback that we are too cold or unfeeling.

• Experience bouts of self-doubt and waves of discontent.

• Notice that most of our beliefs about ourselves or others are negative or
 critical.

• Have difficulty connecting with our intuition, sense of awareness, vision, or
 empathy.

• Have pent-up energy and lack a motive for expressing it.

• Have a difficult time getting in touch with or believing in the psychic or the
 spiritual realm.

  When working with underdrive people, I have usually had to help them
uncover the situation(s) that originally caused them to shut down their feelings.
Often, this requires therapeutic assistance. Upon increasing the flow of feeling
energy, they can better regulate the power they give to their beliefs.

   Those of us with extreme personalities may consistently operate in
overdrive or underdrive. Others of us are mixed. During certain situations,
such as parties, we may shut down or go into underdrive. During other times,
such as visits to family members, we may become hyperactive or go into
overdrive. It is easier to recognize overdrive tendencies as emotionalism
because we appear more emotional, both to ourselves and to others. We are
more active. Our feelings are on the surface. We are expressive. It might be
difficult for ourselves or others to realize that underdrive is an emotional state,
rather than just a personality trait. If our low state of energy interferes with our
well-being, creates unhappiness within us, or impairs our mental or
relationship life, it is a symptom of emotionalism. When we are in overdrive,
we are emoting outwardly. When we are in underdrive, we are emoting
inwardly. Our emotions are hiding within us rather than being displayed
outside of us.

  Once we have recognized that we are being emotional or are stuck in an
emotional pattern, we must begin to separate the thought from the feeling. After
sorting the emotion into its components, we will be much more ready to
address and heal it. Step two and step three are interchangeable, depending on
whether we are working in overdrive or underdrive. When working with an
overdrive emotion, I tend to first isolate the feelings, then the thoughts. When
working with an underdrive emotion, I first work with the thoughts, then the
feelings. I work these different ways because an overdrive emotional state is
run on feelings; an underdrive emotional state is powered by thoughts. It is
easier to pinpoint the top rather than bottom layer of an issue.

                        STEP TWO: ISOLATE THE FEELING


Whenever we are in an emotional state, we are stuck in a certain feeling. When
trying to decipher the feeling caught in an emotion, or in a pattern of distortion,
we must remember that the pertinent feeling comes from the past, not the
present. Even if a current situation has hooked a feeling, the intensity, the
flavor, the breadth and depth of the feeling lies in our past, not in our present.
The rule of thumb for recognizing that a feeling is old or entrenched is one
shared by my therapist. If a feeling seems too big for the situation, it probably
is.

  Sometimes, it is relatively easy to acknowledge the major feeling player.
More often, however, the primary feeling is blanketed by a layer or layers of
secondary feelings. We layer feelings to bandage the original wound, or to
protect the self that was injured in the past, so that it cannot be injured again.

  In general, the more intense and difficult the emotion, the older and more
damaged the feeling is, the younger we were when our feelings became hurt or
misused. It is important to get to the age at which we were injured, the age at
which we formed the emotion that causes us current harm. That self is crying
for help, even though it might also be simultaneously pushing it away. We want
to heal and prevent more pain. This tension can cause us to feel terrified about
being healed, confused about the process, and eager to be helped. Sounds like
an emotional state right there, doesn't it?

   When working with clients who are sorting through their feelings, I often
like to apply hands-on therapies or have them work with a healer or massage
therapist while working with me. Feelings are the language of the body. If we
are willing to listen to it, the body can be of great help in the healing process.
It can help us locate our feelings, uncover repressed feelings and memories,
and repair damaged feelings.

   My favorite method is to use nonintrusive therapeutic touch. Usually, I put a
hand on each chakra, working from the top down. I ask the client to describe
the feeling state this touch brings up in regard to the emotional state he or she
has been experiencing. We go down the chakras, searching for the feeling that
brings up the undesired emotional state, looking for the feeling that triggers the
entire emotion.

   I can often sense where this feeling is by the hot and cold spots in the
person's body. A hot spot means that a feeling is brewing within this area. A
cold spot frequently indicates that a feeling is absent or hiding. When I or the
client feel a hot spot, I have him or her go into this feeling to see if it connects
to the emotional state. If it does, we begin our work here. When the client or I
sense a cold spot, I lightly stimulate this area. I shoot energy into it, and I ask
the client to bring his or her consciousness into it. I might flip the person and
work on the back-side chakra until the person gets some feelings. Once we
have arrived at the feeling, I bring the client further into it, encouraging him or
her to feel, be, and act the age associated with that feeling. Often, my intent is
to enable the person to remember the experience, state, person, or situation
linked to that feeling.
   There are many other ways to pinpoint a feeling. I may ask a client to simply
point to the area that holds the feeling locked within the emotion. I may use my
knowledge of the child development/chakra system to guide the person into a
childhood state. If the client seems truly blocked, I may work mainly with the
back-side system, encouraging help from the person's unconscious and guides.
I may have the person sit in a chair and begin talking to another chair. I support
him or her by directing whatever feeling comes into the body to the "person"
sitting in the other chair. Whatever the case, our objective is twofold:

1. We want to help isolate the major feeling wrapped up in the undesirable
 emotional state or pattern.

2. We want to get a fix on the age and situation at which this feeling became
 stuck.

   Sometimes, a client will take weeks getting to the formative feeling, and that
is okay. I will support the person no matter what, or encourage him or her to
work with another professional. The person might get stuck in fear for a while.
If that is the case, I tell the client to feel as scared as he or she can. The person
might become unbelievably sad; I tell him or her to go to sad movies. The
person might sense the need to be angry, but doesn't feel he or she can let the
anger out. I have the person beat pillows until the feeling comes up on its own.
We want to peel away the layers of feelings until we get to the one that seems
right, until the client can say, "Yes! This is the feeling I feel when I'm emotional
about XYZ."

                   STEP THREE: ISOLATE THE THOUGHT FORM


The thought connected into the troublesome emotion may or may not have
originated with us. It may well represent our personal reaction to a certain
situation. If this is the case, it will probably be phrased like an observation. "I
see that everyone is unhappy." "I just caused pain to my mother." "I didn't have
an answer when the teacher called on me." Thoughts such as these don't cause
an emotional reaction in and of themselves; they must be teamed with a feeling
to create difficulties.
   Take our first example: "I see that everyone is unhappy." Imagine that this
thought originated in a family event at which we expressed some anger. If we
then perceived that everyone is unhappy that we are angry, we might have
formed the core belief and emotion "Everyone becomes unhappy when I am
angry." This emotion may clear if we can discuss it with someone, raise it to
our heart chakra for a second opinion, or experience a family event at which
we saw a very different reaction when we became angry. Unfortunately,
especially with family matters, we tend to receive the same reactions and
judgments over and over. At some point, our perception of others' unhappiness
links with our anger, and they become permanently cemented together. Our
energy system can become muddled every time we see someone angry and
rekindle the thought that someone outside of us is unhappy.

   Thoughts may also come from the people around us. Some thoughts we
swallow whole; others we digest over time. For instance, if we were raised in
a family that decried a certain ethnic group, believed that everyone with money
was bad, or proposed that artists must be poor, we could understandably take
on these points of view wholeheartedly. We might also select pieces of the
belief system swirling around us. Our father, for instance, might insist that
women are stupid. Our mother, who seems intelligent enough to us, may have
trouble balancing the checkbook. We might put two and two together, then
subtract one of each to create the hybrid belief "Women are stupid about
money." Often, these types of beliefs are more difficult to isolate than wholly
owned ones. Because they are composites, they can be quite complicated.

   Distinguishing the most important thought or belief form can be a
troublesome process. We might have thousands of thoughts swimming in our
head at any given time, hundreds of which might be subsidiary conclusions
forming the emotion at hand. The belief that women (or men) are stupid about
money may be the key ingredient in our own struggles to make a decent living.
With time, we may have added a number of tributaries to this belief. "Women
should be kept away from money." "Women shouldn't have any money of their
own." "Women should feel stupid if they make money." What we want to do is
get rid of the core belief, not get lost in the myriad of secondary beliefs
threading themselves throughout our energy system.

   The best way to do this is to isolate the belief in tandem with one of the
other emotional indicators. While feeling the feeling associated with our
problematic emotion, or feeling/being/acting the age at which we incorporated
the emotion, we can simply ask our younger self to tell us what conclusion we
drew from the circumstances around us. Then we must listen. We must hear
ourselves talk to ourselves.

   I will often have clients dealing with confusion conduct a belief exercise.
Using pen and paper, I have them write their understanding of the emotion
affecting them. I then have them make a statement of thought or belief about this
emotion. For instance, a female client might write:

  Statement regarding the emotion: "I often feel bad when I am spending
money. I tell myself I shouldn't be doing it, but the worse I feel, the more I
spend."

  Corollary belief: "I am bad with money."

  To make sure we have really gotten to the bottom, I have the client continue.
After writing "I am bad with money," I have her rewrite this statement, add a
"because," and fill in an answer. I have her continue on this path until she hits
pay dirt, until she feels an "Ah-ha!" and knows that we have hit bottom. For
example:

  Corollary belief: "I am bad with money because I can never hang on to it."

  Corollary belief: "I can never hang on to money because I am a girl."

  Corollary belief: "As a girl, I can never hang on to money because girls are
bad with money.

  Corollary belief: "Girls are bad with money because my father says so."

  Corollary belief: "My father says so because he believes it."
  Corollary belief: "My father believes girls are bad with money because he's
scared of letting them have it."

 Corollary belief. "He's scared of letting girls have money because then they
wouldn't need men."

  Corollary belief: "If they didn't need men, he could be abandoned."

  Ah-ha! See how this brings the issue to its core?

  If I want to go one step farther, I can use this place as a springboard for
regression work. I may now be able to dive into the situation that locked up the
emotions. Regarding the above example, this might involve remembering what
age the client was when she perceived that females were bad with money. She
will want to recall who demonstrated this behavior, taught her this, or forced
her to believe it.

Remember that you can always reduce a problematic belief to one of the six
negative     beliefs     (worthlessness,     undeservedness,   powerlessness,
valuelessness, badness, or lovelessness) or the primary negative belief, "I am
separate." In fact, the most effective healing occurs when we do reduce to this
level.

                      STEP FOUR: UNCOVER THE PAYOFF


Once we have our emotion pared down into its raw components, we want to
free our body and mind from the clutches in which they have been confined.
The only way to do this is to love the emotion-to death. That's right. We must
assume that the problematic, troublesome, and hated emotion we have been
experiencing was meeting a need, and so has the feeling and thought battling
within it. If we are to truly become free from the emotion, we must do more
than destroy the emotion. Hammering it into oblivion will only leave us empty.
This emptiness, this void, will seek to be filled. The original need will call
out. Even if we succeeded in unsticking our stuck emotion, but fail to find a
new way to meet the old need, we will just design a new emotion to fill the
vacuum. This new emotional state will create just as much havoc as the
original did.

   When we understand the need our troublesome emotion is filling and create
a new, more self-loving way to fill it, we become more willing to allow our
feelings and beliefs to detach. We open to the energies and help that we need to
allow damaged feelings and beliefs to heal. We allow the stuck parts of
ourselves to grow up. At first glance, most of us can't believe that we are
receiving benefit for being unhappy, hating ourselves, or picking only
alcoholics as mates, but we are. We may not be proud of our reasons, but they
are there. The types of needs or payoffs I run across vary widely, but there are
two basic types: fear-based payoffs and love-based payoffs.

   Fear-based payoffs are based on fears of consequence. They stem from an
internal drive to avoid responsibility, self- or other care, or truthfulness. We
all have fears. That doesn't mean we are bad people. It probably means that,
when we were growing up, our energy systems didn't fully develop because
something or someone in our environment didn't support the maturing process.
Fear-based payoffs keep us frozen in time. The two-year-old girl or boy that
was hurt will remain within us, locked within our second chakra. This two-
year-old will run the show, scared to let go of control until we meet its needs
and let it be a child again.

   Love-based payoffs are sacrificial in nature. They involve making choices to
hurt ourselves so that someone else may feel better or avoid being hurt. A case
in point is one of my clients who decided to take on her mother's physical
issues. She truly loved her mother and thought that was the best way that she
could help. Even though this client manifested this choice through physical
illness, the disease itself was emotional because it was motivated by a belief
("My mother will die without my help") and a feeling (love for her mother).

   Overall, I see fewer love-based problems than I do fear-based. I remember
several times deciding not to "speak my truth" because it would hurt my father.
I recall a client who mirrored her mother's back pain so her mother would
have it easier. I had another client decide she was bad because if she wasn't,
her mother, who had ritually abused her, would be the bad one; she was
willing to "go to hell" so her mother wouldn't. I more commonly find clients
absorbing a parent's pain, because doing so ensures their own survival. I think
this absorption happens because we exist in a fear-based society. Love is not
mirrored or reflected back to most of us on a daily basis. Unconditional love
may be heard of, but seldom experienced. It is difficult to build a foundation
without blueprints.

   The most common payoffs of both types I see in my work include the
following:

Fear-Based Payoffs


• Don't have to grow up.

• Don't have to take risks.

• Avoid getting hurt.

• Won't have to feel (certain) feelings.

• Get to avoid responsibility.

• Won't have to remember a painful experience.

• Won't have to repeat a painful experience.

• Don't have to confront an issue.

• Can get taken care of by other people.

• Get to feel sorry for self.

• Avoid success.

• Avoid failure.
• Get attention.

• Don't have to admit being wrong-

Love-Based Payoffs


• Save someone's life.

• Ease someone's pain.

• Put another person first.

• Atone for guilt.

• Fulfill karmic debt.

• Be of service.

• Learn a lesson.

• Learn how to be compassionate.

• Experience the positive use of power.

• Practice a healing art.

• Make the world a better place.

   Determining the payoff involved in an emotional issue requires complete
honesty with oneself or another human being. The twelve-step programs are
designed to help people achieve this level of honesty. One of the steps these
programs direct people to undertake is a thorough overview of themselves and
their actions. They are asked to make a list of all the people they have wronged
and to make amends if appropriate. These steps invite seekers of truth to bare
their own souls, to peer within, and to admit failures of spirit. Forgiveness is
inevitable, because we are children of the Divine Source. Children make
mistakes. Children display false pride. Children need guidance. It is prideful
and grandiose to think that we would be the only human being alive to escape
making mistakes, now, wouldn't it? Personally, I find great relief in admitting
when I'm being dishonest or manipulative in an emotional way. Even
experiencing others' feelings is manipulative, because it controls the situation.

  Typically, once a client accepts the fact that he or she is a student of the
universe, a child of the Divine Source, and a self in development, the payoff
simply pops into his or her mind. Of course, there are other techniques for
unearthing the payoff. I might regress clients to the point of injury; use applied
kinesiology, a system for testing the body's response to questions; have clients
ask for an informative dream; or have the client write a fable or fairy tale.
When using the story-writing technique, I have them center the storyline on the
emotional issue in question and freely write whatever comes into their heads.
The payoff usually leaps off the page.

  Once the payoff is clear, we know what we need to know. We have
assembled our character cast. We know the emotion, the feeling, the thought or
belief, and the payoff. I would like to be able to give a quick and easy method
for healing from this point on, but I can't. This is because the first and most
important part of healing the apparent emotion is to become willing to part
with it.

   Here, we must return to the Guardian Principles. I will frequently walk
clients through a few of these principles in question form when healing the
emotion-based problem. I will ask them if they are willing to be healed and to
manifest their desires. I will ask them if they are willing to change or accept a
new way to meet their needs. I will ask if they are willing to let go of the old
patterns and payoffs. I will ask them if they are willing to feel the feelings they
need to feel, to create a new thought for themselves, and to be free rather than
imprisoned. I will ask them if they are willing to allow the Divine Source or
their Divine Source self to serve as a guide throughout the process. Sometimes,
I even ask if they are willing to allow miracles to happen, to let people
become magical, and to do the work they must do to become the people they
want to become. At this point, I go with the flow. I must trust my own sense of
process and encourage the client to do the same, to actually allow the energy
system to change and to shift.

   Support is an important part of an emotional change process. Long-held
feelings may rise to the surface, causing bouts of grief, anger, rage, or terror.
Crusty, debilitating thoughts may storm up, reciting litanies of criticism about
themselves or others. My experience is that if these old energies are provided
a space or place for safe expression, they soon evaporate, mature, or
transform. Left in their wake is usually a somewhat tired but ecstatic new
person who, male or female, looks much like a mother who has just gone
through labor and given birth to an incredibly beautiful baby: the self.


                  EXERCISE: WRITE THE STORY OF YOUR LIFE


A. Take out a pad of paper and a pen. Now, think of an issue that is causing
you frustration or dissatisfaction. You are going to take a journey of words on
the land of paper before you.

     You will be writing your own journey as you go. You will be writing the
  story of your life in relation to this issue. To do this, you might want to
  follow the path of the "Hero's Journey." A hero is someone who learns
  something the hard way and becomes a better, stronger person for it, a
  person able to share his or her lessons with others.

     You are the hero in this story. You are the major character. You are the
  person affected by the emotional problem; you are the hero who rides
  straight into it. You are the hero who struggles and overcomes the problem.
  You are the hero who lives to tell about it and returns home. You are the hero
  who creates good out of the difficulty.

B. The points of your journey will be these:

   1. Begin "at home," describing your background and the situations that set
    you up for your difficulties.
   2. Leave home. What happens to you, the hero, as you journey forth into the
    world?

   3. Fight the dragon. The emotional issue is your dragon. Describe it. Know
    it. How must you approach it? Deal with it? Combat it?

   4. Defeat the dragon. How will you overcome the obstacle this
    emotion/dragon represents? What powers must you draw forth from
    yourself to defeat it? What help must you ask for or accept to master the
    dragon? What wisdom must you have to transform the emotion/dragon?

   5. Cut off the dragon's head. What have you learned from struggling with
    this dragon?

   6. Accept your reward. What does your struggle mean for you within the
    greater context of your life? What new energies, knowledge, or riches
    must you accept to change your life?

   7. Return home. All heroes return to their points of origin. What does this
    beginning point look like to you now? Can you see it with compassion?

   8. Teach others. All heroes bring their lessons, their riches, and their
    wisdom back to the community. What must you do, know, or understand to
    do this?

C. After writing your story, reflect upon its meaning for you today.


                            ALTERNATE EXERCISE


A. Select a problem that you can't seem to shake. Ask yourself these
questions:

   1. What feeling(s) do I feel when I think about this problem? Write these
    down in list format.
   2. What belief relates to each feeling? These beliefs should be written in
    statement form, such as:

Problem Feelings Sadness Fear Panic Problem Beliefs I hurt others when I say
my truth. I can be hurt by others when I ask for something. Nothing can stop this
pattern.

B. Take each belief and pare it back to a thought, such as:

Problem Beliefs I hurt others when I say my truth. Thoughts I can hurt others. I
can say my truth.

I can be hurt by others when I ask for something. Nothing can stop this pattern.
I can be hurt. I can ask for something. I have patterns. Patterns can't be stopped
by anything I know.

C. Take the thoughts and put them together with the feelings as perceptions,
such as:

   • I feel sad when I say my truth and others hurt me, so I can decide when to
    share something or not.

   • I feel scared when I ask for something, and I get hurt. So I can ask
    someone else, until I find someone willing to help me.

   • I feel panicky that I have patterns, and I don't know how to stop them. So I
    will ask people without these patterns to help me.
                     BEING YOUR DIVINE
                       SOURCE SELF:
                        LIVING AS AN
                     EVERYDAY SHAMAN
                              SAVING THE WORLD


When seeking to heal or to manifest, we must often unravel years upon years of
emotional, physical, and spiritual issues, or blocks. These blocks (points of
resistance) are aptly named, because they block the natural flow of energy
revolving between our spiritual and physical selves. Because we come from
the Divine Source, are the Divine Source, and seek the Divine Source within
ourselves, the best way to clear out our resistance is to work with this
knowledge.

  Unfortunately, there is something in the way. It is the something that underlies
most of our emotional issues, physical disorders, and spiritual misperceptions.
That something is denial. Denial exists whenever we ignore our true nature,
our Divine Source self. When we accept anything less than that which the
Divine Source desires for us or that which our Divine Source self deserves,
we are buying into a payoff. By thinking or hoping that a payoff will fill our
needs, we deny ourselves the power, energy, and love that will really meet our
needs-our essential needs.

  How did or does denial enter our existence, and what are we supposed to do
about it? This grandiose question begs both esoteric and practical responses.

                              THE ROLE OF DENIAL


To deny something is to turn our back on it. In relation to our feelings, we are
in denial when we refuse to recognize, affirm, or feel our feelings. In relation
to our thoughts, we are in denial when we refuse to think, attend, or review our
thoughts. In relation to our emotions, we are in denial if our emotions remain
unexpressed or continue to recycle. There is a state of denial behind all of
these circumstances, however: we are in denial when we refuse to affirm our
Divine Source self.

   Getting to the Divine Source self underneath the layers of denial, emotion,
misperceptions, diseases, and bad relationships can be a painful process. It is
painful not because being our Divine Source self is painful, but because it
comes from combating the years of programming that convince us that the best
way to heal or manifest is the hard way. We cure cancer by ingesting drugs. We
make money by working at jobs that we hate. We learn about love by being in
relationships that make us feel bad. We have fun by doing what other people
tell us is fun. We struggle with life so that we can deny death. In other words,
we work very, very hard to do it right-only to end up miserable.

   There are layers to our denial. When working with clients, I often find that
many of them uncover one level only to plunge to the next. These layers appear
with clients sorting through health, relationship, career, psychological,
religious, and all other concerns. I believe that all these levels relate to our
spiritual and child development.

   In my world, it works like this. At some point, our soul was damaged by an
original wound. That wound caused us to turn our backs on the reality of the
Divine Source, at least in part. Feeling guilty about turning our backs, we went
forth in denial of our true Divine Source and our true self, true purpose, and
true will. Denying these, we heaped one feeling upon another, one emotion
upon another, one physical ailment upon another-each layer blanketing the
layer beneath. Healing involves uncovering these layers of denial so that we
can touch back into our original wound or misperception. Manifesting is the
process whereby we receive that which we need to reach this centerpoint.

   The following are the layers of denied emotion that I most typically see. I
have listed them from top to bottom, and described each layer according to its
three major components. The denied feeling indicates the feeling state that
covers up the layer beneath. The predominant thought indicates the primary
belief associated with this layer. The cause relates to the wound that occurred
at this layer.

The Basic Layers of Denial
   I help clients process these layers and rewrite the original scripts in a
number of different ways. In my opinion, the clients who experience the most
growth are those able to get to the basic root of guilt. The clients who become
their true selves, however, are those who allow themselves to fall all the way
into their denial of the Divine Source-and come up again.

   A case in point concerns Fred. A medical doctor, Fred was an alcoholic.
During the past few years, his successful practice had been reduced by half.
His marriage was barely limping along. His children were displaying the
typical characteristics of adult children of alcoholics-their lives were messy
and out of control. For his part, Fred swam in a continual bath of self-pity.
Anytime he was confronted, he would slump into his chair and begin to mutter,
"I know, I know. I'm a failure. I can't do anything right."

   Fred came to me out of desperation. During our first session, I asked him to
throw himself into his feelings of self-pity and uselessness. At first, he was
scared. After a while, he became sad and began to cry, calling himself a failure
over and over. Assuming that we had unearthed at least part of his emotional
issue, I asked him if he really thought of himself as a failure. "Yes," he said. "I
am. That is all I ever have been."

  Even though we had rested on an emotionally laden belief, I didn't feel like
we had gotten to the core emotion. After all, he had been in this state before,
and it had not stopped his drinking. During the next session, I asked him to
pretend that he was drunk. I then spoke with his drunk self, asking it why it
needed to drink. Fred immediately moved from sadness to anger. He began
ranting and raving. Life was unfair, his wife didn't understand him, everyone
expected something from him, but no one cared about him.

   I decided we needed to go for the core. Guiding Fred into his lowest chakra,
I asked him to be the age at which this issue had originated. To my surprise, he
immediately curled up in a ball. He was a small child. The feeling connected
to feeling like a failure? Guilt. He hadn't been able to make his parents get
along with each other and felt bad about it. After processing his guilt and
forgiving himself, Fred's progress leaped ahead. He voluntarily began
attending Alcoholics Anonymous. He checked himself into a treatment program
and asked his wife to get help for herself, too.

   Despite these heroic moves, a year later, Fred was still experiencing waves
of selfpity. His business was still slow. He was still confused about whether or
not he deserved money, a good relationship, and, most of all, his own
existence. Then I saw a miracle occur. At some level, I believe that Fred
continued to process guilt and shame. One day, he came into my office, aglow.
He had been sitting at a stop sign, impatiently waiting for an older woman to
cross the street. For no reason, he said, she stopped, turned toward him, and
smiled. All of a sudden, he got it!

  "For some reason, that smile did it. I realized that she was a part of the
human race, not just somebody out to slow me down. She was-well, a part of
God!" he said. He looked down, as if still somewhat embarrassed by this
revelation and then, his eyes shining, added, "I thought, well, if she is a part of
God, then I must be, too-no matter what I have done." Fred had taken the leap-
he had jumped from denial to truth. Needless to say, his life was never the
same after that.

                           INTEGRATING OUR SELVES


While it can be effective to journey our energy systems chakra by chakra, ray
by ray, age by age, and emotional layer by emotional layer, I often draw on a
concept that is much simpler for my clients (and me) to grasp. I encourage
clients to think of themselves as having three aspects. To keep it easier, I don't
label them body, mind, and soul, although these three aspects of self are
obviously still involved. Instead, I have clients decide which of the following
illustrations describes their current self:

   Everyone can relate to the idea of having an inner child or many inner
children. These are the selves who have become lost within our energy system.
These are the child parts of ourselves who have remained imprisoned within
our developing chakras. These are the selves that, gifted as they are, must be
rescued. Our inner children are the children that we have been and who have
not grown up. Usually, we experience these child selves as very intense. They
are so loud! Their feelings are so forceful! They are so needy! Because they
seem so demanding, we often put these child selves in the driver's seat, giving
them responsibility for our lives (see figure 16.1).

   The trouble is, having too much responsibility only scares these child selves
all the more. They need guidance, which requires that we assume an adult self.
This adult part of us must make sure that we don't make crazy decisions. If our
child selves are to feel safe, this adult self must keep our car in running order,
pay the bills, say hello to the boss, and drive us to our therapist's office. As
long as we keep the adult part of us in working order, the child parts of us can
calm down and do what children need to do-play, heal, laugh, and make magic
(see figure 16.2). However, most of our adult parts feel as lost as do our
children parts. We have limited vision. We feel like we are faking it. We don't
understand the world any better than the next person. We screw up.
   This is where our Divine Source self comes in. If our adult self can establish
a bond with our Divine Source or essential self, it will be able to act
responsibly, for it will receive the mentorship and guidance it needs. After all,
our Divine Source self has a much higher perspective. It knows all there is to
know. It knows what we need to know right now and what can wait. Our
Divine Source self also has the ability to see our final destination and chart the
course to it. All aspects of ourselves-the children parts that need healing, the
adult part that learns how to manifest, and the Divine Source self that seeks
integration-can fall into alignment when they work together (see figure 16.3).

  By working as a trilogy, the following occurs:

1. Our Divine Source self can heal our soul. Our soul draws miracles into our
 lives.

2. Our adult self can heal our mind. It can manifest through work.

3. Our child selves can heal our body. They can manifest through magic.




  Figures 16.1 (left), 16.2 (center), and 16.3 (right): Descriptions of the Self

  The key to all of the above is to allow our Divine Source self into us. Left
alone, our adult/mind self and children/body self run rampant, cause chaos,
become emotional. How do we do this? How do we know whether or not our
Divine Source self is linked in? How do we hear what this Divine Source self
has to say? It's simple. We open to our intuition.

                         THE VOICE OF OUR SPIRIT SELF


Thoughts communicate for our adult/mind self, and feelings speak for our
childlike/ body selves. Intuition, however, is the voice of our soul. Actually,
intuition is the voice of the Divine Source self, the essential spirit self that
speaks through our soul. Intuition tells our soul what to do. In turn, our soul
directs us toward our purpose.

   How do you recognize your intuition? You could read books and books on
the subject, take class after class, but inevitably, you must still answer your
own question. Because each of our Divine Source selves is unique, our
intuitive style is unique. In a positive vein, I have never met anyone who was
not acquainted with his or her intuition. At first, many people have insisted that
they haven't the slightest idea what their intuitive voice sounds like. These
same people, after understanding a bit about intuition, have all provided me
examples of how intuition has affected their lives.

   It is helpful to understand a few facts about intuition. First, it comes in many
forms. Most people experience intuition in one of three ways: they visually see
pictures, they verbally hear voices, or they kinesthetically sense, feel, or know
answers. However, if you look back on our pages describing the major human
chakras, you will notice that each chakra functions as a psychic center. When
we apply our psychic abilities consciously, using the filters available through
the aura and the openness that is the outcome of healing, they transform into
intuitive gifts. Each chakra will work empathetically or intuitively in its own
way. The first chakra, for instance, will understand intuition through physical
sensations. The second will pick up on feelings. The fifth can travel to the
astral plane for assistance. The sixth will provide us with pictures.

  Traveling from center to center for guidance could drive us crazy. When we
move our power center from a lower chakra to the heart, we realign our energy
system. We allow our intuitive messages to converge in the heart. We can
therefore access any guidance that we need from one place-our heart, the
meeting ground of our spiritual and physical selves.

   Following our senses of knowing, feeling, hearing, and seeing, we can gain
the insight necessary to separate the beliefs and feelings that cause us trouble.
We can gain the guidance our adult self needs to monitor our daily lives. We
can obtain the reassurance our child selves desire to feel safe and secure.
Sometimes our intuition will tell us that we need to cry, to hold our inner child,
to regress to another time and place, to read a certain book, or to go out
dancing. Intuition not only tells us how to heal damage, it can help us prevent
further damage.

   The other important reason for incorporating intuition into our emotional life
is that it represents our soul. Our essential self has certain needs and drives.
Our intuition's job is to help us fulfill these dreams by keeping us on track with
our soul purpose. If we live in purposeful process, we will automatically be
involved in healing situations. When we are following our purpose, following
our meaning, and expressing our essential self, we will also be able to
manifest anything we need to heal. When we do this, we are living as our own
shamans. We are being our own creators and healers.

               LIVING AS A SHAMAN WHO CAN HEAL THE WORLD


A shaman's purpose is to walk in both the spiritual and physical worlds. Since
ancient times, communities all over the world selected representatives to link
the spiritual and physical planes for the benefit of all. In The Celtic Shaman,
John Matthews describes a shaman as "one whose work is so integrated into
everyday life that the `join' does not show."' The shaman's job was to help
individuals heal physical and spiritual issues, and assist the community in
doing the same. To do this, the shaman had to negotiate the revolving doors
between the various levels of reality, namely the subtle and the physical levels.

  Our energy systems are designed to enable each of us to be our own
shamans. Our chakras translate the mystical to the mundane. Our aura holds us
within the self, while opening us to the universe. A plethora of other energy
bodies, channels, and fields guarantees that while we're alive, we're able to
access the life energy, information, and grace we need to fulfill our spiritual
mission-in joy. We truly are wheels of light, spinning in the stillness of our
own being.

  Along the journey of life, we learn to be responsible for the energy that we
receive, how we interpret it, and how we then direct it back into the world. If
we believe that we are inherently connected to the Divine Source-and
unconditionally loved and supported because of this-our path through life, and
eventually death, will be meaningful. It might not always be easy. How can a
sword be useful if it is never tempered in fire or sharpened by stone? How can
our minds be intelligent if they aren't presented with challenging problems, or
our hearts be soft if we don't have to choose to keep them so, despite the
various woundings that life brings? There's a reason that life gifts us with
opportunities to decide whether we're going to be loving or not. We can only
create more love on this planet, or within ourselves, for that matter, if we
experience that which does not seem like love.

   You are here on this planet at this time because you are needed. Each and
every person or living being is alive today because he, she, or it has something
to contribute toward the greater design. We talk about programs, patterns, and
strongholds; curses, cords, and codependent bargains. These are all issues that
must be faced and healed, if we're to become who we really are and make a
difference in this world. But underneath all these traumatic, energetic realities
is a greater reality. It is the heaven that is on earth already. It is the Divine
Source that is here, and the "you" that is already held within, sustained by, and
in full accordance with, the Divine Source. To breathe into this knowledge ...
to breathe the Divine into you ... is to live as a shaman who can heal not only
him- or herself, but heal the world.

  As it has been said, let there be peace on earth. And let it begin with you.
                   THE COMPLETE
                 CHAKRA HEALER'S
              VIEW OF DISEASE PATTERNS
The aura of a person with chronic fatigue syndrome, described in chapter 6, is
one example of how an existing or potential medical condition in the physical
body can also be perceived in the energetic and spiritual bodies.

   I and other intuitive people have hundreds of stories of perceiving potential
illnesses this way, which all beg the question: Can we perceive illness
energetically, and if so, can we better treat it energetically? I would say yes.

   This chapter includes examples of physical and mental conditions I have
intuitively perceived in the energetic and spiritual bodies.

                                      AIDS


Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) displays itself in a variety of
energetic symptoms. Depending on how advanced the disease has become, I
can see some or all of the following indicators in an HIV-positive person (see
figure 17.1).

   A white boxlike form in the head indicates a spiritual depression-a
misconception about the spirit and the body (a mirror of first chakra issues). I
usually see a constriction in the heart. A constriction on the left side indicates
relationship judgments from a man/male authority or self issues regarding
masculinity. A right-side constriction shows judgments from a woman/female
authority or self issues about femininity.
                 Figure 17.1: Energetic Indications of AIDS

  Dark splotches in the immune centers indicate deficiencies in these areas. A
concentration of red in the abdominal area (second chakra) is an indication of
pain, usually from an in-utero trauma regarding issues such as sexuality or
gender.

  The genital area (first chakra) also has a pool of blackish, pulsating energy,
which equals judgments about the self regarding sexuality, spirituality, or
gender. If this pool has a red center, there is a "survival depression"-a
misperception about the spirit's right to live and express through the body. Any
green color around this energy pool represents AIDS as a force that is trying to
heal a first-chakra issue.

  White flecks in the blood stream and a reddish energy emanating from the
body indicate the spirit's presence in the body. The life blood dissipates as the
spirit takes over the body. In some cases, the seventh chakra opens to give off
white or purple energy.

   As the AIDS reaches its more advanced stages and the person draws closer
to death, the entire energy body glows with white spirit energy, which means
that the spirit is slipping from the body into another world.

                                  ALLERGIES


Allergies usually involve an emotional stronghold in which a feeling bonds
with a substance to form a new energy, which is unrecognized by the immune
system and therefore, the subject of an attack. Technically, this now creates an
autoimmune disorder. The stuck belief keeps these two energies glued together
(see figure 17.2).

  Following is a summation of the various types of allergies that can be found
in specific chakras, as well as an overview of possible causal issues. The
emphasis is on the feelings involved in the pattern.

First Chakra


Allergies: Red meats, dairy, sugar mixed with other substances, sometimes
eggs, red fruits, animal products and proteins, wool, many air- and cloth-
borne substances and toxins, soaps and cleansers, drugs affecting the blood,
as in some antibiotics or chemotherapy drugs, some heavy metals, links with
eighth chakra to cause reactions to recreational drugs, alcohol, etc.

Possible Causal Issues: Reactions begin with in-womb reactions to immediate
 environment, such as nutrients in the amniotic fluid. Resistance to nutrients
 and drugs needed for personal survival and physical health (i.e., reaction to
 penicillin right after birth). Resistance usually reflects fear of being alive or
 deep alienation from being unwanted. Deserving issues. Can't claim passion
 for life. Can also indicate that someone else doesn't want you alive.
 Substances usually bond with primal shame, guilt, or terror. Stress in
 adrenals.
Figure 17.2: Energetic Indications of Allergies

         (can be found in any chakra)
Second Chakra


Allergies: Pork, wheat, white and whole grains, muffins and other breadstuffs,
grain alcohol, sometimes eggs, some fats, orange fruits and vegetables, citric
acid, yeast, drugs affecting abdominal region, as in some antibiotics.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that nurture and create loving
 connections between self and others. Worthiness issues, fear of being
 vulnerable, needy, or self-expressive. Substances usually bond with grief or
 sadness.

Third Chakra


Allergies: Corn, beer, soda pop, yellow fruits and vegetables, caffeine, fats,
rubber, oil, steel, honey, drugs, and substances affecting digestive system.

Possible Causal Issues: Developing a resistance (allergy) to anything that
 could fuel our success or acceptance of rewards. Fear of drive for power and
 the anger and authority needed to push forward. Substances usually bond with
 anger or fear.

Fourth Chakra


Allergies: Sugar, wine, some sauces and spices, green vegetables, drugs and
substances affecting the heart and lungs, cigarettes and cigars, many airborne
substances and toxins.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that provide spice of life, in
 terms of love, spirit, enthusiasm; use of substances to resist bonding with
 fellow human beings. Issues often held by inner children and even the innocent
 child within. Fear of love. Surety of being abandoned or rejected. Substances
 usually bond with fear, joy, sorrow, or loneliness.
Fifth Chakra


Allergies: Blue and black berries; mercury; some airborne, auditory, thyroid,
and thymus-related substances and toxins; inks; airwaves, radio and other
sonic frequencies. Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that
substitute lies for truth or could open to truth. Fear of truth. Fear of being
heard. Fear of being disliked for stating real needs and opinions. Substances
usually bond with fear, anger, or guilt.

Sixth Chakra


Allergies: Chocolate and cocoa, some proteins, some heavy metals, healthy
fats, drugs and substances affecting vision, broadcasting waves.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that clear vision, invite
 clarity, and strengthen the body to meet goals. Fear of being seen. Fear of
 being real self. Fear of goals. Fear of making a mistake. Desire to convince
 others of inner poor image. Substances usually bond with shame, fear, or hurt.

Seventh Chakra


Allergies: Fish, meats, protein-providing natural foods, heavy metals, healthy
fats, drugs and substances related to higher brain (including SSRIs); power
line emanations.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that allow expression of
 destiny in real life. Fear of grace. Fear of the Divine. Fear of being divine and
 of being human. Sensitivities provide the excuse to be too depressed or
 anxious to be spiritual self. Substances usually bond with shame, guilt, terror,
 or any other extreme feeling.

Eighth Chakra
Allergies: Sugar, coffee, alcohol, recreational drugs, tobacco, and substances
used in rituals; reactions to substances that affected self in the past; silver.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances upon which you can project
 blame for own behavior, i.e., "I wouldn't have hurt my spouse if I wasn't
 drunk." Resistance to substances used to harm you, as in a past life.
 Resistance to mystery, as in allergy to silver, a conduit of shamanic
 information. Fear of substances that allow transcendence; indicates fear of
 being out of control in the great unknown.

Ninth Chakra


Allergies: Precious metals, especially gold; metals and substances from other
planets.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to acknowledging the holiness of all
 processes, including what's considered the good, bad, and ugly in this and
 other existences. Resistance to substances that feed the true self and provide
 healing for learning over time. Fear of substances that are like "ambrosia and
 nectar" to the god within. Behavior will involve active resistance of healthy
 foods. Substances often bond with intense shame, blame (shame directed at
 others), or guilt.

Tenth Chakra


Allergies: Root vegetables, potatoes, nuts and nut butters, environmental
emissions, chemicals, artificial products, materials and substances, cultural-
or genetic-related allergies, iron, wood, leather, plastic, natural elements,
cosmic radiation, and planetary energies.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to being one with the earth and nature, and
 those who came before. Judgment against natural self, nature, or naturalness in
 others causes reactions to natural substances. Judgment against inorganic
 (seen as imperfect) within self or nature creates reactions to processed
products. Judgment against procedures involving the killing, hunting, or
preparing of foods will create reactions against basic life energy in these
substances. Many such tendencies are inherited in that they are accepted from
ancestors or through the soul. Substances often bond with judgmental feelings,
such as shame, terror, and blame.

Eleventh Chakra


Allergies: Radioactive elements such as radon or plutonium; elements that are
geo- or astrophysically related.

Possible Causal Issues: Resistance to substances that inhibit or enhance one's
 ability to command natural and supernatural forces. Resistance to substances
 that have transmutational or intense good and bad properties and effects.
 Indicates judgment against one's own two-sided gifts and abilities. Substances
 can bond with judgment, strong shame or guilt, terror, intense rage, or any
 other strong and motivating feeling.

Twelfth Chakra


Nothing in particular, differs from person to person.

                                  ADDICTIONS


Addictions occur in the same way (and to the same substances) as do allergies.
The most noteworthy energetic difference is that an addiction also involves a
cord or binding to an external entity, in addition to the emotional stronghold
(see figures 17.3 and 17.4).
Figure 17.3: Energetic Indications of Addictions

         (can be found in any chakra)
            Figure 17.4: Energetic Indications of Sugar Addiction

                                  ANXIETY


The medical world relates anxiety to stress and fear. It can cause any number
of psychological, mental, and physical issues, including fears, phobias,
apprehension, and tension, as well as bodily reactions, including fast
heartbeat, shortness of breath, fainting, tremors, and sweating. Some people
become fatigued and others experience insomnia. Anxiety is referred to as a
spiraling disorder, because the more anxious you get, the more anxiety you
have about becoming anxious! It can be hard to distinguish between anxiety and
depression because over time, anxiety can become depressing.

   Energetically, anxiety is produced when the outer wheel of a chakra, or
sometimes the physical etheric layer of an organ or organ system, spins too fast
in a clockwise direction (see figure 17.5). It is an energetic attempt to spin the
present out of existence and to reach a more appealing future. Unfortunately,
the quick spin simply pushes the desired goals farther away, and we never get
to our dreams.

   Tracking anxiety involves intuitively determining which chakra (or energy
body) is spinning too fast in a clockwise direction. Focus on the spinning
energy to perceive an image in the center of the wheel. This image represents
the undesirable present-day condition. Next examine the Shadow Records
related to this unwanted situation. They will look like a clear film surrounding
the corresponding chakra or energy field. If you can't see these records in this
locality, you can find them in the eighth chakra, where they cloak the entire
eighth chakra like a transparent film. The Shadow Records contain information
about what did not happen-things that were never done, said, or thought. These
records contain the desires of the future-the ones that are perceived as better
than the current condition. Healing will involve analyzing the current condition
for what to keep and what to release. One then substitutes the energy of the
desired future for the energy of the undesirable present. The spinning energy
should then be brought into rhythmic alignment with the rhythm of the related
chakra's inner wheel.
                Figure 17.5: Energetic Indications of Anxiety

                 (shows the second chakra as an example)

                                 ARTHRITIS


There are several types of arthritis. The main two are osteoarthritis, also
called degenerative or crystal-induced arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis,
which is considered an autoimmune disorder. I consider both to be energetic
autoimmune dysfunctions.

   Osteoarthritis, which causes a degeneration of the cartilage and joints,
involves chakras three, ten, and twelve (see figure 17.6). It involves emotional
strongholds, often originating in the liver, which cause inflammatory reactions
to certain foods, including yeast, gluten, sugar, and cow's milk. The stuck
feeling (usually anger) will actually emanate from the liver and bond with a
belief from the tenth chakra. This belief is passed down generationally. This
stronghold then travels into the twelfth chakra and auric field, which passes it
into the joints.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic disease and often involves an allergy to
proteins. Recent studies are also suggesting that rheumatoid arthritis might
follow viral infections that provide the macrophages and neutrophils to attack
the joints. Energetically, this chakra also involves an emotional stronghold, the
feeling stemming from the liver in the third chakra and the belief inherited from
the tenth chakra. The twelfth chakra is implicated as the "quarterback" that
passes the emotional stronghold into the body, but it does so through the cord
or filaments attaching an external viral body to a site of invasion. (See viruses
under "Microbes")
Figure 17.6: Energetic Indications of Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid Arthritis

                                  ASTHMA


Asthma will appear as a constriction around the lungs and sometimes, the
entire fourth chakra (see figure 17.7). It involves a smothering sensation,
usually from a parent (most frequently, the mother), and mistrust as to the
source of love, which might stem from a mental or emotional stronghold. The
problem might not originate in the fourth chakra, however. It is important to
track the binding constriction to its chakric starting point and also search for
cords. For instance, you might find a lead from the constricting band around the
heart to the fifth chakra, which could hold a fear about expressing oneself, or
perhaps a lead to the second chakra, which holds a fear about getting angry.
Sometimes asthma involves a fungal infection or mold allergy (see fungus
under "Microbes").
               Figure 17.7: Energetic Indications of Asthma

       AUTISM, ASPERGER SYNDROME, AND ATTACHMENT DISORDERS


Nearly one out of every one hundred children is now being diagnosed with
autism. Physically, mercury-filled vaccines have been implicated, as well as
traumatic brain injuries. Researchers have also shown that autistic children
don't appropriately engage their mirror neurons, a set of nerves beneath the
major nervous system that invites empathy.

   Energetically, autistic conditions involve the incomplete entering of the soul
into the heart. You will see at least a part of the soul attached to the silver
cord, and unable or unwilling to enter the body (see figure 17.8). It will,
however, be connected to the one of the chakras through a life energy cord,
continually recycling a past-life drama that created fear and angst. A dark,
constricting band wraps around the heart, keeping emotions at bay and usually
forcing the person to operate out of the third chakra, which explains the
tendency of autistic individuals to operate with a power-based rather than
love-based approach to life.

   Individuals with reactive attachment disorder, or the difficulty in bonding,
often look the same energetically and can be energetically treated in much the
same way. The major difference is that there will almost always be a cord
between the person and at least one of the parents or perhaps an equally
detached grandparent, chakra-to-chakra as well as auric field-to-auric field.
There might also be a codependent bond between the person and either one of
the other parents.
    Figure 17.8: Energetic Indications of Autism, Asperger Syndrome, and
                            Attachment Disorders

                       CANCER-BREAST AND PROSTATE


In general, the development of breast cancer can be seen in the auric layers as
one or more dark shapes pointed at the breast and moving through the aura. The
darkness almost always points to or parallels the exact area a cyst or tumor
might grow or is growing (see figure 17.9).

   Tumors usually have three colors associated with them: black, white, and
red. Black indicates absent or unexpressed emotions. It may signify the root of
the problem or a secondary symptom of the causal issue. If a person is healthy,
white indicates the presence of the soul; if a person is unhealthy, white
indicates a spiritual misperceptionoften the case when there is a tumor. Red
indicates pain or source of the trauma.

   With cancer, there is often another color present, depending on the type of
cancer and the reason it exists. For instance, blue is often present if the
malignancy is caused by holding on to another's issues. Sometimes it can be
difficult to psychically distinguish these secondary colors because cancer itself
is an elusive, out-of-control force. (Cancer is, in fact, undifferentiated tissue,
or cells, like fetal tissue.)

   There may be energy lines linking the breast tumor(s) to various organs or
glands. These lines often descend to the second chakra (to the ovaries, for
instance), reflecting my awareness that breast cancer is often associated with
misperceptions or repressions of feminine power. Lines may also ascend to the
sixth chakra (the pituitary gland), reflecting that a woman's self-image affects
her well-being. If both areas are linked to the diseased breast, I would say this
woman is affected by identity issues involving sexuality and feminine power.
These issues were probably caused by a relationship to another person, which
leads me to search for cords.

   Sickly yellow, slightly white energy in the prostate area, and white, yellow,
and grey splotches between the second and third auric layers are indications of
prostate cancer (see figure 17.10). Psychologically, this yellow color reflects
inappropriate perceptions about power and a lack of clarity regarding the best
use of male energy. Was this man raised to be a "good guy"? Was he made to
feel shame about his first-chakra energy? Did he misuse his sexuality at some
time, or was he victimized for it (through sexual abuse, for example)? Issues
such as these might also be reflected by a dark spot in the third eye (the sixth
chakra).




             Figure 17.9: Energetic Indications of Breast Cancer
            Figure 17.10: Energetic Indications of Prostate Cancer

  It is possible to see splotchy orange and greyish or dark hues in the second
chakra, which indicates that feelings were not integrated or were shamed.
These discolorations may exist in or between the second and third auric layers
around the first chakra. Also, red spots might be detected in the third chakra,
indicating displaced passions.

                                 DEPRESSION


There are probably hundreds of types of and reasons for depression, at least
from an energetic perspective. In general, depression signifies a repression of
feeling responses or a hidden aspect of the self whose feelings were/are
perceived to be unacceptable or dangerous to the self or others.
   Depression in its generic form is one of the easiest problems to spot
energetically. It always appears to me as a dark spot or chamber in the head,
usually deep within the brain itself (see figure 17.11). Some important part of
that person is locked away in a corner of his or her mind. As well, the outer
wheel of the chakra or energy body holding the depression issue will be
moving too slow counterclockwise.

   The key to working with depression is to view the inside this corner or box.
Usually, I lead a client inside. Sometimes, I may look inside myself and find
the following:

• Feelings, represented by their associated colors.

• Pictures of the client at the age associated with a trauma or fear-related
 experience. (I want to see the primary wound, not just those which hook onto
 the initial reaction.)

• Symbols or representation of gifts that have been locked away. (This is more
 common than you might believe; gifts such as compassion or intuition are
 often too dangerous or unacceptable to be acknowledged or used.)

• A soul fragment, an aspect of the soul that has not been integrated or was
 never truly born during this life.

   I also might trace energy lines linking the box to other sites. Sometimes the
lines extend from this box to another part of the body and provide a clue as to
the date, location, or cause of a trauma, and show me what organ might be
chemically affecting this person. Depression, remember, becomes a chemical
condition over time. If feelings from age four have been hidden, organs in the
third chakra may be affected, thus chemically altering the body. The energy
lines may also connect to a part of the brain which has been altered because of
the depressed state. In some cases, depression may actually be the result of a
chemical imbalance. In these cases, it is even more critical to trace these
energy lines to body organs and glands.
              Figure 17.11: Energetic Indications of Depression

                  (shows the second chakra as an example)

  Aurically, the feelings repressed by the depressed person are often picked
up from other people. This results in discolorations and heaviness in the
emotional auric layer (the second layer). It can also result in holes in the
mental auric layer (the third layer) which can attract the "dirt" or negative
feelings from others. Sometimes these feelings are picked up through cords
attached to one or more of the chakras.

   A greyness around the immune system and its organs, such as the thymus and
the spleen, signifies a depleted immune system.

                                  HEADACHE


There are many types and causes of headaches, but all will involve a too-fast,
clockwise spin in the first chakra, which is anxious about something. This
quickened life energy shoots up the spine and often becomes constricted by a
cord or some other type of energetic binding, usually in the fifth chakra. There
it holds, until the cord gives way and the energy suddenly pushes into the head,
creating conditions for a headache. As well, a mental or emotional stronghold
causes a depressive, or too-slow, counterclockwise spin in the seventh chakra.
The two opposing forces, represented by the first and seventh chakras, cause
an "ache" in the head.

  Most interesting is that this energetic explanation mirrors the most recent
scientific understandings of migraine headaches. Brain scans are revealing that
one factor causing migraines is a sudden increase in blood flow into the head,
an increase of about 300 percent, in fact. Once considered a vascular or blood-
system disorder, some researchers now link migraines with the brain stem, a
part of the limbic system in the back of the neck area.' The energetic
indications in figure 17.12 occur in the same physical localities as noted by
scientific researchers.

                                HEART DISEASE


Heart illnesses often reflect issues about love, because the heart is located in
the relationship (fourth) chakra. Before it strikes, heart disease can sometimes
be seen in the etheric auric layer or in the tenth chakra, where the inherited
diseases are found and where disease patterns might be held until they become
too intense. The issues are then dumped into the body. In general, the key to
heart issues is to locate the fear-based responses to relationships. Fear is the
motivator for a person's inability to give or receive love.

  There are several indicators of heart disease. One is a grey color and black
spots in the fourth auric layer (see figure 17.13). Another is the appearance of
dark energy in one or more of the heart chambers, right outside the heart itself
(somewhere in the pericardium). This darkness becomes more defined and
pronounced as the disease progresses, finally turning into a series of tight
bands that squeeze the heart during or right before a heart attack.
Figure 17.12: Energetic Indications of a Headache
             Figure 17.13: Energetic Indications of Heart Disease

  I might see one or more intense red spots in the heart area. Because these red
spots indicate where the heart is concentrating or trying to contain energy, they
become deeper-colored as the series of bands grow tighter. In this case, the
heart is trying to preserve its life energy.

  Often, there are also spots of white in the heart area. These white spots, if
healthy and bright, indicate the presence of the soul. Either the soul is trying to
work on the heart and its issues, or it is preparing to dissociate (just before
death). If the white is unhealthy looking, I have the client examine what
spiritual misperceptions they hold. These could be the very issues causing the
problem.

  With chronic heart issues, the green color of a healthy heart chakra tends to
discolor, becoming sort of black, brown, or yellow.

   Dark or light red energy often emerges out of the left hand. This is an energy
leak, signifying that the heart is not circulating energy as it should. The red is
life energy draining from the body; the dark is negative energy that the body is
trying to slough off.

  As a person gets closer to a heart attack, the other organs contract tightly
within the body. For instance, the liver may become rigid and collapse inward.

   When dealing with heart disease, one should also look for cords in the heart
area. These cords may also connect to a lower part of the body and a prior
experience causing difficulties, or to a person (alive or not) who, in a
relationship, created these fear-based responses to love.

                        IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME (IBS)


A syndrome is a group of symptoms linked by a known or unknown cause.
Symptoms of IBS include bloating, pain, and incomplete evacuation of the
bowels. Women are three times more likely to be affected than men, and there
is a significant relationship between IBS and a history of physical or sexual
abuse in childhood. IBS is also linked with anxiety, psychological stress, and
personality disorders.

   IBS is a second-chakra disease and always involves an emotional
stronghold, as well as either a depressive (too-slow, counterclockwise spin)
or an anxiety-ridden (too-fast clockwise spin) in the second chakra (see figure
17.14). There is usually at least one energetic binding between the IBS sufferer
and something or someone else, usually a codependent bond.




       Figure 17.14: Energetic Indications of Irritable Bowel Syndrome
                                  MICROBES


Bacteria


Bacteria can only exist in the presence of distorted or unrecognized fear and
will look like tiny dark blots of energy within a chakra (or organ or organ
system) that is spinning too fast (see figure 17.15). Fear appears differently to
different people, but it often looks like a yellowish energy. You can intuitively
peer into any of the bacterium and perceive the situation causing the fear, and
from there, decide how to move forward or backward in relation to the related
situation, or deal with it in a healthier way.
     Figure 17.15: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Bacteria

(shows the fourth chakra as an example, such as walking pneumonia)
Fungus (also yeast and mold)


Fungus is rooted in distorted sadness, often regret, which insists that you have
permanently lost out on an opportunity for love. This might be love in terms of
relationship, but it would also be love related to one's work, a hobby, or any
other opportunity. Sadness is a "wet" energy that encourages fungus, yeast,
parasites, and mold and can be linked to diseases of the autoimmune nature,
including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease; environmental toxicity;
yeast and Candida infections; sugar, dairy and gluten allergies and cravings;
asthma; certain heart diseases (especially those related to heart blockages);
smoking addiction; bowel and intestinal problems; endometriosis; sinus
problems; ear infections; bleeding issues; histoplasmosis (carried by soil and
birds); coccidioidomycosis, similar to influenza; pneumocystosis (often
present in people with AIDS and decreased immune function); cryptococcosis
(often found in people with Hodgkin's disease); and lymph problems.

  Fungi often align with parasites, the thought being that maybe an interfering
entity can be a companion and "do better" than the self did.

  The easiest way to look for a fungus is to intuitively examine either the
second or third chakras, namely the intestines or the liver. It will look like
blobs of grey matter, often surrounded by a watery film (see figure 17.16).
Cords or other energetic bindings might be present, leading from the fungal
microbes themselves, or the corresponding chakras or organs, to the situation,
person, or event that initiated the regret. To heal a fungus-related microbe, it's
important to revisit the event itself, break all bindings, and forgive self or
other. Accessing the Book of Life in the eighth chakra can be extremely helpful,
as it shows how to interpret a "negative" or loss-related situation with a
positive point of view.
            Figure 17.16: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Fungus

                   (shows most frequently affected chakras)

Parasites
Parasites are invaders that feed off our energy. They establish a one-way
binding, usually digging into an already-present energetic binding, to suck our
energy, without giving anything in return. They will look like tiny beings or
entities attached to an energy binding established within some part of the
energetic system or the soul (see figure 17.17). The energy will flow only one
way through the parasitic cord-from us to them.

  Some physical parasites are actually representative of entities from any
level of reality, channeling through the parasite to draw energy from us. It's
important to check for an originating source for the parasite.
     Figure 17.17: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Parasites

(shows the second chakra as an example, such as intestinal parasites)
Virus


Viruses are actually entities that don't belong in the human body, or perhaps on
earth at all. They underlie hundreds of major and minor diseases and indicate a
susceptibility to hosting energies that don't suit us. They usually exist in the
presence of distorted or unrecognized anger or emotional strongholds dealing
with powerlessness. For some reason, we believe that we deserve to be
invaded by something that is not us, and that we don't have the power
necessary to prevent this hostile takeover.

   Physically, a virus doesn't actually have its own DNA; rather, it replicates
our own, making it difficult for our own immune system to recognize a virus
and thus mount an attack. This disguise tactic also makes it challenging to
recognize a virus through energetic means-unless you look outside the body, in
the auric field. Viruses in the body are actually controlled by a larger group
intelligence, which will intuitively look like a cartoon-shaped, pulsating blob
of energy (see figure 17.18). This shape will be attached to the primary
infection site in the body. Secondary filaments might stream from the primary
cord or off the viral parent, as well. The best way to treat a virus is to unpin it
from the body, open the chakras to their true power source (usually through the
first chakra), and lovingly send the viral parent back to its true home.
     Figure 17.18: Energetic Indications of Microbes-Virus

(shows the fourth and fifth chakras as an example, such as a cold)
                                     PAIN


It's important to track systematic or even localized pain to its originating
source and its nearby chakra in order to clear it (see figure 17.19). Begin the
search in the first chakra, which fuels the pain (or the cause of it) with life
energy. A cord or filament will emerge from the first chakra and will split and
travel to these two sites:

1. The pain body and, possibly through it, the red zone. Either or both of these
 energy centers might be the actual source of the pain. The pain body holds an
 overflow of pain, and might either be siphoning off pain from the current
 injury site or actually dumping pain into the body that has been stored from an
 earlier situation. The red zone holds emotional residue from earlier
 incarnations as well as unfelt feelings from this one. It might also be storing
 the overflow of pain from a current problem or disposing of extra emotional
 energy in the physical body.

2. The in-body origin of the pain. This site could represent the true starting
 point of the pain or serve as the receptacle of pain unleashed from the pain
 body or red zone.
                 Figure 17.19: Energetic Indications of Pain

                                   PHOBIAS


Phobias are considered irrational fears that lead to an avoidance of the feared
stimulus. Energetically, they are rational, not irrational, fears, usually
originating in a past life experience. For instance, someone who drowns in a
past life might have an unexplainable fear of drowning. Someone with a fear of
fire might have lost a loved one in a fire, during a different incarnation.

   To track a soul-based, past-life phobia, look for a dark coloration or ball of
energy; the outer wheel might be spinning either too fast or slow (anxious or
depressed; see figure 17.20). You will find it in the chakra holding the phobia.
If you cannot detect this ball, examine the Akashic Records in the eighth
chakra, which always mirrors the phobia's energy. Dark or yellow filaments
will stream from this "phobic ball." At some point, often out in the auric layer
associated with the hosting chakra, these filaments congregate and form a
single rope of energy. This energy line can be tracked across time and space to
the lifetime that initiated the phobia. Sometimes a phobia stems from an
ancestor's experiences, in which case the ball of phobic energy will most
likely emanate from the tenth chakra.
       Figure 17.20: Energetic Indications of a Phobia

(example of fear of flying; phobias can originate in any chakra)
                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albohm, Anders. "Neurodegenerative Diseases, Suicide and Depression
Symptoms in Relation to EMF." Bioelectromagnetics, S132.

Albohm, Anders, Elisabeth Cardis, Adele Green, Martha Linet, David Savitz,
and Anthony Swerdlow. "Review of the Epidemiologic Literature on EMF
and Health." Environmental Health Perspectives, December 2001.

Ambjorn, Jan, Jerzy Jurkiewicz, and Renate Loll. "The Self-Organizing
Quantum Universe." Scientific American, July 2008, Vol. 299, No. 1.

Andrews, Ted. Imagick: The Magick of Images, Paths & Dance. St. Paul, MN:
Llewellyn Publications, 1989.

Arewa, Caroline Shola. Opening to Spirit: Contacting the Healing Power of
the Chakras and Honouring African Spirituality. London: Thorsons, 1999.

Bach, Richard. Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant Messiah. New York:
Dell Publishing Company, 1977.

Balaskas, Janet. "The Feminine Power of Birth," in Uncoiling the Snake, ed.
Vicki Noble. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.

Bradshaw, John. Bradshaw On: The Family. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health
Communications, Inc., 1988.

Healing the Shame that Binds You. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health
Communications, Inc., 1988.

Brennan, Barbara Ann. Hands of Light: A Guide to Healing Through the Human
Energy Field. New York: Bantam Books, 1987.

Bruyere, Rosalyn L. Wheels of Light: A Study of the Chakras, ed. Jeanne
Farrens. Arcadia, CA: Bon Productions, 1989.
Callaway, J. C. "A Proposed Mechanism for the Visions of Dream Sleep."
Medical Hypothesis 26, 1988, 119-24.

Cao, Y. N., Y. Liu, and Y. Zhang. "Effects of Exposure to Extremely Low
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields on Reproduction of Female Mice and
Development of Offsprings." Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei ShengZhi Ye Bing Za
Zhi, August 2006.

Carlson, John B. "Lodestone Compass: Chinese or Olmec Primacy?" Science,
New Series, Vol. 189, No. 4205. September 5, 1975.

Castaneda, Carlos. The Eagle's Gift. New York: Washington Square Press,
1981.

Chopra, Deepak. Creating Health. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1987.

Dale, Cyndi. Advanced Chakra Healing: Energy Mapping on the Four
Pathways. Berkeley, CA: Crossings Press, 2005.

. Advanced Chakra Healing: Heart Disease. Berkeley, CA: Crossings Press,
 2007.

Damasio, Antonio R. Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain.
London: Picador, 1994.

Devereux, Paul. Places of Power. London: Blandford Press, 1990.

Dodick, David W., and Gargus, J. Jay. "Why Migraines Strike," Scientific
American, August 2008, 56-63.

Edwards, Harry. A Guide to Spiritual Healing. London: Spiritualist Press,
 1956.

Evans, John. Mind, Body and Electromagnetism. Dorset, UK: Element, 1986.

Furlong, David. Working with Earth Energies. London: Piatkus, 2003.
Gerber, Richard. Vibrational Medicine. Santa Fe, NM: Bear & Company,
1988.

Goswami, Shyam Sundar. Layayoga. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 1999.

Gray, Henry. Gray's Anatomy. Philadelphia: Running Press, 1974.

Haimov, I., and P. Lavie. "Melatonin-A Soporific Hormone." Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 1996.

Hansen, J. "Increased Breast Cancer Risk Among Women Who Work
Predominantly at Night." Epidemiology, January 2001.

Hunt, Valerie V., Wayne M. Massey, Robert Weinberg, Rosalyn Bruyere, and
Pierre M. Hahn. "A Study of Structural Integration from Neuromuscular,
Energy Field, and Emotional Approaches." Rolf Institute of Structural
Integration, 1977. <http:// www.rolf.com.au/downloads/ucla.pdf>.

Jacka, Judy. The Vivaxis. Charlottesville, VA: Hampton Roads, 2000.

Johari, Harish. Chakras: Energy Centers of Transformation. Rochester, VT:
 Destiny, 2000.

Kalweit, Holger. Dreamtime and Inner Space: The World of the Shaman.
Boston: Shambhala Publications, Inc., 1984.

Katz, Richard. Boiling Energy: Community Healing Among the Kalahari Kung.
Boston: Harvard College, 1982.

King, Serge. Kahuna Healing. Wheaton, IL: The Theosophical Publishing
House, 1983.

Lansdowne, Zachary F. The Rays and Esoteric Psychology. York Beach, ME:
 Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1989.

Leadbeater, C. W. The Chakras. Wheaton, IL: The Theosophical Publishing
House, 1927.

Ledwith, Miceal, D.D., L.L.D., and Klaus Heinemann, Ph.D. The Orb Project.
 New York: Atria, 2007.

Lindsay, Bethany. "The Compass of Birds." The Science Creative Quarterly,
 Sept.-Nov. 2006.

Lloyd, Seth. Programming the Universe. New York: Vintage, 2006.

Matthews, John. The Celtic Shaman. Rockport, MA: Element, Inc., 1992.

McTaggart, Lynne. The Field. New York: Harper Perennial, 2002.

Men, Hunbatz. Secrets of Mayan Science/Religion, trans. Diane Gubiseh Ayala
and James Jennings Dunlapp II. Santa Fe, NM: Bear & Company, 1990.

Morgan, Marlo. Mutant Message Down Under. Lees Summit, MO: MM Co.,
1991.

Motoyama, Hiroshi, and Rande Brown Ouchi. Science and the Evolution of
Consciousness. Brookline, MA: Autumn 1978.

Pearsall, Paul, Ph.D. The Heart's Code. New York: Broadway Books, 1988.

Pert, Candace, Ph.D. Molecules of Emotion: The Science Behind Mind-Body
 Medicine. New York: Scribner, 1997.

Puthoff, H. E. "Gravity as a Zero-Point Fluctuation Force." Physical Review
 A. Vol. 39, No. 5. March 1989.

. "Zero-Point Energy: An Introduction." Fusion Facts 3, No. 3. 1991.

Randall, Georgia Lambert. Esoteric Anatomy (tape series, Wrekin Trust UK,
1991; as relayed in Arewa, Opening to Spirit).

The Etheric Body (unpublished lecture notes, 1983).
Reynolds, David K. Water Bears No Scars: Japanese Lifeways for Personal
Growth. New York: William Morrow & Company, 1987.

Rogers, Carl D. On Becoming a Person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company,
1961.

Roney-Dougal, S. M. "Recent Findings Relating to the Possible Role of the
Pineal Gland in Affecting Psychic Abilities." J. Soc. Psych. Res., 1989.

Rubik, Beverly, Ph.D. "Can Western Science Provide a Foundation for
Acupuncture?" Alternative Therapies, September 1995.

Stein, Diane. Women's Psychic Lives (formerly Stroking the Python). St. Paul,
 MN: Llewellyn Publications, 1988.

Stetler, Alfred. PSI-Healing. New York: Bantam Books, 1976.

Suplee, Curt. "The Speed of Light Is Exceeded in Lab: Scientists Accelerate a
 Pulse of Light." The Washington Post, July 20, 2000.

Talbot, Michael. The Holographic Universe. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.

Taubes, Gary. "The Electric Man." Discover, April 1986.

Tiller, Dr. William. Science and Human Transformation: Subtle Energies,
 Intentionality, and Consciousness. Walnut Creek, CA: Pavior Publishing,
 1997.

. "Subtle Energies," Science & Medicine. May/June 1999, Vol. 6, No. 3.

Tynes, Tore, L. Klaeboe, and T. Haldorsen. "Residential and Occupational
 Exposure to 50 Hz Magnetic Fields and Malignant Melanoma: A Population
 Based Study." Occup Environ Med, May 2003.

Underwood, Anne. "The Good Heart" Newsweek. October 3, 2005.

Varenne, Jean. Yoga and the Hindu Tradition. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1976.

Vestergaard, Lene Hau. "Frozen Light." Scientific American, May 2003.

Villoldo, Alberto, Ph.D. Shaman, Healer, Sage. New York: Harmony, 2000.

Wang, L. J., A. Kuzmich, and A. Dogariu. "Gain-assisted Superluminal Light
Propagation." Nature, Vol. 406, Issue No. 6794 (July 20, 2000).

Watters, Ethan. "DNA Is Not Your Destiny." Discover, November 2006.

Wertheimer, N., and E. Leeper. "Electrical Wiring Configurations and
Childhood Cancer." Am JEpidemiol,1979.

Whistler, W. Arthur. Polynesian Herbal Medicine. Kauai, HI: National
Tropical Botanical Garden, 1992.

Whitton, Joel L., and Joe Fisher. Life Between Life. New York: Doubleday,
1986.

Wiedemann, Frederic. Between Two Worlds: The Riddle of Wholeness.
Wheaton, IL: The Theosophical Publishing House, 1986.

Ywahoo, Dhyani. Voices of Our Ancestors. Boston: Shambhala Publications,
Inc., 1987.
INDEX
       WHEELS OF LIFE

A User's Guide to the Chakra System

          Anodea Judith
Wheels of Life is an instruction manual for owning and operating the inner
gears that run the machinery of our lives. Written in a practical, downto-
earth style, this fully illustrated book will take the reader on a journey
through aspects of consciousness, from the bodily instincts of survival to the
processing of deep thoughts.

  Discover this ancient metaphysical system under the new light of popular
Western metaphors: quantum physics, Kabbalah, physical exercises, poetic
meditations, and visionary art. Learn how to open these centers in yourself,
and see how the chakras shed light on the present world crises we face
today. And learn what you can do about it!

   This book is a vital resource for magicians, witches, pagans, mystics,
yoga practitioners, martial artists, psychologists, medical people, and all
those who are concerned with holistic growth techniques.

                0-87542-320-5, 48o PP., 6 x 9, ILLUS. $17.95

                      To order, call 1-877-NEW-WRLD

                   Prices subject to change without notice

  ORDER AT LLEWELLYN.COM 24 HOURS A DAY, 7 DAYS A WEEK!

                       EVERYDAY CLAIRVOYANT

     Extraordinary Answers to Love, Destiny and Balance in Your Life

                                  Cyndi Dale

This engaging guide from professional clairvoyant and best-selling author
Cyndi Dale features true personal stories and practical advice on how to
handle everything from everyday concerns to major life decisions. Cyndi
has provided intuitive consulting and healing to more than thirty thousand
individuals, helping them lead more successful, happy, and prosperous
 lives.

    In this fascinating book, she shares what she's learned with readers in a
 fun Q & A format that is organized into three main life categories:
 relationships, work or destiny, and health.

    Heartwarming, humorous, and surprisingly down to earth, Everyday
 Clairvoyant also shows readers how to develop and make use of their own
 intuitive gifts.

               978-0-7387-1923-8, 312 PP, 5 3/16 x 8 $16.95

                      To order, call 1-877-NEW-WRLD

                    Prices subject to change without notice

  ORDER AT LLEWELLYN.COM 24 HOURS A DAY, 7 DAYS A WEEK!

                          TO WRITE TO THE AUTHOR


If you wish to contact the author or would like more information about this
book, please write to the author in care of Llewellyn Worldwide and we will
forward your request. Both the author and publisher appreciate hearing from
you and learning of your enjoyment of this book and how it has helped you.
Llewellyn Worldwide cannot guarantee that every letter written to the author
can be answered, but all will be forwarded. Please write to:




Please enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope for reply, or $1.00 to cover
      costs. If outside U.S.A., enclose international postal reply coupon.

  Many of Llewellyn's authors have websites with additional information
and resources. For more information, please visit our website at
