    DAILY VAGUS NERVE
        EXERCISES:
    A SELF-HELP GUIDE TO
   STIMULATE VAGAL TONE,
RELIEVE ANXIETY AND PREVENT
    INFLAMMATION. WITH
 PRACTICAL EXERCISES AND A
    FOCUS ON MEDITATIVE
        TECHNIQUES. 
Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1. What is Vagus Nerve
Chapter 2. Main Functions of the Vagus Nerve
Chapter 3. How the Vagus Nerve Affects Anxiety
Chapter 4. How the Vagus Nerve Affects Stress
Chapter 5. Vagus Nerve and Inflammation
Chapter 6. Vagus Nerve and Depression
Chapter 7. Signs Your Vagus Nerve Requires Attention
Chapter 8. Activating the Vagus Nerve and Exercises
Chapter 9. Passive Method to Activate the Vagus Nerve
Chapter 10 .               Creating a Vagal Tone Routine
Chapter 11 .               Meditative Techniques for the Support of the Vagus
Nerve
Chapter 12 .                                         Measuring Nervous Function with Heart
Rate Variability (HRV)
Chapter 13 .               (VNS) Vagus Nerve Stimulation
Chapter 14 .               Practical Exercises to Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
Chapter 15 .               Health And Life Benefits of Vagus Nerve Stimulation
Chapter 16 .               Vagus Nerve Stimulation to Heal from PTSD
Chapter 17 .               Vagus Nerve Stimulation to Heal from Trauma
Conclusion
                    Introduction
Nervousness can be tricky. It's outlandishly muddled, profoundly close to
home, and ridiculously difficult to foresee. There are times when we think
our uneasiness is behind us—that we are at last one stage ahead—yet
something happens, and we are on our heels once more, battling to return to
a position of harmony and quiet. We are on the understudies of our
uneasiness, and that is the reason seeing precisely how our sensory system
functions—and what we can do to quiet it—can be staggeringly enabling.
In any case, what does "quieting your sensory system" indeed mean?
Numerous individuals would depict it as easing back the pulse, developing
the breath, and loosening up various muscles. But what associates these
sensations to the mind? Enabling us to acquaint you with the vagus nerve,
the piece of the body that appears to clarify how our psyches control our
bodies, how our bodies impact our brains, may give us the instruments we
have to quiet them both.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is brought on by people who have
experienced a traumatic injury or languish trouble or functional disability.
Manifestations incorporate sentiments of re-encountering the horrendous
mishap, keeping away from tokens of the damage, uplifted tension and
excitement, and negative musings or emotions. Ongoing catastrophic
events, mass shootings, psychological oppressor assaults, and urban
communities under attack add to the worldwide weight of PTSD which, as
indicated by a recent report, influences 4–6% of the world's population,
even though most of the injuries identified with mishaps and sexual or
physical savagery. Shockingly, there is no known fix, and flow medicines
are not convincing for all patients. A PTSD psychopharmacology
committee recently gathered and distributed their accord proclamation,
calling for a quick activity to address the emergency in PTSD treatment,
referring to three significant concerns.
The US FDA endorses just two medications (sertraline and paroxetine) for
the treatment of PTSD. These meds decrease side effects seriousness;
however, it may not create a total reduction of side effects. The subsequent
concern is identified with polypharmacy. PTSD patients are recommended
prescriptions to address every one of their numerous extraordinary and
assorted side effects, including nervousness, trouble dozing, sexual
brokenness, wretchedness, and interminable torment. The high comorbidity
among PTSD and fixation gives further difficulties to pharmacotherapies.
The third significant concern is the absence of headways in the treatment of
PTSD; no new prescriptions have been endorsed since 2001.
Going past side effect alleviation, the 'best quality level' way to deal with
treating PTSD pathology is introduction based treatment, where patients are
presented to the tokens of the injury until they figure out how to connect
these prompts with wellbeing. Despite the fact that there is proof for
adequacy with this methodology, not all patients react entirely to the
treatment. Introduction treatment relies on the way toward stifling the
adapted dread memory, which is overwhelmed by another mind that creates
through rehashed exposures. The patients with nervousness issues and
PTSD show weaknesses in their capacity to quench adapted feelings of
dread, which could add to the advancement of scatters and may meddle
with the progress in treatment. Since the memory of the injury isn't lost at
the same time, but rather, upgrades through treatment based on newly
learned affiliations that horrible rival alliances, the parity of the two
recollections can move after some time, prompting backslide. Different
difficulties incorporate the trouble in perceiving and smothering
apprehension of every single molded boost and a high dropout rate, which
isn't astonishing given that shirking is one of the indications of PTSD.
Numerous creature investigative labs have tried endeavors to create
adjunctive medications to quicken or improve the impacts of presentation-
based treatments. Spearheading work done by Michael Davis demonstrated
that organization of the psychological improving medication d-cycloserine
before presenting rodents to unreinforced molded signals upgraded
annihilation, and he and his associates, therefore, deciphered the disclosure
when they found that d-cycloserine improved the impacts of presentation
treatment in patients with understandable fears. In any case, aftereffects of
studies evaluating the effects of psychological enhancers as subordinates to
presentation treatment are blended on account of PTSD. A conceivable
clarification is that medications given before introduction treatment
sessions risk fortifying negative affiliations if presentation produces
nervousness. Anxiolytic drugs have been attempted in light of proof that
these medications ought to improve decency and decrease the tension
reaction during the introduction. Nonetheless, results show that anxiolytic
medications don't improve the impacts of presentation treatment. One
clarification is that the uneasiness reaction is required for accomplishment
in introduction treatment since patients must learn not to fear their own
dread reaction. Similarly, just as stress can improve the capacity of
horrendous mishaps, the tension reaction may upgrade the combination of
the termination memory. Predictable with this, anxiolytic medications will,
in general, hinder memory combination. A perfect deal would take
advantage of the systems that improve the union of horrendous
recollections so as to advance elimination recollections that are similarly as
solid, at the same time bypassing or maintaining a strategic distance from
the aversive pressure reaction.
Developing proof proposes that vagus nerve incitement (VNS) might be a
gainful extra to introduction based treatments through its blending of
definite improvement of memory combination and neural versatility.
Enthusiasm for the vagus nerve (the tenth cranial nerve) as a
neuromodulator originates from a long strand of research demonstrating
that the vagus nerve fills in as an extension between the fringe autonomic
sensory system and the cerebrum. It flags the mind during times of elevated
thoughtful movement, advancing quick stockpiling of recollections that are
significant for endurance. As a vital aspect of the parasympathetic sensory
system, initiation of the vagus nerve neutralizes the thoughtful pressure
reaction.
VNS upgrades memory in rodents and people, proposing that blending VNS
with an unreinforced introduction to adapted signals may improve the union
of the elimination memory. Predictable with this theory, we found that VNS
upgraded the elimination of molded dread in rodents. Ample proof shows
that VNS advances neural versatility, particularly when it is combined with
preparing, and this impact includes VNS regulation of the locus coeruleus
noradrenergic framework. We have watched pliancy impacts in the
termination related infralimbic prefrontal cortex – basolateral amygdala
pathway in the wake of blending VNS with a presentation to unreinforced
molded prompts, proposing that VNS-improved elimination might be
hearty, enduring, and less vulnerable to backslide. In an ongoing report, we
found that VNS improved termination of molded dread in a rodent model of
PTSD. These rodents express a considerable lot of the biomarkers and
conduct phenotypes that are related to PTSD and, significantly, they are
impervious to the elimination of molded dread. We found that the VNS
organization during elimination sessions switched this termination disability
and counteracted the arrival of fear. VNS-treated rodents likewise
performed better on the trial of tension, excitement, evasion, and social
association's weeks later, demonstrating that inversion of the elimination
hindrance meant enhancements in other PTSD indications.
Moreover, interminable, unpaired VNS, as is utilized in the treatment of
epilepsy and despondency, improved execution on the Hamilton Anxiety
Scale in individual patients with tension issues, and diminished uneasiness-
like conduct in rodents. The impacts of VNS on termination in our
examinations are not seen when the VNS is managed 30 min to 1 h in the
wake of preparing. In this way, VNS alone isn't adequate to decrease the
dread reaction. These discoveries recommend that VNS may diminish
nervousness, however, matching explicit pliancy and memory tweak is vital
for elimination upgrade. Our ongoing, unpublished findings show that
rodents are bound to investigate the open arms of a rodent raised in addition
to labyrinth following getting VNS, proposing that VNS produces a
powerful anxiolytic impact. Moreover, corticosterone levels expanded
radically in trick treated rodents following testing on the raised in addition
to the labyrinth, however, such an expansion was not seen in VNS-treated
rodents. This work ought to be imitated in different settings, yet it is an
empowering initial move toward distinguishing an assistant treatment that
may improve decency and adequacy in presentation based treatments.
               Chapter 1. What is Vagus Nerve
We know that the Vagus nerve is a long, “wandering” nerve; it is a parcel of
sensory and motor fibers. It begins in the brain stem and interacts with the
heart, lungs, and gut. It continues to spread out and interact with other
major organs such as the liver, gallbladder, spleen, and more. 
Our involuntary nerve center is boosted and regulates insensate body
operations. It monitors your heart rate, breathing, food digestion, and
sweating. Our blood pressure and blood glucose are balanced. It helps the
function of the kidney, the discharge of testosterone and bile, the release of
saliva is stimulated, controls taste releases tears, and is a major key in
orgasms in women and fertility issues (Ropp, 2017).
Approximately 80 percent of the nerve fibers transmit information by way
of four “lanes” of the nerve. In the opposite direction, the fifth lane is
simultaneously bringing signs from the brain through the body. 
The nerve begins in the brain stem, extends down the neck and into the
chest where it splits into left and right Vagus. Tens of thousands of nerve
fibers that each “road” is composed of branches out into all the major
organs in the body.
To say that the Vagus nerve has a lot to do with how our involuntary nerve
center is powered is an understatement. It has been noted that “if we were
without the Vagus nerve, many major functions of the body that keep us
alive would not be maintained.” In order to have your Vagus functioning at
optimum levels, it needs to be activated. 
Acetylcholine, the neurotransmitter stimulates muscle contractions and is
used by the Vagus nerve. This allows signals to be moved from one place to
another and stimulates various organs. Acetylcholine production can be
interfered with by substances such as Botox and the heavy metal mercury.
Botox is a substance that can interfere with the Vagus nerve. Another
problem is mercury - it blocks acetylcholine.
What happens if your Vagus nerve is not functioning properly?  For some of
us, the solution may be to have it electronically stimulated. 
The FDA has approved the use of vagus nerve stimulation in treating two
different chronic conditions. People who have epilepsy or have an autistic
child may find that this route is the most beneficial way to stimulate the
Vagus nerve to treat and improve these illnesses. Scientists have recognized
the possibility of stimulating the Vagus nerve with an electronic implant
that is activated with a magnetic strip. Chronic conditions such as epilepsy
and autism have had FDA approval to implant this device for treatment.
Those with chronic conditions report great results having their Vagus nerve
stimulated many times each day. 
People with chronic pain and stiffness and who could barely get out of bed
are seeing amazing results. They’re able to go on long walks, swim, and
even dance again. The stimulation of the Vagus nerve is aiding the body in
doing what it’s supposed to do – heal itself. 
When our nervous system functions at optimum levels, we feel great.
However, Vagus nerve damage or low vagal tone is more the norm.
Even small changes to the Vagus nerve can exhibit results that are
impressive. There are several studies being conducted to prove the
stimulation of the nerve is a useful way to treat more chronic diseases.
Whether the treatment is electronic or non-invasive, stimulations proving to
be a non-medicinal way to have diseases show improvement. However,
what about stimulating the Vagus nerve ourselves?  What can we do to
activate it?  But before we get into how to activate it, a look at what causes
the nerve to become damaged is called. Fixing what’s broken doesn’t work
if you don’t address and fix what caused it to be broken in the first place.
      Vagal Dysfunction
Vagal dysfunction can bring a myriad of problems that can disrupt the
normal flow of the body and introduce chronic disease and illness.
The Vagus nerve has quite a few conditions that have been linked or are
being researched at this time for a link to this nerve. These issues can range
from minor conditions to serious, more significant issues.
Quite a few people will have a vasovagal reaction eventually because of the
overstimulation or stress of the Vagus nerve. 
Some reasons and results linked to the Vagus nerve being irritated or
damaged include:

             Obesity
             Hormonal imbalance
             Constant stress and anxiety
             Alcohol addiction
             Diabetes
             Cancer
             Spicy foods
             IBS (Irritable Bowel Syndrome)
             Insomnia
             Chronic Fatigue
             Chronic inflammation
             Depression
             Tinnitus

             Migraine headaches
             Alzheimer’s disease
             Poor blood circulation
             Leaky gut
             Mood disorders
             Vitamin deficiency

So, if you’re overweight, are stressed and anxious on a consistent basis,
overdo it with alcohol, have developed diabetes, eat spicy foods, are
constantly fatigued, and can identify with many of the other causes or
reactions you may be having, your Vagus nerve is probably irritated. 
These conditions are due to the inability to switch from the sympathetic
responses and reestablish balance and calmness in your body.
     Damage of the Vagus Nerve
A range of symptoms can manifest due to damage to the Vagus nerve. The
main reason for this is because the nerve is so long and affects many organs
of the body. (Seladi-Schulman, 2018)

             A hoarse voice or wheezy
             Loss of gag reflex
             Trouble drinking liquids
             Difficulty speaking
             Decreased production of stomach acid
             Vomiting or nausea
             Pain or abdominal bloating
             Testing the Vagus Nerve

A doctor may check the gag reflex to test the Vagus nerve. The doctor may
use a cotton swab to tickle both sides of the back of the throat. Normally,
this should cause a person to gag. If they don’t, this may indicate a problem
with the Vagus nerve.
There are ways that can help to revitalize the Vagus nerve. Stimulation of
the nerve can be a help for your body. Studies have been done to exhibit
how important the Vagus nerve is and how it interfaces with so many of the
body’s organs. 
The Vagus nerve furnishes us to react to psychological, physical, and
emotional symptoms that come from a lack of balance in the body and
might be the key to improving your health.
When you perform vagal nerve stimulation, there are major improvements
health-wise, including the relief of many autoimmune illnesses and an
overall feel-better effect.
The Vagus nerve works well when it is strong and has a high vagal tone. If
you are dealing with many of the named irritants and results linked to the
vagal nerve, the vagal tone is low. 
Vagal tone is an indication of the condition you are in. For example, people
who exercise on a regular basis, athletes, and those who practice yoga or
other types of physical activity will exhibit a higher vagal tone. 
Adversely, people who are alcoholics or drink far beyond legal limits, along
with people who are bedridden or don’t exercise regularly, have lower vagal
tone. You may have a low vagal tone if your mother also had a low vagal
tone during her pregnancy with you. She may have been stressed, anxious,
or angry during the pregnancy. It’s possible the low vagal tone was passed
down to you. 
In order to increase your vagal tone, you need to work it out, just like
exercising the body and continue to activate it. You don’t need to do an
elaborately long workout – 15 to 20 minutes each day would be good. The
more you do, it would be better, but if you’re doing daily stimulations of the
Vagus nerve, you’re doing okay.
      Activating the Vagus Nerve
Most people envision the Vagus nerve to be one thin cord reaching from the
brain stem to the gut. Actually, it is a nerve that extends down both sides of
the body and is a branch of the shaggy, meandering nerve that connects to
most of the major organs like a system of cables or roots. (Zimmerman,
2019)
The Vagus nerve is responsible for the mind-body connection, its role as a
go-between between thinking and feeling. 
Stimulating the Vagus nerve has an impactful effect on lowering the heart
rate. This is what relaxes us. Our Vagus nerve is receiving information from
the way we breathe and sends it to the brain and the heart the message our
breathing signifies.
The more we activate it with deep breathing, the more we negate the effects
of the sympathetic nervous system. Instead of feeling stressed and anxious,
we feel calm and relaxed.
The heart slows, and we relax when we breathe slowly, but when we
breathe quickly, our heart rate increases, and we feel anxious or amped.
Vagal activity is at its highest, and the heart rate is at its lowest when you
exhale.
Researchers found that the most calming way to breathe is six times a
minute. Five seconds inhale, five seconds exhale.
This style of slow breathing is also what practitioners of meditation
naturally drift into with mantras they recite slowly. Each time you repeat a
meditation mantra, your breathing naturally coordinates your breathing at
six times a minute. (Zimmerman, 2019)
There are ways to measure the vagal tone – finding out how strong, healthy,
and functioning the nerve is. Measuring the heart rate variability (HRV) is a
substitute way to measure vagal tone (the other way would be open chest
surgery). 
The amount that the heart rate fluctuates between breaths in when it speeds
up naturally and breathe out when it slows down is heart rate variability.
Thus the heart rate increases when we inhale and decreases when we
exhale, and the difference between the two rates measure vagal tone. 
People who are physically active such as athletes, usually have a higher
vagal tone, and those who have a sedentary lifestyle with little to no
exercise and, surprisingly, astronauts who spend time in no-gravity
situations are known to have low vagal tone. 
There are many ways to stimulate the Vagus nerve. You can laugh, sing,
chant, hum, gargle, meditate, do full-body exercising, breathing exercises,
or engage in sound-related activities such as listening to music or white
noise. These are just a few activities recommended for stimulation.
Splashing cold water on your face or taking a full-body rinse with cold
water after a shower is another way of stimulating the Vagus nerve. 
Mild exercise and general full-body exercise will increase fluids in the gut,
which will stimulate the Vagus nerve. The muscles at the back of the throat
will be worked by laughing and singing, also activating the nerve and
sounding OM while practicing meditation.
Activating the Vagus nerve encompasses sound. Sound is a major
alternative in healing, as well as music. They are a great way to stimulate
the Vagus nerve in a non-invasive, natural manner. 
Dancing is another physical activity that releases endorphins, reduces stress,
and causes our body to have a feeling of optimism, happiness, and calm. It
also incorporates two key elements – sound and movement, which are good
for Vagus stimulation.
Dance, as movement therapy, reduces anxiety, helps people suffering from
depression, and those who have anxiety in social settings. It increases
strength in muscles and improves flexibility offering a better range of
motion. 
It also increases core strength, thus improving coordination, balance, and
posture.
Aside from being a good overall exercise, it stimulates the brain helping to
reduce feelings of loneliness, memory (remembering dance steps)
recognizing beat, synchronizing music with movement, and feeling the
rhythm of the music.
                Chapter 2. Main Functions of the Vagus
                  Nerve
We would like to underscore further the importance of taking proper care of
the nervous system, thereby ensuring the proper functioning of the vagus
nerve and associated biological systems.
The vagus nerve is one broad highway that conducts the flow of
information from the biological systems that it controls up to the CNS. It is
the primary raison d’etre of the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is like a
central command post in which the information comes and goes.
Consequently, the vagus nerve provides the CNS with all of the data; it
needs to keep the body alive.
Let’s assume that the vagus nerve simply stops working for whatever
reason. In such a situation, the person would simply die. How so? If the
vagus nerve ends sending information to the CNS, the CNS may conclude
that the heart and lungs have stopped functioning. Therefore, the brain may
have no choice but to begin shutting down other organ systems as well. This
type of response may lead doctors to place a patient on life support.
This example highlights the importance that the vagus nerve has on the
body’s overall ability to sustain life. Now, let’s assume that the vagus nerve
is functioning correctly, but there is some kind of damage to one of the
organ systems. In that case, the vagus nerve relays the data on the damage
to the organ system back up to the CNS. The brain then sends back the
information through the vagus nerve and adjusts accordingly. For instance,
if one lung is severely damaged, the brain may choose to shut down that
lung and shift all of the breathing functions to the other healthy lung. This is
enough to keep the body alive though not necessarily at peak performance.
In addition, the vagus nerve is the central command post for the digestive
system. This is a crucial function to consider since the digestive system
provides the body with the nutrition it needs to repair itself, fuel movement,
and keep cells running along. Hence, the digestive system needs close
attention. This causal link between the digestive system and the CNS
explains why folks who have undergone a traumatic experience and
experience gastrointestinal distress. When the nervous system suffers a
significant jolt, it is not uncommon to see that it has severe repercussions
for the entire network controlled by the vagus nerve.
So, let’s move on and take a more in-depth look at the specific functions
that are associated with the vagus nerve.
      The Visceral Somatic Function
Given the fact that the vagus nerve is part of the Autonomic Nervous
System (ANS), it is linked to the entire body. Think of it as the main
highway that receives traffic from all over the region even if the majority of
motorists don’t actually plan to stay in that particular area. In a way, the
primary transportation is just passing through.
Based on that premise, any disruption in the flow of traffic in that area may
lead to confusion in the flow of traffic in other seemingly unrelated areas.
The same goes for the nervous system and biological functions.
When we refer to a bodily function, we are talking about the reaction that
comes as a result of the stimuli in the environment surrounding an
organism. In this case, the human body is the organism immersed in a given
situation.
As such, the physical function that the vagus nerve plays is one of constant
monitoring and regulation. Think of it as one large pressure valve that looks
to regulate the build-up within a large engine. If too much pressure builds
up, then the driver may explode. The same goes for the nervous system.
With that in mind, there is one interesting bit of good news.  The body is
adept at adjusting to its environment. So, if the individual finds themselves
consistently inundated by stressful situations, there is the possibility that the
body will become acclimated to such levels of stress. In a way, it creates a
“new normal.”
An example of this attitude can be seen in the so-called “adrenaline
junkies.” These people become addicted to extreme sports due to the
exhilaration that they get from engaging in a dangerous activity. However,
they consistently need to up the ante since their nervous system continually
adjusts to the level of danger in each event. So, in order to get the same
rush, they need to overload their nervous system more and more.
Otherwise, they may not find the same amount of enjoyment in the same
activities.
As far as the physical function is concerned, the vagus nerve is
continuously tracking the performance of the body’s internal organ systems.
As a matter of fact, it is designed with a number of automatic switches that
are intended to protect the body from grievous damage. Think of these
switches like circuit breakers in an electrical system. When the system is
overloaded by the electrical current, the circuit breaker is tripped, thereby
protecting the entire system. If no such switch existed, the wiring would
overheat potentially causing a fire.
The vagus nerve has built-in parameters that prevent the body from
overexerting itself to the point where permanent damage is done to organs.
Consider this situation:
A person who has been working non-stop for a week may find that after
going on little to no sleep, they simply crash and sleep for an extended
period of time. This reaction is triggered in the nervous system in order to
prevent the heart from literally burning out. This is why drug consumption,
the kind that disrupts the nervous system, making it prone for individuals to
suffer from cardiac arrest. Since the substance wreaks havoc with the PNS
natural regulation mechanisms, the body keeps going until it eventually
shuts down.
An excellent example of this can be seen in modern cars. The car’s
computer shuts the engine down when it diagnoses a potentially dangerous
problem in the engine. The car’s control computer module shuts off the
flow of gas, for example, in order to keep the engine from completely
failing. The vehicle will restart once the issue has been corrected.
So, just like a car’s control module, the vagus nerve serves as the body’s
central regulation unit. This protects the body’s vital organs from failing
altogether, at which point death would ensue. This is why optimal
performance from the vagus nerve is essential to ensuring the body’s overall
optimal performance.
      The Physical Motor Function
Since the vagus nerve is part of the overall ANS, it is also connected to the
body’s peripheral nervous system, which controls the movement of limbs.
As such, the vagus nerve is involved in the motor functions of the body.
Now, the vagus nerve itself does not regulate movement, but it does control
the biological functions that aid movement. The following example will
illustrate this point.
When a person engages in physical activity, the CNS broadcasts the
necessary signals to the limbs for movement, be it running, swimming, and
so on. However, the heart is also responsible for supply blood to the
muscles while the lungs need to provide oxygen. Furthermore, there is an
increased metabolic response as the body needs to create the energy it
requires to sustain the level of physical activity. If the action exceeds the
heart’s capacity to pump blood and the lungs’ ability to provide oxygen,
then the individual may simply get tired and stop moving.
This example highlights how vital the vagus nerve is when taking the
movement into account. High-performance athletes have trained not only
for their sport, but also develop stamina. Now, you may have heard of this
term, yet it is generally associated with endurance, that is, sustaining
physical activity over more extended periods of time. But the fact of the
matter is that stamina is the body’s ability to provide the elements the body
needs to sustain prolonged periods of physical activity.
Consequently, the vagus nerve is able to recognize these increased levels of
physical activity and make the necessary adjustments so that muscles get
the elements they need in order to keep going. It should be noted that the
vagus nerve will also recognize when an athlete is becoming overexerted.
At which point, the athlete may feel like they can’t go on anymore. This is
the body’s protective measures that keep it from causing severe damage.
This last point illustrates the importance of keeping a balanced nervous
system so that the vagus nerve can perform its functions appropriately,
thereby allowing the body’s organ systems to provide the elements that the
body requires.
      Essential Biological Functions
These functions are what basically keeps the body alive. After all, if your
heart stops breathing, then chances are you are not going to make it.
With that in mind, it is essential to note that when the vagus nerve is not
functioning at 100%, that is, when there is some kind of disruption, the
crucial biological systems may begin to go haywire. In some cases, it might
be a slow and progressive disruption, while in other cases, it may be a
sudden and shocking disruption.
Let’s consider two possible scenarios:
An individual who has been working a stressful job begins to feel the
effects of chronic stress over months or even years of accumulated stress.
Suddenly, they may develop cardiac conditions, anxiety, or even chronic
digestive disorders. Yet, the progression of these conditions was so subtle
that the person didn’t really feel much of a difference.
On the flip side, there is a person who underwent a major traumatic
incident; for instance, the loss of a loved one. The stress caused by the
sudden loss of a dear person may cause a sudden overload to the nervous
system. This sudden overload may lead to the onset of any of the
aforementioned conditions. This may prompt swift intervention by medical
professionals in order to address the beginning of the symptoms the person
is experiencing.
In either case, the vagus nerve can come under attack. At this point, there is
a severe need for treatment that can correct the imbalances in the nervous
system, thus promoting recovery from the overwhelming effects on the
nervous system. In fact, you may be surprised that some of the most
common conditions that you may be familiar with can be addressed by
balancing out the vagus nerve’s functions.
               Chapter 3. How the Vagus Nerve
                 Affects Anxiety
Anxiety is something that every person will experience in life, and it is
entirely reasonable. We feel anxiety when we go to a job interview or on
our first date. However, when you suffer from an anxiety disorder, things
can be very different. 
It might start with a sense of dread, and you may begin to feel fearful or
irritable, you can’t make it go away no matter what you do. An anxiety
disorder is different from merely feeling anxious every now and then. Those
that suffer from an anxiety disorder struggle with day to day tasks such as
going to work or checking out at the grocery store. They may not be able to
socialize or be part of a relationship. 
      Types of Anxiety
As stated, there are many different types of anxiety; however, there are only
six major types of anxiety disorder. They are PTSD or post-traumatic stress
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, OCD or
obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, and finally, phobia. 
PTSD, as most people know post-traumatic stress disorder, occurs as a
result of someone having a life-threatening or traumatizing event take place
in their life. The person could experience agitation, nightmares, random
flashbacks or recollections, paranoia, and evasion of any circumstance that
would remind them of the event. 
OCD or obsessive-compulsive disorder is something that we hear thrown
around a lot, but many people really do not understand. OCD is much more
than just wanting to clean your house every day or make sure that the
pictures are straight. It is compulsions that the patient has no control over,
such as turning the light on and off 36 times before they are physically able
to leave the room, and if the light is turned off 35 times, they have to start
over. 
Generalized anxiety disorder is also known as GAD, happens when a
patient worries so much or has so many fears that they are unable to
accomplish tasks for the day to day life. They may also feel that something
terrible is always going to happen no matter what. When someone is a
worrywart, they are demonstrating symptoms of GAD. They have no reason
to feel anxious, they have no history of bad things happening to them, but
the fear is so intense that they are not able to focus on anything else. 
Social anxiety disorder is when a person has an extreme fear of negativity
when they are in public or a fear of being humiliated in public. Someone
who is excessively bashful may be suffering from a social anxiety disorder;
however, it may become even more extreme than that. Sometimes the
person will also withdraw from their families. They are so afraid that they
do not want to interact with people at all. Those who have stage fright are
often used as an example of what social anxiety looks like. 
We have all heard of phobias, a fear that is exaggerated concerning
something that would or could not pose any type of danger or threat to the
person. A hatred is very intense, and people will go to extremes to ensure
that they avoid the thing that they are afraid of. In reality, this is only
reinforcing the fear; however, many people have phobias of heights,
specific animals, flying, or of the dark. 
All of the different types of anxiety disorders can be placed in one of these
major types. While they are all anxiety disorders, it is crucial to know the
difference because they all affect the person differently and can affect
different areas of their lives. 
      Symptoms of Anxiety
Anxiety not only affects a person’s mental health, but it can impact them
physically as well. While we know that there are short term effects of
anxiety, what many people do not know is that there are short term effects
as well.

           Symptoms of anxiety can include:
           Feeling fearful, nervous, or even tense
           Feeling restless
           Suffering from panic attacks
           Increased heart rate
           Increased breathing rate
           Shaking
           Sweating
           Weakness or fatigue
           Dizziness
           Trouble concentrating
           Insomnia
           Digestive issues and nausea
           Problems with body temperature (such as feeling far colder or
           hotter than is usual)
           Pains in the chest
           Feeling the need to display certain behaviors in order to reduce
           the anxiety that is felt
Moreover, anxiety affects the body in many other ways, which can actually
lead to chronic illnesses. 
When our bodies feel stress, they respond by telling our bodies that we are
going to have to flee or fight. This is known as the fight or flight response.
At this point, our bodies also release both adrenalin and cortisol, which
many people know as the stress hormones. 
While the fight or flight response is constructive if you are hiking through
the woods and come upon a bear, it is not that useful when it happens
during a job interview or on a date. It is also unhealthy for us to remain in
this state for an extended period of time. When we are exposed to cortisol
and adrenaline for too long, they can actually cause damage to our bodies. 
When we are faced with anxiety in a stressful situation, it is normal for our
breathing to become faster and shallow. It allows our body to take in more
oxygen so that it is prepared if we have to fight or run. If this happens all of
the time, as it does when a person is suffering from an anxiety disorder,
they may continuously feel lightheaded, weak, faint, or dizzy. 
Anxiety can also cause our heart rates to increase as well as increase the
amount of blood that is pumped through our bodies. This happens as our
body is preparing to fight or run because the extra blood is going to provide
our muscles with extra nutrients and oxygen. At this point, our blood
vessels will also narrow, which causes hot flashes. 
Our bodies begin to sweat in order to cool down, and if a person is suffering
from anxiety, they may feel freezing all of the time. 
After looking at what anxiety does to the cardiovascular system, it is easy to
understand how an anxiety disorder could cause heart problems. Studies
have actually shown that those who suffer from anxiety disorders are
actually at a higher risk of developing heart disease in life. 
Anxiety will boost your immune system in the short term; however, it is
possible for it to have the opposite effect on the body when exposure is
prolonged. 
Cortisol will stop the body from releasing histamine into the body when it
goes into the fight or flight reaction, and this impairs the body’s immune
system responses. However, it has been found that people who suffer from
chronic anxiety disorders are more likely to catch the flu, a cold, or other
viruses. Therefore, it is imperative that if you are suffering from any type of
chronic anxiety disorder, you focus on boosting your immune system as
much as possible. 
When our bodies go into the fight or flight response, processes that are
nonessential for survival stop, this means that digestion stops. On top of
that, because adrenaline reduces blood flow to the stomach and causes it to
relax, digestion is affected. Because of this, people who suffer from chronic
anxiety disorders may suffer from the feeling of a churning stomach,
nausea, diarrhea, or they may simply lose their appetite. 
Some studies have linked anxiety, depression, and stress to IBS (irritable
bowel syndrome).
Anxiety can also cause a person to feel as if they need to urinate more
often. This is very common when a person has a phobia. It is believed that
the body loses control of the bladder functions when the person suffers from
anxiety because it is easier for the body to run from the threat if the bladder
is empty. However, many scientists are still unsure why the urge to urinate
happens; yet, they have many different theories. 
Suffering from anxiety can have many adverse short-term effects, but it can
also have long-term effects as well. Those that suffer from chronic anxiety
may also have insomnia, digestive issues, depression, and difficulty in
socializing, at work, or at school, substance abuse, thoughts of suicide, and
a loss of interest in sex or other things that they once enjoyed. These long-
term effects can be life-altering and very difficult for a person do deal with.
Being a female. It is more likely for a female to suffer from anxiety than a
male.
           A history of substance abuse. 
           Having to deal with a lot of stress for an extended period of time,
           from home, finance, and/or work
           Having a parent that suffers from anxiety. 
           Suffering a traumatic experience in your life. 
           Having a chronic medical condition such as cardiovascular
           disease. 
           Use of certain medications. 
           Having one or more other mental health disorders. 
In order to be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, you have to see a doctor.
They are the only ones that can tell you what is really going on. They will
be able to provide you with the medication, support, and information about
lifestyle changes you can make to feel better. 
You can then focus on stimulating the vagus nerve to improve even more. 
      Anxiety and the Vagus Nerve
When the vagus nerve is stimulated, it causes a response, which reduces
stress. Vagus nerve stimulation helps to reduce the heart rate as well as
blood pressure. It also stimulates functioning in different parts of the brain
as well as digestion, which allows us to feel more relaxed. This is all known
as the vagal response. 
Simply put, the vagal response is what happens when the vagus nerve is
stimulated. When the nerve is stimulated, it helps to reduce anxiety.
Amazingly yoga masters were using these techniques long before scientists
even knew about the vagal response. 
Researchers have found that by stimulating the vagus nerve regularly
anxiety, as well as stress, can be reduced. On top of this, it can also help
reduce the symptoms or even neutralize COPD, asthma, and heart disease. 
This should provide us with some comfort, at least. These researchers are
quickly learning that not only is our physical health entirely in our control,
but our mental health is as well. Studies have shown that people who suffer
from mental disorders, as well as chronic illnesses such as COPD, actually
benefit from vagus nerve stimulation. 
There is actual science to back up the vagal response. We talked just about
the fight or flight response and how it can put a person on edge. This is the
same response that you feel when a person cuts you off while you are
driving or when the cashier can’t seem to ring up your order right no matter
how many times she tries.
This response has helped to keep the human race alive over the years, but as
we learned, it can also cause a lot of damage when it is experienced too
often. It is then when we do not feel that we are ever really able to relax that
we need to start stimulating the vagus nerve. 
While stimulating the vagus nerve may sound like it is going to be very
complicated, the truth is that it really is not that hard. The good news is that
it also gets easier the more that you do it. We are going to talk about how
you can stimulate your vagus nerve, but let me give you a little bit of a
heads up. If you can breathe, you can.
                Chapter 4. How the Vagus Nerve
                  Affects Stress
      Body Stress and Vagus Nerve
Stress is a natural way of reaction to change that the body has to go
through. A person is stressed when they face conflicting thoughts or when
they feel threatened. If you are in a situation where you think that your life
is in danger, you are likely to experience stress. Stress is accompanied by
varied physical, emotional, and mental responses. When you are afraid of
something or worried about something, the body will prompt specific
actions to take place naturally. 
Although stress is a normal part of life, it brings varied ups and downs. It is
not possible to take care of your nerves if you are always afraid. As a matter
of fact, any time stress kicks in, and you should let the nervous system take
full control. You may experience pressure from your thoughts, your body,
or the environment. In either case, the vagus nerve will directly be affected.
As we have already mentioned above, any activity that leads to either direct
or indirect stimulation of the vagus nerve may affect its health. If you are
always stressed, the chances are that you may continuously keep on hurting
your vagus nerve. We have seen that chronic inflammation only occurs after
a long time of natural rehabilitation. If the body keeps on trying to
rehabilitate worn-out tissues due to injuries, it will eventually lead to
inflammation. The same case applies to stress. If you continuously
experience stress, you are likely to stimulate the vagus nerve to such an
extent that it is impossible to recover. But how exactly does body stress
relate to the vagus nerve?
Any time you are under stress, you suffer from anxiety or panic attacks.
Although the symptoms of either anxiety or panic attacks are not visible, it
is clear that people who suffer stress may experience some form of anxiety.
The brain is programmed to respond to such stressful situations by
producing CRF hormones. Although the brain naturally produces such
hormones, stressful situations lead to increased production of the hormones.
The CRFs travel through the hypothalamus to the pituitary glands, where
they cause the release of another hormone, known as ACTH. This hormone
consequently travels through the bloodstream to the adrenal glands. This
leads to the stimulation of cortisol and adrenal reaction, which helps protect
the boy from stress. As you can see, this process of stress protection is long
and directly affects your vagus nerve. When we are suffering from stress,
we are likely to get deep into a state of depression if the vagus nerve and
the brain get overwhelmed. 
Stress and depression have all been linked with inflammatory brain
response. In other words, the process of responding to stress puts the brain
under extreme pressure, leading to injuries and inflammation. In other
cases, the same applies to the vagus nerve. As the nerve is exposed to the
stress of trying to deal with the anxious situation, it is common for the nerve
to experience injuries.
Such injuries attract the natural healing process of the body, which
eventually results in inflammation. Even though the body naturally fights
injuries, continued stress can lead to the constant production of hormones,
which ultimately leads to actions that may cause stress to the vagus nerve. 
Chronic stress can also lead to an increase in the production of glutamate in
the brain. The output of glutamate may directly affect the brain and, as a
result, affect the vagus nerve. For instance, glutamate is a neurotransmitter
that causes migraines and depression when produced in excess. When you
are under stress, it is common for the brain to initiate the production of this
neurotransmitter. To protect yourself from such conditions and to ensure
that you preserve your vagus nerve from any damage, ensure that you
reduce stressful moments in your life. There are many ways of dealing with
stress, including meditation, singing, dancing, among others. Such options
will help you deal with stress and reduce the pressure on your brain. By
acting to reduce pressure on your head, you respond to protect the brain and
the vagus nerve as a whole.
In one research conducted by medical students from Ohio State University,
it was revealed that when individual animals are put under excess pressure,
they react by producing high levels of cortisol. The high degree of cortisol
provided tries to reduce the volume of the hippocampus. The fact that a
person is under pressure only means that they reduce their chances of
having a sober brain. If you are struggling with stress, the chances are that
you may not be able to concentrate or keep memories. It is essential to
ensure that you reduce your levels of stress so that you focus on other
aspects of life. If you do not pay much attention to your health and try to
minimize the stress associated with your life situations, the chances are that
you may end up living a life that painful.
All the factors that affect your brain are also impactful to your vagus nerve.
Stress does not only change your mind, but it also affects your nervous
system. The vagus nerve may completely fail if you keep on undergoing
episodes of stress on a daily basis. The inflammation of the vagus nerve
may further lead to other health complications. Swelling means that the
nerve is not functioning to the maximum. A simple problem, such as
inflammation, may lead to digestive and hearing problems. If the case
advances, the entire vagus nerve may be affected and hence affect the
autonomic nervous system.
      Blood Pressure and Heart Rate
Another factor that may lead to the inflammation of the vagus nerve is
blood pressure. The human body is designed to maintain a certain level of
blood flow. This means that there must be signal transmission from the
heart to the brain that coordinates the blood flow. The flow of the blood
depends on the heart rate and the constriction of blood vessels. If blood
vessels are constricted, the heart will be forced to pump the blood a lot
faster so as to achieve equal distribution of blood to all body parts. In the
same way, if the blood vessels are lost, the heart rate has to reduce to some
extent. The vagus nerve is at the center of all the operations that affect the
functioning of the heart.
Vagus nerve stimulation devices have been used for various medical
purposes for more than 30 years. These devices are either implanted or used
externally. Some of the joint implants are devices that range in 1 to 3.5 mA.
These devices are mainly designed to influence heart rate and blood
pressure. Some of the diseases that these devices aim to control include
epilepsy and heart diseases. With that said, it is evident that stimulation of
the vagus nerve has a significant effect on the blood pressure and heart rate.
Research shows that most of the devices used in vagus nerve stimulation,
either use mechanical pressure application or automated electromagnetic
waves. In the early 1800s, the data collected from such devices was vital in
evaluating the overall health of the vagus nerve. Data such as the
Electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate (HR), and blood pressure (BP) were
all evaluated. However, modern-day medical applications focus tends to be
on the performance of the device rather than the wellbeing of the nerve.
Over the years, most device manufacturers have opted to design invasive
devices that do not give out data as it was initially. This does not mean that
the devices used for vagus nerve stimulation are defective in any way. The
main concern would be a case where the device was causing
overstimulation, resulting in fatigue and injuries to the nerve.
It is recommended to use the non-invasive vagus nerve gadgets. Wearable
such as the hand and thump pressure tools are much safer. Today, some
manufacturers are reverting to the traditional options of belt and hand
pressure. In either case, you must ensure that the gadget you chose to use
has been approved and received a clean bill of health. Understanding that
any stimulating device is only supposed to help you enhance activities that
are already taking place will also help you understand that overstimulation
may mess up with the natural processes. The human body is made to run
naturally and provide internal solutions to internal problems. This explains
why the vagus nerve has to defend itself from injuries. In the case of an
injury, the nerve must initiate a process of self-recovery. In this process of
recovery, the damages caused to the body or to the nerves must be resolved.
If you choose to use a device that regulates your blood pressure, you must
ensure that it does not go beyond the required. Overstimulation of the vagus
nerve will obviously lead to excessive production of some enzymes. The
parasympathetic activities of the nerve are awakened during a moment
when the body should be acting in the opposite direction. Although the
ultimate result of reducing heart rate may be achieved, it is still expensive
and painful to experience some complications associated with the
stimulation. If you want to stimulate your vagus nerve for the sake of
reducing blood pressure and heart rate, only do it selectively. It should not
be something you do daily.
                Chapter 5. Vagus Nerve and
                  Inflammation
Let’s talk about inflammation. Inflammation is something that happens in
the body when there is a response to something that shouldn’t exist. 
      Is all Inflammation Bad? 
Not necessarily. Inflammation is significant for making sure you respond to
different stimuli within the body correctly. With inflammation, you have
either an injury, or a pain, or even an infection, and from this, you get more
white blood cells, immune cells, and cytokines that are used for disease. 
Inflammation is something that should be short-term, with redness, heat,
swelling, and pain. But, in some cases, you might have inflammation
happening within the body; without symptoms, you usually don’t notice. 
When there is something in the body the brain recognizes as an invader, it
starts the inflammation in the body. However, when not properly turned off,
it can cause a lot of problems. 
      What conditions does it Cause? 
Well, anything that yields an inflammatory response is a culprit here. For
example, diabetes, heart disease, cancer, fatty liver disease, asthma, Chron’s
disease, IBS, and pretty much anything with inflammation as the cause is a
part of this.
Food allergies and sensitivities are also seen here. Insulin resistance is
another symptom of inflammation, hence why type 1 diabetes is often a
result of inflammation in the body. 
While some of the inflammation can be turned off quite quickly, you’ll
realize that, with every single stimulus, it can actually make a lot of issues
for people, and it can have a lot of problems that are very hard to fix if
you’re not careful. 
People who are obese, or under a lot of stress, usually there is chronic
inflammation there. 
While you might notice it, most of the time, you have to see a doctor get
some blood tests, including the C-reactive protein test, TMF alpha, and the
IL-6, all of which are different chemicals that are within the body whenever
you have an inflammatory response. 
      So, What Causes It? 
Well, there are many different causes here, and the vagus nerve is actually a
part of this. When the vagus nerve is stimulated correctly, it sends out the
neurotransmitters to tell the inflammatory response that it’s over, the
invader is gone, you don’t need to activate, which causes a reduced
reaction.
But, with a vagus nerve that’s improperly stimulated, it can cause you to
have overstimulation of the inflammatory response within the body,
resulting in insulin resistance, heart disease, obesity, and also other
conditions. 
This is partially caused by your diet, of course. Eating high amounts of
sugars, carbs, high fructose corn syrup, and consuming a diet that’s riddled
with junk food is a part of the reason why you might have inflammatory
responses, and the solution, in that case, is, of course, a diet change. 
If you’re stressed, and continuously activating the parasympathetic nervous
system, your vagus nerve will be affected too. This, in turn, causes an
inflammatory response in the body also, and hence, diseases will come forth
too.
But, it’s more than just the sugars. It’s also how your vagus nerve is
stimulated. When your vagus nerve isn’t working, it won’t control the
inflammatory response, and oftentimes won’t control the signals to the
brain. This will, in turn, lead to debilitating conditions in the boy as we’ve
tackled before. 
In many instances, when we’re continually reducing our “flight or fight”
responses, the biological markers will help with reducing inflammation. 
When you see a doctor for inflammation, chances are they won’t prescribe
medications for that.  That’s because the way to combat inflammation can’t
always be handled with medication, and oftentimes, drugs cause more side
effects than help to the body. 
The vagus nerve affects your heart rate, and also acetylcholine, which is a
tranquilizer that you can administer to yourself through merely inhaling and
exhaling, and from there, your parasympathetic nervous system will be
activated. 
When you activate this, you’re essentially encouraging the “rest and digest”
or the “tend and befriend” actions in the body.  The “tend and befriend”
actions within your organization, of course, are those neurotransmitters that
are activated. 
When you activate your vagus nerve, you’re basically turning off all of
those responses you don’t need in the body, and it’ll help with inflammation
                Chapter 6. Vagus Nerve and Depression
When people think of mental health issues, the two that come to mind are
typically anxiety and depression. Depression is the other most common
mental health issue around the world, and many people suffer from it. It is
estimated that somewhere around 15% of people will experience
depression, either acute or chronic, at some point in their lives.
This disorder can be debilitating. It can be exhausting. It can be draining,
and it can be destructive. It can lead to so many different problems, and that
can be a primary reason you would benefit from trying to solve the problem
altogether. Instead of continuing to stress about the issue, you can defeat the
problem.
      Defining Depression
Depression itself is the feeling of negativity and hopelessness that people
sometimes feel. It is a period in which there is a lack of interest in the world
around you. You can feel like you do not want to engage with other people.
You find that anything you used to be interested in is no longer compelling.
You do not want to do anything at all oftentimes, and that can sometimes
really just make the problem worse.
Depression can be debilitating for these people. Especially when severe,
people who suffer from depression can find they do not have the energy for
anything at all. They feel slow, sleepy, even if they cannot sleep. They feel
stuck and unhappy. Even the activities that once brought them joy in life are
no longer enjoyable, and they find that they cannot do anything about it.
This is a significant problem for people; it can really hold them back.
Depression is most often characterized by the following symptoms:

              You cannot regulate your mood up and regularly. Your attitude
              is frequently or always down, and you cannot figure out how
              to bring it back up, no matter how hard you may try.
              Your appetite has fluctuated dramatically, and you either eat
              more often now, or you do not want to eat at all.
              You struggle to sleep, or you sleep regularly. Either way, you
              always feel exhausted.
             Your mood is usually low, and you can find that you become
             very irritable sometimes.
             You are permanently fatigued; you cannot get yourself to
             move around because your body is just that exhausted that
             frequently.
             You struggle to really focus on what matters to you. You
             cannot concentrate on the most critical aspects of your life,
             and you feel like your mood is endlessly dull and foggy.
             You do not have an interest in anything at all, even when they
             used to bring you joy.
             You feel worthless, or like you do nothing but bring the world
             down.
             You may fixate on the idea of death or suicide.

      Depression and the Vagus Nerve
Remember, when the body feels that something is entirely futile, it shuts
itself off; it stops trying to continue moving forward. It finds there is no
reason to stay, so it begins to shut down and slow down. When you go into
a frozen state, this is what happens. Your body dulls your mind, and your
concentration struggles. You lose interest and responsiveness. You feel like
you cannot move at all, or like moving or doing anything at all would take
far too much effort out of your life.
The vagus nerve, when it is overactive, can trigger what is known as a
parasympathetic shutdown. This is the freeze response. It is a primitive
response to fear, developed long before mammals developed their more
modern, nuanced fight or flight system. It is believed that depression, at or
at least, certain kinds of depression, may be linked to this.
There are many types of depression that can be found to be resistant to just
about all treatment options—these people are known to have treatment-
resistant depression, and yet, stimulating the vagus nerve has been shown to
help these people begin to get back to their old routine.
It may also be the case that depression is related to inflammation, especially
if swelling is treated when you stimulate the vagus nerve. Nevertheless,
regardless of whether depression caused by the vagus nerve in the same
way that anxiety was, one thing is known for sure—depression can be
managed with the stimulation of the vagus nerve.
We are going to consider three methods that you can use to begin fighting
off depression. We are going to look at probiotics—these are relevant to the
vagus nerve thanks to the prominent role that the vagus nerve plays in the
digestive system and the digestive system’s leading role in the production of
serotonin—which happens to be one of the ways that we can treat
depression. We will take a look at socialization to help bring the vagus
nerve back to a sense of normalcy, and finally, we will take a look at
meditation.
Probiotics to Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
Every digestive system is jam-packed with bacteria. It lines most of your
digestive tract, allowing your body to mainly digesting the food within your
guts. The good bacteria you want to have in your intestines are known as
probiotics. These are found already in many naturally fermented foods or
other foods that are cultured. Take a look at the yogurt label by the time you
are at the store—you may see that it is labeled as having live culture. That
live culture is all of the bacteria that you can eat and then seed into your
digestive system.
When you do this, you can permanently boost the power of your digestive
system. Even better, however, is the fact the digestive system can realty
influence your mind. Having the right gut biome is absolutely essential
when it comes to being able to function accordingly. If you want to be able
to perform, you must have the right kinds of bacteria to create the right
types of hormones your body will need.
In particular, Lactobacillus Rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium Longum are
both associated with being able to help with stress hormones. They aid in
the uptake of serotonin, and they also create positive changes to the GABA,
a vital neurotransmitter for general regulation. When you do not have
enough GABA in your body, it may impact your mood.
While science is still attempting to determine the exact details, it is believed
when you do not have enough GABA, and you could end up suffering from
anxiety, mood disorders (including depression), epilepsy, and chronic pain.
For this reason, it is incredibly essential for you to recognize that the gut
bacteria absolutely do impact the mind, and you need to ensure you honor
that.
By taking probiotics with both Lactobacillus Rhamnosus and
Bifidobacterium Longum, you can ensure that your body is going to have
more of those proper bacteria that it will need to not only regulate the mood
but also help with the vagus nerve as well. There have been studies done
that have shown that mice actually tend to show fewer symptoms of anxiety
and depression when they are given these necessary probiotics, and it is
believed this is due to the vagus nerve.
Socialization to Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
Once again, we come right back to the social nervous system, the proposed
method through which the vagus nerve regulates the way in which we
socialize. It has been found that socialization is one of the most significant
ways to reduce stress, and this makes sense. Think about it—we are social
creatures. If you want to alleviate stress, you need to be around people you
love and care about. This socialization can leave you feeling fulfilled and
better than ever.
In particular, many therapies also entertain the idea that to treat depression,
you must be willing to go out on a limb and force the point. Many of them
say the only way to get moving again with your own anxiety or depression
is to make sure you go out. You have to sort of reboot the mind into seeing
it as enjoyable and beneficial—sound familiar?
When you suffer from depression, you oftentimes do not want to do
anything at all, and yet, going out there and actively beginning to stimulate
your vagus nerve through being out and exposed to other people is one of
the most effective manners that you can use. You need to be able to
recognize the ways you can spend that time with people and how getting
out there can slowly but surely begin to engage your vagus nerve.
This does not mean you have to go out to a party tonight; instead, take it
slowly. Allow yourself, too, little by little, is to better cope with the way
that you are behaving. Over time, you will find you are better able to focus.
Over time, you will find that this time you spend out and about is worth it.
You will feel like, at the end of the day, you can, and you will be able to do
everything you need to do.
Get up and get out, get moving, and be social. Even if you just spend a few
minutes with someone every day, having a conversation with them at the
coffee shop as you wait for your order, you are still engaging with other
people, and as they join with you, you will find that, little by little, you will
be able to get back to functioning. You will be able to get back to feeling
whole within your own body again.
Meditation to Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
Finally, the last method we are going to consider in terms of what you can
do with yourself to stimulate the vagus nerve for depression is to take a
look at the ways in which you can meditate. Meditation is an incredibly
powerful state of mind, and it has been found to activate those same areas
within the brain that are triggered by the vagus nerve as well, implying that
the two are related.
When you meditate, you are entering a quiet, stable state in which you are
able to relax and focus on the way in which you are feeling. You focus on
the clarity and the peace within yourself, and in doing so, you are able to
slowly but surely seek solace within yourself.
Meditation is something people sometimes resist, but the truth of the matter
is it is actually surprisingly robust. You do not have to go out and suddenly
let go of anything you enjoy to get out there and meditate. On the contrary,
you can usually do it anywhere for any amount of time, with very little
commitment required. All you will need is yourself and a quiet place to rest,
uninterrupted, and left alone to enjoy the peace and quiet within yourself.

           Begin by finding a beautiful, quiet place for yourself where you
           can relax without intervention. Make sure that it is somewhere
           you will be able to better focus without any distractions.
           Take a deep breath in and hold it. Then, breathe out. Repeat this
           process, getting used to the way your breath feels.
           Find a position that you are comfortable sitting within. It could
           be any position at all; it does not have to be any particular one.
           All that matters is you are comfortable in it.
           Slowly shift your focus to your breathing. Let yourself continue
           to focus on just your breath at this point, paying attention to the
           air coming in and out of your lungs.
           Any time that you feel your attention leave your breathing, you
           must quietly and gently shift it back, free from any judgment and
           free from any concern.
Remain in this state for as long as you feel comfortable,
preferably at least five minutes.
                Chapter 7. Signs Your Vagus Nerve
                  Requires Attention
No one wants to have a vagus nerve that does not function properly. If it is
as important as has been pushed throughout this, and is, you do not want to
run the risk of having a vagus nerve that is not functioning well. Whether
due to damage somewhere in the system or low vagal tone, you may find
that you are suffering in many different ways that can be directly linked
back to your vagus nerve. 
The good news here is that you can treat these issues. For the most part, if
you have a malfunctioning vagus nerve, you can begin to manage them.
You can ensure that you are taking care of yourself to try to treat yourself
better. You will be able to tap into the vagus nerve, strengthen it, and
activate it to defeat this problem altogether. You will be able to ensure that
you do cure yourself, and in doing so, you will be better able to cope. You
do not need to get a device implanted to deal with these issues—all you
have to do is ensure that you can, and do, work with yourself to treat the
problem.  
      Vagal Tone
Vagal tone is how functional your vagus nerve is. It is incredibly essential
for you to have a properly functioning vagus nerve. Still, the easiest way to
tell if it is not is through tracking your vagal tone. Vagal tone is done
through a test in which you can measure your heart rate variability. This is
the rate at which your heart rate varies between inhaling and exhaling.
When you inhale, you create a lower pressure within the chest to draw in
the air. The body usually responds with the vagus nerve speeding up the
heart rate. As you exhale, then, the heart rate drops as the pressure changes
again. The slower heart rate means that the blood pressure can fall back to
where it should be. This is repeated with every breath you take—you see
your heart rate pick up as you breathe in, and as you breathe out again, you
see it dropping down back.  This is seen over and over again, and the higher
the difference between inhaling and exhaling, the better your vagal tone is.
      High Blood Pressure
When your vagus nerve does not function properly, you will see blood
pressure go up. This is due to the heart rate, not regulating itself out as
much—the vagus nerve is not keeping you in a relaxed state. Because of
that, you are likely to run into issues such as seeing that spike in blood
pressure. When you can see that peak, however, you can begin to treat and
manage it. When underactive, the vagus nerve can lead to a higher instance
of the sympathetic nervous system being active. This sympathetic nervous
system is what then leads to you suffering from the higher blood pressure to
begin with.
      Higher Resting Heart Rate
Similarly, when the vagus nerve is not functioning the way that it should be,
the heart’s resting rate increases. This is because the heart has its rhythm
that it follows—it usually beats at a higher rate if the vagus nerve is not
there to sort of regulate it and stop it from expending so much energy. This
is where you get your resting heart rate—it is the heart rate at which you are
calm and relaxing, and the vagus nerve is in parasympathetic mode. When
your vagus nerve is inactive or weak, it is no longer regulating the heart rate
at a steady resting rate. This leads to your resting heart rate ending up much
higher than it otherwise would be.
      Depression
Another common symptom of a problem with the vagus nerve is suffering
from depression. When you suffer from depression, you are mostly stuck
within an increased parasympathetic response that has then caused you to
be caught in a constant, mild state of shutting down. Think of it this way—
when you are depressed, and you are withdrawn. You do not want to
interact with other people, and you may even feel like even getting out of
bed is too much effort for you for the day. This is not because of you and
your problems or because you are weak-willed—instead, it is because your
brain is working against you. Your parasympathetic nervous system
assumes that there is a threat somewhere and responds accordingly. The
vagus nerve fundamentally fails to help you stop that parasympathetic shut
down, and you get caught in a persistent state of wanting to withdraw and
conserve energy. Interestingly enough, patients who have persistent,
treatment-resistant depression have reported feeling better when getting
vagal nerve stimulation therapy. They say a decrease in depressive
symptoms that then allows them to begin exploring energized once more.
      Anxiety
Another common problem that people suffer from when their vagus nerve is
not functioning correctly is anxiety. This makes sense when you consider
that anxiety itself is the deep, sustained feeling of being in danger. When
you are anxious, it is like you hear something around you, but you cannot
figure out where it is coming from. You know that there is a threat around
there somewhere, but you are unsure where that threat is in the first place.
That is terrifying for those suffering from anxiety—they feel like they can
never relax.
      Inflammation
As we have tackled, inflammation runs rampant if the vagus nerve is unable
to activate for any reason, or if the vagus nerve simply does not enable.
When this happens, you run the risk of inflammation running on overdrive
because the vagus nerve never steps in to stop it. The vagus nerve is the part
of the nervous system that will directly influence this sort of ending to the
inflammation. You must be able to activate the vagus nerve to release the
neurotransmitters that will alleviate the inflammation in the first place.
It is important to note that inflammation can take several different forms.
Your inflammation could manifest as swollen joints or swollen parts of your
body, such as arthritis. This is perhaps one of the most natural ways of
inflammation to identify. However, many autoimmune disorders also carry
this sense of inflammation, such as lupus or multiple sclerosis. The
inflammation for these is usually a bit more downplayed and hard to
identify. Still, it is there if you know what to look for.
      Gastroparesis
Gastroparesis is the term to describe when the stomach becomes paralyzed
in a sense. When you suffer from gastroparesis, you cannot control the
movement of food from your stomach to your intestines. As a result, the
food in your stomach frequently lingers without ever being pushed
throughout the system. This is a scary symptom to suffer from—it can leave
you struggling to digest food. When you do not digest your food, it can
potentially ferment within your stomach. You also run the risk of the food
solidifying in your stomach as well, and that can be dangerous.
People suffering from gastroparesis usually do so because their vagus nerve
is not functioning for some reason. It could have been damaged, severing
that connection that the brain used to tell the stomach to keep pushing food.
The result is a stomach that will only intermittently drain or not drain at all.
That is a problem—when you suffer from gastroparesis, you are at an
increased risk of suffering from all sorts of issues. Such as struggling to
regulate your blood sugar when the food that you eat is sporadically pushed
through your system becoming malnourished or even dehydrated due to a
failure to have the digestive system functioning correctly. People suffering
from gastroparesis are also usually quite uncomfortable with the disorder,
and it can lead to gas, bloating, feelings of fullness, and pain.
      Vasovagal Syncope
Vasovagal syncope is a fancy way to say that someone has fainted. This is
most commonly due to a shift in the body’s blood pressure that causes there
to not be enough blood at the brain to remain conscious. As a result,
individual faints. This is often attributed to the vagus nerve, especially if it
is in response to something scary or disturbing. 
Generally speaking, the vagus nerve is meant to be a sort of regulator
during periods of stress. If it sees something particularly distressing, it may
overreact—it ends up trying too hard to calm down the body. Instead of
only balancing out the sympathetic nervous system, it goes overboard. The
heart rate then plummets, which leads to a plummeting of the blood
pressure, which leads to insufficient oxygen to the brain.
This is essentially an overactive vagus nerve, and that can be a problem for
you as well. The vagus nerve and its activation are situations in which you
want a perfect balance of activity. Only with that ideal synchronization
between the systems is that you live a healthy life.
Keep in mind that if you only occasionally suffer from this syncope, there is
probably no problem. However, if you are repeatedly suffering from these
sorts of events in which you randomly faint for little or no real reason, you
may want to consider speaking to a doctor to ensure that there are no other
causes for what you are suffering from. It is always better to be safe than
sorry. You can do this in particular if you are suffering from any symptoms
that may be problematic in some way for you.  
      Heart Takes Longer to Recover After Exercising
When your vagus nerve is not particularly strong, you will see it start to
take you longer to calm down when you exercise. For most healthy people,
the heart rate usually drops quite quickly after exercise—as soon as you no
longer need that extended push of blood throughout the body, your heart
rate begins to slow alongside with your blood pressure dropping. It will get
closer to its resting heart rate quickly because it can recover from stress,
both physically and mentally.
However, when your vagus nerve is damaged, it can take you far longer to
calm down. Your vagus nerve may end up a bit slow on the uptake and can
cause you all sorts of problems with regulation just because of that. If it
cannot recognize that it is time to slow down and then activate that slowing
down in the first place, it is struggling somewhere along the way and
probably needs some extra help to treat it.
      Insomnia
Finally, those who struggle with their vagus nerve tend to find themselves
suffering from insomnia. They may find that they are actively struggling
due to their anxiety being on overdrive. When they cannot activate that
parasympathetic response that they need to relax and calm down to heal
themselves and rest, they are going to find themselves stuck in a state of
being awake. They will not be able to trigger within themselves that need to
stop stressing and to relax for themselves—they will find that they simply
cannot sleep, no matter how long they spend in bed.
It will only be in being able to activate the vagus nerve and tone it up to
reenter that state of parasympathetic regulation that they will be able to get
that critical, necessary sleep again, and that can only come with practice
and treatment.
               Chapter 8. Activating the Vagus Nerve
                 and Exercises
The methods presented in this topic have been practiced since ancient
times. However, given that they have zero side effects and bring about an
improvement in the quality of your life, you have nothing to lose when it
comes to following them.
Furthermore, it would be remiss of me not to present these exercises since
all of them are talked about quite a lot. So in the interest of giving you a
well-rounded look at how you can stimulate the vagus nerve, let’s dive into
these ancient practices.
      Breathing Techniques
Humming
A dull hum can get your vagus nerve up and running. The trick is to go all
out with your hum and to let your inhibitions go. It isn’t so much the depth
of your hum or the pitch but the degree with which you can let go. Make it
as deep or as shallow as you want. The theory behind this is that the
vibrations in your throat and chest will stimulate the vagus nerve since it
passes through these areas of your body.
So why should you let go entirely and hum? Well, this is just to get you to
give it everything you’ve got. Besides, everyone is different, and your
vagus nerve’s tuning will be different from that of others. This is why there
is no standard or scale in terms of the vibrational frequency you need to hit
in order to stimulate the central system.
Conscious Breathing
In the depths of my depression, if someone asked me to observe my breath,
I would have thrown something at them. However, the simple act of
keeping your breath has the effect of slowing it down. There are some
claims that the vagus nerve is activated when your breathing slows down to
seven breaths per minute.
There’s no doubt that simple observation can help calm you down and will
help you become more grounded in the present. There are considerable
benefits to this.
       Valsalva Technique
This technique is carried out by pushing your breath against a closed
airway. Inhale once profoundly and close your mouth and pinch your
nostrils together. Now exhale as best as you can and as forcefully as
possible. This increases the pressure inside your chest and airways, and this
stimulates the vagus nerve.
Given that your vagus nerve densely innervates these areas of your body,
this technique is an excellent way to stimulate it.
       Yoga Chanting and Yoga Poses
Activate the Diving Reflex
The diving reflex refers to the way our body reacts when plunged into the
water. Blood flow increases to our brain and our senses become sharper.
You don’t need to jump into the water to recreate this. Simply splash your
face with cold water all the way up to your eye line, and you’ll feel the
effects of this. 
Another way of recreating this effect is to hold a pack of ice cubes against
your face and hold your breath for a second. A third method is to drink
water and play around with it as it flows over your tongue as you feel its
texture.
Yoga
Yoga is an ancient exercise practice that originates from ancient India. It is
a physical and spiritual practice that places great emphasis on learning the
mind to body connection. If you really wish to get into yoga, I highly
recommend locating a qualified teacher who can walk you through the
various poses as well as the breathing techniques to follow.
Speaking of breathing techniques, let’s look at the first practice you can
follow to activate the vagus nerve.
Half Smiling
Smiling is a valuable social tool, and your ventral system plays an essential
role in enhancing it. The connection works the other way as well, just as it
does with socialization. Forcing yourself to smile is a great way to signal to
your brain that there is no threat in the immediate environment, and it
removes you from the dorsal or sympathetic nervous state.
This isn’t a yoga practice, and you can do this wherever you are, as you go
about your day. Move your mouth into a half-smile, and imagine your jaws
loosening. You can close your eyes if you want when doing this.
Opening the Heart
Sit down on the floor and close your eyes. Bring your hands to your
shoulders and inhale deeply. As you inhale, open your chest and raise your
head and simultaneously rotate your shoulders outwards. As you exhale,
turn your shoulders back in and lower your chin into your chest.
Perform this movement a few times and make it as smooth as possible. This
relaxes the muscles in your neck and lower head and, as a result, relaxes the
nervous system as well.
Warrior Pose
The warrior pose isn’t a terribly complicated pose, but it is best if you learn
the posture from a teacher who can explain the intricacies of it to you. The
pose brings your breath and body into sync and forces you to ground
yourself to the earth. It also tests your ability to balance and is a great way
to start off your day.
Cow Pose
You can perform the cow pose by kneeling down on a mat and then
supporting yourself on all fours as you extend your hands out in front of
you. Tuck your stomach in as you inhale and bend your neck inwards. As
you exhale, let go of your belly and arch your back and shoulders down as
you look upwards.
The vagus nerve innervates your belly, and as a result, this pose helps
activate it.
      Metta Meditation (Loving-Kindness Meditation)
Metta refers to loving-kindness, and this form of meditation has been
shown to place the mind in a state of mind that promotes peace and love.
The meditation itself is straight forward. Close your eyes and take a few
deep breaths to ground yourself in the present moment. Once this is done,
visualize all the people in your life and send them all the love you have and
wish them well.
Then,  visualize someone you don’t know and have never met and send
them the gift of your love. Visualize yourself, showering them with all your
love and compassion. Practice this for five minutes and observe the
difference in your mental state. From a biological perspective, loving-
kindness meditation helps remove yourself from a country where a threat
exists to an environment where you are safe and secure. This naturally helps
activate the ventral system.
Yoga Nidra
Nidra is usually the culmination of all yoga practice sessions. To do this,
you simply lay down on your mat or on the floor with your palms facing
upwards. Observe your breath and the sensations in your body. Practice this
for around 10 minutes or so.
Other Factors That Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
The following factors aren’t confined to yoga or any particular exercise
method but nonetheless have an effect in stimulating the vagus nerve.
Where applicable, I’ll highlight research that supports the benefits of these
methods. You can and should implement all of them immediately
Singing
I’ve already asked you to hum, so you might as well sing at this point. It
doesn’t matter how atrocious you are, and singing helps you activate the
vagus nerve. Just like humming, the key is to truly let yourself go and sing
at the top of your voice. Medically speaking, this stimulates the muscles at
the back of your throat and helps activate the vagus nerve better.
Meditation
Like yoga, meditation is a practice that originates in ancient India.
Meditation’s benefits extend well beyond stimulating the vagus nerve.
Meditation has been shown to literally change your brain and rewire it to
create a greater sense of calm. As far as anxiety and depression are
concerned, the increased awareness that meditation brings can be a problem
since it will make the problem appear worse at first.
The key is to have a strategy in place beforehand that you can carry out.
Remaining detached and observing or reinforcing positive habits at this
juncture are examples of things you can do to implement change.
Laughter
Laughter is extremely beneficial for your well-being, but you don’t need me
to tell you that. A study conducted on people practicing yoga laughter (an
exercise where you throw your hands up and laugh as hard as you can)
found that their Heart-Rate Variability decreased. As you’ve already
learned, HRV has a direct correlation to vagal tone. The lower the HRV, the
higher the vagal mood, and the better health you are in.
Prayer
A study conducted on those performing rosary prayers found that their
vagal tones increased. The exact reason for this is not known. There is
speculation that counting the beads produces changes in the breath and that
this is the cause of increased vagal tone.
Pulsed Electromagnetic Field Therapy
This method involves sending electromagnetic waves through the body with
an aim to stimulate bodily function. A study conducted on healthy, middle-
aged men found that PEMF therapy resulted in increased vagal tone. You
can buy devices off the shelf that provide such stimulation. 
Probiotics
As mentioned, the gut microbiome plays an essential role in regulating your
mood and the consequent anxiety and depression levels. Probiotics help
with this, but keep in mind that most supplements are of no use. It’s far
better to consume fermented foods such as yogurt or sauerkraut to help with
digestion.
Exercise
Perhaps the best medicine of them all for anxiety and depression. Exercise
and physical movement challenges you and gives you a sense of
accomplishment, which directly opposes the miserable feeling that
depression causes. In case of anxiety is your issue, exercise gives you an
opportunity to vent your frustration at something.
Exercise also releases endorphins in your system and helps you feel better.
All in all, there is no downside to exercise, and you should aim to make it a
part of your daily routine.
Massage
A massage is a form of visceral manipulation, and a full body massage
relaxes you entirely and removes any blocks in your body. Certain types of
massages directly stimulate the vagus nerve and are incredibly beneficial
for your health.
Fasting
Fasting helps the body regulate the production of ghrelin in your system,
and this helps regulate your blood sugar as well as your metabolism. In
addition to this, practices such as intermittent fasting help you lose fat and
increase muscle tone, which enables you to become healthier.
Sleeping on Your Right
Research is pretty limited with regards to this, but there is anecdotal
evidence that is sleeping on your right increases vagal tone. There’s nothing
to lose by trying this out to be honest.
Recommended Foods
Seafood
Seafood happens to be rich in Omega 3 fatty acids that play an essential
role in diminishing free radicals within our system. Free radicals are a
blanket term used to describe chemicals that cannot be flushed out by the
body on its own. They’ve been linked to the existence of cancer and other
autoimmune diseases.
Fiber
Fiber helps with excretion and improves gut health. Given the gut to brain
connection, consuming fiber in your diet should be a priority.
        Sensory Deprivation
Sensory deprivation is a method that has been increasing in popularity
lately. The technique is best suited for people who do not have
claustrophobia, and there is significant research that suggests that the
technique works exceptionally well.
To begin with, the method itself is pretty straightforward. It works by
immersing yourself in a highly concentrated salt and magnesium bath. This
allows you to float in the water entirely without any aid and thus creates a
sense of weightlessness. Your eyes will be covered, and you will shut the lid
of the tank on top of you. Keep in mind there are also open-air tanks that
don’t have caps for those of us who like a little bit more breathing room.
                Chapter 9. Passive Method to Activate
                  the Vagus Nerve
Besides all the active exercises you can perform on your own, there are
passive treatments that can have profound effects on vagus nerve activation.
Some of these involve using specific equipment or visiting a health care
provider. In contrast, others can be done in your home comfort. Before
beginning any treatment, remember to discuss these options with your
primary health care provider.
      Auricular Acupuncture
A substantial and increasing body of research indicates that in many
patients with depression, anxiety, epilepsy, LPS-induced inflammation,
tinnitus, and highly active pain receptors, acupuncture and transcutaneous
vagus nerve stimulation through the auricular branch of the VN produce
positive results. The best part about this form of treatment is that it is
efficient without invasive action.
      Visceral Manipulation
Visceral manipulation (VM) is a less common therapy, but it is highly
effective when correctly practiced. Typically practiced by osteopaths,
chiropractors, naturopaths, and other health care providers, VM is the gentle
physical manipulation of the abdomen's organs, increasing the flow of
blood to areas that do not function best. Once learned right, patients can use
this feedback device on their own.
All abdominal organs, including the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, kidneys,
spleen, stomach, small intestine, and ascending and transverse parts of the
large intestine, are innervated by the vagus nerve. For the VN to influence
these organs and communicate organ function to the brain, the proper
functionality of the organs is essential. In these organs, physical restrictions
can build up, which can only be altered by material manipulation and
mobilization. Improving the blood flow to these organs can have significant
beneficial organ health outcomes and allow the VN to send out optimum
function-related signals.
Gently administered hands-on treatment is used by visceral stimulation
practitioners to find areas of change or reduced activity within the viscera to
remove constraints within these visceral organs. The therapy involves
gentle compression, mobilization, or soft tissue elongation. Having a
licensed emotional stimulation specialist in your region may be a good idea,
especially for those with detoxification disorder or liver, gallbladder, or
kidney discomfort.
     Electrical Stimulation
Researchers have performed experiments in the last hundred or so years to
learn about the symptoms of the vagus nerve. One technique involved
stimulating the VN on experimental animals with the aid of electrical
stimulators. In addition to learning about the value of the VN itself,
researchers eventually determined that they were able to supplement its
functions by electrically stimulating the vagus nerve.
Experiments were done in the 1980s and early 1990s to show that vagus
stimulation in the neck was effective in reducing seizure activity in dogs.
This research resulted in dedicated clinical trials which produced devices
for vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) that could be implanted into the neck.
The FDA approved these devices for the treatment of epilepsy in 1997, and
the treatment of chronic, treatment-resistant depression in 2005. Regarding
various medical problems, including insomnia, bipolar disorder, treatment-
resistant anxiety disorders, Alzheimer's disease, and obesity, laboratories
and companies have been developing and enhancing tools to activate the
VN since electrically. The most widely used clinically electrical VNS
system is the Cyberonics NCP Program, which is inserted during an
outpatient procedure on the left vagus nerve. This unit is used for treating
patients with severe depression and epilepsy resistant to the treatment.
Right-side VNS is effective in animal models of epilepsy and seizures. Still,
substantial effects on depressive symptoms are not known. Preliminary
human trials are promising and have produced positive results, and some
firms have already started to create vagus nerve stimulation tools that can
be used for different conditions. BioControl Medical's CardioFit system
uses right-side VNS to activate efferent fibers and help in heart failure
treatment. In contrast, BioControl Medical's FitNeSS system is designed to
activate afferent fibers, thereby helping to reduce the side effects of
electrical vagal stimulation.
Typical surgical risks associated with this procedure include infection, pain,
scarring, swallowing difficulties, and paralysis of the vocal cord. Side
effects of implanted electrical stimulators include voice changes, heaviness,
sore throat, cough, headache, chest pain, breathing problems (especially
during exercise), difficulty swallowing, abdominal pain, nausea, skin
tingling, insomnia, and bradycardia (heart rate slowing). Though many of
these may be temporary, they may be severe and may last forever.
Other electrical stimulation systems do not need to be implanted. Still, they
have mixed results and are only licensed at this stage for specific
conditions. Cerbomed's NEMOS system is a transcutaneous VNS unit,
applied to the vagus-innervated portion of the body. Currently, it has been
cleared for epilepsy and depression treatment in Europe. In Europe,
gammaCore device from the US-based company electro Core has been
granted clearance for acute treatment of headaches in clusters, migraines,
and overuse of problems by medication. The gamma Core is a portable
handheld device with two flat contact surfaces for stimulation that are
applied over the vagus nerve to the neck side. More extensive trials for
treating other conditions are underway.
      Daily Practices for Activating the Vagus Nerve

          Gargling 2x daily: Keep a cup to your sink. Use it to rinse your
          teeth twice a day, in the morning and at night.
          Gag reflex activation 2x daily: Use your toothbrush to activate
          the gag reflex on both the left and right side of your soft palate,
          as you brush your teeth in the morning and at night.
          Humming 2x daily: Practice humming deep in your mouth
          during your daily commute, or to note your day. You can use the
          term "om" to keep the pulse as long as you can exhale in your
          throat.
          Cold shower 1x daily: End your daily shower with cold water for
          one minute (as cold as possible) and practice breathing through
          the temperature change shock. It becomes easier to increase the
          time every three days by 30 to 60 seconds until all of your
          showers are taken under cold water.
          Deep breathing 3x daily: Before each meal, perform three to five
          minutes of deep breath in a quiet room. This will help calm you
down for each meal and improve your digestion.
Sunlight exposure 3x daily: Go outside and expose your skin to
the sun within 30 minutes of sunrise, in the middle of the day,
and within 30 minutes of sunset, at least five minutes each time.
If you live in a colder climate, expose your eyes to the light for
two to three minutes at each of these times and practice breathing
through the cold whenever you do so.
Sleep on your side each night: Put a pillow in between your
knees to prevent you from sleeping at night on your side.
                    Chapter 10.                            Creating a Vagal Tone Routine
To get the best results for your vagal tone, you can create a daily routine. However, here are
some points that you should remember when you are using a method. The whole point of the
routine is just that; it should happen regularly. So try and incorporate those activities that you
are comfortable doing. Do not try to cram too much into your day, or else you might find
yourself unable to perform certain operations. This, in turn, might demotivate you. You need to
feel a sense of accomplishment, so make sure you are comfortable performing the activities
every day. 
Start with a few simple additions to your life. This way, you will make it seem like there are no
significant changes in your life. You do not disrupt anything, but at the same time, you are
stimulating your vagus nerve every day. But that does not mean you should not focus on making
the other activities and processes as part of your life. As you keep getting used to certain habits,
think of ways you can incorporate the other practices. Remember, all of them don’t necessarily
have to be done every day, as we are going to see.
Each of the routines below will increase in complexity. Get used to one before you move on to
the other.
With those four quick tips, let us get started on the routines.
Routine #1
This is a relatively easy routine that you can perform. When you wake up in the morning, make
sure that you rinse after you have finished brushing. If you are grazing in the evening, then you
can even rinse again once you are finished. 
This is the simplest of the routines. You might already be rinsing after brushing. The only
difference is that you should try and extend to about 20-30 seconds, rather than quickly rinsing
and spitting out the water when you wash your mouth.
Routine #2
In this routine, you can start splashing your face with cold water. 
Now you might wonder why I didn’t just combine this with the first routine. The main reason is
that many people prefer to wash their face with lukewarm or warm water. 
Once you are used to Routine #1, you can add splashing your face with cold water to your daily
habits.
Routine #3
We are going to add breathing exercises to the mix.
As soon as you wake up in the morning, practice the Deep Breathing Technique for about 10
minutes. As I mentioned earlier, don’t worry if you are unable to do it correctly. What matters is
that you get started. You will eventually be able to master it.
If you have 30 minutes in the morning, you can start by practicing the deep breathing technique
for 10 minutes and then move on to yoga for about 20 minutes.
At this point, your routine should look like this:
Morning

            Wake up and then Deep Breathing Technique (with yoga if you have 30 minutes)
            Rinsing after brushing your teeth
            Splashing cold water on your face

Evening
            Rinsing after brushing your teeth

       Routine #4
You start by waking up in the morning and head out for a brisk walk or jog after the sun has
risen. 
You come back and rinse after brushing your teeth. You then splash cold water on your face.
Once you return home in the evening, you then practice the Deep Breathing Technique or yoga,
You then end the day by rinsing after brushing your teeth.
The above routine might be a bit too overwhelming for some. So if you feel that you are unable
to keep the above method, then make sure that you use Routine #3 but then alternate between
yoga and brisk walking.
So your new routine might look something like this:
Morning 1

            Wake up and then Deep Breathing Technique (with yoga if you have 30 minutes)
            Rinsing after brushing your teeth
            Splashing cold water on your face

Morning 2

            A brisk walk outside after the sun has risen
            Rinsing after brushing your teeth
            Splashing cold water on your face

Evening 1

            Rinsing after brushing your teeth

Let’s plug that into a timetable and see how it looks.
 Days                          Morning Routine                        Evening Routine
 Monday                            Morning 1                             Evening 1
 Tuesday                           Morning 2                             Evening 1
 Wednesday                         Morning 1                             Evening 1
 Thursday                          Morning 2                             Evening 1
 Friday                            Morning 1                             Evening 1
 Saturday                          Morning 2                             Evening 1
 Sunday                            Morning 1                             Evening 1

A simple timetable will allow you to get all the benefits for your vagus nerve.
       Routine #5
This is the most advanced routine. But, essentially, what we are going to do is create two
morning routines and two evening routines. 
We need to start adding a relaxation routine and one for laughter. When it comes to relaxation,
pick up an activity that you can use to unwind. It could be reading, listening to wonderful music,
or even cooking, if that relaxes you.
So essentially, you are going to have the below options to work with.
Morning 1

            Wake up and then Deep Breathing Technique (with yoga if you have 30 minutes)
            Gargling after brushing your teeth
            Splashing cold water on your face

Morning 2

            Brisk walk outside after the sun has risen
            Gargling after brushing your teeth
            Splashing cold water on your face
Evening 1

            Unwind with a relaxing activity
            Gargling after brushing your teeth

Evening 2

            Tickle your funny bone
            Gargling after brushing your teeth

Let’s plug them into a timetable and see what happens.
Days           Morning Routine          Evening Routine
Monday           Morning 1                 Evening 2
Tuesday          Morning 2                 Evening 1
Wednesda         Morning 1                 Evening 2
y
Thursday           Morning 2              Evening 1
Friday             Morning 1              Evening 2
Saturday           Morning 2              Evening 1
Sunday             Morning 1              Evening 2

Remember, you can sometimes combine a few things. For example, you could be someone who
unwinds by watching comedy. That is a beautiful idea too. However, some people enjoy reading
a book more than watching something funny. To them, having a separate day for getting a laugh
is essential. If you can combine relaxing and laughing, then that would also be doubly
beneficial. However, I am going to assume that you are busy with a lot of other vital chores or
responsibilities.
One of the best things about the above routines is that you can change and modify them to fit
your purpose. So you could add a gentle Deep Breathing Technique in the afternoon along with
Routine #2 if that is possible for you. I would recommend that you do not think of the routines
as rules established in stone. They are more like notes you make on Google Docs; you can
change them easily.
Make sure that you try and incorporate all the methods that improve your vagus nerve. Too busy
to do yoga every day? Try every weekend. Not a morning person? Then the morning Deep
Breathing Technique is perfect for you!
                Chapter 11.                   Meditative Techniques
                  for the Support of the Vagus Nerve
We've already tackled some of the great benefits of mindfulness meditation.
It can help you focus on your present moment and make you more aware of
your body. It can bring awareness to physical sensations you would have
ignored before. All of this can help you further understand your physical
reactions to stress and how to bring relaxation to your body. There are many
different ways you can approach meditation. Choose the one that you're the
most comfortable with.
One mindfulness meditation that can help with stress, anxiety, and
depression is loving-kindness mindfulness. This is because it creates more
positive emotions, which, in turn, change your body physiology and help
you improve your vagal tone. Loving-kindness can help you overcome any
issues with low mood or low self-esteem. They can also help you with
emotions like anger, guilt, and resentment. All of these involve our feelings
about ourselves or others. Loving-kindness is about reminding yourself of
kindness to you and others. It creates so many positive emotions that it can
change your mentality and is a great way to start improving your cognitive
distortions.
To start your loving-kindness meditation, you're going to need a safe,
comfortable space. Since this meditation is kind of long, you may want to
have this book open while you do it, or you can listen to a guided
meditation to walk you through it. This loving-kindness meditation is based
on the work of Dr. Emma Seppala.
Start by sitting cross-legged if you can or sitting on a chair. Relax your
body, and close your eyes so that you are focused on your inner world,
rather than the external one. 

        1. Take a deep breath in and slowly release it. 
        2. Think about someone who is close to you and loves you. This
           can be someone from your life now, someone from the past, or
           someone who has passed away. Imagine that person standing
           beside you.
        3. They are sending you their love and their hopes for your
           happiness and safety. See and feel the warm wishes coming from
     that person toward you. You might picture it as a wave coming
     toward you, filling you, and surrounding you. 
4.   Think about a second person who also loves you. They also send
     you their love and their hopes for your happiness and safety. See
     and feel that warmth surrounds you and enter inside of you.
5.   Now, imagine that you are surrounded by all the people you have
     ever known who love and cherish you. Your friends, family
     members, and community are sending you their love and their
     hopes for your happiness and safety. Surround yourself in that
     love and fill your heart and body with it. You are overfilled with
     love.
6.   Look at the first person beside you. Start to send them your love.
     You and this person are alike; you both wish for happiness and
     love. Send your love and your hopes for their pleasure and safety
     to them.
7.   Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending the wishes to that
     person.

          May you be safe, may you be happy, and may you be
          healthy. 

8. Now focus on the second person on your other side. Start to send
   them your love. You and this person are alike; you both wish for
   happiness and love. Send your love and your hopes for their
   pleasure and safety to them.
9. Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending the wishes to that
   person.

          Like I hope to, may you live a good life full of safety,
          happiness, and good
          health.                                                            

     10.                       Now imagine all of the other people who love you.
     Start to send them your love. You are all alike; you all wish for
     happiness and love. Send your love and your hopes for their
     happiness to them.  
     11.                       Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending
     wishes to those people.  
               May your life be full of happiness, well-being, and health.

          12.                       Think of an acquaintance that you know. Someone
          that you have no particular feelings toward. You are all alike; you
          both wish for happiness and well-being. Send all of your hopes
          for their well-being to them.  
          13.                       Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending the
          wishes to that person.  

               Just like I hope to, may you live a good life with health and
               happiness.

          14.                       Think of another acquaintance who you know, but
          don't have any particular feelings toward. You are all alike; you
          both wish for happiness and well-being. Send all of your hopes
          for their well-being to them.
          15.                       Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending the
          wishes to that person.  

               May your life be full of happiness and well-being.

          16.                       Now imagine the whole world in front of you. All of
          the living beings in the world are just like you; they all want to be
          happy. Send all of your warm wishes to them.  
          17.                       Silently repeat this phrase three times, sending your
          wishes to every living being in the world.  

               May your life be full of happiness and well-being.

          18.                       Gently bring your awareness back to yourself. Take a
          deep breath in and then out. Bring awareness to your body and
          mind. Think about how you feel after doing this meditation.
          Open your eyes and continue your day.  
Once you've completed the meditation, you should feel a little better. You
may feel relaxed and calm. You may even feel more compassion for others.
If you don't, that's okay. Keep practicing loving-kindness meditation to gain
the benefits from it. If this isn't your cup of tea, try some other kinds of
meditation. If you want a more physical sort of meditation, try yoga,
qigong, or taiji (Thai chi).
Yoga is often considered relaxing as it uses movements and breathing to
help calm the body. It can sometimes be triggering for people, so if you've
experienced trauma or PTSD, proceed with caution or do yoga with
someone who understands trauma. There is some evidence that yoga can
stimulate the parasympathetic nervous system and the Vagus nerve. It's also
been linked with helping to heal depression, anxiety, stress, and chronic
pain. So it can be worth it to try if you want to activate your Vagus nerve.
There are a lot of different types of yoga to try. If you've been practicing
yoga for a while, stick with the ones you know or try something new. If
you're a beginner, then don't start with the advanced classes.
Here are some significant types of yoga that are good for beginners but also
help with stress reduction:
Hatha Yoga - In a hatha yoga class, you'll have a basic understanding of the
different poses in yoga. It's generally considered to be a gentle yoga class
and shouldn't strain you too much. You'll learn to work on posture, while
also following the breath.
Iyengar Yoga - This type of yoga is very focused on your position and
poses. There isn't a lot of strenuous work, but you'll have to maintain poses
for a while. The classes should be run by someone who understands the
human body well and can provide you with support in different positions. If
you choose to do Iyengar yoga, make sure that your instructor has been
well-trained and can provide you with the necessary guidance, so you don't
hurt yourself.
Restorative Yoga - Like the name itself suggests restorative yoga is all
about relaxation. In this style of yoga, you put yourself in poses while being
supported by other materials. So while you are in the pose, you're not
straining yourself.
Each of these kinds of yoga can require a class with an instructor. However,
if you don't want to go to an actual level, you can find some good yoga
videos online. For relaxation, choose yoga videos that use terms like gentle
yoga, beginner's yoga, or yoga for relaxation. Find videos that you enjoy
and help you relax. If gentle yoga is not your thing, they try vinyasa yoga,
ashtanga yoga, or Bikram yoga. All of these are more intense, but also put a
lot of emphasis on the breath and movement. All of them can help you
achieve more balance in your body.
Qigong is a new type of meditation. It combines physical form and
movement with focused breathing and meditation. Its goal is to balance
your life energy or Qi. It has a lot of backing from both traditional medicine
and modern science. Many scientists consider qigong to promote well-
being. It causes relaxation of your muscles, reduces your stress levels, and
deepens your breathing, which has been repeated many times thus far and
can help with activating your Vagus nerve. Qigong has many different
forms, and it can be adapted for many different people. It's often used
medically in China, is related to many kinds of martial arts, and is
sometimes just simple meditation and movement. One of the most popular
forms of qigong in the U.S. is tai chi.
If you've ever walked through a park in a major city during the weekday
morning, you may come across a group of people doing slow, fluid
movements that look very much like martial arts. They're most likely doing
Thai chi. It is, in fact, a type of martial arts that focuses on the body's slow
movement and breath. It is considered a style of meditation, even though
there is an exercise component to it. If you're interested in either qigong or
tai chi, find a class near you and give it a try. You can also find videos on
YouTube for home practice.
Tai chi takes a lot of practice before its flow becomes routine, so keep
working with it.
               Chapter 12.                   Measuring Nervous
                 Function with Heart Rate
                 Variability (HRV)
Vagal tone refers to the effect that is created by the parasympathetic nervous
system on the body at rest. It affects the heart rate, lungs, and digestive
tract.
Put merely, and vagal tone is how the parasympathetic nervous system
responds to stimuli. The reaction that we humans give when stressed, sick,
or traumatized is affected by the parasympathetic and sympathetic parts of
the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic system influences are,
however, more prevalent. Vagal tone is often used to determine heart
functionality and emotional regularities.
      Vagus Nerve Testing
To check whether your vagus nerve is underperforming, a health
practitioner might test your gag reflex. They do this by irritating the back of
your throat. If you do not gag, it could be down to your vagus nerve not
working in the manner in which it should.
Measuring your vagal tone is a bit more complicated than tickling the back
of a person's throat. Testing your vagus nerve's strength includes monitoring
your heart rate variability (HVR).
HRV looks at how fast the body boots into the parasympathetic nervous
system response of "rest and digest." The higher your HRV is, the higher
your vagal tone will be. It suggests that having a high vagal sound causes a
person to experience far better moods, health, and brain function.
An electrocardiogram can measure your heart rate. Did you know that when
we breathe in, our hearts beat faster to speed up oxygenated blood
throughout our bodies? When we breathe out, our heart rate automatically
slows down again. The vagus nerve is activated when we breathe out but
impaired when we breathe in. These differences in heart rate indicate your
vagal tone. In plain English, it means that your body can deal with stress
and is capable of processing stressful situations faster.
If you experience a low HRV, you will have a low vagal tone. Those who
have low HRV or vagal tone take far longer to recover from illness, stress,
and situations that cause unease and discomfort. Low HRV is sadly also
linked to inflammatory diseases, cancers, heart diseases, and brain
conditions. That is why there is a considerable impact that stimulating the
vagus nerve can have on overall health and treating illnesses.
      A Closer Look at Heart Rate Variability (HRV)
These days, we can track all sorts of bodily information, such as sugar
levels, weight, and the number of steps we did. By monitoring HRV, a
person may soon be able to discover the impacts that stress has on the body
and its effect on energy output and more. HRV is there to monitor the
fluctuations in time between each heartbeat. The variations, as mentioned in
the discussion about vagal tone, are controlled by our autonomic nervous
system, so even if we want to react in a certain way, our bodies usually
respond in a manner that is out of our control.
In saying so, the autonomic nervous system is forever working, and
messages are being relayed back and forth between the brain and the organs
to gauge and weigh our experiences and then provide the body the
opportunity to react in what it thinks is the appropriate manner. If we
experience continual stress, live a rather sedentary life with no exercise, and
do not sleep well, combined with dysfunctional relationships and lousy
eating, the body will try to balance itself out, causing our flight-or-fight
reactions more prevalent. Think about how happy you are when you get a
raise or when your first child is born. All these feel-good moments will
impact your health in a more positive light and cause the right reactions.
      Why Should I Check My HRV?
Checking your HVR is a great way to test the autonomic responses within
your body. If you find yourself more in a flight-or-fight mode, naturally, the
fluctuations between heartbeats will be lower. Relaxation brings with it
higher variations between heartbeats. Low HRV levels bring a myriad of
problems, including cardiovascular issues, and it can exacerbate depression.
If you have a high HRV, you will be able to handle stressful situations with
a lot more ease and experience better cardiovascular fitness. By monitoring
your HRV, you can make small improvements that can significantly benefit
you throughout your day and lifetime. Through simple practices such as
meditation and practicing mindfulness, HRV rapidly improves. There is
definitive proof that this is something that people should learn more about
and invest. HRV can be the reason you change your life for the better!
     HRV Testing
HRV can be tested in the doctor's rooms by attaching wires to a person's
chest and monitoring the fluctuations. The relayed data is then printed on a
sheet of paper that the doctor then reads, thus determining HRV. HRV can
be tested at home, too, with a chest-strap heart monitoring system. It is
advised that you check your HRV right after you wake up during the week
to gauge where you can make changes to your lifestyle to improve your
health.
               Chapter 13.                   (VNS) Vagus Nerve
                 Stimulation
Alternatively, several home-based methods can also be used to stimulate
this nerve. When a device becomes needed, it is usually to treat cases of
epilepsy and depression that haven't been able to respond to other medical
treatments such as pharmaceuticals or psychotherapy.
The device is located under the skin of the chest or neck, with a wire
connecting it to the vagus nerve itself. The device can then send signals
through the vagus nerve to your brain stem and then process the
information given to your mind. The device would typically be
programmed and controlled by a trained neurologist. Still, the patient will
often receive a handheld magnet that can also help them manage their
equipment. Studies are being conducted currently with the hopes that in the
future, the stimulation of the vagus nerve can also be used to treat other
conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, migraines, and cluster headaches, as
well as multiple sclerosis. 
We all know the saying, "What happens in Vegas, stays in Vegas." 
Well, things tend to work a little differently when we refer to the vagus
nerve. What happens in the vagus nerve most certainly doesn't stay in the
vagus nerve, no matter how much you try to keep it there. Stimulation of
the vagus nerve can affect just about the entire nervous system, as it links
the brain to the heart, lungs, and digestive tract. 
It also goes a step further and allows interaction with the liver, kidneys,
ureter, female fertility organs, neck, spleen and gallbladder, ears, and the
back of your tongue. It also helps to release bile and testosterone into the
system as well as stimulate the secretion of your saliva and release tears.
When the vagus nerve gets damaged or has a problem, there can be many
physical issues abnormally slow heartbeat, weight gain and obesity,
gastrointestinal disorders and diseases, trouble swallowing, mild to severe
mood disorders, fainting spells, seizures and epilepsy, vitamin deficiencies,
and chronic inflammation within the body. 
By stimulating the vagus nerve, we have found that we can improve on
certain conditions such as the following:
                Heart disease is a condition involving blood clots to the
                heart as well as diseased blood vessels and structural
                problems with the heart itself.
                Tinnitus causes a buzzing or ringing sound in your ears that
                you may associate with hearing loss. This ringing noise may
                be a constant sound, or it may come and go.
                Obesity is a condition of a person's weight. They fall on the
                larger end of the scale and develop other secondary issues on
                top of their weight.
                Alcohol addiction where a person ultimately becomes utterly
                dependent on alcohol to function in society.
                Migraines are painful headaches, often causing a loss of
                balance, eye sensitivity to light, as well as seeing 'spots' or
                patterns in vision.
                Anxiety disorders whereby a person may experience intense
                and uncontrollable feelings of worry, stress, or fear to the
                point that it interferes with the person's daily routine in
                society and leaves them unable to function correctly.
                Alzheimer's disease is a progressive disease that takes over a
                person's mental functions and destroys their memory.
The leaky gut syndrome is a gastrointestinal digestive condition where
toxins and bacteria can 'leak' through the intestinal wall, affecting the rest of
the body. 
Inadequate blood circulation is often caused by a buildup of plaque within
the arteries and blood vessels, resulting in stiffness in your limbs as well as
severe pain. 
Mood disorders are classified generally as extreme highs or extreme lows.
This is an elevation or lowering of someone's mood for a short period. 
Cancer, whereby abnormal cells within the body will uncontrollably divide
themselves and destroy body tissue and healthy cells along the way. 
With vagus nerve stimulation, we can say that approximately 80% of nerve
fibers are meant to send information from the body and organs to the brain.
In comparison, the other 20% of nerve fibers will send data back from the
brain to the rest of the body.   
Your daily diet can also play a significant role in how your vagus nerve
functions and is stimulated. 
A healthy diet is more likely to leave you feeling energized with your vagus
nerve getting all the power it needs to function. In contrast, a junk food diet
that consists of high-fat and high-carbohydrate meals will reduce the nerve's
sensitivity overall. Eating overly spicy foods can also cause the vagus nerve
to have a moment of miscommunication with the body. 
So, since the vagus nerve has control over such a vast amount of our
gastrointestinal tract, we can say that when a person has a 'gut feeling,' they
are feeling it in their gut. 
It isn't just in their imagination, as these nerve signals that we feel control a
vast amount of our lives to keep us safe and healthy. These feelings come
from the vagus nerve that is telling us that there is a chance that something
in the current situation might be wrong. 
Your gut feeling is due to a part of the nervous system being stimulated that
precisely controls your gastrointestinal tract called the enteric nervous
system. This nervous system then communicates with the brain via the
vagus nerve. 
It has also been found that up to 90% of the main signals and
communication that is passing through the vagus nerve is coming from the
enteric nervous system firing away.
Medical professionals have been studying the vagus nerve's influence on
the human brain thoroughly, especially in the sense of using electrical
stimulation to help combat the effects of epilepsy or depression. Vagus
nerve stimulation is now able to help prevent a person from getting seizures
by sending mild electrical pulses to the brain regularly, using a small device
that is implanted under the skin. 
It has also been found, especially with patients who have epilepsy, that this
device has another added benefit that goes along with it, which is that these
patients felt like their mood had drastically improved after using the
machine, showing that the benefits of helping those who are depressed can
also be achieved.
Vagus nerve stimulation can also be achieved using passive methods such
as holding your breath for a short period, splashing cold water over your
face, coughing suddenly, or even squeezing and tensing the stomach
muscles in a bearing down motion. 
Concentrating on your breathing through meditation is a gentle and passive
way to stimulate your vagus nerve and become more self-aware of all that is
around you. You could join a yoga class or meditation class that can
explicitly teach you these specific breathing exercises. 
Alongside the vagus nerve stimulation therapy, you can also get vagus
nerve blocking therapy, which is similar to using the stimulation device but
will only be used during the day. With vagus nerve blocking, you are
blocking specific signals to the brain instead of stimulating them. 
For example, you can block the signal that tells your brain that you are
hungry and therefore need to eat something. Instead, the vagus nerve
bypasses that particular sign. Your mind will not get the message that you
are hungry, thus reducing food intake during the day. This appropriate
method is often used in obesity cases, allowing the patient to curb any
unnecessary cravings.
The vagus nerve has now also been stimulated to help patients who have
epilepsy. This form of epilepsy treatment was first performed in 1997,
through the vagus nerve stimulator device being placed into a person's chest
under the skin and a wire linked to their vagus nerve. When stimulating the
vagus nerve electronically for the treatment of epilepsy, the patient may find
a few side effects that may become uncomfortable. Should the following
side effects be experienced, the patient should visit a doctor immediately to
see if there is a way to reduce or stop the symptoms. 

          Hoarseness or changes in voice - The patient's voice becomes
          quite rough and grainy, sounding, which can ultimately lead up
          to our symptoms.
          Sore throat and difficulty with swallowing - The patient may
          experience pain in their throat that will also affect their speech
          and daily functioning.
          Coughing - can lead on from the sore throat. The patient may
          experience a 'tickle' or rough sensation as they speak, which
          triggers the gag and cough reflexes.
          Shortness of breath - The patient may find that since their vagus
          nerve stimulator is also directly linked to their diaphragm, they
          may experience some discomfort in breathing and not be able to
          get the lung capacity that they may just have had. 
          Slow heart rate - As this little artificial ticker sits in the chest
          cavity controlling your vagus nerve, it will also monitor your
          most crucial ticker, the heart. The parasympathetic side of the
          vagus nerve will be stimulated, thus slowing your heart rate as if
          you had just been in fight or flight mode, it is time to relax.
          Stomach discomfort or nausea - This comes from that nasty 'gut'
          feeling we tackled earlier. Your digestive tract reacts to the vagus
          nerve being stimulated. It may make you feel quite ill as if you
          were going into a situation you'd rather not be a part of. 
If any of these problems continue to occur during your epilepsy treatment,
please inform your doctor as soon as possible. 
Because the vagus nerve has connections to every organ in the body,
researchers now think that the vagus nerve might be able to help other cases
and reduce nasty symptoms along the way. 
These studies are now being performed on heart failure patients, those with
diabetes, abnormal heart rhythm, Parkinson's disease, as well as severe
inflammation from Crohn's disease. 
When it comes to such cases as those with arthritis, which affects most of
the population at some stage in their lives, studies that were done in 2016
showed that the symptoms of arthritis could be significantly reduced with
the stimulation of the vagus nerve. The patients who did not respond to
medications for their aches and pains showed significant improvement after
vagus nerve stimulation. No adverse side effects were shown as a result of
the trials. 
               Chapter 14.                   Practical Exercises to
                 Stimulate the Vagus Nerve
D
      The Power of Stretching
Let’s talk about stretching. This doe tie into yoga, but if you combine
diaphragm breathing with yoga.  Doing this as you do a mall stretch will
benefit you in a ton of different ways. For starters, most people don’t stretch
nearly enough, and it shows. Most people aren’t flexible, and it affects how
they end up faring in life. Many get injured due to a lack of stretching.
But it’s more than that. Stretching is powerful. Stretching is used to help
naturally stimulate the body, and make movement simple.  There is a lot
you can get from this, and you can get out of this. Most people don’t realize
that they’re not only releasing tension within the muscles when they stretch,
but they’re also focusing their breathing, so it’s simple and yet very useful.
A lot of people don’t stretch enough, so that tension sits there. But, a way to
naturally start up the parasympathetic nervous system and activate et vagus
nerve is to do just this. Sitting down, stretching out your body, and working
on this helps promote relaxation and wellness, and from there will stimulate
your entire body in its way.
Plus, it feels fantastic too. Most people don’t stretch enough, and they’ll
realize as they do this, that they need to. Sometimes having calming music,
and focusing on your breathing changes this.
You also don’t have to hold the stretches for very long. About 10-12
seconds suffices.
Try touching your toes, stretching your arms behind your head, pushing
them up, and holding your arms in the air, or even just moving towards your
foot will help with this. There is a lot of benefits to be had with stretching
and a lot of beautiful things to do with this.  You’ll be shocked, you’ll be
amazed, and most of all, you’ll be quite happy with the power of this small
exercise. You’ll feel invigorated for whatever is to come for you in the
future.
Consider stretching right before you begin your day, or at the end of the
night, and see how it helps you feel during the day. You’ll feel your vagus
nerve stimulate almost immediately.
      Weight Training
Weight training might seem weird to do to stimulate the vagus nerve, but it
does work.  That’s because, when you lift weights, it is changing the speed
of the body. Plus, through the power of repetition, you get your body to
relax.  A lot of people think lifting weights is only for big, burly people, but
that isn’t the case.
Ever just doing a few sets of curls will change the way your body feels, and
your vagus nerve.  Many people also think they need to start with a
heavyweight right away, but that isn’t the case. I suggest just progressively
overloading over time if you want to see physical gains. You must
understand that weight training is a relaxing process, and you must breathe
as you do it. You need to breathe in deeply to help with pushing the oxygen
around to help you with strenuous exercise. So yes, pick up that dumbbell
and try it.  You’ll feel the difference right away.
      HIIT Workouts
HIIT, or “high-intensity interval training” is a form of workouts that require
you to do a lot in a minimal period. Sometimes, this involves sprinting;
other times, this can be pushups, sit-ups, or other exercises. The main goal
behind this is to do a lot in a bit of time, and through spurts.
These sprits are what cause vagus nerve stimulation. The vagus nerve is
usually not stimulated if you’re always stressed out. Still, the periods of
stress, and then relaxation kick the vagus nerve into gear, helping it activate
whenever needed.
HIIT workouts are also great because they are often straightforward to do. 
No matter what it is that you do, you’ll feel the difference in these
immediately.
A lot of people don’t realize that HIIT is also very short in terms of
workouts.
Some people can get these done within a half-hour or so, and that’s their
workout for the day. But HIIT is great because it lets you get a great
workout and also lets you improve your wellness and health.
It’s a great way to get in shape, so it’s something you should consider if
you’re looking to improve your physical fitness.
      Walking
Walking is an excellent option if you’re not going to the gym to lift or don’t
want to spend time doing HIIT or yoga. Walking is an excellent habit to get
into because it stimulates your body and helps with physical fitness and
wellness.  Your vagus nerve will get stimulated with walking, especially if
you live a sedentary lifestyle.
I think walking for 30 minutes a day is ideal, especially if you’re unable to
do this otherwise. Sometimes, pacing while on your breaks is a great way to
do this, and walking also lets you improve on your health and wellness.
You want to do this to help with your physical fitness, and walking is a
good start, especially if you’re not active otherwise.
Jogging is also another good one because this can help with deep
breathing.  A lot of people, when they start, will get into the habit of
breathing with short breaths, but that won’t work here.  This can make it
hard to run, and you might pass out.  With jogging, you want to make sure
that you’re breathing in a slow, deep, and even manner, and focus on this. 
This will help with your vagus nerve and help you get into the habit of
breathing deeply.  You can also do running with this, but it’s more high-
intensity and might be harder to engage in deep breathing otherwise.
      Jumping
Again, another form of cardio that’s great, but your vagus nerve will love it.
Jumping jacks, burpees, and other jumping exercises are useful because
they help improve circulation, which can help with blood pressure and your
vagal tone.
When you jump too, be mindful of your breathing. Try to do it with a deep
breath, and you’ll notice it’s a much harder workout, but you’ll feel the
difference. It increases blood flow, blood pressure, and heart rate as well.
Your vagus nerve will thank you for this, and you’ll be able to, with
jumping too, improve on your health and wellness.
      Aerobics
Aerobics is another higher-intensity exercise, but some variants aren’t as
extensive or intensive as others. Zumba tends to be on the more intensive
side, but there are different classes you can try. However, there are even
different kinds of aerobic exercises, such as water aerobics, weight training,
cycling, and even yoga. 
All of these, when combined, are wonderful for vagus nerve stimulation and
are great for the body.  You’ll be amazed and surprised at how helpful this
can be for the body, and how you can use these to help improve your vagus
nerve. They encourage you to breathe during these too, which promotes
deep breathing and thereby vagus nerve stimulation.
      Swim it Out!
Swimming is a great aerobic exercise too, and if you’re not a fan of jogging
or running, or weight training, swimming is good.
That’s because it helps in many different ways. For starters, you’re
submerging your head, which stimulates the mammalian diving reflex,
which includes your vagus nerve. It also pushes you to control your
breathing as you move.  You need to hold your breath, but also walk
through the water, and it’s a combination of both of those things which
provides you with the correct vagus nerve stimulation.
It also will help improve your bodily movement. That’s because you’re
moving about, and this encourages blood flow too.  You’ll notice that as
you begin with this, it’s hard to do, but over time, you’ll get better with this.
It’s a beautiful form of cardio, and it’s gorgeous for properly stimulating the
vagus nerve.
      Dancing
Finally, we have dancing. Dancing is an excellent form of self-expression
for starters. Even if you’re silly, it can help you feel much better about
yourself. Dance is lovely because it enables you to improve your physical
fitness, get the blood flow moving, and help you stay active and fun.
There are so many different kinds of dance classes these days too. You can
do Zumba or other forms of dancing. Some people even like ballet dancing
because it requires control, and this can stimulate the vagus nerve. They’re
fun to do, and they encourage you to move, control your breathing, and let
you express yourself.
Even silly interpretive dancing helps. After all, if it can make you laugh,
that naturally stimulates the vagus nerve, and that’s a beautiful, fun way to
do this.
Dancing is excellent, and it lets you feel good about yourself. Consider
dancing the other time you want to express yourself correctly and feel good.
When it comes to stimulating the vagus nerve, these are all practice
activities that boost the vagus nerve. Your vagus nerve is vital because it
lets you relax the body and helps curb inflammation. But, while these
exercises are great for stimulating this, it also helps with getting the body
moving, which increases vagal tone. It can also help offset obesity, diabetes,
and other conditions related to weight.
Your vagus nerve does benefit from exercise, and here, we tackled why and
how it happens, and the benefits of this.
                Chapter 15.                   Health And Life
                  Benefits of Vagus Nerve Stimulation
      Vagus Nerve and Depression
Depression, or major depressive disorder, is a mood disorder that causes a
person to have persistent feelings of sadness and loss of interest. Depression
can affect a person mentally and physically and take a significant toll on a
person's daily activities. It is an illness, just like any other, that can cause a
person just not to want to face life and become secluded. Even though
mental health is gaining prominence and becoming accepted by the general
population, a significant segment of the population does not take it
seriously. They feel that a person can just snap out of it. This is not the case.
A person cannot just snap out of it. Depression is more than just getting
over something. It is an illness that may require medical attention. There is
a difference between having an off day, and a major depressive disorder that
significantly reduces your ability to function every day. When a person is
suffering from severe depression, they are often walking a thin line, and one
little thing could push them over the edge. For this reason, their feelings and
mood disorders always need to be validated. They need to be taken
seriously.
Untreated depression can lead to significant pain and trauma. Severe
depression may lead to a person harming. There are many unfortunate
stories of people who did not reach out for help, out of fear of appearing
weak, and things took a turn for the worse. We do not want this to happen to
anybody because they felt like they could not reach out to someone.
Depression is not something to take lightly, and if a person is exhibiting the
signs of depression, it must be taken seriously. There are many signs and
symptoms of depression that must be considered. Among them are feelings
of sadness and tearfulness, anxiety, reduced appetite, unexplained physical
problems, feelings of worthlessness, seclusion, loss of interest, anger,
frustration, always blaming themselves, and many other things. Take special
notice when someone suddenly stops doing something they have always
loved to do. Also, give special attention to significant mood swings.
A study conducted in 2002 in biological psychiatry showcased outcomes
that long term vagus nerve stimulation vastly improved symptoms of major
depressive disorder and reduced episodes of depression. Stimulation of the
vagus nerve appears to change brain wave patterns, which reduces the
symptoms of depression. This implies a significant physical component for
depression. However, doctors are still not fully aware of exactly how vagus
nerve stimulation improves symptoms of depression. It just seems to work
well, which is a good thing. Perhaps there is a connection between an
overstimulated sympathetic nervous system that speeds up body processes
and depression. This is something that is still not fully understood. One
thing that researchers want to emphasize is that stimulating the vagus nerve
may not eliminate depression. However, it will always vastly improve a
person's quality of life. If a person can at least feel good most of the time,
then a particular therapy is worth paying attention to.
Other times a person you know and love is experiencing symptoms of
depression; don't get annoyed. Depression is an illness, just like diabetes,
and a person suffering from it needs support, and not be told to just get over
it. Perhaps using the natural techniques for vagus nerve stimulation may be
beneficial for them. Once again, it may not cure their depression, but it will
improve their mood and ability to live life tremendously. If vagus nerve
stimulation continues to inhibit depression effectively, then maybe the
stigma that still exists around mental illness can be eliminated once and for
all. This just may be the most significant result of all. Even people who
have mental illness feel guilty. We don't hear people apologizing for heart
disease. But they still apologize for being depressed. This needs to stop, and
increased vagus nerve research can help.
Here is one suggestion that will help all parties involved. When promoting a
friend who is experiencing depression, take them out to have some fun.
Remember that laughing and having a good time helps to stimulate the
vagus nerve. Take your friend out for a night on the town, and you may just
help with their depression.
      Vagus Nerve and PTSD
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, or PTSD, is a mental condition caused by a
traumatic event that had a severe impact on someone. The people who are
affected most commonly are in the military, law enforcement, first
responders, or anyone in a field where tragedy is a common occurrence.
However, PTSD may also strike just about anybody and everybody who has
been through a traumatic event. A serious accident, death of a loved one,
getting assaulted, or any number of tragic events may cause a person to
have PTSD. It may take years to overcome PTSD, and some never
overcome it at all. PTSD can manifest itself in multiple ways, including
anxiety, anger, nervousness, negative thoughts, flashbacks, and chronic
pain. They will often re-experience the trauma various times in their heads.
There is a significant split, even within the military community, whether or
not PTSD is legitimate.
For this reason, just like with depression, people will dismiss it as a non-
issue. They believe that someone can just get over it. A person cannot only
get over it, though. PTSD is genuine and is a severe mental disorder that
needs to be treated as such. Unfortunately, PTSD continues to carry a
negative stigma to it that can hopefully be a thing of the past once people
start realizing some of the physical elements to it as well.
While there is no known cure for PTSD, there are therapies that may be
used to help subside some of the signs and symptoms. Currently, some of
the treatments include talk therapy and exposure therapy. Several studies
suggest that vagus nerve stimulation may be a productive adjunct therapy
for helping with PTSD, especially with its associated pain. A University of
Texas, Dallas, and study researched the effects of vagus nerve stimulation
on rats. The rats in this particular study were shown to display some signs
that come with PTSD, like fear, aggression, and anxiety. A session of vagus
nerve stimulation showed a significant reduction in these negative signs.
Not only that, but the symptoms also did not return in many cases after
another episode of trauma, suggesting that the stimulation may have more
long-term effects than the other therapies. Researchers feel that if the
stimulus can work in the same manner in humans, it may significantly
reduce the pain associated with PTSD. If the effects are more long term as
well, it is undoubtedly an adjunct therapy worth looking into.
If you have a friend or loved one who experiences PTSD, perhaps it is time
to work on them. Help them by using the techniques that will stimulate their
vagus nerve. That old cliché of "laughter is the best medicine" may be the
ultimate tool. Help your loved one get regular exercise. Remember, this
does not just mean going to the gym. Most people are more likely to do
something if they enjoy it. Find something they want to do physically and
help them do it. If they love playing basketball, play a quick pickup game.
If they love going for walks, find a beautiful trail, and enjoy the sites.
Whatever you can do to get them moving, do it. Finally, how about a nice
round of karaoke? Singing and dancing are a great way to stimulate the
vagus nerve and get your friends out of the poor mental state. If we can
continue to correlate vagus nerve stimulation with helping to subside the
signs of PTSD, we can hopefully remove the stigma associated with it. Just
like with depression, we may never be able to cure PTSD, but we can
certainly manage it with the appropriate practices.
We want to talk about how PTSD can manifest itself into physical
symptoms like muscle tightness, chest pain, fatigue, and digestive issues.
Many of these physical responses to a traumatic event indicate a
sympathetic nervous system activity. Things like muscle tightness and chest
pain that is not heart-related often come from stress and being worked up
for so long. They do not come from being in a relaxed state. Furthermore,
fatigue develops when the body is overly stressed for long periods. This is
why excessive sympathetic responses are not healthy for the organization. If
your body is in a constant state of pain and tiredness due to a traumatic
event, then perhaps it is time to stimulate your vagus nerve to inactivate
your parasympathetic response. The parasympathetic response inhibition
will put your body in a state of relaxation, releasing the built-up tension and
helping reduce the pain associated with PTSD. Do this regularly, and it can
help to manage the negative signs and symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder.
      Vagus Nerve and Inflammation
Does the vagus nerve help with inflammation? Yes, it does. Inflammation,
also known as the inflammatory response, is your body's natural response to
a variety of things, such as stress. The inflammatory response occurs under
many circumstances, especially when our body is trying to fight off disease.
Mild inflammation is needed for the body to maintain its proper functions.
When the body perceives a threat like an illness or injury, the inflammatory
response kicks in to subdue the threat. This can be marked by swelling,
pain, fevers, and fatigue. Once again, inflammation is needed to help out
bodies maintain their functionality. However, excessive or untreated
inflammation can create many health problems throughout the body. In
cases of stress, inflammation may occur due to the sympathetic nervous
system's fight or flight response. In general, whenever the body perceives
any type of threat, it inhibits the parasympathetic nervous system. It
stimulates the sympathetic reaction so that it can deal with the perceived
threat. This is why you will notice an increase in heart rate when a person
has an infection. The body is becoming stimulated to defend itself.
      Vagus Nerve and Stress
Stress is a significant trigger for the inflammatory response also. Indicating
even further, the sympathetic nervous system is at play here. In this case,
things like deep breathing and humming will effectively reduce stress,
inhibit the sympathetic response, stimulate the vagus nerve, and ultimately
reduce inflammation. When encouraged to its full potential, the vagus nerve
can strongly influence the immune system, thereby affecting good health.
The vagus nerve is looking more durable and more energetic, the more we
talk about it.
One of the words we have continuously used is the word "help." We have
said that the vagus nerve "helps" the human body. We say this because the
vagus nerve alone cannot just solve all of our problems. At least, not at this
moment. Stimulating and utilizing the power of the vagus nerve is more of
an adjunct therapy for improving body processes and preventing chronic
diseases, both physically and mentally. We don't want it to sound like a
cure-all. Of course, it will cure a lot. Allow your vagus nerve to "help" you
feel better. The point is to make the vagus nerve work as efficiently for us
as possible.
               Chapter 16.                   Vagus Nerve
                 Stimulation to Heal from PTSD
Stimulating the vagus to stop the sympathetic system is done when the
individuals feel safe and secure. The following activities can instantly
promote varying levels of these feelings.
Make connections with others. It is challenging to feel as if you can trust
others. The best way to switch from the sympathetic nervous system to the
parasympathetic nervous system is to make a connection with someone
else. 
Hug . Along with the first technique, hugging helps us feel safe and
connected to others. By giving or receiving a hug, you can instantly trigger
the vagus nerve.
Laugh . If hugging is not your thing, you can laugh instead. Laughing can
help stimulate the vagus nerve to release oxytocin. Oxytocin encourages
you to make connections with others and lift your mood. Laughing, just like
hugging, helps you feel connected with others and can strengthen bonds. 
Shake it off . One of the ways you can bounce out of the shutdown mode is
to do a full-body shake. Before you go into a full out shake, do a quick
body scan. Are there any areas of your body that feel tense or stiff? If you
find tension in your body, these are the areas you want to focus on when
you wiggle and shake. Give your attention to each area as you shake the
tension out when you have gone through all the fields and feel relieved,
pause for a moment to take in the stillness that surrounds you and let it fill
you. This is your body waking up again. This is the feeling you want to
recall when facing a trauma-induced memory or episode.   
      Daily Long-Term Vagal Toning Technique for Trauma and
      PTSD
Healing from trauma or PTSD can be a life-long process. Strengthening the
vagus nerve daily results in developing the skills necessary for your mind
and body to bounce back from traumatic events and experiences that trigger
trauma symptoms. The following regular exercises you can perform to
receive long-term benefits from the vagus nerve:  
             1.   Bhramari pranayama. The Bhramari pranayama is
                  referred to as the humming bee breath in yoga practice.
                  This type of breathwork helps you tone the vagus nerve
                  by stimulating it through the vocal cords. When you
                  perform this breath, you can keep the nervous system
                  calm and prevent it from going into fight or flight mode.
                  To achieve this type of breathwork, get into a comfortable
                  sitting position on the floor or bed. Cross your legs and
                  bring your hands to cover your ears. Your thumbs should
                  face down towards the ground. Take a deep breath in; as
                  you exhale, begin to make a humming sound that vibrates
                  through your ears. You can repeat this process as many
                  times as you need. 
             2.   Sleep on your right side. Trauma and PTSD have severe
                  adverse effects on sleep, and how you sleep can add to
                  these difficulties. Sleeping on the right side of your body
                  can stimulate the vagus nerve and lead to a more restful
                  night's sleep. You should avoid sleeping on your back as
                  this is often the worst position for vagus nerve
                  stimulation. 
             3.   Tai chi or qigong. Like yoga, tai chi and qigong are forms
                  of slow movement exercises that stimulate and tone the
                  vagus nerve. These practices focus on strengthening the
                  internal systems through precise moment and breath. Sun
                  Style tai chi is a type of tai chi that utilizes smooth,
                  flowing movements that can help individuals feel
                  grounded. This is an essential aspect for those with PTSD
                  who can often feel lost and unsure of where they are,
                  resulting in panic, frustration, and confusion. Doing a
                  simple Sun Style tai chi sequence can tone the vagus
                  nerve and be an effective way to help heal from trauma.

      Sample Short Form Sun Style Sequence:
Step 1 : Begin at a standing position with the elbows near your side, slightly
bent upwards. Palms should face in towards each other. On the exhale,
lower your arms and your bend your knees slightly, then lift the arms back
up as you take a step forward on the left foot. Push your hands in front of
you as you bring the right foot up to meet with the left. Feet should be
slightly apart. 
Step 2 : Bring the hands back slightly towards the chest, palms facing one
another. As you inhale, move them wider apart; on the exhale, push the
palms back in towards each other. 
Step 3 : Step the right heel slightly up and out to your right side. Allow your
weight to shift to the right leg as you turn your palms to face out in front of
you. Push the palms forward, then extend the arms around and out to your
side. Your gaze should follow the left hand. Then bring the palms back
around in front of you, so they face each other again while stepping the left
foot up to meet the right. Bend the arms, so they are at a 90-degree angle in
front of you. Fingers should point toward the ceiling. 
Step 4 : Move the right hand to meet the left elbow. Step your right foot out
to your right side as you move your right hand to extend in front of you,
palms facing away from your body, and the left arm comes down. Shift
your weight from your right leg to the left leg as you turn the upper body
slightly to the left and move the right arm down somewhat to your side
while lifting the right wing with the palm facing away from your body.
Bring the left foot closer to the right and repeat this process two times.
Step 5 : Bring the hands back slightly towards the chest, palms facing one
another. As you inhale, move them wider apart; on the exhale, push the
sides back in towards each other. 
Step 6 : Shift your gaze to the right hand as you stretch it out in front of you
while the left hand comes to meet the right elbow. Step your left foot out to
your side as you reach the right hand up towards the ceiling. Turn the left
palm to face the floor and push down towards the ground. Your weight
should be on the left foot. Turn your body slightly to your left as you move
the left hand to sweep across your left knee and bring the right hand
towards the right ear's side. Push the palm of your right hand forward and
deliver the right foot in just barely to meet the left. 
Step 7 : Bring the hands towards the center of the chest, so the palms are
facing each other (about 6-inches apart). Move the right hand forward as
you step back on the right foot. Keeping the weight on the right foot, bring
your left foot back to meet the right as you move the right hand back and
bring the left hand forward. 
Step 8 : Step forward on the left foot while turning the palm of the right
hand up toward the ceiling and the left palm down toward the ground. Shift
your weight to the right foot as you move your right palm out in front of
you and the left palm back toward your abdomen. Bring the right foot
forward, stepping in front of the left while reversing the palms so the
remaining faces towards the ground and the right up towards the ceiling.
Shift your weight to the right foot as you move the right hand back towards
the abdomen, and you left out in front of you. Step the left foot in front of
the right as you make your hands into fists and bring the right-hand level
with the left. 
Step 9 : Bring the left foot back slightly. Un-fist your hands and turn the
palms, so they are facing out in front of you. Step back on the right foot as
you push the hands forward. Shift your weight to the right foot and bring
the sides back in towards your body. 
Step 10 : Turn the palms, so they face one another. On the inhale, move
them wider apart; on the exhale, push the hands back in towards each other.
Step 11 : Repeat all the above steps but start on the reverse side. 
               Chapter 17.                   Vagus Nerve
                 Stimulation to Heal from Trauma
 The body experiences other distressing signs of post-traumatic stress— a
tightness in the abdomen, a sinking sensation in the stomach, a familiar pain
in the mouth, or a constant sense of fatigue. We now understand that as part
of the recovery process we have to turn to the body and as a result, we have
seen an increase in the use of meditation, mindfulness, tai chi, qigong, Feld
ink circle, massage, Craniosacral therapy, dietary therapy, and acupuncture
for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Such mind-body treatments are helping us to be less passive, less
aggressive, and less impulsive to stress. We're growing our understanding
of the options we need to make us stay grounded and relaxed. We felt in
need of this more. One way the mental-body treatments operate is by
activating the nerve in the vagus. Awareness of how this nerve works offers
a profound understanding of traumatic stress and promotes our healing
capacity. The vagus nerve has, therefore, taken center stage in the treatment
of trauma.
"Mind-body treatments work on the nerve of the vagus to help you regain
the balance—some breath and movement activities in this article, aimed at
relaxing and resetting the vagus nerve. By a cycle of self-study and
conscious body consciousness, you will continue to develop techniques that
help you regain a sense of comfort and recover from trauma." Effects of
Mind-Body Therapy Vagus Nerve Yoga Dr. Arielle Schwartz. The
utilization of mental-body therapy is correlated with a wide variety of
wellness and wellbeing changes, including physical and mental wellbeing
enhancements Reduction. They allow us to focus on our feelings, impulses,
and behavioral motives. This observational capacity tends to improve
tolerance to discomfort, which can reduce emotional reactivity, fear, panic,
chronic pain, and depression. Mind-body treatments improve self-
understanding and the capacity to perceive that person's point of view with
understanding.
Moreover, mental-body treatments are successful as they require structural
improvements in the autonomic nervous system as determined by increases
in vagus nerve activity. The vagus nerve reaches through the muscles of the
nose, inner ear, chest, back, lungs, stomach, and intestines from the
brainstem down. Mind-body treatments make changes in how we relate to
our surroundings by encouraging a gentle look and allowing us to try new
breath or activity patterns that communicate specifically with other parts of
the body. Researchers also calculate the changes that exist in the vagus
nerve, which is often referred to as respiratory sinus arrhythmia by heart
rate variability (HRV). HRV refers to the rhythmic heart rate oscillations
that arise with the breath. It's a function of the intervals between beats in the
heart. Higher variability in heart rate is associated with a better ability to
withstand or rebound from stress.
In comparison, lower variability in heart rate is correlated with stress and
anxiety. You should think of any form of mind-body therapy that improves
the heart rate variation by creating strength and endurance within the
autonomic nervous system. As a result, switching between emotions of
anticipation and easiness is smoother.
Pain and recuperation of the vagus nerve vagus and pain. If we feel a threat
(real or perceived), we change the way we breathe. We can get a good
picture here by considering the ways animals react to predators. In certain
situations, an animal may rapidly breathe into the upper chest, which is a
protective reaction of the nervous system that allows them to run or fight in
a dangerous environment. In other situations, an object may freeze that
includes breathing shallowly or holding the air to prevent a predator from
being detected. This freeze reflex causes the animal to stand very still and is
a response to the threat of immobilization. For certain situations, animals
are weak, and a predator, not a scavenger, can lose interest in a dead animal.
An evolutionarily older vagus nerve axis supports both the freezing and
sluggish responses as a member of the parasympathetic nervous system.
Most notably, an animal can activate the stress reflex by shaking and
breathing in a manner that maintains homeostasis until it's healthy.
Nevertheless, we humans will also live for long periods either in high
activation (fight and flight) or weak activation (freeze and faint) responses.
This appears to be the case where abuse is persistent and prolonged, as in
the case of Complex PTSD (more of this can be found here). We frequently
miss the resources to handle challenging or painful experiences. It may
result in physical stress and restricted breathing habits that form the
foundation of our posture, modes of activity, and general self-sense.
      The Vagus Nerve and Trauma Therapy 
To help repair the vagus nerve, you will learn practices; but, not all training
is right for everybody. Alternatively, I encourage you to play with and try a
range of methods of breathing and action before you discover what fits for
you. You will start developing techniques through a cycle of self-study and
conscious body consciousness that help you maintain a sense of protection
and recover from trauma. Here are a few tools to help get you started:
Attend your Gut: Dr. Arielle Schwartz Somatic Therapy. You can also boost
the health of the vagus nerve by ensuring a balanced digestive system. The
inner nervous system, also known as the belly brain, is comprised of the
"microbiome" that resides in the gut. This habitat includes hundreds of
healthy and bacterial organisms that live within the intestinal tracts. An
imbalance in your intestine can result in an inflammatory reaction in your
immune system and cause a wide range of debilitating symptoms, including
anxiety and depression. By raising the sugar intake and finding any latent
food intolerances, you will build a balanced microbiota. You may require a
doctor or nutritionist to help find the causes of a deficiency in the gut;
however, the effort it takes to incorporate these improvements into your life
is well worth it.
                     Conclusion
Chronic pain and inflammation is a terrible condition to live with. Still, as
everything has shown, there is hope in the incredible power that the vagus
nerve holds. The truth is that vagal stimulation is still in its infancy.
Research is continually being carried out and the areas of potential research.
As mentioned, merely scratch the surface of the full body of new studies
that are being undertaken. You can expect this decade to bring rapid
advances in the field of chronic inflammation remedies, and the vagus
nerve is likely to be at the front and center of it. Living with pain is severe.
It’s even worse when you realize that all those pills you’re popping aren’t
doing anything for you and are mere placebos. It is a position in which my
wife and I found ourselves at different points in our lives. Thanks to the
miracle that is the vagus nerve, we managed to dig our way out of it.
Challenges in life never cease, but living with pain, inflammation, and
chronic illness is one particular challenge you don’t have to deal with day in
and day out. While the vagus nerve is a miraculous thing, it helps to live a
healthy lifestyle. As you can see from the alternative methods to stimulate
the vagus nerve, the majority of solutions point towards living a balanced
and overall healthy lifestyle. This is precisely what ancient wisdom teaches
us, and we would do well to follow it. Methods such as yoga and meditation
might not find an excellent fit for themselves in today’s reaction based
medicinal approaches. Still, when it comes to being proactive with regards
to your health, they remain amongst the best solutions to undertake.
So take action starting right now and begin implementing the stimulation
exercises mentioned. I can guarantee that they will change your life for the
better. After all, everything is the result of meticulous scientific research I
carried out to heal my family’s conditions. In other words, healing the
vagus nerve means treating the body. Your entire being is so intimately
connected that it almost seems silly to look at your body as a series of
separate parts. Stop thinking of yourself as a machine that needs to be fixed
and is thinking of yourself as a living being, the product of thousands of
years of evolution. Your body is perfectly adapted, in some sophisticated
ways, to survive and thrive here on planet earth. It has far more healing
power than you may have ever given it credit for. While its design may not
be perfect for handling social media interactions or supporting you forty
hours a week in your office chair, it’s designed is perfect when supported by
a whole and healthy lifestyle. Please don’t blame yourself or your body for
its physical, psychological, or emotional shortcomings. Instead, work
together with your body to gain autonomy over your wellness. Protect and
nurture your body, unleash its rejuvenating power, and begin to see your
body as a partner in the healing processes, rather than the cause of all your
troubles.  It will take time for you to reap the benefits but never lose hope
that better days are ahead. One of the benefits of vagal stimulation is that as
your mood improves, you’ll begin to believe in the treatment to a greater
extent. This will create a self-reinforcing positive cycle.
I wish you the best of luck in your path forward and look forward to hearing
your story of how you banished pain, inflammation, and chronic illness
away from your life. Good luck and I wish you all the health in the world!
