           “This is an interesting book that will keep you reading all the way through.
          It provides little-known historical background that adds clarity to the issues
                                                                                                                                    Emily L. Casanova, PhD
                                                                                                                                  and Manuel F. Casanova, MD


                                                                                                                           DEFINING
           and a rich human dimension to what happened on the road to delineating
         and understanding people and families affected by autism spectrum disorder.”
          —Nancy Minshew, MD, Founder of the Autism Center For Excellence
                                 at the University of Pittsburgh

      “Understanding the biology of autism, the role the brain, the immune system, and




                                                                                                                            AUTISM
    the environment play is no easy task. This book, however, explores these connections
    along with the effects of medication, genetics, and their interactions. This book opens
      discussion around causes, yes, but it amplifies the need for individual profiles and
                              plans, to enable effective support.”
                        —Dr Wenn B. Lawson, lecturer and author

       “Having known the Casanovas for some time, I have seen the ideas that form
      this book take shape. If read with an open mind their work will give any student
                                of autism a lot to think about.”
     —John Elder Robison, Neurodiversity Scholar, The College of William & Mary


        Drawing on the most up-to-date research on autism, this incisive book argues
         that while there are different causes and variations of autism, there is in fact
          one biological autism. By examining developmental and genetic factors and
     investigating lesser known autism-related syndromes, it clears away misconceptions
                              surrounding this complex condition.




                                                                                              and Manuel F. Casanova, MD
                                                                                              Emily L. Casanova, PhD
     Emily L. Casanova, PhD, is a research assistant professor in Biomedical Sciences
    at the University of South Carolina’s Greenville School of Medicine, working in close
    conjunction with the Greenville Health System. Her research foci include the autism
          spectrum and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome/hypermobility spectrum disorders.

      Manuel F. Casanova, MD, is the director for the Childhood Center for Neuro-
        therapeutics at University of South Carolina’s Greenville School of Medicine
            and professor within the department of Biomedical Sciences. He is a
      world-renowned neuropathologist and expert on neurodevelopmental conditions.

                                                  Jessica Kingsley Publishers




                                                      www.jkp.com/autism
                                                                                                                           A Guide to Brain, Biology, and Behavior
                                             Cover design: www.ianrossdesigner.com




Casanova_UK_9781785927225_13.8mm_AW.indd 1                                                                                                                     12/09/2018 11:25
DEFINING AUTISM
of related interest

Re-Thinking Autism
Diagnosis, Identity and Equality
Edited by Katherine Runswick-Cole, Rebecca Mallett and Sami Timimi
ISBN 978 1 84905 581 9
eISBN 978 1 78450 027 6


Understanding and Evaluating Autism Theory
Nick Chown
ISBN 978 1 78592 050 9
eISBN 978 1 78450 306 2


The Interbrain
Embodied Connections Versus Common Knowledge
Digby Tantam
ISBN 978 1 84905 476 8
eISBN 978 0 85700 856 5
DEFINING
 AUTISM
A Guide to Brain, Biology, and Behavior


        Emily L. Casanova
      and Manuel F. Casanova
First published in 2019
by Jessica Kingsley Publishers
73 Collier Street
London N1 9BE, UK
and
400 Market Street, Suite 400
Philadelphia, PA 19106, USA
www.jkp.com
Copyright © Emily L. Casanova and Manuel F. Casanova 2019
Front cover image source: Ian Ross.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any
material form (including photocopying, storing in any medium by electronic
means or transmitting) without the written permission of the copyright owner
except in accordance with the provisions of the law or under terms of a licence
issued in the UK by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd. www.cla.co.uk or in
overseas territories by the relevant reproduction rights organisation, for details
see www.ifrro.org. Applications for the copyright owner’s written permission to
reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed to the publisher.
Warning: The doing of an unauthorised act in relation to a copyright work
may result in both a civil claim for damages and criminal prosecution.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 1 78592 722 5
eISBN 978 1 78450 349 9
                                  Contents


 1.	Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	9

 2.	The Brain in Autism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	27

 3.	The Genetics of Autism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	43

 4.	The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility .  .  .  . 	65

 5.	Regression in Autism .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	101

 6.	Autism and Epilepsy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	121

 7.	The Neurodevelopmental Spectrum .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	137

 8.	The Broader Autism Phenotype .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	157

 9.	Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	173

10.	Toward a Definition of Autism .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	193

    References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	211

    Subject Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	249

    Author Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	257
To those on the autism spectrum and their families.
To Bram, for our many conversations on science.
                           Chapter One


     KANNER’S CONUNDRUM
      AND BERNIE’S BIOLOGY


THE BEGINNING
Fortunate to have escaped the ravages of war-torn Europe, by 1924
Jewish-born Chaskel Leib Kanner (Leo Kanner: Figure 1.1) found
himself working as a physician in the American Midwest. Born
in Klekotow, Austria-Hungary, Kanner had been pursuing a career in
medicine at the University of Berlin when his studies were interrupted
by the turmoils of World War I. As sometimes occurs with the rise and
fall of empires, hundreds of thousands of Austro-Hungarians died in
battle or from starvation, and those left alive were further consumed by
the Spanish influenza ravaging nations. By 1921, the Austro-Hungarian
Empire had lost over one million people to war, hunger, and illness, and
malnourishment and poverty would continue to remain a problem for
the fallen empire. Raised within the Jewish faith, the young Leo Kanner
must surely have looked upon America as a promised land.




                        Figure 1.1: Leo Kanner


                                   9
10                               DEFINING AUTISM


     Like Kanner, many Germans and Austrians fled Europe, settling in
     America. In order to curb the influx of low-skilled immigrants the
     United States Congress passed laws establishing quotas and requiring
     literacy tests for those aliens wishing to enter the U.S. These laws
     favored well-educated Northern Europeans who, like Kanner,
     emigrated from their homelands eager for a better life.
          By the time Kanner had arrived in South Dakota in 1924, the state
     had been welcoming immigrants in droves for decades. Austrian and
     German immigrants tended to settle in the Midwest, living inland rather
     than on the coasts. As continuing incentive, the earlier Homestead Act
     of 1862 signed by Abraham Lincoln turned over millions of acres at
     no cost to private citizens, while most of these homestead acquisitions
     occurred west of the Mississippi River. What’s more, the development
     of the railroads provided an easy means of travel for those enticed by
     the 1870s gold rush.
          Although plenty of land was available west of the Mississippi, the
     Midwestern Plains were an otherwise undifferentiated landscape with
     little opportunity for cultural expansion. Though the Plains have an
     unstructured natural beauty of their own, it’s likely the arctic winter
     blasts and lack of cultural activities weighed heavily on Kanner,
     prompting him to make his stay in South Dakota a temporary one,
     en route to the metropolitan life that better suited his and his wife’s
     European upbringings.
          Nevertheless, South Dakota opened new vistas to the academic
     career of Kanner in unexpected ways. Originally constructed to house
     German-Russian immigrants, the South Dakota governor acquired two
     wooden buildings that were eventually transformed into the Dakota
     Hospital for the Insane. By the time Kanner arrived, the hospital had
     been renamed the Yankton State Hospital, in recognition of changing
     perceptions of the term “insanity,” and the fact that patients with other
     medical conditions, such as epilepsy, were also hospitalized there.
          For over a century, the United States lacked regulatory restrictions
     concerning the practice of medicine. There was an unspoken belief
     that people in need of medical attention were consumers who had
     the right to pursue their care, and the government’s role was to
     protect that right. However, by the 1920s, most states had initiated
     significant restrictions, allowing only medical schools to teach and
     practice  medicine. Nevertheless, a lack of additional oversight still
     allowed doctors ample latitude within their practices.
              Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                        11


     Kanner was originally trained in electrocardiography and
cardiophonography. And so during his early days at Yankton he surely felt
at odds with his surroundings, working in a field in which he had little
training. During that period of history, psychiatrists were often known as
alienists, taken from the French adjective aliene, meaning “insane.” A
cardiologist by training, he likely felt “alien” in his new hospital post.
But this was the impetus he needed to reinvent himself as a psychiatrist,
which would change the history of autism forever. Ultimately, he
would emerge as the father of American child psychiatry.


THE GERMAN SCHOOL
It was not uncommon for polymaths in the 19th and early 20th
centuries to play professional musical chairs, changing specialties
throughout their careers. In fact, this tradition was long-standing.
The father of American psychiatry, Benjamin Rush, was himself a
politician, social reformer, and educator. In 1812, he published the
textbook Medical Inquiries and Observations Upon Diseases of the Mind,
in which he advocated for the humane treatment of the mentally ill.
However, his humanitarian outlook didn’t dissuade him from using
patients as guinea pigs, testing treatments such as vinegar-wrapped
blankets, mercury rubs, cold baths, and extreme blood-letting. In
those days, intentions were good but treatment implementation was
based on poorly constructed theory rather than empirically based
observations, much to the chagrin of the patients being subjected to
these “treatments.”
    The German-born Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915), a noted patho­
logist, was also regarded as a psychiatrist, in part due to his close
association with Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926), the father of modern
psychiatry. Unsurprisingly, this proved to be of mutual influence, since
Kraepelin’s association with Alzheimer and other neuropathologists
impacted his concepts of the biological origin of mental conditions
such as schizophrenia. This organic tradition was eventually exported
to the United States by Elmer Ernest Southard (1876–1920), a well-
known American psychiatrist and neuropathologist, who died tragically
young but nevertheless mentored and substantially influenced many
prominent thinkers of the day (Casanova, 1995).
    A graduate of Harvard Medical School, Southard received
his postgraduate education at both the Senckenberg Institute and
12                              DEFINING AUTISM


     Heidelberg University in Germany. After returning to the United States,
     he interned in the pathology department at Boston City Hospital
     before becoming the president of both the American Medico-
     Psychological Association and the Boston Society of Psychiatry
     and Neurology. He also became the Director of the Massachusetts
     Psychiatric Institute, devoting much of his time to establishing a new
     nomenclature of psychiatric illness and working to identify brain
     abnormalities common to dementia praecox (schizophrenia). Along
     with Mary Jarrett, he founded the field of social psychiatry, which
     they applied to the benefit of industrial employees. All of this was
     accomplished before the ripe old age of 43 when he died suddenly
     of pneumonia, the likely result of workaholic exhaustion. Had it
     not been for his untimely death, one can only imagine the many
     achievements he would have continued to realize. Death be not proud
     of dreams destroyed!
         At the beginning of the 20th century, many medical conditions
     were diagnosed by nonspecific symptoms. These conditions were
     often systemic in nature and received the descriptive appellation of the
     “Great Imitators” or “Masqueraders.” Various forms of cancers, lupus,
     multiple sclerosis, and syphilis were all grouped under this rubric.
     Ultimately, these conditions were diagnosed at autopsy where the
     pathologist had the final say.
         Before the influence of the German School, it was presumed
     that psychiatric conditions lacked identifiable pathology. Those
     conditions with distinctive brain pathology were instead thrown
     into a wastebasket category known as organic brain syndrome. As with
     many European‑born psychiatrists of the day, the influence of the
     German School had a profound effect on how Leo Kanner perceived
     and treated mental conditions in his professional career. However,
     another major influence on Kanner would come from the Swiss-born
     physician, Adolf Meyer (Figure 1.2).
         Adolf Meyer was a neurologist who studied under the tutelages of
     Auguste Forel, John Hughlings Jackson, and Jean-Martin Charcot, all
     grand names in the annals of psychiatry and neurology (Casanova et al.,
     2007). Upon arriving in the United States, he practiced pathology
     before becoming the first psychiatrist-in-chief of the Johns Hopkins
     Hospital and president of the American Psychiatric Association
     (APA). Meyer introduced the faculty at Hopkins to Emil Kraepelin’s
     classification of mental disorders, a thesis that laid the foundations
              Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                          13


for both the World Health Organization’s International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) and the APA’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM)
(Figure 1.2). (We’ll discuss Kraepelin and his thesis further in Chapter 7.)




          Figure 1.2: Adolf Meyer (left) and Emil Kraepelin (right)

Also like Kraepelin, Meyer believed psychiatric illness was rooted
in biology, gradually setting a course to distance himself from
psychoanalytical ruminations. He found clarity in viewing mental
conditions from a biopsychosocial perspective, stressing to his students
and colleagues the importance of information gathering of major
physical, psychological, and social aspects of the patient that could
cause or affect their symptoms.


KANNER AT THE CROSSROADS
After four years in South Dakota, Kanner exhibited modest academic
proclivity but nothing that truly distinguished himself. He had
published on the tertiary stage of syphilis (general paralysis) among
Native Americans and had studied the effects of adrenalin on the
blood pressure of patients with functional psychosis. Not having much
in terms of academic credentials and having traced a confusing career
path amongst medical specialties, he interviewed with Adolf Meyer at
a congress of the American Academy of Psychiatry in Minneapolis in
the hopes of finding a new position.
    In spite of Kanner’s early lack of distinction, Meyer eventually
accepted Kanner into a three-year Commonwealth Fellowship at
Hopkins (1928). During this time he had the opportunity to work
14                                DEFINING AUTISM


     alongside many distinguished people, including Lauretta Bender, who
     performed research at the Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, and Paul
     Schilder, a visiting professor and guest lecturer. After three years as a
     fellow, however, Kanner’s talents were evident. Based on the financial
     support of the Macy and Rockefeller Foundations, Meyer enlisted
     Kanner’s efforts to establish the Children’s Psychiatry Service at the
     Harriet Lane Home.
          The final stage of his academic career began with one small
     examining room equipped with a washstand and a table. Yet in this
     new position Kanner would soon transcend his academic role as
     renowned child psychiatrist to become an even greater social activist
     on behalf of those with the condition we now know as autism.


     KANNER’S CONUNDRUM
     In 1943, Kanner published his famous thesis—a manuscript describing
     eleven children and their “inability to relate themselves in the ordinary way
     to people and situations from the beginning of life” (Kanner, 1943,
     p. 242). He describes the congenital nature of their social challenges:
     “There is from the start an extreme autistic aloneness that, whenever
     possible, disregards, ignores, shuts out anything that comes to the
     child from outside” (p. 242). He describes the children’s language
     impairment, often consisting of echolalia, as well as their “anxiously
     obsessive desire for the maintenance of sameness that nobody but the child
     himself may disrupt on rare occasions” (p. 245).
         In future years, Kanner would expand on this work, emphasizing a
     humanistic approach that rebelled against the prevailing deterministic
     mentality of the medical profession and the limited accommodations
     offered by society. Through this, he emphasized the strengths of
     his patients, proposing new ways in which their potentials could be
     actualized. He also recognized the clinical heterogeneity amongst his
     patients, going to great lengths to describe differentiating features
     across his cases. Like Meyer, he advocated for an integrative approach
     that included the physical, psychological, and social aspects of each
     patient. Influenced by the German School, he harshly criticized
     operant conditioning and the use of aversives (e.g. electric shocks),
     well before Ivar Lovaas, the father of applied behavioral analysis,
     rose to fame. Instead, he advocated a variety of approaches in the
             Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                           15


treatment of autism based upon an individual’s needs. However, this
propensity often left him conflicted, as his holistic approach clashed
with his desire to narrowly define and differentiate autism from other
conditions like childhood schizophrenia.
    In medicine, it is necessary to establish stringent criteria so
that we can begin to conceptualize a condition as a singular entity.
Broadening of symptoms sometimes blurs distinguishing features and
can falsify diagnostic claims. But as Kanner continued to enumerate
more symptoms of autism, the more difficult it became to pinpoint
those traits that were truly fundamental to the condition. Meanwhile,
his view of autism as a single condition continued to clash with the
heterogeneous behaviors he observed amongst his different patients,
making the establishment of universal criteria progressively more
challenging. Nevertheless, Kanner believed every person should be
treated as an individual:
   By this time, it should be—but very likely is not—quite commonplace
   to state that one of the combined goals of medicine, psychology,
   social work, and education is to make it possible for children to attain
   their optimal condition of comfort and smoothness of functioning.
   No matter how simple this formulation sounds, civilization took a
   long time to arrive at it, and to many people and in many areas, it
   still has the ring of novelty. We are, after all, not too far behind from
   the era of the rod and the dunce cap and the bending of the twig to
   insure the haphazardly preordained inclination of trees.
   …
   Particular emphasis should be placed on the adjective “optimal”
   contained in the formulation. The optimum which can be reached
   is, of course, not identical to each individual…[he] can be helped
   if we examine the specifics of the underlying disharmony of the
   integrants and work for a better consonance between them. (Kanner,
   1971c, p. 134)
It’s important to emphasize again that Kanner recognized the exis­
tence of a spectrum within autism, although in modern times the
definition of that spectrum has continued to broaden. He lauded the
children’s gifts and called for parents and educators to help them on
their paths of personal development so that they could achieve their
16                                 DEFINING AUTISM


     true potentials. Kanner promoted the civil rights of autistic people
     and, in a sense, is one of the forefathers of the civil rights movement
     for “differently-abled” individuals (Casanova, Casanova, & Sokhadze,
     2016). The following paragraphs provide a call to action by Kanner:
         In the last few millennia our species has had its gifted and productive
         thinkers and poets and artists and scientists and explorers. Many of
         them have advanced our civilization by upsetting deep-seated archaic
         notions guarded zealously and at times cruelly by mighty autocracies
         of one kind or another. We are now in a position to spot potential
         talents at an early age and have the laudable desire to see to it that
         as many as possible reach their optimum. We can do this only if, as
         they  mature, we as parents, educators, and human engineers can
         pave their way toward the developments of unhampered automaticity.
         It is up to us, then, to attenuate the hampering agents, be they organic,
         emotional, or social, and to encourage rather than crush, spontaneity
         and self-organization. (Kanner, 1971c, p. 142)
     Kanner noted that there is “one other very interesting common
     denominator in the backgrounds of these children. They all come of
     highly intelligent families” (Kanner, 1943, p. 248). Although he didn’t
     openly speculate that the parents had some form of autism, Kanner did
     believe that intelligence linked the parents and children. He may have
     suspected a heritable relationship existed, one which we now refer to
     as the broader autism phenotype (BAP) (more on this in Chapter 8).
     He also noted that some children were exposed from “the beginning to
     parental coldness, obsessiveness, and a mechanical type of attention to material
     needs only … They were left neatly in refrigerators which did not defrost”—a
     genuine yet unfortunate observation that was taken up by Bruno
     Bettelheim as we’ll discuss later in the chapter (Kanner, 1949, p. 425).
     Kanner himself was an intellectually complicated, imperfect man
     who at times stressed the congenital nature of autism and other times
     criticized parents for their coldness, the latter a position he officially
     recanted in 1969 at the first meeting of the Autism Society of America.
     Unfortunately, he was a product of Freudian times, after all.
          Fundamentally, however, Kanner—like the German School—
     believed that disorders of the mind were rooted in the biology of the
     brain and therefore autism was a congenital condition, not the result
     of abnormal parent–child relations. In addition, Kanner abhorred
     psychoanalytic cogitations and, in spite of his conflicting opinions,
               Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                            17


criticized the Refrigerator Mother Theory of autism stemming from
his original description. It’s therefore unfortunate that Kanner failed
to identify a broader phenotype1 in parents, although his early work
clearly danced about the idea. Unfortunately, hindsight is 20/20.
    From the start, I was greatly impressed with one observation which
    stood out prominently: The parents of these patients were, for the
    most part, strongly preoccupied with abstractions of a scientific,
    literary, or artistic nature, and limited in genuine interest in people. As
    time went on and more autistic children were studied, the coincidence
    of infantile autism and the parents’ mechanized forms of living was
    really startling. This was confirmed by many other observers. I noted
    then, however: These children’s aloneness from the beginning of life
    makes it difficult to attribute the whole picture exclusively to the type
    of early parental relationship that they have experienced. (Kanner,
    1968, pp. 17–18).
Kanner’s book In Defense of Mothers was subtitled “How to Bring Up
Children in Spite of the More Zealous Psychologists” (Kanner, 1941).
Published two years before his case series on autism, Kanner’s book
urged mothers to “regain that common sense which is yours, which
has been yours before you allowed yourselves to be intimidated by
would-be omniscient totalitarians.” The theme of the book was not
psychogenic but focused on explaining abnormal childhood behaviors
in a contextual setting, understanding what occurred in the child’s life
at the time the behaviors began or intensified. Interestingly, Kanner
described family dynamics as a democracy in which every member,
including children, was an active participant whose voice deserved to
be heard.
    Later, Kanner would openly criticize and mock Bruno Bettelheim,
the psychoanalytic huckster, at the height of Bettelheim’s popularity.
Kanner’s criticisms were highly personal and clearly transcended the
usual norms of academic debate. Shortly after Bettelheim’s book
The Empty Fortress was published, Kanner railed:



1	 “Phenotype” refers to the outward expression of genes. Most often it is used
   to refer to a physical trait, such as eye color or height; however, in this
   instance, it refers to a subtler expression of autism known as the “broader
   autism phenotype.”
18                               DEFINING AUTISM


        The futility of such speculation is illustrated by a recent publication,
        The Empty Fortress, published in 1967. Its intrepid dust jacket
        promised the reader that it “sheds new light on the nature, origin
        and treatment of infantile autism,” but the author of the book, being
        perhaps somewhat more hampered by actual fact than the author
        of the dust jacket, felt called upon to employ such qualifications
        as “maybe”, “perhaps”, “probably”, “possibly”, “as if ”, “as it were”,
        “seemed to”, “suggests”, 146 times in 48 pages of the report of the
        first case, and he cautions his readers further within the text, “This
        like other interpretations of Laurie’s behavior, is highly speculative…”
        (Kanner, 1968, p. 26)
     Kanner championed a humane approach to autism, rather than
     psychoanalysis:
        This modesty, humility and caution must be applied to therapy as
        well as to etiology, and this is the keynote at certain centers where
        efforts continue to be made, consistently and patiently, to help these
        children find their way into a world which may be threatening to
        them. (Kanner, 1968, p. 26)
     At times, Kanner criticized those who joined the common chorus of
     “Cherchez la mère!” or “Find the mother!”—a refrain derived from
     the phrase, cherchez la femme (find the woman) suggesting that at the
     root of all men’s problems is ultimately a woman. In this instance,
     Freudians wrongly believed that the root of all the child’s problems
     was the mother. Kanner chastized his psychoanalytic colleagues in
     defense of his observational methodology: “Poohpoohing description
     as an obsolete pastime of atavistic nosographers, they started out with
     interpretations in which the mother–child relationship was put on the
     pedestal as the only valid etiological consideration” (Kanner, 1965,
     p. 417). Kanner placed observation before theory, one of the primary
     tenets of science.
          He explained his reasoning for utilizing the term early infantile
     autism, to denote the condition’s early manifestation: “We must assume
     that these children come into the world with an innate inability to
     form the usual, biologically-provided affective contact with people,
     just as other children come into the world with innate physical and
     intellectual handicaps” (Kanner, 1943, p. 250). Kanner did adhere to
     his diagnostic scheme, believing that dilution of the original concept
     would lead to an artifactual increase in worldwide prevalence rates
              Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                            19


that would balloon to include any individual with unusual behaviors.
He and others warned about the “abuse of the diagnosis of autism”
declaring that it would threaten “to become a fashion” (Kanner, 1965,
1968). He adhered to his criteria in order to make diagnosis “more
uniformly reliable” (Kanner, 1965, p. 414).
    Contemporary to his writings he noted that other authors
had introduced the term pseudo-autism for those cases with atypical
presentation. Although we now recognize a far broader spectrum
of autism than did Kanner, during his time the pseudo-autism
classification rapidly expanded to include conditions variously
described as “hospitalism,” “anaclitic depression,”2 and “separation
anxiety” (Kanner, 1965). As Kanner explained, “An identifying
designation appeared to me to be definitely desirable because, as later
events proved, there was danger of having this distinct syndrome
lumped together with a variety of general categories” (Kanner, 1973,
p. 95). He goes on to explain:
    In the early 1950s, Rank created the concept of the “atypical child”
    as an overall designation for children presenting signs of “ego
    fragmentation” in close connection with maternal psychopathology.
    The underlying idea was: Why bother about questions of genetics,
    organicity, metabolism, or anything else if we can proceed promptly
    with the psychogenic denominator common to all disturbances
    of the ego? Thus, a pseudodiagnostic waste basket was set up
    into which went “all more severe disturbances in early development
    which have been variously described as Heller’s disease, childhood
    psychosis, childhood schizophrenia, autism, or mental defect.” With a
    perfunctory bow in the direction of “heredity and biology,” mother–
    infant involvement was decreed to be the sole key to everything that
    goes on within or around the neonate. (Kanner, 1971b, p. 18)
Ironically, Heller’s disease, now known as childhood distintegrative
disorder, was included under Pervasive Developmental Disorders
in both the DSM-IV and DSM-IV-TR but has since been removed in
the latest iteration. In addition, it’s now recognized that autism occurs
alongside many rare genetic syndromes and is more commonly used
as a descriptive diagnosis similar to “intellectual disability” rather

2	 Anaclitic depression is a failure in the development of an infant following
   his or her separation from its mother.
20                               DEFINING AUTISM


     than as a singular entity unto itself. One therefore may wonder what
     Kanner would say about our modern usage of the autism diagnosis.
     In some ways, he would find it foreign and perhaps even be slightly
     appalled. However, we now recognize the extensive heterogeneity
     and fundamental biological nature of these conditions, which Kanner
     probably would have also appreciated.
          In support of this notion, we know that Kanner admired
     Bleuler’s conception of schizophrenia, in which Bleuler envisioned
     schizophrenia not in the singular but as a group of related conditions—
     the schizophrenias (Kanner, 1971b). Kanner similarly mused, “It is well
     known in medicine that any illness may appear in different degrees
     of severity, all the way from the so-called formes frustes to the most
     fulminant manifestation. Does this possibly apply also to early infantile
     autism?” (Kanner, Rodriguez, & Ashenden, 1972, p. 32). Ironically,
     Kanner frequently dealt with the differential diagnosis of autism as
     it applied to schizophrenia (Kanner, 1965). And one of his primary
     opponents in this regard was Lauretta Bender.
          Lauretta Bender was an old colleague of Kanner’s from Hopkins
     who had moved to Bellevue Hospital in order to take charge of
     children services. Bender, who is best known for developing the
     Bender-Gestalt Visual Motor Test, was married to Paul Schilder, an
     Austrian psychiatrist and pupil of Freud. Together they composed a
     towering power couple whose influence surpassed that of Kanner.
     Indeed, she would publish her experience on hundreds of cases, far
     more than Kanner would ever study.
          Bender and Schilder believed that one of the core features of
     childhood schizophrenia was anxiety, which could be either biological
     or environmental in origin. Unfortunately, Bender, much like Benjamin
     Rush, sometimes instituted aggressive treatments based on subjective
     bias, ignoring the complaints voiced by her patients. In the end, she
     administered electroshock and insulin shock therapy to hundreds of
     children with childhood schizophrenia (inclusive of autism), some
     younger than three years of age.
          Bender thought that autism was an early manifestation of
     schizophrenia that rarely occurred in “pure” form; that is, “without
     signs of other developmental disabilities and organic features” (Faretra,
     1979, p. 119). In her cases, developmental symptoms anteceded the
     appearance of psychotic symptoms. She did agree, however, that some
     cases of autism didn’t progress into fullblown schizophrenia and
               Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                            21


grouped these individuals into a wastebasket category of neurological,
environmental, and/or idiopathic causation.
     Kanner, for his part, believed childhood schizophrenia was a rare
condition, an assertion that casts doubts on Bender’s mega series and
with which modern clinicians would generally agree. He felt that
many of the patients diagnosed with childhood schizophrenia fell
into an assortment of neuropathological, progressive, and congenital/
acquired anomalies of the central nervous system. Although some
cases of childhood schizophrenia manifested a prodromal phase3
that included autistic symptomology, childhood schizophrenia was
ultimately a psychotic disorder with a deteriorating course. Kanner
recognized clinical antecedents of autism in the works of Sukhareva
in Russia, Lutz and Tramer in Switzerland, and Despert in the U.S.
(Kanner, 1965, 1971a), but despite similarities he differentiated these
descriptions from his own case studies: “It was deemed essential for
the diagnosis in both groups that a period of relative normalcy had
preceded the beginning of the illness” (Kanner, 1965, p. 417).
     Recognizing the broad spectrum of symptomology, and expressing
some frustration with nosological scheme,4 Kanner nevertheless
believed that autism would ultimately fall under the broader classi­
fication of schizophrenia. However, he steadfastly maintained that the
constellation of symptoms he had described was sui generis (unique).
     In the end, Kanner believed that the refinement of autism criteria
should be guided by autistic people and their families:
    By far the greatest incentive is coming from child patients themselves,
    not having read those articles and monographs and unconcerned
    about existing nomenclature present themselves as they are and thus,
    as individuals, continue inviting further refinements of criteria for
    differential diagnosis. (Kanner, 1971a, p. 19)
To this date, autism remains a diagnostic conundrum in which autistic
individuals and their families have had a growing voice in how it is
defined. After all, who knows autism better than those who live with
it daily?



3	 The appearance of an early, lesser phase of symptoms that precedes the onset
   of schizophrenia.
4	 Refers to the classification of diseases.
22                              DEFINING AUTISM


         Kanner was a keen student of human nature, constantly striving
     to familiarize himself with every quirk and distinguishing trait of his
     patients. He maintained voluminous correspondence with his patients
     and at times undertook long train rides in order to keep in touch with
     them. He fought on behalf of wards of the state and people who had
     been outcasts of society. In the preamble to World War II, he saved
     the lives of hundreds of physicians persecuted by the Nazi regime
     by offering them employment in the United States. Unfortunately, as
     no good deed goes unpunished, Kanner’s place in history has been
     questioned by some modern authors due to his loose association with
     the Refrigerator Mother Theory. Nevertheless, Kanner is the father
     of autism. He provided a comprehensive description of the condition
     and its heterogeneity and was a fervid advocate for those with the
     condition and their families. His stream of publications and lectures on
     the subject spanned several decades, and in the end he molded positive
     public opinion and fought against institutionalization.
         It’s difficult to say how the study of autism would have proceeded
     without the remarkable contributions of Leo Kanner. The identification
     of autism would have likely been many years delayed, considering
     Freudian psychology maintained its popularity for several decades
     to come. Yet Kanner also mentored others who went on to make
     significant contributions to autism research and advocacy, such as
     Bernard Rimland, psychologist, researcher, and father to a boy with
     autism. While Rimland surely would have produced his magnum opus
     with or without Kanner, Kanner reviewed his work and smoothed the
     way professionally, providing vital support for Rimland’s book, which
     held sway with the medical community of that era.


     THE BIOLOGICAL CONUNDRUM
     Bernard Rimland earned his PhD in 1953. Shortly afterwards, his son
     Mark was born. Although Rimland suspected something was different
     about his child, it was his wife who realized Mark was showing signs
     of autism, based on case histories she had previously read. In spite of
     the Freudian views of most medical professionals at the time, Rimland
     knew that he and his wife hadn’t caused their child’s autism. Instead,
     he strongly suspected the roots of autism lay in its biology. With an
     obsessive focus sometimes characteristic of autism parents, Rimland
     transformed part of his house into a research headquarters and read
             Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                        23


all the relevant materials he could get his hands on. Within a few
years, he had made himself an autism expert—at least as “autism” was
known at the time.




         Figure 1.3: Bernard (Bernie) Rimland (left) with Micaela
        Edelson, daughter of Stephen Edelson, director of the Autism
            Research Institute. Bernie, Steve, and Micaela (right)
                   (Images courtesy of Steve and Micaela Edelson)


His original idea was to write an article publicizing his findings. After
five years of passionate research, the information he had compiled
was far greater than any single article could contain. Instead, his
wife suggested he write a book, which was eventually published by
Appleton Century Crofts under the title Infantile Autism: The Syndrome
and Its Implications for a Neural Theory of Behavior.
    The foreword to the book was written by Leo Kanner himself, who
had exchanged correspondence with Rimland and reviewed a draft
of the book. High praise given by Kanner lent the book credibility
and helped to publicize it. It won the prestigious Century Psychology
Series Award, and has recently been republished (2014)—edited by
Dr. Stephen Edelson, Rimland’s longtime mentee and dear friend.
Emphasis on the historical importance of Rimland’s contributions are
detailed in the foreword of the new book, written by Temple Grandin
and Margaret Bauman, and in the afterword written by Sidney Baker.
    From his years of study, Rimland was able to pinpoint and detail
major patterns in the literature that provided evidence against the
psychogenic view and support for the biological view of autism.
24                                DEFINING AUTISM


     He specifies that the first five points of the following list were identified
     by Kanner himself, and used as a basis for further study.


       Rimland’s case for the biological causation
       of autism (Rimland, 1964, p. 74)
       –– Some clearly autistic children are born of parents who do not fit
          the autistic parent personality pattern (i.e. “refrigerator mother”).
       –– Parents who do fit the description of the supposedly pathogenic
          parent almost invariably have normal, non-autistic children.
       –– With very few exceptions, the siblings of autistic children are
          normal.
       –– Autistic children are behaviorally unusual “from the moment
          of birth.”
       –– There is a consistent ratio of three or four boys to one girl.
       –– Virtually all cases of twins reported in the literature have been
          identical, with both twins afflicted.
       –– Autism can occur or be closely simulated in children with known
          organic brain damage.
       –– The symptomatology is highly unique and specific.
       –– There is an absence of gradations of infantile autism which would
          create “blends” from normal to severely afflicted.


     In general, Rimland’s synthesis indicated that the personality of the
     parents was not a strict determinant of the child’s autism. He also
     highlighted the congenital nature of most cases of autism—although
     current research now acknowledges that a minority of cases has
     near‑normal development prior to regression (see Chapter 5). He
     discussed the lop-sided gender ratio of three to four boys to every
     girl, a ratio virtually unchanged today. And he discussed high rates
     of heritability amongst identical twins, yet also the possibility that
     environmental exigencies can trigger autism, research that will be
     discussed further in Chapters 3 and 4 in this book.
          Rimland goes on to discuss each of these nine points in detail,
     providing irrefutable evidence against psychogenic theory, citation
     after  citation—sounding the death knell for the era of Bruno
             Kanner’s Conundrum and Bernie’s Biology                      25


Bettelheim’s “refrigerator mother.” Kanner helped to publicize the
book, but Bernie Rimland’s tenacity and doggedness summarized
the massive amounts of data that were spread piecemeal throughout
the literature. It was sheer persistence and innovation that turned the
psychogenic tides.
     Bernard Rimland went on to become a founding member of
the Autism Research Institute and the Autism Society of America.
He remained steadfast against the prevailing mores of the psycho­
analytically minded medical establishment, helping to change the way
we view autism. Every autism stakeholder, practitioner, and researcher
in the field has invariably been touched by his efforts—as the
following chapter, “The Brain in Autism,” attests. Without Rimland,
Freudian psychology would have dominated the study of autism for
much longer than it did, and our biological understanding of the
heterogeneous condition would be severely delayed.
     Both Leo Kanner’s and Bernard Rimland’s careers have been
touched by controversy, which has unfortunately tarnished some of
our perceptions of these men. However, in spite of that controversy,
they are giants in the field of autism research upon whose shoulders
all of us—stakeholder, health professional, and scientist alike—stand.
Much like the recent controversy that has arisen over Hans Asperger’s
role within the Nazi regime (Donvan & Zuker, 2016), most of autism’s
founding fathers are flawed yet performed truly groundbreaking work.
And it is for this reason we humbly acknowledge their contributions.
                           Chapter Two


         THE BRAIN IN AUTISM


Autism is defined as a neurodevelopmental condition, a term that
indicates an impairment in the normal development and/or growth
of the brain. Many neurodevelopmental conditions are nonspecific,
lacking an obvious single underlying cause, and are grouped together
by symptoms into broad categories like “intellectual disability,” “motor
disorders,” and “autism spectrum conditions.”
    Autism makes its presence known early in life and tends to carve
a course without remission, although severity of symptoms may
improve with age. In order to understand the nature of autism as a
neurodevelopmental condition it behooves us to examine key issues
about the tightly orchestrated development of the brain and how they
bear clinical relevance to the condition. Therefore, we will start by
describing the complexity of the brain and some of the many steps
that can go wrong during brain development.
    It has often been said that the brain has more cells than the
Milky Way has stars. While that claim is an exaggeration (the brain
has approximately 100 billion neurons and our galaxy has two to
four times as many stars), the number of neurons in the brain is
nevertheless amazingly large. In fact, that number pales by comparison
when considering that each neuron makes 1000 to 10,000 cell‑to‑cell
connections, each expressing one of approximately 50 different
neurotransmitters. Seen from this perspective the staggering array of
possibilities makes the brain an especially complex organ. This is all
the more apparent when tracing the brain’s development from a few
weeks post-conception, when it is part of an almost unrecognizable
tube the size of a grain of sand, to the gelatinous mass of the adult
human, weighing some three pounds. It is this amazing transformation
in terms of size and complexity that has attracted researchers to the
various fields of neuroscience.


                                  27
28                              DEFINING AUTISM


         Total neuronal numbers and connectivity patterns can vary across
     individuals considerably. In addition, there are two to ten times the
     number of supporting cells (glia) as there are neurons. Therefore, it is
     interesting to note that the final outcome of brain development is an
     organ with a fairly regular shape comprising consistent subsections
     or modules, regardless of whether we look at its cellular or chemical
     architecture. In fact, Korbinian Brodmann, a German neurologist
     working in the late 19th/early 20th century, was able to divide the
     brain into different regions based on cell types and other aspects
     of architectural organization (Brodmann, 1909/2006). According
     to Brodmann’s scheme, the brain is divided into approximately
     50  areas whose variations in cellular architecture presumably
     indicate differences in regional functionality. These regions are now
     referred to as “Brodmann’s areas” and are still occasionally used in
     research and medicine today. Interestingly, however, there are gross
     deficiencies in Brodmann’s mapping because it was based on a single
     brain hemisphere of a particular patient, failing to take into account
     asymmetries between the two hemispheres and other minor aspects of
     brain architecture that vary across people.


     BRAIN EVOLUTION
     Throughout evolutionary history the brain has increased its complexity
     by the addition of newer structures to older ones. One popular theory,
     espoused by Paul MacLean, is called the Triune brain (MacLean,
     1990). This theory divides the brain’s evolutionary ladder into three
     steps, the most primitive of which is the reptilian portion, which
     provides for a survivalist’s autopilot and controls our wake–sleep
     cycle. The second addition came in terms of the limbic system, which
     controls our emotions, memories, and habits. And the latest addition
     is the cerebral cortex (neocortex), which provides for the complex
     representations and processing of our three-dimensional world.
         According to this much-debated model, each evolutionary stage
     complements the others while not being necessarily interdependent.
     Experiments from the 1930s showed, for instance, that cats who have
     had their neocortices removed can still walk, feed, and have emotional
     responses while only using their reptilian and limbic portions of
     the brain (Magoun & Ranson, 1938). By contrast, humans are more
     dependent on their cerebral cortex than other animals, and widespread
                          The Brain in Autism                                29


damage to this area causes a person to enter a persistent vegetative
state with general lack of awareness of his or her surroundings.


THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
Thomas Henry Huxley, the famous English biologist and “Charles
Darwin’s bulldog,” long pondered the question of questions: What makes
us most human? To many neuroscientists and paleoanthropologists
alike, the answer is clear: our brains. And in particular, the cerebral
cortex, the seat of higher learning and thought, is most responsible for
our uniqueness as a species.
    The cerebral cortex is the part of the brain that provides for
cognitive control of behavior and is responsible for the regulation
of attention, working memory, and cognitive flexibility. Since many of
these functions are affected in autistic individuals, it is plausible that
developmental abnormalities of the cerebral cortex are responsible for
some of the symptoms observed in the condition.


Neocortical minicolumns
The germinal matrix is a region of highly vascularized cells that
surround the inner cavity of the brain. The cerebral cortex forms
when stem cells within this region divide symmetrically to establish
a pool of additional precursor cells during early gestation. Later
during development, the same cells divide asymmetrically, one of them
remaining behind as the original primitive or mother cell, while
the other one migrates radially towards the cortical plate (Mione
et al., 1997). These radially migrating neurons, called neuroblasts,
differentiate in the developing cerebral cortex into excitatory cells that
form the core of larger structures called minicolumns (Figure 2.1).
    The cells surrounding the ventricles are often called germinal cells,
but this is a confusing designation since they have nothing to do with
the sex cells (gametes) within the reproductive organs. In reality, the
germinal matrix contains stem cells that have the capacity to reproduce
themselves or to provide a progeny that will differentiate into a more
specialized type of cell (e.g. an excitatory neuron). Early divisions
of these stem cells are of crucial importance for brain development.
The number of symmetrical divisions account for the total number of
30                                    DEFINING AUTISM


     minicolumns in the cerebral cortex, while later asymmetrical divisions
     are responsible for the total number of cells in each minicolumn
     (Figure 2.2).




                    Figure 2.1: Minicolumns within the human brain
       Note the vertical arrangement (columns) of these cells that is reminiscent not only
       of how the neurons had migrated early during embryonic development but also of
       how the cells wire together and communicate, preferentially, within minicolumns.




               Figure 2.2: Symmetric and asymmetric divisions of radial
                  glial (RG) cells within the developing human cortex
                     Radial glia are the progenitors of neocortical neurons.


     If the switch from symmetrical to asymmetrical divisions occurs too
     early, the stem cell pool will quickly be depleted, potentially resulting
     in a smaller brain (e.g. microcephaly). Conversely, if the switch occurs
     too late, the brain may find itself with a larger pool of cells, resulting
     in a greater number of minicolumns and a larger brain. Evolution
     has in fact used this feature to its advantage, preferentially increasing
     the numbers of minicolumns, the addition of which may increase an
     organism’s cognitive faculties. As an example, when we compare the
     brains of mice and humans, we find that while there is a threefold
                          The Brain in Autism                                31


increase in cortical thickness between our two species (i.e. an increase
in the number of cells within minicolumns), there is a thousandfold
increase in total brain surface area (i.e. an increase in minicolumn
number). For this reason, humans have a highly convoluted brain with
its undulating hills and valleys of gray matter, while the mouse has an
especially lissencephalic or smooth brain. Meanwhile, these surface
convolutions known as gyri are an evolutionary adaptation, allowing
us to pack more surface area into a small space.




  Figure 2.3: Processes that can go wrong during early brain development


Minicolumns in autism
Scientists have found significant differences in the organization of
minicolumns in the brains of those with autism (Casanova et al.,
2002a, 2002b). While we see this effect throughout the cerebral
cortex, this is especially the case within the frontal lobes, the seat of
important executive functions. However, because the frontal lobes are
so large compared to other lobes of the brain, it is possible this may
be the result of a statistical artifact, though further research is needed
to address this possibility. In general, however, these changes clearly
point towards disturbances during early brain development.
    To help you better understand, imagine the minicolumn as the
microprocessor of your computer. A modern computer usually has
two microprocessors—but the human brain has about 600 million
microprocessors, aka minicolumns. This huge number of “micro­
processors” underlies our capacity for the parallel processing of
information. That allows us to acquire and analyze various types
32                                DEFINING AUTISM


     of  sensory input, coordinate that data, synthesize it, and finally
     determine and execute an appropriate output. Picture, for instance, how
     much parallel processing the brain must perform in order to coordinate
     social interactions, from which we draw huge amounts of incoming data
     at any given second: the turn of a lip, the flutter of an eye, the angle at
     which an individual is facing us, the literal meaning of his or her words,
     the tone of her voice, a hand gesture, and overall context, just to name a
     few. The sheer amount of simultaneous information is astounding.
         Minicolumns are also versatile units that can process different
     kinds of information depending on how they are trained and how
     they are connected. In this way, imagine them as an electrical outlet in
     a wall. Even though you plug different appliances into this outlet, each
     one requiring somewhat different wattages, the outlet is able to adapt
     and provide electricity to whatever is connected, be it a tiny nightlight
     or an electricity-guzzling hair dryer.
         Similar to a wall outlet, the minicolumn can perform different
     functions depending on what is connected to it. For instance, a person
     who is born blind doesn’t have use for a visual cortex. Instead the
     area that normally would process visual information is appropriated
     by auditory or tactile fibers. Neuroimaging studies have shown
     that the visual cortex activates when the blind person reads Braille
     (Burton, 2003). In a similar way, the auditory cortex of a person born
     deaf may be co-opted by visual fibers, providing the recipient with
     superior peripheral visual and motion detection. In either example,
     be it congenital blindness or deafness, the cortex never goes to waste.
     Although some people claim this is due to “brain plasticity,” it is more
     accurate to say that the minicolumn is a very versatile unit whose
     development is guided by the connections it makes in life.
         However, even though minicolumns are highly versatile, they are
     not clone-like elements. There is great variability in minicolumnar
     organization within and across brain regions, as well as between the
     brains of different species (e.g. Buxhoeveden et al., 2001). Without
     some minicolumnar variability, stimuli entering a field of minicolumns
     would invariably produce the same output as any other field. Although
     such a clone-like state would make it easier for scientists to study and
     understand, it would preempt behavioral variability, depriving us of
     subtleties in our response patterns. Interestingly, studies on autism
     have shown some reductions in minicolumn variability across brain
                          The Brain in Autism                               33


regions, hinting at one of the reasons why some autistic people may be
fond of routine and dislike changes to their environments.
    If the reader is not yet convinced that minicolumns play an
important role in autism, let me explain in the next few paragraphs
how other aspects of brain development and organization give clues
to autism’s various etiologies.
    Anatomists have a long tradition of reductionism (attempting to
understand organs and tissues by studying their constituent parts), and
neuroanatomists are no exception. In other words, anatomists want to
take Humpty Dumpty apart to understand why he keeps falling off that
wall. Minicolumns unfortunately have not escaped the reductionistic
approach of anatomists. The minicolumn has been partitioned into
a central or core compartment and a peripheral compartment. The
cellular elements inhabiting the core of the minicolumn are excitatory
neurons, the ones that we learned arise from asymmetric divisions
of stem cells located below the developing cortical plate. Once
these newborn excitatory neurons arrive at the cortex they establish
functional relationships with inhibitory cells that have traveled from an
even longer distance away from a region called the ganglionic eminence.
Newly arrived inhibitory cells have to coordinate their function with
other cells, primarily the excitatory cells of the core compartment.
These anatomical and functional relationships between excitatory and
inhibitory cells are called dyads. The proper function of the cerebral
cortex, including the establishment of an excitatory–inhibitory balance,
depends on the finely orchestrated relationship of these dyads. People
with autism often experience sensory abnormalities, anxiety, obsessive-
compulsiveness, and even seizures, all of which are theoretically
related to an excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in the cerebral cortex,
suggesting that these dyads have somehow been disrupted.
    The inhibitory cells that have migrated into the cortex from the
ganglionic eminence usually occupy the periphery or outer portions of
the minicolumns. These cells regulate the transmission of information
both within and between minicolumns, acting like the brakes on
a car. Interestingly, throughout evolution the components of the
core of the minicolumn (the excitatory neurons) have been strongly
preserved, while the peripheral cell types and arrangements vary more
substantially between species (Casanova, Trippe, et al., 2009). Among
many species studied, humans seem to have the largest variability in
overall minicolumnar width.
34                               DEFINING AUTISM


          While in real life a damaged shower curtain allows water to
     spill out of the shower onto the floor, in the same way damaged or
     impaired inhibitory cells allow information to seep outside the core
     of the column. If a large number of peripheral compartments are
     impaired, this can result in a cascading effect, with excitation seeping
     from one minicolumn to the next. In some types of syndromic autism,
     for instance, especially those that manifest seizures (e.g. tuberous
     sclerosis), treating the runaway cascade of excitation can reduce autism
     symptoms (Jambaque et al., 2000).


     Connectivity
     The masterplan for the connectome or connectivity map of the brain
     is defined early during development. This map is strongly influenced
     by the relative concentrations of two key proteins known as EMX2
     and PAX6. PAX6 is primarily released from the embryonic anterior or
     frontal pole of the brain, while EMX2 is released from the posterior
     regions. When the EMX2 gene is mutated and fails to produce a
     functioning protein, this results in an expansion in the size of frontal
     regions such as the motor area (M1) and the somatosensory cortex
     (S1) and a diminution of the visual cortex at the back of the brain
     (V1). When a mutation occurs in the PAX6 gene, instead the visual
     cortex is grossly overdeveloped while the motor and somatosensory
     areas are much smaller than normal (Stiles, 2008) (see Figure 2.4).




               Figure 2.4: Diagram of the mouse brain illustrating how
             inappropriate expression of PAX6 or EMX2 can alter how the
                 motor, sensory, and visual areas of the brain develop
                          The Brain in Autism                               35


Because of these mutation events, cells within the expanded cortical
regions take on characteristics relative to their functions rather than
the  region in which they were supposed to have been. In EMX2
mutants, cells that should have been part of the anterior portion of the
normal somatosensory cortex now are large and express anatomical
features of motor cortex. Meanwhile, in the PAX6 mutant, the opposite
is true, and the posterior of the would-be motor cortex instead contains
small granular cells characteristic of somatosensory cortex.
     Large cells contain the metabolic machinery necessary to transmit
signals and substances over long distances, beyond the brain and
out into the spinal cord. Some of these projections span several
feet in length. Structures that control protein synthesis in these
motor neurons (e.g.  nucleoli) are also enlarged to support their
high metabolic demands. By way of comparison, smaller cells have
much shorter connections and would be incapable of sustaining the
metabolic machinery required to transport signals and substances over
long distances.
     The motor regions are ideally suited to connect different areas of
the brain, interlinking the cerebral hemispheres, and projecting long
distances outside of the brain. Some motor regions act as hubs of
transportation, enabling information to be sent anywhere in the central
nervous system within just a few short steps. This is referred to as a
small-world network. In many biological systems, a small-world network
offers a certain degree of resilience to impediment. Think of the pony
express, for instance: back in the days when mail was carried on
horseback, a small-world network would have dramatically expedited
its delivery by reducing the number of stops to the final destination.
     By way of contrast, the sensory cortex projects to nearby locations.
Sometimes their projections go from one neighboring gyrus to the
next, forming connections reminiscent of Roman arches. This type of
connectivity is ideal when performing multiple levels of processing
for a particular piece of information. A prime example occurs in
the visual cortex where short connections facilitate a hierarchy of
feature extraction that enables us to process edge detection, estimate
the relative motion of objects, and perceive differences in color.
Without these short connections in the visual cortex, we would have
no hope of ever “finding Waldo.”
     All of the anatomical findings we have discussed so far that bear
on the brain’s connectivity have significant clinical repercussions.
36                                  DEFINING AUTISM


     Some studies have shown that autistic individuals have heightened
     visual perception. When watching a computer screen, autistic subjects
     are able to better discern whether two bars popping up together do
     so at the same time or at closely timed intervals (Falter et al., 2013).
     These studies suggest that robust visual processing may give rise to
     increased resolution of visual events.
         If we assume that the brains of autistic people preference short
     connections over long ones, this finding makes perfect sense. And
     in fact, that is what scientists have found. In a study performed at
     Massachusetts General Hospital, researchers discovered that autistic
     individuals and those with developmental language delay had
     disproportionate enlargement in white matter that was specifically
     composed of short connections (as opposed to long-range white
     matter like the corpus callosum) (Herbert et al., 2004).
         Recall that the increase in total number of minicolumns leads to
     increased surface area and the creation of gyri on the surface of the brain.
     This is what gives our brains a “cauliflower” appearance. The folding
     of the cerebral cortex also has important implications for connectivity.
     As the brain has become progressively more convoluted across species
     over evolutionary time, the white matter connections coming from the
     neurons contained in those gyri have a smaller and smaller window
     through which to exit the cortex and enter the communicating structures
     below. Anatomically, this creates a “pinching effect,” which effectively
     serves to reduce the number of axons that can exit (Figure 2.5).




                    Figure 2.5: An illustration of the gyral window
                         in the neurotypical and autistic brain
             Note how the gyrus is slimmer within the autism example and allows
               fewer axons to exit compared to the typically developing gyrus.


     Perhaps unsurprisingly, when researchers have measured the size of
     this “gyral window” in autism, it is significantly diminished in size
                           The Brain in Autism                                37


compared to people without autism. In addition, the corpus callosum,
the huge white matter tract that connects both hemispheres of the
brain and is composed of large numbers of axons, is also reduced in
size in autism (Casanova et al., 2011; Casanova, El-Baz, et al., 2009).
    Considering all of this evidence, the brains of autistic people seem
to preference shorter neural connections at the expense of longer
ones. This is in stark contrast to dyslexia, in which minicolumn width
is expanded, the gyral window is wider, and the corpus callosum is
larger than in autism (Williams & Casanova, 2010).
    It is also interesting to note that these conditions on the whole
tend to have contrasting cognitive profiles that echo their respective
anatomies. For instance, people with dyslexia are often good
synthesizers with a top-down cognitive style that is holistically
oriented—the probable result of an emphasis on long connections.
Autistic individuals on the other hand have a bottom-up cognitive
style, making them detail-oriented and good analyzers, the result of
an emphasis on short connections. Therefore, it seems that there is a
predisposition for certain cognitive qualities that are acquired early
during brain development and that are strongly influenced by the
organization of minicolumns and their respective connectivity patterns.


PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
When it comes to the brain in autism, the problem isn’t that we lack
data but that we have too much. In terms of postmortem studies, some
of the findings may, unfortunately, have more to do with how a person
died rather than whether he or she was autistic. This is often the case
when someone dies from blunt trauma or from oxygen deprivation, such
as the many cases of drownings in autism (Casanova, 2007). Artifacts
in brain tissue, as may occur during tissue collection and storage, can
also be mistaken for genuine findings. For this reason, a well-trained
neuropathologist should be a requisite for any postmortem brain
study. As in the case of autism, it is vital we account for the possibility
of numerous types of artifacts so that the science is not misled. More
than any other research materials, brain tissue is precious because it
represents a remarkable sacrifice by autistic people and their families.
     In piecing together this autism puzzle, the researcher must
become an anthropologist, who must dig into the brain, looking for
telltale footprints of some kind of mechanism. In the case of autism,
38                                  DEFINING AUTISM


     minicolumnar architecture is altered in a process that appears to take
     place during early brain development. Yet rarely do such findings
     occur in a vacuum. Therefore, what other features of the brain may be
     appended to our minicolumn story? Let us explore.
          As I (MFC) was attending an international meeting a few years
     ago, I heard a well-known researcher claim that there were few
     significant research findings in the brains of people with autism, with
     little to separate them from typically developing brains. From this he
     concluded that autism was an extreme of the human condition.
          While this may well be true taken from certain perspectives, in
     the case of postmortem findings, the autistic brain does seem to have
     some pretty unique features, of which this individual appeared not to
     be aware. For instance, many studies have shown that there is often an
     abundance of neurons residing within the white matter tracts of the
     brain in autism. We know from many human and animal studies that
     these neurons should not be there, suggesting that they either got lost
     along their migratory ways or were once part of an earlier structure
     called the “subplate,” which normally dies off before birth after it has
     served its function as a way station for incoming nerve fibers, but in
     the case of autism this clearly hasn’t happened efficiently (Hutsler &
     Avino, 2015). These misplaced neurons are referred to as heterotopias
     (Figure 2.6). These heterotopias are similar to a hernia, which occurs
     when an organ pushes past a muscle wall and protrudes into a foreign
     space. Like a hernia, these islands of cells occur in a tissue in which
     they shouldn’t be, a “hernia of neurons.” For this reason, scientists
     don’t normally consider these heterotopias “normal,” especially when
     we know that many of these misplaced cells are epileptogenic or prone
     to the production of seizures.




      Figure 2.6: Microscopic images showing heterotopias (misplaced clusters of
      cells) within the hippocampus (left) and cerebellum (right) in cases of autism
                             (Images courtesy of Dr. Jerzy Wegiel)
                          The Brain in Autism                               39


Although some heterotopias do occasionally occur in otherwise
asymptomatic individuals, they are also often associated with motor
problems and even intellectual disability. In autism, heterotopias
vary in location and numbers from one individual to another.
This provides an important clue to our story: heterotopias that are
the  result of genetic conditions tend to be widespread, meanwhile
autistic individuals without any identifiable genetic conditions tend
to have variable “pockets” of heterotopic malformations, suggesting
the additional possibility of environmental factors that may increase
risk in the condition (see Chapter 4). As an example, prenatal
exposure to x-rays can result in clusters of heterotopias within the
brain, while the topography of these “herniated neurons” depends on
which area of the germinal matrix was originally exposed to radiation
(Ferrer et al., 1993).
     We know that heterotopias occur in a large number of autistic
people (Wegiel et al., 2010). However, the overall prevalence depends
on the resolution of the technique being used to investigate them.
For instance, neuroimaging studies such as MRI will identify fewer
heterotopias than postmortem tissue studies that screen the brain by
using a higher-resolution technique (i.e. light microscopy). Yet even
with microscopy, the prevalence of heterotopias increases as you
dissect more and more brain regions. In summary, postmortem studies
that screen serial (consecutive) brain sections will uncover the greatest
number of abnormalities. Using this type of technique, it is safe to
say that approximately 60 to 80 percent of autistic individuals show
some evidence of heterotopias (Wegiel et al., 2010). When we include
other cortical malformations, the overall prevalence increases to more
than 80 percent (Wegiel et al., 2010; see also Casanova, El‑Baz,
et al., 2013).
     It is possible that an environmental exigency acts in susceptible
individuals during particular times of gestation, which disturbs
normal neuronal migration, leading to the heterotopias we see in the
condition. This triple-hit mechanism (Environment × Risk Factor
× Developmental Timing) ultimately leads to poor coordination
of excitatory and inhibitory elements within the cerebral cortex
(Casanova, 2007; Casanova, Buxhoeveden, & Gomez, 2003). Many
studies that have found evidence of a variety of types of neuronal
heterotopias and a relative loss of inhibitory cells in the brains of
autistic people, indicating that migrational disturbances are a major
40                               DEFINING AUTISM


     feature of the condition (Andrews et al., 2017; Avino and Hutsler,
     2010; Hashemi et al., 2017).


     CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
     The usefulness of a theoretical mechanism of action lies, in part, on
     its predictive ability. When considering migrational abnormalities, it’s
     clear that they often co-occur with autism. This can be seen in the prime
     example, tuberous sclerosis (TSC). This condition is characterized by
     the growth of noncancerous tumors in numerous organ systems, most
     especially within the brain, skin, kidneys, and heart. In the brains of
     people with TSC there is usually a migrational abnormality involving
     the stem cells surrounding the cerebral ventricles, in which they
     become waylaid near their places of origin or within the white matter
     tracts (DiMario, 2004).
          In addition, the surrounding cerebral cortex is disorganized by
     both tumorous growths and other malformations accrued via the
     underlying migrational abnormality. Many patients with TSC suffer
     from intractable seizures, attentional deficits, behavioral outbursts,
     and obsessive-compulsive traits. This constellation of symptoms is
     highly suggestive of autism and, indeed, this dual diagnosis is given in
     approximately 50–60 percent of TSC infants by age three (McDonald
     et al., 2017).
          Another example occurs in infants born with congenital
     cytomegalovirus infection (see Chapter 4). This is a common viral
     infection that is typically asymptomatic. Often, pregnant women may
     not even be aware they’re infected, yet they may give birth to infants
     with obvious infection. The most common symptoms are jaundice,
     hepatosplenomegaly (swollen liver and spleen), and petechiae, which
     are small purple, red, or brown spots in the skin resultant from small
     bleeds (Leung et al., 2003). Some infants may also be premature
     or small for gestational age, and have microcephaly and seizures.
     In addition, some of these affected infants go on to develop the
     behavioral phenotype of autism (Yamashita et al., 2003). Interestingly,
     case studies suggest that children with congenital cytomegalovirus and
     autism typically exhibit subependymal cysts in the brain, which is a
     type of migrational disturbance (Yamashita et al., 2003). For readers
     who are interested in reading more, there are further examples of
                          The Brain in Autism                               41


autistic syndromes with underlying migrational abnormalities that
have been reviewed by our research group (Casanova, 2014a, 2014b).
     Given what we’ve learned about these malformations and the
excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in autism, this raises the possibility
of therapeutic application. For many years, interventions were aimed
at treating the symptoms of autism rather than affecting its underlying
causes. However, researchers and clinicians in recent years have taken
aim at the decreased inhibitory tone of the cerebral cortex. Some
scientists have tried to target this excitatory–inhibitory imbalance
through the use of certain types of drugs, such as barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, and anticonvulsants. Unfortunately, these drugs are
often the equivalent of taking a sledgehammer to a small nail, affecting
a wide range of neurons throughout the brain.
     In the case of autism, it is more useful to implement a degree of
specificity. It would be ideal, for instance, if we could directly target
those cells involved in maintaining the “shower curtain of inhibition”
surrounding minicolumns, which we talked about earlier. This would
allow us to rein in excitatory tendencies.
     In fact, our laboratory has been able to do exactly that using a
technique called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). To
help you understand how this technique works, first you need to know
that minicolumns stand perpendicular to the surface of the neocortex,
similar to a figure “T.” As we discussed earlier, each minicolumn is
composed of an inner core of excitatory neurons and an outer core
that includes a variety of different inhibitory neurons. One type of
inhibitory neuron that is vital in maintaining the shower curtain effect
is the double bouquet (DB) cell. Unlike other inhibitory cells, DB cells
have long bundled projections reaching both towards and away from
the surface of the cortex. They look so much like “horse tails” that is
how they are informally known.
     When a powerful magnetic force is placed on the surface of
the skull (Figure 2.7), anything standing perpendicular to the skull
(e.g. minicolumns) may be stimulated. However, in the case of
low‑frequency rTMS, which is the tool our research group utilizes,
the force is weak and preferentially stimulates only larger projections
(Sokhadze et al., 2009). In this case, the behaviors of excitatory
cells remain largely unaffected and the broad bundled axons of
DB cells are stimulated instead. Since activity drives neural plasticity,
42                                DEFINING AUTISM


     this stimulation strengthens the DB shower curtain and ultimately
     improves the excitatory–inhibitory balance.




            Figure 2.7: A young man with autism receiving low-frequency
                 repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
                                (Image courtesy of Michael)


     Since our initial trial, other research groups have used rTMS in autism,
     reporting similar results (Casanova et al., 2015; Oberman et al.,
     2016). In fact, an entire book has been written on the topic from the
     perspective of a patient who received TMS treatment (Robison, 2016).
     Additional trials of rTMS in autism have shown that it improves
     functional measures of information processing and behavioral
     responses, attention, and something known as “error monitoring,”
     which is the way an individual adjusts and adapts to previous mistakes
     (Casanova et al., 2012; Sokhadze et al., 2012, 2014a). This is usually
     tested using various kinds of computer programs. Unfortunately,
     although all of these results are significant, they have shown only
     modest effects in their outcome measures and are primarily limited to
     high-functioning individuals who are able to sit still for longer periods
     of time and follow sets of instructions. For this reason, clinical trials are
     looking to combine rTMS with other techniques, like neurofeedback,
     to see if we can impact people’s quality of life in more meaningful
     ways (Sokhadze et al., 2014b).
                             Chapter Three


    THE GENETICS OF AUTISM


THE HISTORY OF GENETICS STUDIES IN AUTISM
Any history of the heritability of autism must begin with Bernard
Rimland’s seminal 1964 book Infantile Autism: The Syndrome and Its
Implications for a Neural Theory of Behavior. As we discussed in the
introductory chapter of this book, the zeitgeist of the middle 20th
century espoused that conditions like autism were psychogenic in
origin, rooted in aberrant parent–child relations. However, both as a
psychologist and a parent, Bernie Rimland strongly suspected autism’s
roots were biological. He knew that he and his wife had not caused
their son’s autism and in fact had done everything in their power to
relieve their child’s symptoms.1
     Due to the times but also to limits in methodology, the heredity
of autism was not of much interest to early researchers. Prior to
Infantile Autism, only a handful of twins studies existed, each with
somewhat dubious methods, yet all suggesting autism could be a
heritable condition (reviewed in Judd & Mandell, 1968, and Rutter,
2000). Unfortunately, these data were largely ignored by the research
community until Bernie Rimland’s book finally began to draw
attention to these studies and provided a soapbox for the topics of
genetics and heritability.
     It wasn’t until 1977, however, that the topic of heritability caught
the eye of the broader research community, when Susan Folstein and
Michael Rutter published a study on autism concordance rates between
identical and fraternal twins (Folstein & Rutter, 1977). Folstein and
Rutter discovered that more than a third of their identical twin pairs
shared an autism diagnosis, while none of the fraternal twins were

1	 An excellent book that reviews their story is In A Different Key: The Story of
   Autism by Caren Zucker and John Donvan (2016, Allen Lane).

                                       43
44                                DEFINING AUTISM


     concordant.2 This was shocking and strongly indicated that autism
     was indeed a heritable condition. Because no fraternal twins appeared
     concordant in the original study, it also suggested at the time that
     autism could be due to one or a few gene mutations.
          However, during this time reports began to arise linking autism
     with specific prenatal infections, such as rubella and cytomegalovirus
     (Chess, 1971; Stubbs, 1978) (see Chapter 4). In addition, by the
     1980s and ’90s scientists found that certain genetic syndromes such
     as fragile  X syndrome and tuberous sclerosis also had high rates of
     comorbid autism, making it clear that autism wasn’t due to a single gene
     mutation (Gillberg & Wahlström, 1985; Smalley, 1998). Together, this
     early evidence suggested that the syndrome was far more complex
     than Folstein and Rutter had originally believed.
          Researchers began to grasp autism’s genetic complexity starting
     with two major studies. The first looked at rates of inheritance
     in first-degree relatives of those with autism (Bolton et al., 1994).
     Specifically, researchers found that siblings shared a 12–20 percent
     concordance rate, which depended on the stringency of the criteria
     used. Approximately 12 percent were concordant for the full autism
     diagnosis, meanwhile an additional 8 percent expressed a subclinical
     phenotype, suggesting that autism severity could vary dramatically
     within the same families.
          The other report was a twins study, which, unlike the original
     Folstein and Rutter investigation, found that fraternal twins exhibited
     a similar concordance rate for autism as seen amongst non-twin
     siblings (Bailey et al., 1995). All of these data together suggested that
     most cases of autism were likely the interaction of multiple heritable
     factors rather than a single-gene pattern of inheritance. In addition,
     variations in symptom severity between identical twins suggested that
     environment also played an important role in the condition.
          Although the early twins studies foreshadowed current knowledge
     of the genetic complexity of autism, at the turn of the millennium
     geneticists were still hopeful that human genome sequencing would
     allow us rapidly to identify the causal genes. This was inspired by
     early linkage studies indicating that multiple genetic loci could act
     cooperatively to affect risk, such as the long arm of chromosome 7

     2	 In twins studies, “concordance” means that a pair of twins share the same
        diagnosis; when they do not, they are “discordant.”
                         The Genetics of Autism                               45


(Rutter, 2000). However, despite all the hoopla and high hopes,
we have since identified hundreds of genes significantly involved in
autism risk. Some gene mutations, as will be discussed in succeeding
sections, confer high risk for autism, and the genes in which they
occur are known as major effect genes; meanwhile, other mutations
confer lower though still measurable risk and are known as minor effect
genes (see Figure 3.1). Some mutations involve the change of a single
nucleotide of DNA. Meanwhile, other variations can span many genes
at once, the result of deletions or duplications of large amounts of
genetic material.
    Although many of these genes share functional overlap, their
diversity nevertheless prevents us from identifying a single underlying
biology. As a result, to this day, autism is defined by constellations of
behaviors, despite the plethora of biological findings. In this respect, it
is not unlike related conditions such as intellectual disability.


AUTISM RISK GENES
In genetics, penetrance is defined as the proportion of people who carry
a particular genetic variation and express an associated trait of interest.
To give an example, approximately 80 percent of women who have
certain mutations in the BRCA1 gene will develop breast cancer. That
means that the penetrance of these BRCA1 mutations is 80 percent
for the condition. This is a very high penetrance rate, making the
BRCA1 gene a “major effect gene” for breast cancer (Apostolou &
Fostira, 2013).
    Meanwhile, mutations in genes such as ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, and
CHEK2 have very low penetrance on their own but when they occur
in families with a strong history of breast cancer, risk is significantly
elevated. These are good examples of “minor effect genes” and
probably represent polygenic or multigene effects (Byrnes, Southey,
& Hopper, 2008). When these genetic variations occur in tandem
with other risk factors, overall risk for developing breast cancer can
exponentially increase.
    Autism is very similar in this way, There is a subset of risk genes
that confer very high risk for autism. Most of these are associated
with some kind of genetic syndrome and include examples like the
FMR1 gene associated with fragile X syndrome and TSC2 associated
with tuberous sclerosis. However, other genetic variations have minor
46                                    DEFINING AUTISM


     effects on autism risk and are sometimes seen in unaffected family
     members and even the general population. Therefore, combinations
     of major and minor effect variations probably lead to significant
     variability across autistic individuals and family members with a
     broader phenotype (Berg & Geschwind, 2012; Girirajan et al., 2012).




             Figure 3.1: Diagram illustrating the relative frequency of rare
                and common variants in major and minor effect genes
            Major effect genes are often affected by rare mutations that have highly
          deleterious effects. Meanwhile, minor affect genes are more likely the targets
                 of less deleterious rare mutations and common polymorphisms.



     A whole lotta genes
     There are about 21,000 protein-coding genes in the human genome.
     Several thousand of these genes have been loosely linked with autism
     (Xu et al., 2012). Several hundred are considered high-confidence
     risk factors, and a large minority of these are major effect genes
     (Casanova, Sharp, et al., 2016). Chromosomal disorders, composed
     primarily of large deletions and duplications of genetic material, also
     target multiple  genes at once. Oftentimes, each of these genes may
     be of only minor effect, but in conjunction they confer significant
     autism risk. Examples include 16p11.2 deletion, 22q11.2 deletion,
     and 15q11.2‑13.1 duplication syndromes. All of this genetic
     complexity and variable symptom severity makes it clear that autism
     is a heterogeneous group of conditions that differ in cause but overlap
     in behavior.
          However, there are common threads that tie these genes together,
     suggesting autism does indeed share some common biology. In  our
     previous work, we discovered that the majority of major effect
                        The Genetics of Autism                               47


genes code for proteins that function within the nucleus of the cell,
where DNA is located (Casanova, Sharp, et al., 2016). In particular,
they help to regulate the expression of other genes (i.e. they are
“epigenetic regulators”). Other researchers have also found similar
patterns of enrichment amongst autism risk genes (De Rubeis et al.,
2014;  Geschwind & State, 2015; Glessner et al., 2009; Iossifov
et al., 2014; Krumm et al., 2014).
     Epigenetic regulators are key in early development by regulating
the timing of events. When these regulators fail to function properly,
this can lead to either the suppression or premature maturation of cells,
potentially altering the quantity and quality of cells within a particular
tissue. When this occurs, it’s known as a “heterochrony,” which loosely
means a “mis-timing of events.”
     A portion of autism risk genes also code for synaptic proteins
within the brain. Common examples include neurexins and their
partners, neuroligins; neurotransmitter receptors; and calcium channel
proteins. Neurexins, which are cell-adhesion molecules, are involved
in regulating cell-to-cell communication by acting as anchors in the
creation of physical bridges between cells.
     Although neurexins and their partners, the neuroligins, are best
understood for their roles within the adult synapse, they’re also
expressed in newborn neurons long before mature synapses develop.
Scientists have found that neurexins are expressed in the prenatal
mouse brain as early as day ten of pregnancy, during one of the
earliest stages of neuron production within the cortex (Puschel & Betz,
1995). This suggests that neurexins may be involved in processes like
cell movement, branching, and other aspects of neuron maturation
long before they settle into their mature role at the synapse. Because
excitatory input is imperative in guiding the development of newborn
neurons, these neurexin–neuroligin pairings may allow them to
receive input from a foundational network of cells that helps them
to coordinate these efforts (Ben-Ari, 2002).
     Because they’re expressed very early in development, synaptic
proteins may play roles in cell-to-cell communication that drive
neuron development long before the neuron sprouts adult dendrites
and synapses. Synaptic mutations, therefore, have the potential to
divert the production of new neurons, their migrations, and other
aspects of early development—findings very similar to gene mutations
in epigenetic regulators.
48                               DEFINING AUTISM


         On the other hand, epigenetic regulators also continue to play
     important roles in adult neurons, regulating aspects of branching
     and synapse formation. In this way, epigenetic regulators and
     synaptic proteins overlap across all stages of neuron development and
     plasticity, although they may target different stages of development to
     varying degrees.


     Scientists’ obsession with the synapse
     Although some synaptic genes clearly play important roles in autism
     risk, there has been a scientific obsession with the functional role of
     the synapse in autism, at times leaving other gene types and cellular
     structures poorly studied.




                 Figure 3.2: Microscopic image of synapses (arrows)

     Interest in synapses (Figure 3.2) began following a publication by
     Thomas Bourgeron and his colleagues, reporting an association of
     neuroligins 3 and 4 mutations with autism (Jamain et al., 2003). This
     paper was quickly followed by a hypothesis article by Huda Zoghbi
     (2003) in which she proposed that autism was a result of “disruption
     of postnatal or experience-dependent synaptic plasticity” (p. 826). A
     few years later, enthusiasm for synaptic involvement in autism was
     further stoked by the identification of other relevant autism-associated
     mutations in synapse-related genes such as SHANK3, CNTNAP2, and
     other risks genes that help to carry out cell signaling, such as the
     serotonin transporter gene SLC6A4 (Alarcón et al., 2008; Anderson
     et  al., 2002; Arking et al., 2008; Durand et al., 2006). Since that
     time, the synapse has been a hot topic in autism research and many
                         The Genetics of Autism                                  49


researchers have tried to fit new findings into a synapse-focused
paradigm, for example:
    ASD may arise from dysregulation of activity-dependent signaling
    pathways locally at a synapse, including changes in the post-translational
    modifications of synaptic proteins and the local translation of mRNAs
    at synapses, as well as from the dysregulation of activity-dependent
    gene transcription. (Ebert & Greenberg, 2013, p. 328)
Unfortunately, viewing the cell in such a compartmentalized fashion
as if its constituent parts were developed in a vacuum is theoretically
simplistic. And perhaps more concerning, much of the research has
focused on how synapses function in the adult neuron, whereas we
know little of these mutations’ consequences in newborn cells. The
autism risk gene CNTNAP2, for instance, is not only located within
the  synapse, its mutation leads to disturbances in neuron migration
long before adult synapses are formed. Its mutation results in the
formation of heterotopias, which are misplaced clusters of cells that
often have the propensity to produce epileptic discharges (Strauss
et al., 2006). Ultimately, these data cause us to question what we truly
mean when we use the term, “synaptic gene.”

Gain-of-function mutations and cell stress
When a gene is severely mutated, failing to produce a viable gene
product, this is known as a “loss-of-function mutation.” In many
instances, no gene product is produced or the product is unstable and
breaks down rapidly. However, at other times a protein is produced but
is misfolded. When this happens, the protein is retained within a cellular
compartment known as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), an organelle
that’s vital in identifying and dealing with misfolded proteins either by
refolding them or getting rid of them (Figure 3.3). When a large number
of misfolded proteins arrive in the ER, this triggers a cascade of signals
that slows protein synthesis, upregulates inflammatory pathways, and
triggers a general stress response to deal with the backlog.
    When this response occurs chronically because of a mutation,
this mutation also results in a “gain-of-function,” because the cell
stress response would not occur normally. This is in contrast to the
loss‑of‑function that results from the loss of the protein product at
the site within the cell for which it was intended—at the synapse,
50                                     DEFINING AUTISM


     for example. Therefore, these mutations result both in a gain and loss
     of function, respectively.




              Figure 3.3: The rough and smooth endoplasmic reticula (ER)
                 The rough ER helps produce proteins within the cell, while the
                       smooth ER produces fats and steroids (hormones).
     (Image adapted from OpenStax Anatomy and Physiology, Version 8.25. Published May 18, 2016)


     For reasons not well understood, there are a number of studies that
     have reported gain-of-function mutations in synaptic genes in autism,
     all resulting in chronic cell stress responses in the cases they studied
     (Comoletti et al., 2004; Falivelli et al., 2012; Fujita et al., 2010;
     Zhang et al., 2009). Is this a reporting bias or are synaptic mutations
     more likely to cause ER stress? Unfortunately, we don’t yet know the
     answer. But one possible explanation may concern the large, complex
     structures of synaptic proteins and their propensities for misfolding.
     (See Chapter 5 for further discussion on processes related to the cell
     stress response, such as inflammation and oxidation.)


     What protein structure tells us about function
         Whether it be the sweeping eagle in his flight, or the open apple-
         blossom, the toiling work-horse, the blithe swan, the branching oak,
         the winding stream at its base, the drifting clouds, over all the coursing
         sun, form ever follows function, and this is the law. Where function
         does not change, form does not change. (Sullivan, 1896, p. 408)
     So wrote the American architect, Louis Sullivan. Sullivan was strongly
     influenced by the writings of the Roman architect, Marcus Vitruvius
     Pollio who in his De Architectura asserted that a building or structure
     must be firmitas, utilitas, venustas—solid, useful, and beautiful.
                            The Genetics of Autism                                51


    Proteins are one of the major building blocks of the cell. Although
a protein doesn’t need to be solid or beautiful as in the case of a
building, its shape certainly helps to determine its function. Even
the change of a single amino acid sequence, the building blocks of
proteins, has the potential to alter or destroy the function of the entire
molecule. The most minute of changes in how a protein folds can
mean the difference between a protein being useful or useless.
    Since there’s a relationship between protein shape and its function,
the length and complexity of proteins also vary according to their
functions. Longer proteins tend to have more functional segments
or “domains,” while shorter proteins have fewer. What an excellent
example of “form ever [following] function.” Interestingly, the functions
of proteins are also partly reflected in the structure of the genes that
code for them. While we would expect this to be the case for the
segments of gene that code for the proteins themselves, this trend also
includes non-coding sequences within genes, such as introns.
    In most genes, the protein blueprint is broken down into segments
known as “exons” that are separated from one another by non-coding
sequences (i.e. “introns”: Figure 3.4). Later on, introns are usually
spliced out before RNA is translated into protein. Genes that code for
big proteins (such as those found at the synapse) tend to have very
long introns. One potential reason for this is that long introns increase
the accuracy of gene expression, reducing the number of mutations
(Niu & Yang, 2011). The cause of this is biochemically complex, but to
put it simply: longer genes compel the cellular machinery to transcribe
RNA more carefully. This means that long genes may experience
fewer mutations than smaller genes. In addition, these long genes are
often vital for numerous developmental processes and therefore when
a mutation occurs, it’s rapidly weeded out (Casanova et al., 2017a;
Woolfe & Elgar, 2008).




   Figure 3.4: Illustration of an intron, which is book-ended by two exons
      Normally introns are removed from the gene transcript afterwards and the
        exons are molecularly “sutured” back together. Although introns don’t
       typically encode for transcripts and proteins, they do, however, contain
            many regulatory elements that help control gene expression.
52                               DEFINING AUTISM


     Introns also contain many small sequences that help regulate gene
     expression. In particular, large genes contain a greater density of
     noncoding regulatory sequences compared to smaller genes. While
     we won’t delve into the complicated ways these sequences regulate
     genes, just know that they provide vast layers of functional complexity
     to the genome, which are largely responsible for the evolutionary
     differences we see between species today. For instance, the proteins
     that humans and chimpanzees make are virtually identical to one
     another, yet the differences in our regulatory DNA are much greater.
          Regulatory DNA also seems to evolve faster that protein-coding
     DNA because it’s under weaker selection. Imagine that proteins are the
     building blocks for a city you’re designing: you can change the ways
     in which you combine blocks to make many different designs, but if
     you change the nature of the building blocks themselves you could
     endanger the stability of your buildings. Regulatory sequences tell the
     body the different ways in which it can put proteins together, forever
     allowing new evolutionary designs to arise, but nature settled on basic
     protein designs long ago. Therefore, much of genetic evolution over
     the last several hundred million years has focused on sequences that
     regulate genes.
          Why have we reviewed the relationship between molecular form
     and its function and what does this have to do with autism? It turns out
     that because autism risk genes have overlapping functions in areas such
     as regulation of gene expression and synapse development, their genes
     and related proteins also tend to share common structural features. For
     instance, if you compare the length of autism risk genes to the average
     of all the protein-coding genes in the human genome, you would find
     that autism risk genes tend to be much longer (Casanova et al., 2017a).
     In fact, several of these risk genes are among the largest in the human
     genome, notable examples including CNTNAP2 and NRXN1, both of
     which are over a million base pairs in length. We, along with other
     scientists before us, have found that genes strongly associated with the
     central nervous system tend to be unusually long.
          As we noted, these long genes have large numbers of regulatory
     sequences in their introns that add functional complexity to the gene,
     allowing it to, for instance, produce different variations of RNA known
     as transcripts. We have also found that autism risk genes tend to produce
     more transcript variations than other genes on average, making them
     a nuanced and versatile group of genes, just perfect for building a
                        The Genetics of Autism                             53


complex brain (Casanova et al., 2017b). The neurexin genes alone, for
instance, produce over 3000 transcript variants!
    In summary, the structural features of genes can tell us a lot about
their evolutionary histories, how they evolved and adapted over
time, and—perhaps most importantly—how these proteins function
throughout the different organs of the body, including the brain. As
Louis Sullivan so aptly wrote, “form ever follows function,” and genes
and their proteins are no exception.


RARE MUTATIONS, COMMON VARIATIONS
Most of your genetic makeup is identical to that of any other human
being. However, when variation does occur, it’s labeled as either “rare”
or “common.” Common variants, as their name suggests, can be found
in a significant proportion of the human population. Most often, these
variations occur at a single point within the DNA—however, there
are also some examples of common variants that affect large spans of
genetic material. These are known as common copy number variations
(CNVs), which contrast with rare CNVs often associated with various
diseases and syndromes. We’ll talk more about CNVs later.
     When we refer to “common variants,” this typically alludes to
differences at a single nucleotide location across individuals. These
are also sometimes known as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) or
simply  polymorphisms. Polymorphisms comprise a major allele, which
is a gene variation that occurs in the majority of the population,
and one  or more minor alleles, which occur in anywhere from 5 to
49 percent of the human race.
     On the other hand, the definition of rare variations, often
colloquially referred to as “mutations,” occur anywhere from less than
1 percent up to 5 percent of the human population, depending on the
research study.
     Now that you have a better grasp of these basic definitions, let’s
discuss the types of rare variations associated with autism. Cytogenetic
abnormalities, for instance, which are major disruptions to the chromo­
some material, are observed in about 3 percent of all prenatal exams
(Park et al., 2001). These chromosomal abnormalities are identified
through a method called “karyotyping,” in which a sample of amniotic
fluid is taken during pregnancy and the DNA from the fetus present in
the fluid is tested for major disturbances. About 2 percent of the time,
54                              DEFINING AUTISM


     there are entire duplications or deletions of chromosomes, such as we
     see in trisomy 21, otherwise known as Down syndrome. Another 1
     percent of the time, there are structural malformations of one or more
     of the chromosomes themselves. These tend to involve large deletions,
     duplications, inversions, or translocations of segments of the DNA.
         It’s believed that about half of all spontaneous abortions occurring
     between weeks 5 and 25 of pregnancy are the result of major
     chromosome abnormalities in the embryo or fetus (Eiben et al., 1990).
     This doesn’t account, however, for spontaneous abortions that occur
     even earlier in gestation before the mother’s aware she’s pregnant,
     which comprise about half of all pregnancies. Therefore, serious
     genetic mutations are quite common, but the majority are weeded out
     long before birth. The few infants with major genetic mutations that
     make it to term may have severe impairment during life but these
     mutations are comparatively less deadly.
         Although the percentage is small compared to the general
     population, scientists have found that more than 5 percent of those
     with autism have major chromosome abnormalities (Vorstman et al.,
     2006). However, not all structural abnormalities can be identified with
     traditional karyotyping, which may miss smaller genetic mutations
     that are nevertheless significant. Using newer methods, we now
     know that CNVs, a type of mutation that karyotyping often misses,
     occur at a higher-than-expected rate in autism (Sebat et al., 2007).
     This is especially the case for new CNVs, which arise in either the
     sperm or egg but are otherwise not present in the parent (see Berg
     & Geschwind, 2012, for review). Interestingly, however, the rate of
     inheritance of older CNVs doesn’t appear to differ between autistic
     and typically developing kids.
         CNVs are structural variations in the human genome in which
     segments of DNA, ranging from about one thousand to millions of
     nucleotides in length, are deleted, duplicated, or translocated in some
     other fashion. As you might imagine, this can lead to disastrous effects
     on the genes that are located in or near the CNV, which can ultimately
     have a cascading effect on many cellular pathways.
         Researchers studying autism genetics often separate people with the
     condition into simplex and multiplex cases. “Simplex” means that autism
     occurs only once within a particular family. Meanwhile, “multiplex”
     means that two or more siblings have the diagnosis (Figure 3.5). While
     simplex cases of autism have particularly high rates of new CNVs,
                        The Genetics of Autism                             55


multiplex families have lower though still significantly elevated rates
of these new CNVs as well (Miller et al., 2010; Pinto et al., 2010;
Sebat et al., 2007).




    Figure 3.5: Examples of pedigrees of simplex and multiplex families

CNVs only occur in a small minority of those with autism (10%). An
additional 10 percent have other smaller genetic variations, such as
point mutations, scientifically known as rare single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) (Jiang et al., 2013). On average, autistic people don’t have
more SNVs than their non-autistic counterparts—in contrast to CNVs
associated with autism. Instead, when SNVs occur, they tend to target
high-risk autism genes, such as CHD8, ARID1B, and SHANK3 (Berg
& Geschwind, 2012, for review). From this work, we now know
that patterns of gene mutation share strong links with penetrance,
a concept  we discussed earlier. Genes within CNVs usually have
low penetrance but additively confer high risk. Meanwhile, SNVs
that target high‑risk genes confer significant individual risk and are
therefore highly penetrant.


Parents, new mutations, and old mutations
Older paternal age is a known risk factor for sporadic (simplex) cases
of autism. This is because males are constantly making new sperm—in
contrast to females who are born with their lifelong complement of
eggs. As men age, the number of mutations they pass on to each
offspring increases (Callaway, 2012). For instance, a 36-year-old
father will pass on twice as many new mutations to his child than
a father who is the age of 20. Most of these mutations are clinically
insignificant, however, the more mutations occur the more likely
56                               DEFINING AUTISM


     a harmful one will arise. Men pass on an astounding four times as
     many mutations to their children compared to women. It’s therefore
     little surprise that increased paternal age is a recognized risk factor in
     the development of autism and is linked with greater autism severity
     (Croen et al., 2007; Jiang et al., 2013).
          Interestingly, a recent study indicates, however, that advanced
     paternal age (and the sperm mutations that come with it) may not be the
     sole driving factor in the correlation between older age and autism risk.
     Instead, advanced paternal age may explain only about 10–20 percent
     of increased risk. Meanwhile, scientists have found that fathers with
     subclinical autism traits are more likely to have children at older ages
     compared to their “typical” counterparts (Gratten et al., 2016). For
     instance, mild social deficits may delay at-risk men in finding partners
     and having children. In addition, fathers with higher levels of education
     may also elect to postpone parenthood until it’s more convenient,
     including various reasons such as career advancement (Kogan et al.,
     2009). Therefore, older paternal age in some cases may not be the cause
     of autism but just another symptom of its familial heritability.
          But what about mothers? Even though men may pass on new
     mutations to their children at a higher rate, women may be more likely to
     pass on old harmful mutations. This is particularly true in the case of
     sons, because daughters may be better protected against certain mutations
     by nature of their sex. Mothers who harbor such mutations may have
     a subtler phenotype compared to their sons—or no recognizable
     phenotype at all. Sometimes, this is because the mutation in question
     is located on the X chromosome. Males typically inherit only a single
     X from their mothers (except in conditions like Kleinfelter’s syndrome,
     in which the male has an XXY genotype). Therefore, if a gene on the
     X chromosome is mutated, males have no genetic back-up. Meanwhile,
     the mother has an extra copy of the X  chromosome, subduing the
     effects of the X-linked mutation.
          Other times the mutation in question may lie within one of
     the “autosomal” or non-sex chromosomes. However, the mother
     may still not be as severely affected as her son, for reasons poorly
     understood. While we can only guess as to the mechanisms involved
     (e.g. hormones), it’s possible some of the brain differences between the
     sexes may exaggerate autism symptoms in males meanwhile attenuating
     them in females. In this regard, the extreme male brain theory of autism
     may provide a basis for understanding why and how cognition in
                           The Genetics of Autism                                   57


males (e.g. higher systematizing vs. lower empathizing) overlaps that
of autism so considerably (Baron-Cohen, 2002).


Inherited risk for developing mutations
Advanced paternal age is not the only risk factor for developing new
mutations in sperm. Not only can mutations be inherited, but the
tendency to form new mutations can also be passed on genetically.
For instance, Molina et al. (2011) studied genetic deletions and
duplications in the sperm of a sample of men. While overall rates of
deletions and duplications didn’t vary much across the entire genome,
there were significant differences between the individual men when
looking at two autism- and intellectual disability-risk loci, namely
7q11.23 and 15q11-q13. These differences suggested that the men
harbored minor genetic variations in or near these loci that somehow
affected the regions’ stability, increasing or decreasing risk of mutations
in these regions.
    Another example of inherited mutation risk is premutations for
fragile X syndrome (FXS). The promoter region of the FMR1 gene
contains a CGG triplet repeat3 and most people have anywhere from
5  to 54 CGG repeats. However, people with 60–230 repeats are
carriers for FXS, and these premutations are unstable: the larger the
number of repeats, the greater the instability and the greater likelihood
they may have children with FXS (Hagerman & Hagerman, 2004).
Therefore, not only can mutations be inherited from generation to
generation, genetic instability can also be inherited, increasing risk for
new mutations in specific genetic loci.


Like attracts like
Another pattern affecting the inheritance of autism risk is “assortative
mating.” Simply put: like attracts like. Recent research suggests that
people with risk factors for conditions like autism or schizophrenia
are more often attracted to one another, increasing the likelihood that

3	   The DNA is composed of 4 different nucleotides (A, T, G, and C). CGG triplet
     repeats are strings of the nucleotides “CGG” repeated within the DNA. In
     the case of FXS, individuals usually carry 200+ CGG triplet repeats (there’s
     some overlap in genotype with carriers). This ultimately alters how the gene
     is methylated and therefore how it is expressed.
58                              DEFINING AUTISM


     their children may develop related neurodevelopmental conditions
     (Nordsletten et al., 2016). This type of mating pattern is probably
     important in the spread of weak autism risk factors such as common
     risk variants.
         Educational assortative mating (the tendency for people to
     choose partners with similar educational backgrounds) may also
     play a minor role in autism risk. Scientists have found that children
     with autism, especially  those with less cognitively impaired forms
     like Asperger’s syndrome or Pervasive Developmental Disorder–Not
     Otherwise Specified (PDD‑NOS), are more likely to have parents with
     above‑average educational attainment (Croen et al., 2007). As you may
     recall from Chapter 1, this characteristic was well described in Leo
     Kanner’s original manuscript—although his case studies may have
     represented some ascertainment bias.


     Diagnostic gender bias and the female protective effect
     On average, males are three times more likely to receive an autism
     diagnosis than females (Ozonoff et al., 2011). One reason for this
     discrepancy seems to be a gender-based diagnostic bias. Surprisingly,
     even when females exhibit similar levels of impairment as males, they
     are still less likely to receive an autism diagnosis (Russell, Steer, &
     Golding, 2011). While it’s a challenge to understand where this bias
     comes from, it’s clear that much of the foundational work delineating
     the autism phenotype was performed using male-dominated patient
     pools, which has presumably influenced our concepts of the stereotype
     of autism. As an example of the sex-skewed nature of mid-20th-
     century research, early in his career Hans Asperger didn’t even believe
     autism could occur in females!
         Some of the diagnostic skewing may be accounted for by differences
     between the sexes. For instance, scientists have found that males in
     general, regardless of whether they are on the autism spectrum, display
     more repetitive and restricted behaviors than females (Messinger et al.,
     2015). Autistic and non-autistic males also perform more poorly on
     certain developmental scales of learning compared to their respective
     female counterparts, suggesting that some of the characteristics upon
     which we are basing diagnoses are not necessarily autism-specific but
     are exacerbated by the condition, particularly in males.
         Hereditary research, however, does suggest that males develop
     autism more often than females. Some cases, for instance, can be
                         The Genetics of Autism                                59


accounted for by X-linked mutations, in which females may be
asymptomatic or subclinical carriers. But this accounts for only a small
portion of familial cases. Instead, sex hormones presumably skew rates
of autism occurrence (Gockley et al., 2015).
     Family studies have shown that the autistic siblings of females
with autism are more severely affected than the siblings of similarly
affected males (Robinson et al., 2013, 2014). This indicates that the
hereditary load in families with autistic girls is greater, suggesting girls
are typically more resilient than the boys. This has been replicated in
numerous genetics studies, finding that girls with autism usually have
more mutations, and therefore a greater genetic load, than males who
are similarly affected (Jacquemont et al., 2014; Sanders et al., 2015;
Sebat et al., 2007).
     Assuming differences in the hormonal milieu drives the female
protective effect, how might the steroid, estrogen, reduce severity of
the autism phenotype? One major mechanism of action is the role
estrogen and its receptor plays in regulating the expression of genes.
Unlike most receptors that are relegated to the outer membrane of the
cell, when estrogen binds to the estrogen receptor this complex is able
to travel into the nucleus, bind to DNA, and directly regulate gene
expression. The receptor is also able to interact with other molecules
that bind to and regulate DNA, controlling gene expression through
less direct means (Marino, Galluzzo, & Ascenzi, 2006).
     Interestingly, genes that are expressed strongly in the male-typical
brain significantly overlap those that are abnormally expressed in
the brain in autism (Werling, Parikshak, & Geschwind, 2016). This
suggests that these genes are targets of sex steroids and female-typical
hormones reduce their expressions and thereby alleviate the autism
phenotype. Using animal models to test this hypothesis, scientists have
discovered that stimulation of the estrogen receptor rescues the effects
of certain autism-specific mutations (Hoffman et al., 2016). Additional
work needs to be performed, but initial studies indicate that estrogen
in particular decreases the severity of autism during certain periods of
development.


PHYSICAL FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH AUTISM
There is ongoing debate whether intellectual disability is as prevalent
in autism as standard IQ tests indicate (Nader et al., 2016). While we
won’t delve into the nitty-gritty of this debate here (see Chapter 9
60                               DEFINING AUTISM


     for further discussion), moderate-to-severe intellectual disability does
     sometimes co-occur with autism and can have strong genetic roots.
     When these forms of intellectual disability accompany autism, they
     are also often associated with multiple congenital anomalies (MCA).
     People with MCA have physical anomalies in multiple organs of the
     body, such as malformations of the face, the hands and feet, or heart
     defects. If these anomalies occur together in a consistent fashion
     across multiple people, dysmorphologists (professionals who study
     differences in body structure) define this as a “syndrome.” Oftentimes,
     these syndromes have identifiable causes, such as certain types of
     mutations or specific environmental insults. Common examples
     include fragile X and fetal alcohol syndromes, which are genetic and
     teratogenic (environmental) syndromes respectively.
          In recent research, we have found that malformations of the
     face are particularly common in people with autism and intellectual
     disability who have rare highly penetrant single-gene mutations.
     Although people with intellectual disability have higher rates of
     congenital anomalies in general, those with autism are more likely to
     have multiple facial malformations for reasons not yet well understood
     (Casanova et al., 2017a).
          On the other hand, people with idiopathic forms of autism don’t
     typically have obvious facial malformations but may have subtler
     distinctive features. For instance, Aldridge et al. (2011) studied facial
     features in prepubertal autistic boys using 3D stereographic technology.
     While the majority of boys in their study appeared not to differ from
     controls, a large minority of boys with autism (28%) exhibited one
     of two distinctive facial patterns. The first subgroup had a longer
     midface, with greater distances longitudinally between the eyes, nose,
     and mouth, and overall smaller mouths and chins. These boys also
     tended to be more severely affected, with fewer cases falling within
     the high-functioning range. Meanwhile, the second subgroup of boys
     had a shorter midface and a longer upper lip around the area known
     as the “philtrum.” In contrast to the first subgroup, these boys tended
     to be higher-functioning and also had higher rates of macrocephaly
     (large heads).
          More recently, other researchers have discovered that both
     prepubertal boys and girls with autism have facial features indicative
     of increased masculinity, reinforcing the idea that maternal hormones
     play an important role in autism risk in some cases (Tan et al., 2017).
     Interestingly, increased masculinity in autism correlates with greater
                        The Genetics of Autism                              61


social and communication impairments, suggesting that social ability
and secondary sex characteristics share a significant relationship.
     Finally, a recent twins study in Sweden discovered that autism
twin pairs had significantly more minor physical anomalies (MPAs)
compared to ADHD twins and unaffected controls (Myers et al., 2017).
These MPAs included hypermobility, flat feet, straight eyebrows,
overweight/obesity, vision impairment, long fingers and toes, long
eyelashes, and underdevelopment of the external ear (microtia). Some
of these features, it should be noted, share overlap with connective
tissue disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan syndromes.


Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, hypermobility
spectrum disorders, and autism
Research is still early, but some studies suggest that Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (EDS) and related hypermobility spectrum disorders (HSDs)
share overlap with the autism spectrum (Baeza-Velasco et al., 2015;
Casanova et al., 2018; Cederlöf et al., 2016; Eccles et al., 2014;
Fehlow et al., 1993; Shetreat-Klein, Shinnar, & Rapin, 2014; Takei
et al., 2011). Hypermobility, otherwise known as double-jointedness,
can occur in any joint, although it often targets and is most problematic
in the major weight-bearing joints like the spine, knees, hips, and
shoulders (Figure 3.6). Hypermobility within the hands can also cause
significant dexterity issues.




              Figure 3.6: A girl with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
                 illustrating generalized joint hypermobility
                       (Images courtesy of Lianne Hedden)
62                                DEFINING AUTISM


     While rare forms of EDS are typically associated with collagen
     mutations, the form known as hypermobile EDS (HEDS) and other
     HSDs are rarely associated with identifiable genetic mutations, with
     a few exceptions. This suggests that they are a genetically complex
     group of associated conditions, not unlike the autism spectrum,
     whose  hereditary underpinnings have so far been challenging
     to identify.
          In some of our recent work, we have found that individuals on
     the autism spectrum who also have generalized joint hypermobility
     (GJH), a primary feature of EDS, report high rates of immune-
     mediated symptoms, such as respiratory, food, and skin allergies,
     asthma, rhinitis, and autoimmune disorders (Casanova et al., 2018).
     Our ongoing research, as well as that of others, suggests this is the case
     for EDS/HSD in general (Casanova, 2017; Cheung & Vadas, 2015).
          Similar immune symptoms occur in the related connective tissue
     disorder, Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), which shares overlap with EDS
     and Marfan syndrome (MFS), both at the molecular and diagnostic
     levels. Each of these conditions, for instance, have Marfan‑like features,
     such as hypermobility, long arms, long fingers, chest malformations,
     poor vision, and crooked teeth (Malfait et al., 2017). While it’s uncertain
     why connective tissue disorders cause immune dysfunction, work on
     LDS and MFS suggests that the connective tissue surrounding cells
     is vital in sequestering and inactivating immunostimulatory proteins,
     such as TFG-β (Frischmeyer-Guerrerio et al., 2013). However, when
     connective tissue isn’t working properly, as in the case of connective
     tissue disorders, these proteins may be prematurely released, leading to
     a chronic cascade of local immune activation. Unfortunately, connective
     tissue is present throughout the body, suggesting that many different
     organ systems may be affected.
          Much work has been performed on the immune system in autism,
     as we’ll discuss in the following chapter. A large subset of those on
     the autism spectrum exhibit either clinical or metabolic evidence of
     immune dysregulation (Ahmad et al., 2017; Molloy et al., 2006;
     Zerbo et al., 2015). It’s therefore possible that the immune system may
     be an important link between autism and connective tissue disorders
     like EDS/HSD. However, further clinical work is needed to address
     this possibility, which our laboratory is currently pursuing.
                        The Genetics of Autism                              63


CLINICAL RELEVANCE OF GENETICS
Genetics studies are of great importance in diagnostics and clinical
treatment. For those people who have rare syndromic forms of autism
with identifiable mutations, knowledge of the causative gene(s)
can lead to better understanding of the biological processes that
underlie the condition. This knowledge can then foster development
of pharmacological or other treatment interventions that reduce
symptom severity or even offer a cure for some individuals.
     A great example of just such a genetic syndrome is phenylketonuria
(PKU). PKU is the result of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase
gene, which codes for a protein that helps break down the amino
acid phenylalanine into other amino acids the body can use. A large
percentage of untreated PKU patients go on to develop symptoms
of autism and intellectual disability, which can be prevented by early
dietary intervention (Khemir, Halayem, & Azzouz, 2016).
     Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is another genetic syndrome
with high rates of intellectual disability and autism. People with PMS
have mutations in the SHANK3 gene, which results in a loss of function.
One of SHANK3’s primary functions is to form structural bridges at
synaptic sites, affecting the function of those synapses. Scientists have
found that animals harboring SHANK3 mutations show dramatic
improvement in certain symptoms when treated with insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and early pilot studies suggest that children
with PMS significantly improve on an IGF-1 drug regime (Kolevzon
et al., 2014).
     These are just a couple of examples of the roles genetics plays
in helping to direct research and treatment into conditions related
to autism. But what can genetics studies do for those with autism
who don’t have rare mutations? Although research is still early, the
scientific community is working towards identifying additional rare
and common genetic variants that may play important roles in autism’s
etiologies, as well as medical conditions that sometimes accompany
the condition. Once we reach that stage, we will be able to better
understand each person’s unique biological underpinnings, working
towards targeted treatment interventions based on his or her inherited
makeup. Although some individuals on the spectrum may prefer
to avoid pharmacological intervention for their autism symptoms,
64                              DEFINING AUTISM


     genetics studies may nevertheless offer treatment options for other
     comorbid conditions, such as anxiety and immune disorders. These
     types of interventions will ultimately improve quality of life for those
     on the spectrum and are the ultimate goals of Precision Medicine.
                           Chapter Four


   THE ROLES ENVIRONMENT
       PLAYS IN AUTISM
        SUSCEPTIBILITY


It’s challenging to identify the point at which a living creature ends
and the environment surrounding it begins. Our environments don’t
just surround us, they are in us. You must consume food daily so your
cells can break it down into usable molecules, such as sugars, proteins,
and minerals. These nutrients become a part of your cells, used as
building blocks for numerous structures and processes. For instance,
we know that some metal ions, such as zinc and magnesium, bind
to DNA and without those tiny metals our DNA wouldn’t hold its
shape or function properly (Šponer et al., 1998). But your cells don’t
make zinc or magnesium. Instead, they derive it from the foods you
eat. So are these zinc and magnesium ions part of us or part of the
environment? There’s no simple answer to that question.
     You also can’t survive without breathing in oxygen, which in turn
helps you derive energy from the food you eat. And while we take
oxygen levels for granted as if they’re an environmental constant
(how wrong we are!), they are a foundational variable upon which
multicellular life is dependent (see Ward, 2006, for more). So we can’t
forget the roles that oxygen plays in the way our cells function. We
are part of the environment and the environment is an inseparable
part of us.
     Some of the environmentally induced syndromes we’ll be
describing in this chapter are complex and are not always due to
environment alone. As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, approximately
10 percent of infants exposed prenatally to the medication valproic
acid develop autism (Moore et al., 2000; Rasalam et al., 2005).


                                  65
66                                DEFINING AUTISM


     However, another 90 percent do not. While some of this variation may
     be due to differences in timing of exposure, medication dosage, and
     length of exposure, it may also be affected by genetic predisposition.
     Therefore, although we label some syndromes as “genetic” and others
     as “environmental” or “teratogenic,” nature is rarely so simple.


     A DISCLAIMER BEFORE WE BEGIN
     We have all heard the adage, “Correlation doesn’t equal causation.”
     But before we delve into the list of environmental factors that affect
     autism risk, it is worthwhile reiterating that well-worn phrase. Just
     because two events coincide does not mean that their relationship is a
     causal one. In Figure 4.1, we illustrate some of the simple relationship
     scenarios any two events (A and B) may have, though these illustrations
     are not exclusive. In the simplest scenario, A may cause B or vice versa.
     However, in the second scenario we can see that A and B are the result
     of some other factor (X), leading to a correlation between the two
     variables. And finally, as shown in the third panel, A may have some
     complex relationship with factor X, which causes B (or vice versa). In
     the last two scenarios, A and B may be strongly correlated with one
     another but they are not related by causality. Instead, they are related
     by more complex means, which is frequently the case when studying
     biology due to the complicated nature of living systems. In biology,
     most of the time A does not cause B.




              Figure 4.1: Theoretical examples in which correlation does
                    not equate to causation (examples #2 and #3)
          The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                        67


This chapter deals largely with the prenatal environment and how
different exposures or deprivations can increase autism risk. These
range from pharmaceuticals to infections to pesticides. And as you’ll
glean from these materials, the range of environmental factors is
extensive, highlighting once again the heterogeneous nature of the
autism spectrum from an environmental perspective.


CHEMICALS
Prescription medications
Anti-seizure medications
Once they’re born, infants who were exposed to anti-epileptic drugs
(AEDs) in the womb often experience neonatal withdrawal symptoms
similar to those seen in adults, such as jitteriness and irritability.
Unfortunately, these withdrawal symptoms can cause complications
in early infant health, a common concern regarding many types of
neonatal drug withdrawal (Hudak et al., 2012).
    Infants prenatally exposed to AEDs also have a two-to-three-times
increased risk for major congenital malformations, such as neural
tube defects like spina bifida (in which the neural tube fails to close
properly),  cleft palate, urogenital malformations, and heart defects.
That risk is even higher with the use of combination therapy, in which
two or more AEDs are used in conjunction. Congenital malformations
occur in about 14 percent of cases exposed to AED compared to
3  percent in the general population (Dean et al., 2002). Unfortunately,
most AEDs afford at least minimal risk for birth defects.
    Aside from physical malformations, infants with fetal anti­
convulsant syndrome may also have cognitive deficits. The vast
majority have either developmental delay or learning difficulties,
and language is usually impaired to the extent that most kids require
some form of speech and language therapy. Many exposed children
also have behavioral challenges like attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) (Moore et al., 2000; Dean et al., 2002).
    Originally, it was hoped that the newer generation of AEDs
would be less teratogenic1 than their older counterparts, but many of
these medications such as topiramate and gabapentin instead confer

1	 A “teratogen” is a foreign agent, such as a chemical or an infectious agent that
   disrupts prenatal development, often leading to congenital malformations.
68                                 DEFINING AUTISM


     measurable risk (Holmes 2002; Hunt et al., 2008; Prakash et al.,
     2008). An exception appears to be the drug lamotrigine, which due
     to its low risk is now often prescribed to pregnant women in place of
     medications like valproic acid (Vajda et al., 2010).

     Valproic acid (Depakote)
     Valproic acid’s mechanism of action isn’t well understood, although
     it does appear to act as an effective sodium channel blocker, helping
     to suppress the excitability of neurons (McLean & McDonald, 1986).
     It also has neuroprotective2 effects because of its role as a histone
     deacetylase inhibitor, which helps to regulate gene expression and
     promotes cell growth and repair (Phiel et al., 2001).
          Valproic acid is one of the most effective drugs in treating epilepsy.
     Unfortunately, it is also one of the most teratogenic, an effect that is
     exacerbated with combination therapy. The incidence of fetal valproate
     syndrome (FVS) is currently unknown, but it appears to affect males
     and females in equal numbers. Symptoms can include malformations
     of the neural tube (spina bifida), the face (epicanthal folds, upturned
     nose, small mouth), the genitals, the heart, and other parts of the
     skeleton (ribs, hips, etc.). In addition, eye abnormalities are typically
     present, including nearsightedness, astigmatism, and strabismus.
          Similar to other AEDs, valproic acid also affects the developing
     brain, and there is considerable risk for behavioral and learning
     deficits. In addition, about 10 percent of those with FVS also have
     autism, while an additional 50 percent exhibit autistic features,
     making autism symptomology a common core to fetal valproate
     syndrome (Moore et al., 2000; Rasalam et al., 2005).
          Following these clinical studies, animal research models have been
     developed to investigate valproic acid’s effects on brain development
     in relation to autism. Patricia Rodier was one of the first to use valproic
     acid on rodents prenatally in order to mimic exposure in humans
     (Rodier et al., 1996). Although she studied the brainstem and not the
     cortex as is typical in modern autism research, she found significant
     disturbances to that area of the brain, which she believed linked autism
     and a brainstem condition known as Moebius syndrome (Figure 4.2).
     We will discuss more of these links in further sections.


     2	 Able to protect nerve cells against damage.
        The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility               69




              Figure 4.2: An infant with Moebius syndrome
                (Reproduced with permission of Al Kaissi et al., 2007)


Following on Rodier’s work, Henry Markram and his team studied the
microcircuitry of the cortex in rats that had been prenatally exposed to
valproic acid (see Markram, Rinaldi, & Markram, 2007, for review).
Markram’s team found that the excitatory neurons in these animals were
both “hyper-reactive” and “hyper-connected” compared to neurons in
control rats. As such, a single excitatory neuron had a greater number
of neurons with which it was interconnected. Markram proposed that
this hyperexcitable, hyperconnected network triggered an exaggerated
response to a particular stimulus, mimicking some of the cognitive and
behavioral features of autism, such as sensory hypersensitivity. This is
the core of the “intense world syndrome” theory of autism.

Antidepressants
Antidepressants work by targeting various combinations of the
serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine systems. The selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), as the name suggests, block the reuptake of
serotonin into the communicating cell, allowing serotonin to remain
in the synaptic cleft longer and to continue to activate receptors on
the receiving cell. Atypical antidepressants meanwhile function in a
variety of ways—some, like Wellbutrin, function as a dopamine and
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, while others, like Cymbalta,
are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. Unlike the
SSRIs and atypicals, tricyclic antidepressants inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin, norepinephrine, and partially dopamine and therefore tend
to have more side effects. Finally, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOI) are the oldest class of antidepressant and are typically used
70                                 DEFINING AUTISM


     as a last line of treatment in depression. They work by inhibiting
     monoamine oxidase, which is an enzyme that helps to break down
     many of the neuromodulators like serotonin, norepinephrine, and
     dopamine, thereby increasing their bioavailability and activity.
          Safety studies on the prenatal use of antidepressants have been
     exceedingly mixed and at times downright confusing. However, most
     large studies conclude that if risk for congenital malformations is
     present as a result of prenatal antidepressant use, it is extremely small
     (e.g. Ross et al., 2013).
          There has been considerable interest in the roles serotonin may
     play in autism risk as well, given reports of hyperserotonemia3 in the
     condition. This relationship has therefore inspired interest in prenatal
     antidepressant exposure in relation to autism. To date, a variety of
     studies agree that prenatal antidepressant exposure may confer small
     but measurable risk for autism (Boukhris et al., 2016; Croen, Grether,
     et al., 2011; King, 2017; Rai et al., 2013; Sujan et al., 2017). Other
     studies, however, have failed to find a connection, suggesting that
     differences in methodology may be driving some of the disagreement
     (Brown et al., 2017; Castro et al., 2016; Hviid, Melbye, &
     Pasternak, 2013).
          However, a recent study has taken the earlier epidemiological
     research a step further. Scientists studied prenatal antidepressant
     exposure in patients contained within the Simons Simplex Collection,
     a database that houses genetic and clinical information on single-
     incidence autism families. When they studied these simplex cases, they
     found that individuals with certain genetic mutations who had been
     prenatally exposed to antidepressants were more severely affected
     than those who didn’t have similar mutations or weren’t exposed
     to antidepressants (Ackerman et al., 2017). As this study suggests,
     antidepressant exposure superimposed atop a genetic vulnerability
     may increase the severity of autism. This is akin to the triple hit
     hypothesis (genetic vulnerability, environmental agent, and timing of
     exposure) proposed both in autism and other areas of research into
     complex, partly heritable conditions (Casanova, 2007; Kollodge &
     Hinkley, 2015).
          Research into antidepressant risk in autism will likely be ongoing.
     Although the evidence is building, the data are not overwhelming
     and scientists continue to argue as they refine research methodologies.

     3	 “Hyperserotonemia” refers to high levels of serotonin in the blood.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility               71


If antidepressants are indeed a risk factor for autism, they appear to be
of small risk. Although given their widespread use, even such minor
risk may be alarming.

Thalidomide
A clever strategy at rebranding: nowadays it is known as “Immunoprin”
and is used in the treatment of cancers and leprosy. Most people, if
they’re familiar with it, however, know the drug as “thalidomide.”
    It was developed by the German company, Chemie Grünenthal, in
the 1950s and was originally marketed for the treatment of respiratory
infections. Eventually, they discovered it was an effective antiemetic
and quickly rebranded it for use as a drug to treat morning sickness.
At the time, scientists and doctors did not believe that substances the
mother consumed could cross the placental barrier and harm the fetus.
Therefore, there were no stringent laws on drug development targeting
pregnant women. In the meantime, thalidomide was successfully
marketed throughout 46 countries.
    However, by 1960 there were reports trickling in linking the
drug to cases of peripheral neuropathy (Fullerton & Kremer, 1961).
And within the following year, reports of major birth defects were
already coming to light. Children were being born with shortened
limbs (phocomelia), missing limbs (amelia), missing or extra fingers
or toes, webbing around the digits, blindness, deafness, cleft palate,
facial paralysis (Moebius syndrome), and malformations of the
gastrointestinal tract and other organs (Figure 4.3).




               Figure 4.3: Limb and foot malformations in a
                   case of prenatal thalidomide exposure
            (Reproduced from Wikimedia Commons: Otis Historical Archives
                      National Museum of Health and Medicine)
72                               DEFINING AUTISM


     By March of 1962, following horrendous public outcry, the drug
     was finally removed from the market. However, by that time over
     10,000 children with thalidomide-induced deformities had been born
     worldwide, several thousand of whom died shortly after birth. To the
     United States’ good fortune, only 17 U.S. infants are recognized to
     have been born with thalidomide-related malformations, even though
     Chemie Grünenthal managed to distribute samples to approximately
     20,000 pregnant women within U.S. borders. It is possible that more
     thalidomide victims exist that still go unrecognized.
          Yet it is a miracle there weren’t more. And the heroine of that story
     is a Canadian woman, Frances Oldham Kelsey.
          Kelsey was one of a small number of medical officers who worked
     for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the late 1950s
     reviewing  drug applications for approval in the U.S. Kelsey, being
     the officer in charge of thalidomide’s review, was already familiar
     with the  reports of neuropathy. She, alongside the pharmacologist
     and chemist assisting her, was dissatisfied with Chemie Grünenthal’s
     safety studies. They felt that the chronic toxicity studies hadn’t
     been long enough and the manufacturing controls had considerable
     shortcomings (Bren, 2001). Thus, in spite of extensive pressure from
     the pharmaceutical company and from her own supervisors at the
     FDA, she refused to approve the application, repeatedly requiring
     more data. Before long, reports of limb malformations began popping
     up worldwide and the drug was banned from market. Thanks to
     Dr. Kelsey and her assistants, undoubtedly thousands more cases of
     thalidomide embryopathy were prevented in the U.S. For her service
     to the country, President John F. Kennedy awarded her the medal for
     Distinguished Federal Civilian Service in 1962 (Figure 4.4).
          But the rest of the world wasn’t so lucky. While West Germany
     itself was hardest hit with approximately 5000 cases reported, Great
     Britain and Japan had about 700 cases each. In Sweden in particular,
     approximately 150 cases were reported, although roughly one third
     died from severe birth defects. This was largely a result of severe organ
     malformations that were fatal shortly after birth.
          In 1994, Kerstin Strömland and her team studied the Swedish
     cohort of thalidomide victims, investigating Moebius syndrome,
     the most common condition associated with exposure, which is
     a brainstem disorder resulting in facial paralysis and various eye
     motor defects. Interestingly, they also investigated rates of autism in
          The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                      73


the cohort. Of the one hundred individuals they studied, four fulfilled
a diagnosis of autism (4%). (Another individual may have been autistic
but was attending a special school for those with mild intellectual
disability and was unavailable for examination. Unfortunately, his files
were inconclusive.)




  Figure 4.4: Frances Oldham Kelsey receiving the medal for Distinguished
      Federal Civilian Service from President John F. Kennedy in 1962

While 4 percent may seem low, ranging only a few percentage points
above the rate seen within the general population (~1%), Rodier et al.
(1996) noted that of the 15 individuals who had been exposed to
thalidomide on days 20–24 of pregnancy, four (27%) were autistic. All
four individuals displayed features indicative of Moebius syndrome,
as did a fifth child unavailable for autism screening. Interestingly, no
individuals exposed later in pregnancy had any indications of autism.
Therefore, when taking into account this time period of vulnerability,
thalidomide may promote autism in about 25–30 percent of cases.
In those cases, autism is usually accompanied by symptoms of Moebius
syndrome. Interestingly, Moebius syndrome occurs alongside autism
in other conditions as well (Johansson et al., 2001).
    Thalidomide’s mechanisms of action are currently unknown,
although it seems to have immunomodulatory4 and antiangiogenic5

4	 “Immunomodulatory” refers to a substance that affects activity of the immune
   system.
5	 “Angiogenic” refers to a substance that stimulates vascular growth; therefore,
   “antiangiogenic” means that vascular growth is suppressed.
74                               DEFINING AUTISM


     effects, which may explain its usefulness in treating some forms of
     cancer (Paravar & Lee, 2008). Although the abnormal immune function
     has been linked with autism, thalidomide-induced autism is more
     likely the result of suppressed vascular growth. As you will see later
     in the section on misoprostol, a medication that also causes Moebius
     syndrome, it triggers ischemia6 depriving the fetus of adequate blood
     supply (Dooley et al., 2004). Like thalidomide, it also increases risk
     for autism, suggesting that first trimester ischemia could be a general
     risk factor for the condition.

     Terbutaline
     The drug terbutaline has typically been used as a relief inhaler for
     asthma and works by stimulating the β2-adrenergic receptor. It has
     also been in use off-label as an anti-contraction agent in women who
     experience premature labor. In February of 2011, the U.S. Food and
     Drug Administration ordered the placement of a boxed warning
     on the label, contraindicating its use in pregnant women in the
     prevention or prolonged treatment of preterm labor as it had led to a
     number of maternal heart problems and deaths (U.S. Food and Drug
     Administration, 2011).
         Terbutaline is also a risk factor for autism when used for longer
     durations (two or more days) (Bercum et al., 2015; Connors et al.,
     2005). Since it was first investigated as a labor repressant in the 1970s
     (Ingemarsson, 1975), terbutaline has been one of the most commonly
     used β2-adrenergic receptor agonists in preterm labor management;
     the  number of cases of autism that go unidentified is therefore
     probably considerable. This effect seems to be limited to terbutaline
     in particular and doesn’t include other β2-adrenergic receptor agonists
     (Croen, Connors, et al., 2011). In future, cases of terbutaline-
     induced autism will likely decrease due to the new warning label
     limiting exposure periods. However, researchers may continue to find
     individual cases of “fetal terbutaline syndrome” in people who were
     exposed prior to 2011.
         Interestingly, some scientists have found that autism risk following
     prenatal terbutaline exposure is strongest when people have at least
     one of two particular genetic variants in the gene for the β2-adrenergic
     receptor, each of which leads to overstimulation of that receptor

     6	 Reduced, inadequate blood supply.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                75


(Connors et al., 2005). This research has been extended using an
animal model, looking at the combined effects of terbutaline and
maternal stress on fetal development (Bercum et al., 2015). Combined
exposure results in severe disturbances in behavior and high rates
of epilepsy (45%). These studies clearly illustrate how genetics and
environmental exposures can combine to increase autism risk.

Misoprostol
Misoprostol is used to induce labor, promote abortion, treat postpartum
bleeding, and to prevent and treat stomach ulcers. It acts as a synthetic
version of a prostaglandin, which is a fat molecule that functions as a
hormone in humans.
    A small percentage of chemical abortions attempted with
misoprostol fail. In those cases when surgical abortion is not attempted
or is not an option, the fetus is at risk for developing significant birth
defects, particularly if it was exposed during the first trimester of
pregnancy. Because surgical abortions are illegal in some countries
in South and Central America, many women will use (and misuse)
misoprostol, leading to higher rates of drug-induced congenital
defects in these regions (Gonzalez et al., 1998).
    Birth defects associated with prenatal misoprostol exposure
include Moebius syndrome, terminal limb defects in which portions of
the limb (e.g. fingers, hands) fail to form, and other malformations like
enlargement of the fluid-containing ventricles of the brain (Vauzelle
et al., 2013). Misoprostol-induced Moebius syndrome is believed to
be related to disruptions in the vascular system, leading to reductions
in blood supply that feed developing tissues (Gonzalez et al., 1998).
    As we saw with thalidomide, misoprostol increases risk for
Moebius syndrome and autism when exposed in the first trimester.
In a study performed in Brazil, a group of researchers found that
26 percent of those with Moebius syndrome met criteria for classic
autism (Bandim et al., 2003). In addition, another 9 percent who were
under the age of two displayed autistic features. Of the seven children
with Moebius syndrome and autism or autistic features, 57 percent
had been exposed to misoprostol. Once again, this suggests that the
causes of Moebius syndrome (e.g. ischemia) are strong risk factors for
the development of autism.
76                               DEFINING AUTISM


     Drug abuse
     Alcohol
         Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no
         wine or strong drink…
                                                              (Judges, 13:7)

     Though fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) wasn’t officially identified until
     the 1960s, the harm of prenatal alcohol exposure to unborn infants
     had long been suspected. There had been isolated case reports strewn
     throughout the medical literature for several hundred years:
         [Several] physician groups in England in the late 1700s described
         children of alcoholics as “weak, feeble, and distempered” and “born
         weak and silly…shriveled and old, as though they had numbered
         many years.” In 1899, Sullivan described the offspring of alcoholic
         women imprisoned in England. He concluded that these women
         produced children characterized by a pattern of birth defects of
         increasing severity and higher rates of miscarriage… (Hoyme et al.,
         2005, p. 40)
     Linked with the temperance and eugenics movements of the late
     19th and early 20th centuries, many people believed that prenatal
     exposure could harm the unborn child, leading to a heritable form
     of imbecility. It was partly this belief that led to the successful spread
     of the temperance movement and to Prohibition in the United States,
     which lasted from 1919 until 1933 (O’Neil, 2011).
          If you’ll recall from the section on thalidomide, before 1962
     scientists and doctors didn’t believe substances the mother consumed
     could cross the placenta and affect the developing infant. After the
     thalidomide scare, however, professionals began realizing this wasn’t
     the case and if thalidomide could cross the placental barrier, other
     agents such as alcohol might do so as well.
          By 1968, researchers began reporting features of prenatal alcohol
     exposure, documenting more than one hundred children born to
     women who drank heavily. Scientists noted that these children were
     born with physical malformations and eventually developed behavioral
     problems (Lemoine et al., 1968). However, it wasn’t until 1973 that
     the name “fetal alcohol syndrome” (FAS) was officially adopted (Jones
     et al., 1973).
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                              77


    FAS occurs on a spectrum and can include physical malformations,
as well learning and behavioral issues, the severity of which increases
with earlier and extended alcohol exposure. People with FAS may
have characteristic facial features (Figure 4.5), small head size, low
body weight, hand and foot malformations, problems with the heart
or kidneys, learning disabilities, developmental delay, intellectual
disability, poor judgment, and even seizures (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2015).

       Craniofacial features associated with fetal alcohol syndrome

                                       Facial features of FAS



                                                                Small head circumference
          Skin folds at the corner of the eye
                                                                 Small eye opening
                            Low nasal bridge
                                                                 Small midface
                                 Short nose

      Indistinct philtrum (groove between                          Thin upper lip
                        nose and upper lip)




                Figure 4.5: The various facial malformations that
                      can occur in fetal alcohol syndrome

People with FAS also have higher rates of autism. Initially, only
individual case reports were published, hinting at overlap between the
two conditions (Harris, MacKay, & Osborn, 1995; Nanson, 1992). But
by the late 1990s, larger studies were being published (Landgren et al.,
2010). For instance, one study out of Sweden reported that 13 percent
of children with FAS had autism, while an additional 42 percent had
ADHD (Aronson, Hagberg, and Gillberg, 1997). Of the FAS children
in the study, 25 percent attended school for the intellectually disabled
while another 46 percent received some form of special education.
     Though you may be unaware, alcohol can be a useful source of
energy for the body. In fact, without any alcohol consumption at all, the
flora in your gut produce approximately three grams of ethanol per day
(Tillonen, 2000). Therefore, you can imagine that alcohol metabolism
and the energy derived from it has been an important part of life for a
long evolutionary time. Unfortunately, humans have created new ways,
78                               DEFINING AUTISM


     namely in the form of wines, beers, and liquors, in which to consume
     large quantities of alcohol that our bodies are not naturally equipped to
     handle. And this leads to complications in health.
         Alcohol’s toxic effects on the body are complex. In the adult,
     intoxication can disrupt the function of the brain’s neurotransmitters.
     It can alter how the basic building blocks of our cells function. It
     reduces the immune system’s capacity to fight off infection. It impairs
     the gastrointestinal tract, the liver, and the pancreas. It alters the
     amount of cortisol the body produces. And it even impairs wound
     healing (Manzo-Avalos & Saavedra-Molina, 2010).
         With the help of the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzyme,
     the body metabolizes alcohol first into acetaldehyde, a very toxic
     substance, and finally into the less-damaging acetate. (Acetate, it is
     believed, is the molecule responsible for headaches during hangovers.)
     Unfortunately, with excessive or chronic alcohol consumption, the
     ALDH enzyme becomes “saturated,” meaning there is too much
     acetaldehyde for ALDH to deal with. When this occurs a portion
     of acetaldehyde escapes into the blood stream. Once it is out in the
     blood stream, it can travel to many areas of the body, causing damage
     through its ability to attach to numerous proteins, nucleic acids, fats,
     and carbohydrates and alter their abilities to function. Acetylaldehyde
     also forms free radicals that trigger a chain of toxic reactions if not
     quenched by antioxidants like vitamin C. Its function as a free radical
     makes acetaldehyde a particularly potent carcinogen (cause of cancer).
         Armed with this knowledge, you can easily imagine what far-
     reaching effects excessive alcohol consumption can have on an unborn
     child. Under the influence of alcohol, the brain produces fewer neurons
     and can lead to neuronal death in adult neurons (Hansson et al., 2010;
     Ikonomidou et al., 2000; Uban et al., 2010). These data help us to
     understand why small head size (microcephaly) is such a common
     feature of FAS.

     Cocaine
     Cocaine is a drug derived from the coca plant, which has both
     stimulating and anaesthetic properties. Until the early 20th century
     in the United States, it was sold over the counter as a painkiller and
     antidepressant and was also an ingredient in the now-popular soft
     drink Coca Cola. Coca leaves had largely been removed from Coca
     Cola before the 1914 Harrison Narcotics Tax Act was put into effect,
        The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility               79


although it took the company another 23 years to perfect the removal
of cocaine’s psychoactive agent, ecgonine alkaloid, from the drink,
which still had trace elements up until 1929 (Hamblin, 2013). In
the 1960s, there was an upsurge in popularity of the drug, which
led to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 in which cocaine
was re-categorized as a Schedule II controlled substance and the
public’s access to it became considerably limited. Nevertheless, even
today, it is the second most trafficked illegal drug in the world and
results in considerable morbidity and mortality. In the United States
in 2005 alone, close to half a million emergency department visits
were reported  involving cocaine use (Foundation for a Drug-free
World, 2016).
    As mentioned, cocaine is a highly addictive substance that acts
by inhibiting the reuptake of certain neurotransmitters (serotonin,
norepinephrine, dopamine), which results in their accumulation within
the synaptic cleft and prolonged stimulation. Dopamine in particular
is a key player in the reward system of the brain, leading to intense
addiction.
    Unfortunately, the study of prenatal cocaine exposure has been
a challenge. One of the biggest confounds is that pregnant mothers
who abuse cocaine often abuse other drugs, such as alcohol, cigarettes,
and other illegal substances (Lutiger et al., 1991; Mayes et al., 1992).
In addition, many coke abusers tend to have poor diets, further
complicating the study of infant outcomes. Nevertheless, it’s clear
that prenatal cocaine exposure leads to higher rates of premature
birth. Affected infants also tend to have low birth weight and are
small for gestational age (Behnke et al., 2001). Cocaine is known
to constrict blood vessels, suggesting infants prenatally exposed do
not receive adequate blood supply from their mothers (Ryan, Ehrlich,
&  Finnegan, 1987). Adverse neurological outcomes, on the other
hand, are likely due  to reduced blood flow and cocaine’s ability to
target neurotransmitters systems.
    There is also some evidence that prenatal cocaine exposure
increases autism risk. One study found that 11 percent of children
with documented prenatal cocaine exposure developed autism (Davis
et al., 1992). However, almost half of them had been exposed to a
combination of cocaine and alcohol, once again highlighting the
challenges scientists and doctors face in studying and treating prenatal
drug exposures.
80                                DEFINING AUTISM


     NUTRITION
     Folate deficiency
     Also known as vitamin B9, folate is an essential B vitamin necessary
     for DNA synthesis, repair, and methylation. We do not synthesize our
     own folate and therefore it must be derived from the foods we eat.
     Because of the vital roles it plays in DNA function, you might imagine
     its importance in cells that are rapidly growing and dividing.
          Dark leafy greens, beans, peas, lentils, citrus fruits, nuts, and
     seeds all have high folate content. Folate deficiency can occur due
     to lack of consumption of appropriate foods, an inherited propensity
     for deficiency (e.g. MTHFR polymorphisms, see below), or some
     combination of the two. When deficiency occurs during pregnancy,
     this can lead to spontaneous abortion, premature birth, and intrauterine
     growth restriction of the fetus. It can also increase risk for neural tube
     defects like anencephaly, which is the absence of a large portion of the
     brain, the skull, and the scalp and is lethal shortly after birth. There is
     also increased risk for spina bifida, which is an incomplete closure of
     the tissues covering the spine and spinal cord.
          A common polymorphism in the methylenetetrahydrofolate
     reductase (MTHFR) gene known scientifically as “C677T” occurs
     in approximately 25 percent of the human population worldwide
     and may account for up to one quarter of all neural tube defects
     (Ensembl, 2016; reviewed in Scholl & Johnson, 2000). Functionally,
     this gene variant reduces the activity of the MTHFR protein at high
     temperatures. When that happens, MTHFR can’t do its job efficiently,
     normally helping to detoxify the body of a chemical known as
     “homocysteine.” Homocysteine can wreak havoc on cells, even leading
     to neurodegeneration within the brain when it isn’t cleared properly
     (Rajagopalan et al., 2012).
          When folate metabolism works well, the new folate metabolite
     converts homocysteine into methionine, which is vital in providing
     methyl groups for the methylation of DNA, RNA, and proteins.
     However, when this process doesn’t work, such as when a person has
     one or two copies of the C677T MTHFR variant, cells are placed
     under greater stress and the processes that normally occur smoothly
     begin to short-circuit. In addition, abnormal DNA methylation can
     result in disturbances to gene expression. This effect is worsened if the
     person is not consuming adequate amounts of folate.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                 81


    Reduced maternal folate consumption is a risk factor for autism
(Schmidt et al., 2012). And unsurprisingly, the C677T MTHFR variant
also increases autism risk, even if the mother is consuming normal
amounts of folate. While scientists do not understand precisely how
folate deficiency increases risk for autism, one possibility is that folate
metabolism affects blood flow. Increased homocysteine levels, for
instance, disrupt development of the vasculature, resulting in ischemia
(Oosterbaan, Steegers, & Ursem, 2012). This is similar to what we saw
with thalidomide and misoprostol.
    However, MTHFR is also important in DNA methylation and the
regulation of gene expression. If genes are not properly methylated,
this can lead to abnormal expression of important neural genes that
may dramatically disrupt brain development. A similar issue is seen in
Rett syndrome in which loss of function of the MECP2 gene, which
is involved in silencing key neural genes during specific times in
development, leads to a syndromic form of autism (Gabel et al., 2015).


Vitamin D
Like estrogen and testosterone, vitamin D is a steroid. Until more
recently, its roles in prenatal development have been poorly
appreciated and are still little understood. The vitamin D precursor,
7-dehydrocholesterol, is a light-sensitive steroid that is produced in
the skin. However, in order to be converted into its vitamin D form
and used by the body, it must be exposed to ultraviolet B (UVB) rays.
Current research suggests that, in spite of common conceptions, we
likely consume adequate amounts of vitamin D and receive enough
daily sun exposure to satisfy our basic needs. However, some scientists
have found that low vitamin D levels are in fact indicators of other
disease processes, such as chronic inflammation (Autier et al., 2014).
In which case, if the inflammation is treated, vitamin D levels should
also normalize.
    As with other hormones, vitamin D receptors are able to bind to
DNA, regulating it directly (Eyles, Burne, & McGrath, 2011). For this
reason, vitamin D can have dramatic effects on cell biology.  For
instance, when it is applied to neural stem cells it halts cell division
and  causes neurons to develop prematurely (Brown et al., 2003).
Vitamin D also has antiseizure capacity by blocking uptake of the
excitatory ion calcium (Kalueff, Minasyan, & Tuohimaa, 2005).
82                               DEFINING AUTISM


     While reductions in excitation may be good for alleviating seizures,
     during prenatal development reduced excitability may lead to
     premature neuronal death since neurons require sufficient excitatory
     input in order to survive (Yan et al., 1994).
          Despite its myriad effects on the brain, vitamin D has been
     poorly studied in relation to autism. A few retrospective studies
     have investigated the seasonality of conception and birth in autistic
     individuals, finding a preponderance of spring births, suggesting
     winter-associated vitamin D deficiency could play a role (Grant &
     Soles, 2009; Hebert, Miller, & Joinson, 2010). Links between spring
     births in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are more robust, although
     other factors like wintertime infections may play an added role in
     these other conditions (Torrey et al., 1997).
          A more recent study suggests that low vitamin D levels may be
     associated with autism (Fernell et al., 2015). A group of Swedish
     researchers found that autistic siblings had significantly lower
     neonatal vitamin D levels than their unaffected brothers and sisters.
     Once again, however, we cannot know whether vitamin D deficiency
     is itself a risk factor for autism or a symptom of another causal factor,
     such as inflammation. For instance, inflammatory markers have also
     been identified in neonates who go on to develop autism (Krakowiak
     et al., 2015).
          On the other hand, specific polymorphisms in the vitamin D
     receptor (VDR) gene may share autism links, suggesting it could be a
     direct effector in risk. Researchers from the MIND Institute at the
     University of California at Davis have found that several common gene
     variants in the VDR, including the TaqI and BsmI polymorphisms, are
     overrepresented in the paternal gene copy of the receptor (Schmidt
     et al., 2015). Aside from linking VDR function and autism risk, these
     data also suggest that the VDR gene may be parentally imprinted,
     meaning that the gene is expressed differently based on which parent
     (mother vs. father) it came from.
          In summary, vitamin D deficiency does not appear to be a strong
     risk factor for autism, but it is an excellent candidate worthy of more
     study. In future, genetic testing for VDR polymorphisms may also
     help obstetricians inform patients what dosages of supplementation
     they should be taking during pregnancy, potentially reducing the role
     vitamin D deficiency could play in autism risk.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                 83


Iron
Iron is vital for many biological processes. Most people are vaguely
familiar with the role it plays in oxygen intake in the lungs. As part
of the larger hemoglobin complex, it allows hemoglobin to take a
shape that accepts the oxygen molecule, similar to a glove and ball
formation. Without the attached iron ion, hemoglobin doesn’t form
properly, preventing oxygen from attaching to it and being taken up
into the body. Oxygen is necessary for helping to turn the food we eat
into usable forms of energy.
     Iron is also part of the cytochrome structure, a complex molecule
that associates with the powerhouses of the cell, the mitochondria,
and aids in the generation of cellular energy known as adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). As we have seen with hemoglobin, cytochrome
doesn’t function properly without iron and the mitochondria cannot
produce energy efficiently. Iron deficiency can therefore cause very
severe problems for the body, depleting it of fundamental resources.
     Maternal iron deficiency (a form of anemia) increases risk for
premature birth and low infant birth weight. In developing countries in
which nutrition is poor and severe anemia is more common, the mother
is also at considerable risk for cardiac failure during labor, which is the
leading cause of death related to iron deficiency (Allen, 1997).
     Like maternal folate deficiency, maternal iron deficiency increases
risk for autism, although the mechanisms are not well understood
(Schmidt et al., 2014). Functionally, iron shares some overlap with
folate since they are both involved in basic cellular metabolism. Both
can cause anemia, which is when the blood doesn’t manage to carry
enough oxygen to the different cells of the body. Anemia can also
be caused by bleeding (e.g. menstruation or ulcers); it can be due
to decreased red blood cell production; or it can be caused by an
increased breakdown in red blood cells. In the case of folate and iron,
deficiencies are most typically associated with reduced red blood cell
production. The body simply cannot make enough red blood cells to
carry oxygen where it needs to go.
     In the fetus this can be especially detrimental. Scientists have
found that during early brain growth, iron deficiency dramatically
alters neuron development and impairs learning and memory well
after  the deficiency has resolved (Tran et al., 2008). It may also
exacerbate the effects of other risk factors, particularly inflammation.
84                               DEFINING AUTISM


     Using animal models, researchers have found that pregnant rats
     who are iron-deficient produce more inflammatory molecules when
     exposed to lipopolysaccharide (a bacterial mimic) than mothers who
     aren’t deficient (Harvey & Boksa, 2014). Together, these data indicate
     that iron deficiency can have some extreme consequences and is a
     basic substrate to life.


     PREMATURITY
     Approximately 13 percent of all births are premature, defined as
     occurring at or before 36 weeks gestation (reviewed in Rais-Bahrami
     & Short, 2013). The greatest challenge for preterm infants is living
     in a world for which most of their organs are developmentally
     unprepared. For instance, because the preemie lungs don’t produce
     enough surfactant, this can lead to significant respiratory distress.
     Their gastrointestinal tracts may also not receive enough blood supply,
     leading to a condition called “necrotizing enterocolitis,” which is
     when gastrointestinal tissue start to necrotize or die off. And finally,
     the brain is also vulnerable to bleeds and ischemia at such a young
     age. Intraventricular hemorrhage, one of the major types of bleeds, is
     graded by severity: infants with grades III and IV hemorrhages, which
     are the most severe, are the most likely to develop cerebral palsy.
          Autism seems to share strong links with prematurity. Research has
     shown that about one quarter of ex-preterm infants who weighed
     1500g or less at birth score positively on toddler autism screening
     tools like the Child Behavior Checklist and the Vineland Adaptive
     Behavior Scale (Limperopoulos et al., 2008). Other studies confirm
     these high rates, particularly in extremely preterm infants who are
     born between 24 and 26 weeks gestation (Kuniewicz et al., 2014).
          However, it is not prematurity per se that seems to be a risk factor
     for autism but specific types of brain lesions that are more likely to
     occur in premature infants. When bleeds and ischemia are so extreme
     as to cause damage to the tissues surrounding the ventricles, such as the
     developing white matter and the germinal zone that produces newborn
     neurons, this can lead to enlargement of the ventricles as cerebrospinal
     fluid fills the space that these brain tissues once occupied. Infants who
     are positive for such lesions at birth are almost seven-fold more likely
     to develop autism than preemies with normal cranial ultrasounds
     (Movsas et al., 2013). Clearly, early widespread damage to the tissues
     surrounding the ventricles of the brain is a major risk factor for autism.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                  85


THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The immune system is a most ancient system. Even prokaryotic7
single‑celled organisms like bacteria have the ability to fight off
foreign  pathogens using various enzymes to break down and
degrade invaders. In addition, the ability of some immune cells to
phagocytose or  “eat” foreign material was derived from eukaryotes’
ability to consume other cells or parts of cells as food. And the cells
of many invertebrate species, such as amoebas, worms, insects, and
sponges, have the ability to bind to other cells, identifying “self ” from
“non‑self.” All of these preceding elements compose the foundations
of the innate immune system (Buchmann, 2014).
    It wasn’t until the evolution of jawed fish that the adaptive
immune system appeared. While the innate immune system is the first
line of defense to invading pathogens, the adaptive immune system is
able to remember previous infections, mounting an antibody response
before the next pathogen has a chance to get a foothold. It is the
adaptive immune system that allows vaccinations to work. Insects, for
instance, would never benefit from inoculations because they don’t
have adaptive immune systems!
    Although both branches of the immune system are necessary for
fighting off infection, they are also integral to processes of growth and
repair. Consider for instance if you sprain your ankle: typically the ankle
will swell, become red and hot, and you may lose function in the affected
area depending on the severity of the sprain. Swelling, redness, hotness,
and pain are all indicators that inflammation is working to clear the area
of damaged cells and promote growth and repair of tissues.
    Interestingly, many proteins involved in inflammatory pathways,
like various cytokines and chemokines, also play non-inflammatory
roles in the developing brain. They may, for instance, function as
growth factors during neurogenesis (birth of neurons) (Borsini et al.,
2015). Therefore, although we label them as “inflammatory molecules”
and associate them with the immune system, these proteins are truly
multifunctional and multisystemic. Unfortunately, however, when an
infection occurs during the prenatal period, changes to the levels of
cytokines and chemokines can dramatically alter brain development.


7	 Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms that lack a well-defined nucleus.
   Meanwhile, eukaryotes are either single-celled or multicellular organisms
   that have a true nucleus.
86                               DEFINING AUTISM


          Abnormal antibodies may also disrupt brain development. During
     pregnancy, for instance, IgG antibodies that are produced by the
     mother can cross the placental barrier. In this way the fetus “borrows”
     the mother’s adaptive immune system, providing the baby with
     resistance to infections to which the mother has previously become
     immune. However, a very small portion of IgG is able to sneak past the
     blood brain barrier and gain access to the developing central nervous
     system. The area underlying the cortex known as the periventricular
     region seems to be particularly “leaky” for reasons not well understood
     (Rojko & Price-Schiavi, 2008).
          Unfortunately, because the mother shares her antibodies with
     the developing child, she can also pass on autoantibodies (antibodies
     to self ) that may harm fetal development and, depending on the
     type of autoantibody, even lead to miscarriage. In the case of autism,
     approximately 12 percent of mothers express autoantibodies that are
     reactive to fetal brain tissue, suggesting that their presence may have
     significant effects on brain development and autism risk (Bauman
     et al., 2013).
          Using animal models, scientists have found that when rhesus
     monkeys are prenatally exposed to IgG autoantibodies derived from
     mothers of children with autism, after birth these rhesus monkeys show
     demonstrably abnormal social behavior. Exposed males also tend to have
     larger-than-normal brains, which is primarily due to an increase in white
     matter volume, the portions of the brain that make up communicative
     fibers (Bauman et al., 2013). Surprisingly, however, exposed mothers
     also display heightened protectiveness and anxiety concerning their
     “autistic” offspring, suggesting that the adult brain may be vulnerable to
     autoantibody exposure as well, triggering psychiatric symptoms.
          The following section describes various prenatal and, on occasion,
     postnatal, infections that have been linked with autism. We also
     describe how immune system activation may lead to autistic regression
     by triggering pathways related to cell stress and inflammation and
     ultimately how this process may share links with forms of senile
     neurodegeneration, such as Alzheimer’s disease.


     TORCH infections
     TORCH stands for “toxoplasmosis, other (syphilis, varicella-zoster,
     parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and herpes” infections.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                87


Pre- and perinatal infections are associated with about 2–3 percent of
congenital anomalies worldwide, with TORCH-related infections the
most common (Stegmann & Carey, 2002).
    Prenatal infections can be dangerous to the developing infant,
although they are sometimes an unavoidable part of life. Most
congenital infections associated with autism risk are viral as opposed
to bacterial. The reasons for this are unclear but may be linked to the
body’s variable reactions to the different types of infections.

Rubella
Rubella, also known as German measles, is an infection caused by
the rubella virus. The virus is spread when an infected person coughs
or sneezes. Typically, if a person is symptomatic (many are not) he or
she will develop a rash, swollen lymph nodes, and may experience
fever, sore throat, joint pain, and fatigue.
    According to the World Health Organization (WHO), when a
woman is infected with the rubella virus, she has about a 90 percent
chance of passing it on to the fetus (WHO, 2016). This is especially
dangerous at less than 20 weeks gestation, when there is greatest risk
for a miscarriage (Lambert et al., 2015). Fetuses under 20 weeks are
also more likely to develop congenital rubella syndrome (CRS).
    The classic triad of symptoms that defines CRS is deafness, eye
abnormalities (e.g. cataracts), and congenital heart defects. Intellectual
disability, developmental delay, learning disabilities, microcephaly,
growth retardation, and other organ malformations are also common.
    In 1971, a professor at New York University, Dr. Stella Chess,
published a paper reporting on the behavioral characteristics of 243
preschool children with CRS. She found that approximately 7 percent
of those with CRS in her study had an autistic-like syndrome, more
than half fulfilling a full diagnosis of autism. This was a considerable
rise compared to the 3 per 10,000 diagnosis rates of the 1970s at
the time (Blaxill, 2004). Though additional studies have been few,
autism occurrence rates in CRS have tended to hover between 4 and
7 percent (Chess, 1971).
    What does the rubella virus do to the developing brain? There is
growing evidence that rubella virus triggers cell suicide (apoptosis),
leading to high rates of microcephaly in the condition (Duncan et al.,
1999). Interestingly, however, immature cells such as neural stem cells
are not as vulnerable to the rubella virus and do not typically apoptose.
88                              DEFINING AUTISM


     Instead, mature neurons are targeted leading to a major loss in the
     adult cell population (Adamo et al., 2008).

     Cytomegalovirus
     Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is in the same family as herpesvirus and is an
     extremely common virus spread through contact with bodily fluids.
     Most adults have antibodies, which are indicative of prior infection.
     Infected adults are typically asymptomatic, however those with
     weakened immune systems can develop pneumonia, hepatitis, or even
     encephalitis. Pregnant mothers can also pass on the infection to their
     unborn infants, especially if the mother contracts the virus for the
     first time during her pregnancy (Kenneson & Cannon, 2007). It is
     estimated that about 40,000 children are born each year with CMV
     infection, making it the leading cause of birth defects and childhood
     disabilities in the United States. For perspective, about 4000 children
     are born each year with Down syndrome and about 5000 are born
     with fetal alcohol syndrome (Cheeran, Lokensard, & Schleiss, 2009).
          According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
     about 80 percent of infants born with congenital CMV infection
     never develop signs of the condition. About 10 percent of infants
     are, however, symptomatic at birth and present with prematurity,
     microcephaly, small birth size, seizures, or organ problems and are
     likely to develop neurological issues such as intellectual disability or
     developmental delay. Another 10 percent of infants who are initially
     asymptomatic may eventually develop complications within the first
     several years of life, displaying signs of gradual hearing loss, vision
     loss, or other forms of neurological impairment (Centers for Disease
     Control and Prevention, 2010).
          Brain malformations are very common in infants who have
     symptomatic CMV infection at birth. These malformations include
     dilation of the ventricles of the brain, calcifications, delayed white
     matter development, cysts, and various other structural abnormalities,
     like polymicrogyria (many small gyri) and lissencephaly (smooth
     brain) (Cheeran et al., 2009).
          As early as the 1970s, case reports linking autism and congenital
     CMV infection began to trickle in (Stubbs, 1978). Unfortunately, the
     largest study to date investigating these links has contained only seven
     children, two (29%) of whom fulfilled criteria for autism (Yamashita
     et al., 2003). With so few data it is impossible to estimate comorbidity
     between the two conditions.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                89


     However, in a more recent retrospective study, a group of scientists
looked at rates of CMV infection in blood spot samples and dried
umbilical cords from autistic children and found that while active
infection was more common in the autism group compared to controls,
it was significantly lower (7%) than the earlier study (Sakamoto
et al., 2015). However, prior to analysis these scientists weeded out
individuals with autism who also had other neurological problems like
intellectual disability, the latter which is a hallmark of congenital CMV.
It is therefore possible they underestimated prenatal CMV infection in
autism. More research is desperately needed in this area in order to
determine true prevalence rates.

Herpes
Like cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus is part of the Herpesviridae
family. When symptomatic, it can cause sores in the affected areas.
During these times, affected persons are the most contagious and can
spread the illness through exchange of bodily fluids like saliva. In very
rare instances, the herpes simplex virus is able to travel into the brain
via either the trigeminal or olfactory nerves, leading to a severe form
of encephalitis that can involve fever, headaches, seizures, vomiting,
long‑lasting neurological impairment, and often death. For those
who survive the encephalitis, the neurological impairment tends to
be permanent.
    Although until now we have primarily discussed prenatal infections,
postnatal infection by the herpes simplex virus is also a risk factor for
autism, although occurrences are rare given the rarity of herpesviral
encephalitis. However, the most unusual aspect concerning this form
of encephalitis is the age at which it can trigger autistic regression:
though regression typically occurs between ages one to three in autism
(with rare exceptions in the case of childhood disintegrative disorder),
onset of herpesviral encephalitis-related autism has been reported
as late as age 31 (Ghaziuddin, Al-Khouri, & Ghaziuddin, 2002;
Ghaziuddin et al., 1992; Gillberg, 1986; Gillberg, 1991). Sometimes
the autism symptoms remain after recovery, at other times they are
transient and resolve with the infection.
    The severity with which herpes attacks the brain is dramatic,
leading to significant impairment when it occurs. Though the
case studies are few, there are other examples of encephalitis-
induced autism, such as enterovirus encephalitis, autoimmune-induced
encephalitis, and other unidentified types of infection or autoimmunity
90                                DEFINING AUTISM


     (DeLong, Bean, & Brown, 1981; Marques et al., 2014; Scott et al.,
     2014). Encephalitis, therefore, appears to be a significant risk factor
     in the development of regressive autism.


     Regression following illness or inoculation
     In the previous sections, we discussed how prenatal infections can
     affect the developing infant; and how postnatal infections and other
     immune challenges, as we saw with herpesviral encephalitis, may
     trigger an underlying vulnerability and lead to temporary regression
     or a permanent loss in skills already acquired. But what are the
     mechanisms that potentially cause this skill loss? Below we will see
     how both epilepsy and infection can trigger regression.


     Fever-inducing factors, epilepsy, and the brain
     Autism and epilepsy appear to have much in common. Although most
     cases of autistic regression do not seem to have an underlying epileptic
     cause, epilepsy during this critical time period can and does cause
     regressive symptoms in select cases. A notable example frequently
     cited is Landau-Kleffner syndrome, in which the child experiences
     language regression at the onset of his or her epilepsy. Other examples
     include Dravet syndrome, Angelman syndrome, Phelan-McDermid
     syndrome, and various types of early infantile and childhood-onset
     encephalopathies (Carvill et al., 2013; McIntosh et al., 2010; Nava
     et al., 2014; Soorya et al., 2013; Valente et al., 2006).
          While the link between illness and seizure onset is not well
     understood, it is believed that infection, especially that associated
     with fever, may increase excitability of neurons in the brain. This can
     lower the threshold for seizures, which, in a person with a previously
     unrecognized vulnerability, dramatically increases seizure risk.
          One potential mechanism of action is the pro-inflammatory molecule
     interleukin 1 (IL-1). Originally, scientists believed that fever-associated
     seizures were due to the fever itself. However, further research has
     shown that fever-reducers such as Tylenol fail to protect against these
     kinds of seizures (Uhari et al., 1995). Instead, it is believed that while
     IL-1 promotes fever, it also targets the brain increasing the excitability of
     neurons (Vezzani et al., 2011). Further work is still needed to determine
        The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility               91


whether IL-1 is the primary culprit in fever-related seizures or whether
other factors play intermediate roles.
     But how do seizures cause regression? Seizures can significantly
damage neurons and the cells around them. On the extreme end,
severe or chronic seizures can trigger cell death through cytotoxicity.
Cytotoxicity is when excessive neuronal activity occurs, leading to
huge influxes of calcium and cell damage or even death. On the less
severe end, seizures can alter patterns of neural connections, which
may lead to an “unwiring” of skills a person has already learned.
     A related example with which you may already be familiar is
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Patients with chronic, medication-
resistant depression may be good candidates for ECT. At one time in
history, however, ECT electrodes were placed on the temples of the
brain overlying the temporal lobes. This tended to result in a loss of
memory with chronic ECT use because the parts of the brain that
control memory consolidation are located in these regions. Nowadays,
however, the electrodes are placed towards the front of the brain,
reducing the extent of memory loss.

Illness, inoculation, and cellular stress
Here we will only give a brief introduction to the potential links
between immune system challenges, cell stress, and regression, as
these will be covered more extensively in the next chapter. For now,
however, we will address some of the basics.
     When a cell is under stress, whether this is due to an infection,
an inoculation, poor nutrition, or a genetic predisposition, it tends to
react in a predictable fashion.
     During an infection the immune system must rapidly mobilize
to deal with the invading pathogen. In order to do so, the cells of
the immune system increase their protein production to deal with the
acute demand. Whenever a new protein has been produced, it has to
go through a system of checks in an organelle of the cell called the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The ER verifies that the protein has been
produced and is folded properly. In the world of biochemistry, shape
helps determines function; and if a protein isn’t shaped properly, it
cannot function in the way it was intended to. So the ER has molecular
chaperones that keep an eye out for misfolded proteins and try to
reshape them when necessary. If a protein cannot be refolded, it is sent
92                               DEFINING AUTISM


     to the trash, otherwise known as endoplasmic reticulum-associated
     degradation.
          When a cell rapidly increases its protein production to deal,
     for instance, with an acute infection or even an inoculation, it must
     also increase its number of chaperones in order to accommodate the
     increased demands (Nakaya et al., 2011). They are part of what is
     known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), which also includes
     a sudden decrease in the production of proteins in order to ease the
     overall flow (Janssens, Pulendran, & Lambrecht, 2014). In an individual
     who has an impaired or already overworked UPR prior to additional
     environmental stressors, when they are subjected to an infection this
     can increase the risk that the UPR will become overwhelmed and will
     be unable to handle the demand. In such instances, a set of events
     is triggered that can lead to a stagnation in growth, a regression in
     growth, or even programmed cell death. This general scenario appears
     to be the primary mechanism for neurodegenerative conditions
     like Alzheimer’s.
          Although research is still early, features of autistic regression are
     similar to some features of neurodegeneration and may share overlap
     in their underlying mechanisms (Kern et al., 2013). (For more on this
     topic, see the next chapter.)
          Many of the infections linked with autism risk are viral in nature,
     as opposed to bacterial or parasitic. Viruses in particular may place
     greater stress on the ER (He, 2006). Not only does infection disturb
     the homeostasis of the ER, the cell becomes a protein-producing
     machine for the invading virus, adding an additional load onto an
     already strained system. Cell death, on the one hand, may help to slow
     spread of the infection, but if this occurs in cells in the developing
     brain the results can be catastrophic.


     HORMONES
     The immune system is intricately intertwined with the endocrine
     system, which produces the body’s hormones. One practical reason
     for this is that organisms that use internal fertilization during sexual
     reproduction must have an immune system that knows not to attack the
     developing embryo. This is in contrast to organisms that use external
     fertilization, such as when the egg and sperm are both released into
     the water in a process known as “spawning.”
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                  93


     One of the major ways the immune system knows not to attack
a developing embryo is through hormones. Hormones change during
pregnancy and effectively tell the immune system to “calm down.”
Without this crosstalk, internal fertilization would have likely never
evolved, dramatically limiting species’ evolutionary potential.
     But the immune and endocrine systems have continued to refine
their crosstalk over hundreds of millions of years, and now cooperate to
create biological variability well outside the bounds of pregnancy. In fact,
the immune system alters its behavior based simply on sex, irrespective
of pregnancy. Consider for instance the high rates of autoimmune
disorders in women compared to men (Cooper & Stroehla, 2003). The
immune system also alters its activity in response to the presence of
stress hormones, such as adrenalin and cortisol, both of which help
to suppress inflammation. Unfortunately, chronic stress can leave us
vulnerable to infection, which is why we are more likely to get sick
following an intense bout of psychological or physical stress. Together,
immune and endocrine crosstalk affects organ development and tissue
repair, from the birth of the central nervous system to a sprained ankle,
and these systems complement each other in numerous ways.


The metabolic syndrome
Given our modern sedentary lifestyles, with refrigerators, cupboards,
and vending machines packed full of easily accessible and ready-to-
eat high-carbohydrate, high-calorie foods, the obesity epidemic is not
shocking. Most of us—perhaps the women amongst us especially—
have an inkling that carbohydrates are particularly addictive.
Scientists have recently found that the production of insulin, which
is part of the lock-and-key mechanism that allows sugars to be taken
into the cell, actually amplifies the release of dopamine in areas of
the brain that are involved in addiction (Stouffer et al., 2015). This
suggests that carbohydrates have an addictive effect, whose intensity
may vary by person and even by sex.
    Along with obesity come other problems, such as high cholesterol
or triglyceride levels, high blood pressure, and insulin resistance or
type 2 diabetes. Together these symptoms are known as the metabolic
syndrome. With the presence of this syndrome comes increased risk for
heart disease and stroke, both of which make the top five list of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s leading causes of death.
94                                DEFINING AUTISM


          Unfortunately with obesity also comes increased inflammation—
     fat cells being an active participant in helping to generate numerous
     cytokines. In addition, macrophages, a type of immune cell, are also
     drawn to regions of increased fat tissue, compounding the burgeoning
     problem (Lee & Pratley, 2005). Molecules released by macrophages
     subsequently disrupt insulin signaling within peripheral tissues and
     within the pancreas itself, targeting β-cells that produce insulin. This
     can lead to both insulin resistance, in which insulin fails to activate the
     insulin receptor, and insulin deficiency (Esser et al., 2014).
          Scientists have also found that diabetes and pre-diabetes (insulin
     resistance) can lead to conditions such as polycystic ovarian syndrome
     (PCOS) in women. One of the hallmarks of PCOS is a buildup of
     small cysts on the ovaries. PCOS is the primary cause of female
     infertility, leading to changes in the menstrual cycle and sometimes an
     excessive production of male hormones. This latter feature often leads
     to a condition known as hirsutism, which is an unwanted and often
     embarrassing male-pattern of hair growth, such as the development of
     thicker facial hair or chest hair.
          Recent research has revealed that PCOS, or its underlying metabolic
     cause, is a significant risk factor in the development of autism. One
     study found that children of PCOS mothers were considerably more
     likely to develop autism than those without (Kosidou et al., 2016).
     What is more, children born to PCOS mothers who were also obese
     had even higher risk of developing autism, suggesting the severity of
     these metabolic conditions may also affect the extent of risk.
          There have also been a number of studies looking at maternal
     diabetes and the risk of autism. Most studies suggest that type 2
     diabetes increases autism risk at a rate similar to that seen with PCOS
     (Xu et al., 2015). Given the relationship between PCOS and diabetes
     2/insulin resistance in women, it is possible the similar rates of risk
     are reflective of the same underlying metabolic syndrome, although
     further research is still needed to address this possibility.


     Endocrine disruptors
     I [ELC] had a professor back in graduate school who was a renowned
     biochemist that studied estrogens, their mimics, and how they relate
     to breast cancer. He was a quirky professor from Texas who had a
     penchant for wine tasting and whose attire always reminded me of
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                95


a rough-hewn paleontologist who had spent years in deserts scraping
away grit from old fossil bones. In characteristic fashion, he introduced
his endocrinology course to us by saying, “Even though my wife hates
it when I say this, the estrogen receptor is highly promiscuous !” We
would all chuckle, and then he’d explain.
    The estrogen receptor is in fact highly promiscuous. Compared to
most receptors in our bodies, the estrogen receptor not only accepts
estrogen as its ligand (a kind of lock-and-key system), but other
chemicals can also mimic or block the receptor. These substances are
called xenoestrogens, “xeno-” meaning “foreign, other, or different in
origin.” They include plant-derived phytoestrogens, fungally derived
mycoestrogens, and a growing list of other man-made estrogen
mimics, such as various plastics or pesticides. (Keep in mind that
animal products such as meats, eggs, and dairy also contain naturally
occurring estrogens. If you are eating food, you are consuming estrogen
in some form.)
    But other hormone receptors, such as those for androgen, are
also at the mercy of these foreign steroid mimics, which can have
decidedly unwanted effects on health and development. Man-made
xenosteroids, like certain plastics, are of particular concern as they are
recent additions to our daily environment, ones that degrade extremely
slowly and to which our bodies may not have had time to adapt. In
the next several sections, we will review different endocrine disruptors
and how exposures to them may increase the risk of autism, all via
directly or indirectly activating or antagonizing hormone receptors.

Heavy metal exposure
A condition known as “itai-itai” or “ouch-ouch” disease afflicted post-
menopausal women in a small region along the Jintsu River in Japan
in the 1940s. Many of these women became bedridden with horribly
painful skeletal deformations. Eventually it was discovered that they
had been poisoned by high levels of the metal cadmium, which had
been deposited into the local river by an upstream mining company
(Safe, 2003). These women were exposed to extremely high levels of
the metal—however, even low levels have been shown to affect the
structure and function of reproductive organs in animals.
    A growing body of evidence suggests that specific heavy metals
are estrogenic, with the ability to stimulate molecular pathways
downstream of the estrogen receptor (Choe et al., 2003). Termed
96                               DEFINING AUTISM


     metalloestrogens, many of these metals interact directly with the estrogen
     receptor, exhibiting potency greater than even native estrogen itself
     (Safe, 2003).
         Using animal models, scientists have found that prenatal exposure
     to various heavy metals, such as cadmium, lead, arsenic, manganese,
     and mercury, causes various behavioral abnormalities reminiscent of
     autism. For instance, manganese and arsenic result in repetitive and
     impulsive behaviors in mice, while lead results in distinctive social
     abnormalities (Hill et al., 2015). These same exposures lead to changes
     in epigenetic patterning (and therefore expression) of the CHD7 gene,
     whose mutation in humans results in CHARGE syndrome, a genetic
     condition in which approximately 60 percent of those affected also
     have autism (Smith et al., 2005).
         Other studies have found an increased prevalence of autism
     births proximal to high environmental concentrations of heavy-
     metal pollutants, such as near various industrial facilities (Dickerson
     et al., 2015, 2016). Heavy metals also seem to preferentially target
     the expression of many autism susceptibility genes, suggesting that
     they, along with other endocrine disruptors, may significantly increase
     autism risk by targeting nuclear hormone receptors that help to
     regulate the activity of these genes (Carter & Blizard, 2016).
         Heavy metals, like many of the other xenoestrogens we will be
     reviewing here, also have effects on the immune system, which is one
     of the key reasons these metals are so often used as adjuvants and
     immunostimulants in vaccinations. Unfortunately, this has also led to
     adjuvant-induced autoimmunity in vulnerable subpopulations, which
     scientists are actively working to understand and, hopefully, prevent in
     future (see Guimarães et al., 2015, for a review).

     Pesticides
     Pesticides are specifically designed to kill living organisms. We have
     developed them to target insects, plants, and fungi, making things like
     modern large-scale agriculture possible. We are subsequently exposed
     to many of these pesticides in foods, household products, home
     gardens, drift from agriculture, and public health sprayings. In 1961,
     our agricultural use was about 0.49 kilograms per hectare (kg/ha).
     However, by 2004, it had quadrupled to 2kg/ha, suggesting our
     levels of exposure have increased dramatically within a comparatively
     short period of time (reviewed in Mnif et al., 2011).
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                     97


     Most insecticides are designed to target the nervous system,
disrupting activities of various receptors and molecular pathways
(Casida, 2009). However, because humans and other animals also have
these same pathways and receptors, insecticides have the potential to
be poisonous to us when ingested.
     By contrast, the mechanisms of action of herbicides and fungicides
are often plant- or fungus-specific, targeting pathways involved
in photosynthesis, carotenoid synthesis,8 plant-essential amino
acids, and fungal steroids (Casida, 2009). Unfortunately, overuse of
pesticides is quickly leading to strains of insects, plants, and fungi that
are becoming resistant to whole families of pest-control agents.
     Aside from their direct action on the nervous system and synthesis
pathways, approximately one hundred pesticides are also recognized
as endocrine disruptors, although some of these, such as DDT, are
no longer in use but are still present in the environment (Mnif et al.,
2011). As with other endocrine disruptors we have reviewed, most
of these pesticides interact with hormone receptors, mimicking the
activity of native steroids. Some pesticides may also antagonize or
block hormone receptors—and others still may disrupt the synthesis,
transportation, and elimination of the hormones themselves.
     Some pesticides also appear to cause extensive oxidative stress
upon exposure, which in turn triggers inflammation (Astiz, de Alaniz,
& Marra, 2012). Airborne pesticides can also cause significant
inflammation within the lungs, which can damage the bronchial
epithelium, leading to symptoms of asthma. This kind of exposure
also sensitizes the lungs to other allergens and irritants, worsening the
asthmatic condition (Hernández, Parrón, & Alarcón, 2011).
     Several studies have raised questions concerning the risk of autism
relative to the severity of pesticide exposures. Although organochlorine
pesticides like DDT were finally phased out of use in the United
States in 2016 (the last-standing pesticide was Endosulfan, whose
phase‑out began in 2010), many of these pesticides are still present in
the environment and may have effects on prenatal development. For
instance, women pregnant and living within 500 meters of spray sites
in California were several times more likely to have had a child with
autism than mothers who lived in regions with the lowest exposure
rates (Roberts et al., 2007). It is uncertain, however, whether increased

8	 The production of red, yellow, and orange pigments in fruits and vegetables.
98                                DEFINING AUTISM


     risk is due to organochlorine pesticides’ effects on GABA receptors9 in
     the central nervous system, their ability to disrupt the endocrine system,
     or a combination of both— although GABA receptor antagonism is a
     more likely cause (Guillette, 2000).

     Flame retardants
     Prenatal exposure to organophosphates, which are used in building
     materials, textiles, and electronic appliances due to their low
     flammability, have been linked with increased risk for autism (Shelton
     et al., 2014). Excess levels lead to overstimulation of acetylcholine
     receptors in the nervous system. During acute poisoning, extreme
     anxiety, convulsions, depressed respiration, and coma can occur
     (Eddleston et al., 2008). However, organophosphates can also disrupt
     functions of several types of estrogen receptors, the androgen receptor,
     and the glucocorticoid receptor (Kojima et al., 2013).
          Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) and brominated flame retardants
     also have significant endocrine disrupting properties (Connor et al.,
     1997; Legler & Brouwer, 2003). In addition, it seems that certain
     brominated flame retardants trigger an inflammatory response in some
     autistic children, an effect that is largely unseen in controls (Ashwood
     et al., 2009). This suggests that in vulnerable subpopulations, chemical
     flame retardants may have immunostimulatory properties, and that
     exposure could play a role both in the etiology and presentation of
     these conditions.


     MATERNAL STRESS
     Pregnancy is stressful. Parenthood can be stressful. But what if stress
     is a risk factor for autism? Some studies suggest that mothers who are
     unusually stressed during pregnancy are more likely to have children
     with autism (Ronald, Pennell, & Whitehouse, 2010). The greatest risk
     period seems to span the end of the second and beginning of the third
     trimesters of pregnancy, for reasons not well understood (Beversdorf
     et al., 2005).



     9	 “GABA receptors” are receptors for the inhibitory neurotransmitter, gamma-
        aminobutyric acid (GABA), which helps to regulate and refine excitatory
        neuron transmission.
         The Roles Environment Plays in Autism Susceptibility                 99


    However, anxiety disorders are often reported in mothers of those
on the autism spectrum, as part of the broader autism phenotype (BAP)
(Murphy et al., 2000; Piven et al., 1991). What if anxiety is merely a risk
factor in the same way that BAP in parents is a risk factor for autism in
their children? A reflection of heredity rather than a cause of autism.
    While heredity certainly predisposes towards autism, animal
models have also shown that the stress of the mother affects brain
development in her offspring. For instance, pregnant mice who
are exposed to regular restraint stress tend to have offspring with
microscopic brain malformations (Stevens et al., 2013). In particular,
newborn inhibitory neurons are especially vulnerable to this stress.
    Inhibitory neurons are born in a region of the brain known as the
ganglionic eminence and then must travel, sometimes up to several
inches, to their final resting places. Maternal stress, depending on the
severity, length, and frequency of exposure, disrupts these migrations,
preventing inhibitory neurons from reaching their final destinations.
This may ultimately result in an excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in the
brain, reminiscent of the prevailing theory in autism (Casanova et al.,
2003; Rubenstein & Merzenich, 2003). Interestingly, many genetic
mouse models of autism show similar deficits in which populations of
inhibitory cells are reduced in number within the cortex. This suggests
that prenatal stress exposure can mimic the detrimental effects of
autism risk genes to some extent.


CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
We have covered considerable ground in this chapter, reviewing
probable and potential environmental risk factors in the development
of autism. We have focused on chemical exposures, such as prescription
medications and non-prescription drugs like alcohol, and various
endocrine disruptors, such as heavy metals, pesticides, and flame
retardants. We have also reviewed nutrition, concerning deprivation of
key nutritional elements like folic acid. And we have highlighted how
infections, metabolic and hormone disorders like diabetes, and even
maternal stress can promote autism risk.
    The clinical implications in this chapter are probably the simplest
of any of the chapters in this book. In the case of environmental
factors that increase risk for autism, the best treatment is prevention
by avoiding those substances. Or in the case of nutritional deficiencies,
100                                DEFINING AUTISM


      supplementation is strongly advised. But in the case of infections,
      prevention is decidedly more challenging. Although there are currently
      no vaccinations for cytomegalovirus, rubella and herpes vaccines are
      available and it is suggested women get vaccinated prior to pregnancy,
      provided they don’t have a history of adverse reactions to inoculation
      or are otherwise immunologically compromised. In those instances,
      women are advised instead to work with their doctors to draw up
      plans tailored to their individual needs.
          Hormonal disorders are also difficult to prevent, especially when
      there is a hereditary component to many of the conditions associated
      with the metabolic syndrome. However, a balanced healthy diet and
      adequate exercise may help significantly to alleviate the severity of these
      syndromes, decreasing overall risk for autism in the child. Medications
      targeted to the treatment of diabetes 2/pre-diabetes and PCOS may
      also be beneficial, such as synthetic insulin and progesterone. In
      addition, for those who experience a component of food addiction
      with their weight problems, Wellbutrin may be a useful tool in aiding
      weight loss prior to pregnancy by targeting the reward systems of the
      brain and reducing cravings (Billes, Sinnayah, & Cowley, 2014).
          In spite of our best efforts, however, there will always be risk
      factors present in our environments, some of which are inherent to
      our modern-day lifestyles (e.g. the ingestion of plastics) and others
      that are simply an unavoidable fact of life (e.g. infections). Yet there
      are lifestyle changes we can make that may significantly reduce risk
      for autism and that come from simple awareness of these risk factors.
          Autism will always have a major hereditary component—more in
      some cases than in others. But there are also cases of autism that contain
      a clear environmental exigency, such as fetal valproate syndrome and
      congenital rubella. This shows us that although autism is a highly
      heritable condition, it is not the result of simple heredity.
                           Chapter Five


       REGRESSION IN AUTISM



WHAT IS REGRESSION?
As the following quote from a parent illustrates, observations of
regression have been intricately linked with autism from the time of its
designation in 1943, when Leo Kanner first published the case histories
of eleven children with “autistic disturbances of affective contact.”
    I can’t be sure just when he stopped the imitation of word sounds. It
    seems that he has gone backward mentally gradually for the last two
    years. We have thought that it was because he did not disclose what
    was in his head, that it was there all right. Now that he is making
    so many sounds, it is disconcerting because it is now evident that he
    can’t talk. Before, I thought he could if he only would. He gave the
    impression of silent wisdom to me.
                    (Report from a parent, Kanner, 1943, pp. 225–226)
Although Kanner didn’t belabor the point of skills loss in these
children, such cases did later inspire him to propose the division of
autism into innate and regressive types. Interestingly, as a reflection
of concepts of the time, he felt that regressive autism had more in
common with childhood schizophrenia than autism proper, although
nowadays we would differentiate schizophrenia by the presence of
psychosis rather than the looser definitions that characterized the
condition in the mid-20th century.
    Regression in autism usually occurs within the second year of life
and can happen either abruptly or gradually. The child experiences
a stall in skill acquisition or a measurable loss, which usually occurs
in the areas of language and/or social skills, although there are


                                  101
102                               DEFINING AUTISM


      occasional reports of the loss of adaptive and fine motor skills too.
      Eventually, the regressive period is succeeded by the regaining of
      skills, although some children may never fully regain the skills they
      had originally lost (reviewed by Baird et al., 2008).
           Anywhere between 10 and 50 percent of children who are
      diagnosed with autism have experienced regression, with the most
      common reported figure hovering around one third of cases (Barger,
      Campbell, & McDonough, 2013; Kurita, 1985). These estimates
      probably vary because of differences in criteria used to define
      “regression.” Some studies for instance restrict it to extreme forms of
      language loss, while others include subtler plateaus in language and
      social skills. However, estimates also probably vary modestly because
      the primary means for estimating regression in autism is generally
      parental report. While parents know their children better than anyone
      else, especially in those early formative years, human memory isn’t
      infallible—particularly if the regressive losses are subtle and the parent
      is answering a questionnaire ten years after the fact.
           Interestingly, regression appears to be largely unique to autism.
      When comparing autistic toddlers with other children with various
      intellectual disabilities, scientists have found that language regression
      occurs in a large minority of those with autism, however, it is rarely
      seen in those with intellectual disability alone (Baird et al., 2008).
           Regression also occurs in some syndromic forms of autism, such
      as Rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD)
      (once known as Heller’s syndrome), both of which had previously
      been grouped under the DSM-IV’s autism umbrella, Pervasive
      Developmental Disorders, but have since been removed.
           Most cases of Rett syndrome are linked with loss-of-function
      mutations involving the MECP2 gene, which produces a protein
      that binds to methylated DNA and helps to control gene expression.
      Almost all cases of Rett syndrome are female due to the lethality of
      the X-linked mutation in males. When it does occur in males, this is
      typically due to something known as somatic mosaicism, in which the
      mutation is not present in all cells of the body but only a portion
      because it has occurred later in embryonic development rather than in
      the originating germ cells.
           Prior to regression, the majority of girls with Rett’s present with
      some type of developmental delay. Regression onset then usually
                         Regression in Autism                               103


occurs between 12 and 18 months of age, with an average of 16 months,
which is slightly younger than the average 20 months in idiopathic
autism (Baird et al., 2008; Millichap, 2002). The most prominent
feature in Rett syndrome is a decline in motor skills involving the
hands, often leading to the characteristic “hand wringing” gesture
for which Rett’s is known. However, large numbers of girls also lose
language, nonverbal communication and play, and other motor skills
(Millichap, 2002).
     Unlike Rett syndrome, CDD is a poorly studied and understood
condition that occurs more often in boys. Currently, there are no
known mutations associated with CDD, which may reflect the state of
our science but may also suggest that, like autism, it is a heterogeneous
disorder. Occasional case studies reporting the occurrence of autism
and CDD in the same families suggests the latter may also be true
(Zwaigenbaum et al., 2000).
     CDD is typified by normal or near-normal development until at
least two years of age, after which a regression period begins that may
be characterized by high levels of anxiety, followed by a severe decline
in skills and the onset of autistic symptomology (Volkmar & Rutter,
1995). Often, language is lost and rarely regained, as are self-help
skills such as appropriate use of the toilet or feeding. Unfortunately,
most children with CDD develop intellectual disability and are severely
affected for the rest of their lives.


A call for research
Despite the prevalence of regressive symptoms in idiopathic autism,
there has been little definitive research concerning clinical outcomes, a
fact that is both shocking and sad, suggesting the research community
and relevant funding agencies have a particular blind spot for this
harrowing issue. What few studies that have been performed generally
agree that individuals who experience regression are more likely to
be diagnosed with intellectual disability than their non-regressive
counterparts, they are more likely to experience sleep problems, they
tend to develop language more slowly, and their autistic symptoms are
more severe (Barger & Campbell, 2014). These studies, however,
are preliminary and more research is desperately needed.
104                                DEFINING AUTISM


      ARE AUTISTIC CHILDREN “NORMAL”
      BEFORE THEY REGRESS?
      According to Sally Rogers (2004), autism onset can be grouped into
      three basic categories:
          •	 Congenital autism—the child’s development is atypical
             from birth.
          •	 Developmental plateau—the child plateaus in developmental
             milestones in the second year of life.
          •	 Regression—the child loses skills within the second year
             of life.
      Despite this tidy categorization, recent research suggests that
      symptoms of regression occur in a majority of those with autism
      and that regression itself falls on a spectrum of timing and severity
      (Thurm et al., 2014). Though sudden late loss of speech may represent
      the more severe end of the regressive spectrum and is most obvious
      and alarming to parents and pediatricians, subtler earlier losses in first
      words, responding to his or her name, interactive smiling, babbling,
      and eye contact may represent the lighter end of that same spectrum.
      Regression may instead be a symptom of autism rather than that
      of a subset of autism. As the writer Emily Willingham (2014) so
      poignantly asks:
          … is regression a universal feature of being autistic but one that
          occurs at different ages in different people, like walking or puberty
          or executive function skills? Or are there really truly distinct entities
          characterized by different onset timing?


      Does autistic regression exist?
      I [ELC] remember while I was in graduate school, a well-known
      researcher visited my university and gave a lecture. In it, he showed
      a video of an autistic child. The video was a compilation of shorts
      taken from different periods in the young boy’s life. The first video
      was of a boy sitting in a high chair, looking at the videographer who
      presumably was his mom or dad, and he was smiling and giggling,
      looking up at the parent. He was completely engaged. But in the
      next video, he wasn’t smiling anymore. He was sitting in his high
                          Regression in Autism                               105


chair staring off, barely reacting to his name or all the cajoling the
parent tried, quiet and almost completely enclosed within himself. I
remember how shocked I was to see so drastic a change in such a short
period of time in the boy’s behaviors—there was such a severe shift in
his personality. It was as if he were an entirely different child.
     I remember thinking then and there, “Regression is real.” Before
seeing that video, I had waved it away saying, “They were atypical to
begin with, the parents just didn’t see it.” And that may well be true
to some extent. But subtle clues don’t negate the magnitude of such an
extreme shift in how the brain functions. When that loss occurs, it can
truly be a monumental one.
     Emily Werner and Geraldine Dawson published a landmark
study in 2005 that proved to the research community the existence
of regression in autism (Werner & Dawson, 2005). The researchers
collected videotapes of children’s first and second birthdays who had
been diagnosed with autistic regression, early-onset autism, or were
typically developing. They then used blinded raters (psychologists
who do not know the diagnoses of the children) to code the behaviors
in the videotapes collected from the two different time points. They
found that although children with regressive autism did display some
subtle deficits in self-regulation suggestive of some kind of biological
vulnerability, their social and communication development did not
significantly differ from that of the typically developing kids. In spite
of previous assumptions, in no way did these children fulfill the criteria
for autism prior to regression.
     This sudden regression is illustrated well in a quote from Ron
Suskind (2004), a father of an autistic boy who experienced regression
at the late age of three:
    In our first year in Washington, our son disappeared. … Just shy of
    his 3rd birthday, an engaged, chatty child, full of typical speech— “I
    love you,” “Where are my Ninja Turtles?” “Let’s get ice cream!”—
    fell silent. He cried, inconsolably. Didn’t sleep. Wouldn’t make eye
    contact. His only word was “juice.”
                                                         (Suskind, 2014)


WHAT CAUSES REGRESSION?
Some types of autism have variable hereditary patterns. For instance,
parents of multiplex (multiple incidence) families often exhibit a
106                                DEFINING AUTISM


      broader autism phenotype (BAP) themselves. Meanwhile, parents who
      have only a single child with autism (simplex cases) are considerably
      less likely to have autistic features than multiplex parents (Davison
      et al., 2014). (See Chapter 8.)
           Although it may seem surprising given the typical developmental
      trajectory of children with autistic regression, typified by near-normal
      development followed by sudden or gradual regression, parents of
      these children have similar rates of BAP as parents of children without
      regression (Lainhart et al., 2002). This suggests that regressive autism,
      on the whole, is as heritable as non-regressive autism.
           We know that regressive autism may be partly inherited, but what
      causes it? One of the more popular current theories is the over-pruning
      hypothesis of autistic regression (Thomas et al., 2016). According to this
      hypothesis, the loss of neural connectivity leading to regression is due
      to overactive pruning of those connections, which normally starts to
      occur in toddlerhood and extends throughout childhood. Interestingly,
      the neurocomputational model used to test this hypothesis does seem
      to support the idea that regression is due to a loss of connectivity—
      however, it never proves what causes that loss (e.g. pruning), merely
      that there is indeed a loss.
           In addition, as we covered in Chapter 2, the brain in autism is not
      typified by generalized underconnectivity and in fact has a wealth of
      short-range connective fibers. Instead, the larger longer fibers of the
      brain are preferentially depleted.
           Many cases of autistic regression seem to be linked with some kind
      of stressor or stimulus, as we will review in the following sections.
      Sometimes, that stressor is the onset of an epileptic disorder. Other times,
      that stimulus is an illness. Sometimes, it is both. Therefore, we instead
      suggest that regression is the result of excessive or chronic cellular
      stress, leading to the rapid or slow loss of synapses, neural connections,
      and sometimes cells themselves. This loss leads to a subsequent loss in
      skills, such as language and socialization. Sometimes these skills may
      be regained, especially in smaller neural networks in which regrowth
      is possible. However, long-range connections are unlikely ever to be
      recovered owing to the need for specific developmental cues that lead
      connections along their arduous paths and that are no longer present
      in the postnatal brain. In this way, coordination amongst disparate
      functional modules of the brain will be permanently impaired.
                        Regression in Autism                              107


Inflammation and autoimmunity
Links between autism and immune dysregulation have been studied
for decades, though the mechanisms of risk are likely complex. Early
research identified high prevalence rates of autoimmune disorders
in family members of those with autism (Money et al., 1971).
Meanwhile, more recent studies have found that mothers, autistic
children, and their siblings produce higher numbers of autoantibodies
to components of the human brain such as the myelin sheath that
covers and insulates axons (Singer et al., 2006). As we discussed in
the previous chapter, if mothers produce brain autoantibodies there is
concern these molecules may target the developing embryonic brain,
increasing autism risk (Warren et al., 1990).
    Although it is possible this is a related yet incidental finding of
familial immune dysfunction, we do know that maternal IgG antibodies
are capable of passing both the placental and fetal blood–brain
barriers, suggesting autoantibodies are able to access the embryonic
brain (Wills et al., 2007). Primate studies have shown that prenatal
exposure to autoantibodies derived from mothers of autistic children
leads to socially abnormal behavior in monkeys (Bauman et al., 2013).
    Meanwhile, immune factors known as cytokines offer another
potential avenue for autism risk. Although these molecules were
identified because of their associations with the immune system,
they are involved in many other processes, including general growth
and development. For instance, a number of studies have shown that
maternal infection during key periods of pregnancy is significantly
linked with increased autism risk (reviewed by Matelski & Van de
Water, 2016). During such times as infection, specific cytokines are in
abundance, aiding in fever induction and the stimulation of important
immune cells that help to fight off the invading pathogen.
    While many of these cytokines do not seem to cross the placental
barrier in considerable numbers, a few, such as interleukin-6 (IL‑6),
are able to make it through the placenta (Zaretsky et al., 2004).
Interestingly, IL-6 has been shown to alter neuron development both
during prenatal development as well as in the adult hippocampus
in which neuron production occurs lifelong (Taga & Fukuda, 2005;
Vallières et al., 2002). It has been discovered that IL-6 is also vital
for the stimulation of certain immune cells involved in triggering
autoimmunity within the brain (Samoilova et al., 1998). And so this
108                                DEFINING AUTISM


      cytokine may not only alter brain development by stimulating
      brain  cells directly but by priming local immune cells to attack
      the  brain should sufficient autoantibodies be present. This suggests
      that maternal autoimmunity and infection act in tandem.
           In adult forms of dementia, researchers have long recognized
      the roles that inflammation plays in these various diseases. Although
      inflammation is a beneficial reaction to an injurious or infectious insult,
      excessive or prolonged stimulation of inflammatory pathways can lead
      to major neuronal damage. Likewise, modest inflammatory stimulation
      superimposed on an already weakened condition (i.e. a predisposition)
      may also lead to brain damage (reviewed in Cunningham, 2013).
           There are indications that a similar process occurs in autistic
      regression. Scientists have found, for instance, that autistic children
      who regress are more likely than their non-regressive counterparts
      to have experienced fever-related illness in the six months prior to
      their regression. In addition, families of those with regressive autism
      are also more likely to have autoimmune disorders (33% vs. 12%),
      suggesting there is a heritable immune component underlying risk for
      regression (Scott et al., 2017).
           A clear-cut case of immune-related regression can be seen in the
      genetic condition known as Dravet syndrome. Dravet’s is a form
      of epileptic encephalopathy that is almost always accompanied
      by intellectual disability. In addition, about 25 percent of Dravet
      syndrome patients have autism (Li et al., 2011). Children with Dravet’s
      typically experience somewhat normal development until the toddler
      years when they begin to have seizures, which subsequently lead to a
      regression in psychomotor skills.
           Surprisingly, in a large subset of these children seizure onset is
      closely preceded by either illness or vaccination, suggesting that
      immune challenge is a key factor in triggering regression in this
      condition (McIntosh et al., 2010). It should be noted that the clinical
      outcomes of children with seizure onset following immunological
      challenge are not significantly different from those who experience
      no obvious environmental triggers prior to epilepsy onset, with the
      exception that the former group develops seizures on average a few
      months earlier (McIntosh et al., 2010). This may be good reason to
      consider altered vaccine schedules for such a vulnerable population.
      However, it also comes with the realization that for most children it
                          Regression in Autism                              109


may only slightly postpone the inevitable. Yet since most individuals
with Dravet syndrome harbor mutations in the sodium channel gene
SCN1A, clinical genotyping in infancy may offer parents and doctors
that choice as well as foreknowledge of the condition.


Oxidation
You have probably heard the term, antioxidant, in the context of
nutrition. We know that many plant-based foods, such as berries or
spices like turmeric, tend to be very high in antioxidants. Meanwhile,
animal-based foods such as eggs or fish are generally fairly low
(Carlsen et al., 2010).
    Antioxidants help to neutralize free radicals, which are molecules
that have unpaired electrons, a state that leaves them chemically
unstable. In the case of biological systems, we are usually most
interested in oxygen-based free radicals known as reactive oxygen species
(ROS), because they are a common metabolic byproduct. In order
to stabilize, free radicals steal electrons from other molecules around
them. However, in doing so, whatever molecule has been robbed of its
electron typically becomes a free radical itself. This can lead to a long
chain of electron thievery, leaving misshapen and poorly functioning
molecules in its wake (Figure 5.1).




     Figure 5.1: A free radical, known for stealing electrons from other
         molecules thereby creating a chain reaction of free radicals
110                               DEFINING AUTISM


      Thankfully, the body has a supply of antioxidants that shuts down this
      runaway reaction, either by donating electrons or degrading the free
      radical itself. As we mentioned, many of the antioxidants in our bodies
      are derived from the foods we eat, most of which come from fruits and
      vegetables and include the vitamins, A, C, and E. However, we also
      produce antioxidants ourselves, such as glutathione.
          In fact, the sleep hormone, melatonin, is a very powerful
      antioxidant (Reiter, 1996). Melatonin is mostly produced by the brain’s
      pineal gland, beginning in the evening hours and reaching its peak at
      night. Melatonin production is suppressed by exposure to the blue
      end of the light spectrum, which is why sleep specialists recommend
      the use of dim yellow lighting in the evenings to mimic effects of
      the setting sun. Unfortunately, energy-saver bulbs popular in today’s
      houses tend to produce a lot of white light (including blue light),
      suppressing melatonin and potentially complicating sleep problems.
      For these reasons, sleep specialists recommend avoiding the use of
      bright unnatural lighting in later evening.

      Mitochondrial dysfunction and reactive oxygen species
      Mitochondria (Figure 5.2) are the powerhouses of the cell. Through a
      complex string of events known as respiration, mitochondria take energy
      from the food we eat (glucose) and the air we breathe (oxygen) and
      produce the basic energy currency of the cell, adenosine triphosphate
      (ATP). The cell can then take that ATP and break off phosphate
      molecules to produce an energy catalyst for processes within the cell.
            ROS are major byproducts of cellular respiration. Whenever the
      cell is overrun by ROS, this leads to oxidative stress, which in turn
      triggers a host of reactions termed the “oxidative response.” In bacteria,
      this response is fairly straightforward because they tend to live in
      environments with fluctuating oxygen levels, therefore the presence
      of ROS can trigger an oxidative response. Eukaryotic organisms such
      as ourselves, however, live in environments in which oxygen levels are
      fairly constant. Therefore, the presence of ROS is not necessarily an
      indicator of impending damage but a normal part of respiration. Thus,
      it is the quantity of ROS, not their presence, that leads to a complicated
      cascade of events in mammalian cells that help not only to deal with
      increased ROS load but also repair damage to cellular structures. In
      some cases, when extreme, these processes may even lead to apoptosis
      or cell suicide (Martindale & Holbrook, 2002).
                             Regression in Autism                                     111




    Figure 5.2: Diagram of a mitochondrion, the powerhouse of the cell
 Most cells have many mitochondria, which produce ATP as a form of cellular energy.
                      (Reproduced from Wikimedia Commons)

How oxidative stress damages the brain
Because we need oxygen to survive, our cells are constantly bombar­
ded by ROS, leading to perpetual damage of DNA, proteins, and
fats that must constantly be repaired. However, ROS are not only
byproducts of cellular metabolism, they also play important roles in
various molecular pathways, such as inflammation, and therefore we
are always in a precarious state of balance between having too much
and too little ROS. For this reason, it is important to eat antioxidant-
rich foods but also not to take excessive amounts of antioxidant
supplements because we need some ROS for our cells to work properly
(reviewed in Halliwell, 2006).
    Unfortunately, as we age the ability of our tissues to repair
themselves  following ROS damage declines. The brain is especially
vulnerable to oxidative damage because of its high oxygen demands,
requiring about 20 percent of the body’s basal consumption. In
addition, many things can go wrong in the brain, leading either
to increases in ROS or impairments in the mechanisms that deal
with them.
    For instance, excessive availability of the excitatory neurotransmitter
glutamate can lead to cell damage or death through “excitotoxicity”
or the excessive stimulation of neurons. Oxidative stress can damage
neurons, leading to a release of glutamate into the surrounding space,
112                                DEFINING AUTISM


      triggering an excitotoxic domino effect. This excitotoxic storm is one
      of the major risks following stroke, as cellular damage from the initial
      ischemic attack releases excessive glutamate into the extracellular space,
      overstimulating intact neurons surrounding the original lesion. For this
      reason, stroke patients need to be treated rapidly with medications that
      prevent the spread of excitotoxicity to surrounding areas of the brain
      (Hazell, 2007).
          Metal ions, such as iron, can also act as free radicals and are released
      into the extracellular space following neuronal damage. Unfortunately,
      because the brain has little iron-binding capacity, the presence of these
      metal ions can persist for long periods of time, triggering oxidative
      stress until they are finally flushed from the cerebral spinal fluid.
          The fatty membranes of neurons are also common targets of
      oxidation in a process known as “lipid peroxidation.” When lipid
      peroxidation occurs in excess, the membranes of cells can become
      more permeable, allowing in toxic agents that damage the cell. The
      functions of ion channels and receptors within the membrane can also
      be irreparably damaged, ultimately leading to cell death and many of
      the processes mentioned above (e.g. release of glutamate and metal
      ions into the surrounding tissue).
          In contrast to much of the rest of the body, antioxidant defense
      is comparatively modest in the brain (Halliwell, 2001). Considering
      the communicative roles some ROS play in brain function, such
      as nitric oxide, this may well be an adaptive evolutionary strategy.
      However, with such benefits come risks, notably increased oxidative
      stress over time.
          With time also come mutations. Not only do we house DNA within
      the nucleus of our cells, our mitochondria contain their own small
      genomes, which, like nuclear DNA, acquire more and more mutations
      over time that affect the mitochondria’s capacity to function properly.
      Because mitochondria produce a lot of ROS, many of these mutations
      are likely the result of oxidative damage. Impaired mitochondrial
      function can lead to excessive ROS production and further oxidative
      stress, resulting in a positive feedback loop.
          Finally, inflammation also drives oxidative stress. Astrocytes, a type
      of glial (helper) cell, produce inflammatory molecules such as various
      cytokines. These cytokines then stimulate immune cells within the
      brain known as microglia. These microglia release more inflamma­
      tory molecules, as well as various ROS, as part of their inflammatory
                          Regression in Autism                                113


response (Duncan & Heales, 2005; reviewed in Halliwell, 2006).
If this type of reaction occurs chronically, it can lead to progressive
damage as seen in some types of neurodegenerative disorders.
    There are many more ways in which ROS can damage the cell.
However, the majority of these mechanisms feed into one another,
leading to progressive damage regardless of which pathway is
stimulated first. All of these processes together lead to aging of
the brain and, in those vulnerable individuals, play pivotal roles in the
development of senile neurodegeneration. However, as we’ll discuss in
the next section, they may play important roles in neurodevelopmental
conditions such as autism as well.

Mitochondrial diseases and dysfunction in autism
More than three decades ago, scientists realized that the mitochondrion,
the powerhouse of the cell, may play a role in autism susceptibility
(reviewed in Frye & Rossignol, 2011). We now know that mitochondrial
disorders occur in roughly 7 percent of the autism spectrum population,
making it one of the most common “rare” disorders associated with the
condition (Oliveira et al., 2005). However, the vast majority of autistic
people may have some kind of mitochondrial dysfunction, although
in most cases it may be a secondary symptom of another underlying
problem, such as chronic inflammation (Giulivi et al., 2010). It is likely,
however, that mitochondria play an integral role in positive feedback
loops that maintain this chronicity.
    Individuals with certain types of mitochondrial disease are
sometimes vulnerable to immunological challenges, such as illness and
vaccination, which can trigger cognitive decline, a feature reminiscent
of regression in autism (Verity et al., 2009). Surprisingly, about
60  percent of children with both autism and mitochondrial disease
experience regression, rates that are twice as high as those seen in the
rest of the spectrum (Shoffner et al., 2010; Weissman et al., 2008).
What is more, the vast majority (~70%) of these children regress
following a fever-related illness or vaccination. However, vaccination
does not appear to trigger regression in the absence of fever, suggesting
the extent of immunological challenge is the driving factor in disease
onset in these cases (Shoffner et al., 2010).
    Although true mitochondrial disorders occur in only a small
minority of those with autism, genetics research suggests that many
autistic children have mitochondrial mutation profiles similar to
114                              DEFINING AUTISM


      those seen in older people, indicating significant oxidative damage.
      Interestingly, the same patterns of oxidative damage are seen in
      mothers of children with autism, suggesting that damage to the DNA
      may occur maternally and is then inherited by the child (Napoli,
      Wong, & Giulivi, 2013).
          Because of the mitochondrial DNA’s proximity to the production
      of ROS within the mitochondrion, it is more vulnerable to the
      effects of free radicals than nuclear DNA. And because we all inherit
      our mothers’ mitochondria, we preferentially inherit our mothers’
      mitochondrial mutations. Thankfully, women seem to produce far
      more antioxidants and fewer ROS than males, leading to a four-fold
      decrease in the comparative rates of mutation, an effect that is largely
      mediated by the hormone estrogen (Borrás et al., 2003).
          Undoubtedly, evolution has taken great strides to protect the
      mitochondria from harmful mutations in women because of their
      carrier status, whereas men are effectively mitochondrial dead ends.
      Unfortunately, this also means that males are more vulnerable to the
      effects of oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction, which has
      been suggested as a reason why men on average do not live as long
      as women. In addition, if mitochondrial dysfunction plays a role in
      autism susceptibility, it may also help explain the higher prevalence
      in males.


      Epilepsy and regression
      Seizures, oxidation, and inflammation
      As we discussed earlier, the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate
      is toxic to the brain in excessive quantities. It is therefore easy to
      understand how poorly controlled epilepsy can lead to significant
      loss in neural connections and cells via excitotoxicity. Oxidative
      stress seems to play an important role, not in seizure control, but in
      triggering damage following seizures, which can be prevented with the
      application of antioxidants like vitamin E and glutathione (Frantseva
      et al., 2000).
           Inflammation and oxidation are interdependent systems, both
      of which have been implicated in conditions such as diabetes, high
      blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, neurodegeneration, cancer,
      and even aging (Biswas, 2016; Salzano et al., 2014). Not only can
      inflammatory cells trigger a free-radical cascade, oxidation can also
                          Regression in Autism                               115


increase inflammatory signaling. It is believed, however, that although
oxidative stress may increase morbidity in some of the conditions
mentioned, chronic inflammation is a major driving factor in these
disease states (reviewed in Biswas, 2016).
    There is increasing evidence that inflammation may be a crucial
element in some cases of epilepsy as well (reviewed in Vezzani
et al., 2011). For instance, steroidal and anti-inflammatory drugs are
useful in the treatment of some drug-resistant cases, suggesting an
immunological underpinning. In addition, febrile seizures and some
types of genetic epilepsies, such as Dravet syndrome, are triggered by
an immune challenge most typically associated with fever. And finally,
epilepsy associates with certain autoimmune disorders for reasons not
entirely clear (Vincent & Crino, 2011). In fact, a portion of epilepsies
may be autoimmune in origin. Although prevalence is currently
unknown, early research suggests that roughly 10–25 percent of cases
of the idiopathic condition may be autoimmune disorders and could be
treated with immunotherapies in addition to anti-seizure medications
(Dubey et al., 2016).

Epilepsy-induced regression
The relationship between epilepsy and autistic regression is a
complicated one. There are specific syndromes, collectively known
as epileptic encephalopathies, whose onset is associated with seizure
activity, leading to a decline in cognition, language, and/or behavior
that sometimes resembles autism. Perhaps the most classic example
is Landau-Kleffner syndrome, a condition typified by language
impairment (aphasia) that is the result of seizures in and around the
language centers of the brain.
    Once scientists realized that seizures could trigger the regressive
symptoms of Landau-Kleffner syndrome (a syndromic form of autism),
general interest in autistic regression and epilepsy exploded. Since that
time, numerous studies have been performed investigating potential
links between the onset of seizures and regression. However, it seems
that for almost every study that finds a link between the two, there
is another study reporting no association (Baird et al., 2006, 2008;
Canitano, Luchetti, & Zapella, 2005; Giannotti et al., 2008; Kumar,
Devendran, & Devendran, 2017; Oslejsková et al., 2008). This
suggests that some of the variability in results may be due to differences
in methodology, such as the definition of “regression” used by these
116                               DEFINING AUTISM


      studies, the ways in which epileptiform (seizure-like) activity was
      classed, and what types of patient pools were utilized (e.g. age, IQ ).
          We know that uncontrolled seizure activity can lead to cell
      damage and death. In addition, current research suggests that autistic
      regression is due to a loss in neural connectivity. We also know that
      Landau-Kleffner syndrome exhibits language regression at the onset
      of seizure activity—a regression that is not dissimilar to the language
      loss seen in idiopathic autism. All of these data suggest that epilepsy
      may trigger regression in some cases of autism. However, scientists
      are not yet agreed whether that is the case and, if so, how prevalent
      it might be. Further research will hopefully continue to address these
      important questions, potentially offering better treatment interventions
      that ameliorate skill loss and aid in recovery.


      Infantile proteopathy
      A proteopathy is a condition in which the structure of particular proteins
      is altered, placing stress on the workings of the cell and increasing the
      likelihood of cell damage and death. Classic examples include some
      of the adult and senile neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer’s
      disease, with its characteristic Tau protein neurofibrillary tangles and
      plaques; Lewy body dementia, with its Lewy bodies composed of
      misfolded α-synuclein protein; and Huntington’s disease, in which
      proteins produced from the mutated HTT gene contain expanded
      numbers of the amino acid glutamine, which ultimately leads to
      misfolding and aggregation of the Huntingtin protein.
           Scientists are learning, however, that not all forms of proteopathy
      are limited to adulthood and senility. Some in fact occur in infancy
      and early childhood and may be responsible for specific forms of
      intellectual disability and developmental delay. Unlike their adult
      counterparts, infantile proteopathies do not necessarily appear like
      classic cases of progressive neurodegeneration. Instead, given the
      remarkable biological plasticity of youth, infantile proteopathies may
      not result in obvious tissue damage as in senile dementia, but they
      may impair cell function in other ways by affecting cell development
      (Sarnat & Flores-Sarnat, 2015).
           One form of infantile proteopathy—specifically a tauopathy— with
      overlap with autism is tuberous sclerosis (TSC), a condition that is due
      to mutations in either the TSC1 or TSC2 genes. Tuberous sclerosis
                         Regression in Autism                              117


occurs in no more than five in 10,000 births and is characterized by
benign tumor-like growths in organs such as the skin, brain, heart,
kidneys, and lungs. TSC2 mutations are the most common mutation in
tuberous sclerosis, composing more than two thirds of that population
(Numis et al., 2011). Autism occurs in about 40 percent of people
with the condition, although infrequently in the presence of TSC1
mutations (~3%). Instead, TSC2 mutations are responsible for about
75 percent of cases of tuberous sclerosis-associated autism.
     Down syndrome, like tuberous sclerosis, also shares significant
comorbidity with autism, occurring in about 13 percent of that
population (Capone et al., 2005). Unfortunately, many people with
Down’s go on to develop Alzheimer’s disease, with prevalence rates at
40 percent by ages 50–59 (Holland et al., 1998). Down’s, like classic
Alzheimer’s, is a tauopathy exhibiting evidence of neurofibrillary
tangles and plaques in the brains of those affected (Cárdenas
et al., 2012).
     Regression is a characteristically autistic phenomenon, regardless
of whether it occurs alongside idiopathic autism or is associated with
a genetic syndrome. In Down syndrome with comorbid autism, an
astounding 50 percent of children experience a loss in language or
sociocommunicative skills (Castillo et al., 2008). Different from
idiopathic autism, however, regression in these patients is more likely
to occur in late childhood. But similar to the idiopathic form, many
individuals with Down’s do not develop autism until the time of their
regression (Worley et al., 2015).
     Because Down syndrome is considered partly a tauopathy, it begs
the question whether autistic regression in Down’s is the result of Tau
pathology. Likewise, it also suggests other forms of autistic regression
could be the result of infantile proteopathies.


Crossroads at the synapse
Although there has been much emphasis placed on the presence of
neurofibrillary tangles and plaques in the advanced Alzheimer’s brain,
the root of dementia seems to lie within the synapse (reviewed in
Krüger & Mandelkow, 2016). Scientists have found, for instance,
that laboratory mice that express a mutated form of Tau begin to
have memory impairment when their synapses begin to fail, which
occurs long before they develop neurofibrillary tangles and plaques
118                              DEFINING AUTISM


      (Van der  Jeugd et al., 2012). To confuse matters more, tangles and
      plaques are also common findings in the brains of elderly who don’t
      experience dementia, suggesting that in low numbers they are part of a
      normal continuum of aging (Arnold et al., 2013; Mufson et al., 2016).
           Alpha-synuclein, a protein known for its involvement in Lewy
      body dementia, is also responsible for some rarer forms of Alzheimer’s
      disease, Parkinson’s, and even multiple system atrophy (Cheng,
      Vivacqua, & Yu, 2011). Although its cellular functions are not well
      understood, it is richly expressed at the synapse and may be involved
      in neurotransmitter release and synaptic plasticity. Similarly, the
      Huntingtin protein, responsible for Huntington’s disease, is also
      enriched within the synapse, and the early pathology of the disease
      is characterized by synaptic impairment long before symptoms have
      become manifest (Milnerwood & Raymond, 2010). All of this work
      suggests that the synapse is a major seat of vulnerability in some
      neurodegenerative diseases (Wishart, Parson, & Gillingwater, 2006).
           While it is too early to say whether autistic regression is an
      infantile form of non-progressive neurodegeneration, they do have
      some features in common, most strikingly a distinctive loss of already
      acquired skills. Recent research suggests that autistic children who
      harbor mutations in synaptic genes are more likely to experience
      regression than children with other types of mutations (Goin-Kochel
      et  al., 2017). In addition, our own recent work indicates that a
      significant number of different forms of syndromic autism share certain
      clinical neurodegenerative-like features, such as evidence of brain
      atrophy and psychomotor dysfunction like spasticity and hyperreflexia
      (overactive reflexes) (Casanova et al., 2017a). Together, this work
      provides early yet tantalizing evidence that synaptic dysfunction may
      be a key player in autistic regression. Meanwhile, epilepsies, illness/
      autoimmunity, proteopathies, and oxidative stress can all converge on
      a vulnerable synapse, tipping a precariously balanced scale.


      CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
      The best way to reduce the occurrence of autistic regression is to
      identify the underlying causes and develop treatments that target these
      specific vulnerabilities. Ideally, diagnosis occurs before regression
      happens—however, some metabolic and immune disorders may not be
      apparent until regression onset. Yet even after the onset of regression,
                         Regression in Autism                               119


treatment application may alleviate regression severity and ultimately
alter its course, providing better outcomes for these children. In order
to do this, however, we require more research into the etiologies of
regression and the heritable factors that underlie the conditions.
     Some types of regression follow certain triggers. Often this
comes in the form of an immune challenge, regardless of whether
the underlying disorder is metabolic or immunological. In addition,
this immune challenge may either be an exposure to wild-type illness
(as it occurs in nature) or to inoculation. This unfortunately poses a
particular conundrum for healthcare professionals and parents alike,
because vaccinations protect against wild-type infections but may
also trigger onset of illness. Therefore, to go unvaccinated poses
similar risks to those associated with inoculation. What to do in such
circumstances?
     Although research is poor in this area, there are some possible
avenues of further study. First, we know that altered vaccination
schedules affect the rates of adverse reactions (e.g. Englund et al.,
2005; Nolan et al., 2002). Combining vaccines modestly increases the
likelihood of adverse reaction, suggesting that dividing vaccinations
may reduce risk, while also providing sufficient protection against
wild-type illness and maintaining overall heard immunity.
     In addition, should an infant or child experience a significant
adverse reaction to a particular vaccination, doctors and parents should
discuss whether the vaccine schedule needs to be further altered to
reduce the likelihood of reactivity or even discontinued altogether.
This should be on a case-by-case basis. Before vaccination, doctors
also need to discuss with parents the differences between what is
considered a significant adverse reaction and a typical reaction, as many
vaccines trigger a mild immune response that is normally of little risk
to the child.
     Finally, it is important that doctors take a full history not only
of the child but also of first-degree relatives. Familial symptoms and
disorders indicative of immune and/or metabolic dysregulation should
be suspect, informing the doctor that an altered vaccination schedule
may be wise. In taking these precautions, we may reduce the number
of serious adverse reactions children have following inoculation
while also protecting them and others around them from significant,
potentially life-threatening, illness.
                             Chapter Six


         AUTISM AND EPILEPSY


THE HISTORY OF EPILEPSY
According to the Grecian physician, Hippocrates, now known as the
Father of Medicine, the cause of epilepsy lay within the brain.
    The popular superstition, the magicians, the wizards and charlatans,
    who named the disease sacred, are being attacked. The alleged divine
    character is only a shelter for ignorance and fraudulent practices.
    The assumption of the gods being its cause reveals those people
    as fundamentally impious, for the gods do not make men’s bodies
    unclean, as the magicians would have them believe. … [Epilepsy’s]
    cause lies in the brain, the releasing factors of the seizures are cold,
    sun and winds which change the consistency of the brain. Therefore,
    epilepsy can and must be treated not by magic, but by diet and drugs.
                                     (Hippocrates, cited in Temkin, 1994)
Prior to his work, the ancient Greeks believed that illness, regardless
of its symptoms, was a disease that was sent by the gods or spirits
and affected the entirety of the human body. Epilepsy, in particular,
was a sickness of the soul and could be attributed to different deities
depending upon the specific epileptic symptoms present. The ill would,
therefore, often seek sanctuary and healing from magico-religious
physics who set up practice near mountains or natural springs, and
who in turn would provide proper diet, exercise, and baths for the
sick—often for considerable fees (Haykin, 2012).
    The Hippocratic Corpus, which is a collection of medical texts
associated with the works and teachings of Hippocrates, established
a rational scientific interpretation of “the sacred illness” as a sickness
of the body with a specific, natural cause. For this rational approach,



                                    121
122                               DEFINING AUTISM


      Hippocrates’ work was lauded by the post-Socratic Greek philosophers
      Plato and Aristotle.
            Unfortunately, with the rise of early Christianity in Europe
      came a revival of superstitions surrounding epilepsy. No longer was
      the epileptic deemed afflicted by the gods, as in Grecian times—the
      epileptic was instead possessed by the Devil or demons. And worse
      still, people with epilepsy were viewed as demonically contagious,
      resulting in considerable stigmatization and their isolation. As one
      15th-century professor instructed, “Therefore, neither talk nor bathe
      with him, since by their mere breath they infect people” (cited in
      Temkin, 1945). Sadly, even by the 18th century, epilepsy was still
      viewed as infectious.
            With the rise of the philosophical Enlightenment in Europe
      in the  17th century, philosopher-intellectuals slowly sought to
      demystify  the roots of human illness, including epilepsy, seeking
      explanation in natural rather than spiritual causes. In particular, the
      works of William Cullen (1710–1790) and Samuel-Auguste Tissot
      (1728–1797) set the stage for the future of epileptology, in which
      they outlined and studied several types of epilepsy (Magiorkinis
      et al., 2014).
            The study of epilepsy spread throughout France, driven by
      notable physicians such as Maisonneuve, Calmeil, and Esquirol.
      However, it was  work by the English neurologist John Hughlings
      Jackson (Figure 6.1) that turned the tides of epileptology and gave the
      condition its first true physiologic definition. He wrote: “Epilepsy is
      the name for occasional, sudden, excessive, rapid and local discharges
      of grey matter” (reviewed in Magiorkinis et al., 2014, p. 2). As you will
      see, this definition is very similar to the one we utilize today.
            Much of Jackson’s work was based on lesion studies, in which
      localized damage or some other type of structural disturbance to the
      brain correlated with the seat of epilepsy.
            Around the same time, two German physicians, Gustav Fritsch and
      Eduard Hitzig, performed a series of experiments that laid additional
      groundwork for Jackson’s theory. The two German physicians
      experimented on dogs—utilizing methods that are thankfully
      considered unethical by today’s research standards—by exposing the
      brain and stimulating it with current from a battery. This led to muscle
      contractions that varied depending upon the motor region of the brain
      that was stimulated. In addition, it also showed that symptoms of a
                          Autism and Epilepsy                               123


seizure could be replicated through excitatory stimulation, lending
credence to Jackson’s theory of gray matter “discharges” (Magiorkinis
et al., 2014).




        Figure 6.1: The famous neurologist John Hughlings Jackson,
              who is well known for his research on epilepsy

Work on epilepsy exploded in the 20th century and was buoyed by the
invention and application of the electroencephalogram (EEG), which
is used to measure the electrical activity of the brain and is a common
tool for diagnosis today. This work was furthered by the invention of
the patch-clamp technique by Erwin Neher in 1944 that allowed the
research scientist to measure the flow of current through individual
ion channels of the cell, leading to the discovery of the importance
of calcium channels in epileptogenesis. Neher and his colleague Bert
Sakmann went on to win the Nobel Prize in 1992 for their invention
(Magiorkinis et al., 2014).


Epilepsy in autism
Epilepsy in autism became a focus of scientific inquiry during the 1960s.
By the 1970s, several observations further linked the two conditions,
notably the frequent co-occurrence of infantile spasms and autism,
as well as high occurrence rates of autism in the condition known as
tuberous sclerosis, which itself is known for high rates of epilepsy
comorbidity (reviewed by Tuchmann, Moshé, & Rapin, 2009).
124                                DEFINING AUTISM


          Since that time, scientists have argued over the frequency of
      epilepsy  in autism, reporting as little as 5 percent to as much as
      46  percent of sample populations (Spence & Schneider, 2009).
      However, this also does not include a large minority of people with
      autism who exhibit abnormal EEG activity but have no apparent
      behavioral manifestations of seizures. Therefore, the number of people
      on the autism spectrum with EEG abnormalities, with or without
      epilepsy, is substantial.
          Of interest, there are ongoing trials to treat individuals with
      autism and abnormal EEG activity who do not manifest apparent
      seizures, in the hope that some of the severity of autism may also
      be alleviated. This work will further help to address where precisely
      the dividing line lies between autism and epilepsy, whether they are
      simply different but overlapping conditions or, at least in some cases,
      may be one and the same.


      WHAT IS A SEIZURE?
      Most readers are probably somewhat familiar with the terms “epilepsy”
      and “seizure.” Thankfully, at least one benefit of our television- and
      internet-oriented culture is that people tend to have a greater familiarity
      with medicalese, even if we are that much more likely to misuse it.
      As the 18th-century poet Alexander Pope wrote, “A little learning is
      a dangerous thing.” But in this case, these types of resources have
      familiarized us with a variety of medical terms, including “epilepsy.”
          According to the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE),
      a worldwide group of physicians and health professionals vested in
      the study and treatment of epilepsy, an epileptic seizure is defined as,
      “a transient occurrence of signs and/or symptoms due to abnormal
      excessive and synchronous neuronal activity in the brain” (reviewed in
      Engel, 2013, p. 4). (We will delve later into what is meant by the terms
      “excessive” and “synchronous.”)
          Subclinical or non-convulsive seizures can also occur even
      when there is no recognizable change in cognition or behavior but
      the EEG shows abnormal brainwave activity, consisting of spike or
      spike‑and‑wave discharges (Tuchman et al., 2009). Therefore, the
      person may look and feel relatively normal but their brainwave activity
      in fact indicates that they are having a seizure. In contrast, there are
      also times when changes to cognition or behaviors characteristic of
                           Autism and Epilepsy                                125


seizure activity happen but are not accompanied by an abnormal EEG
reading. In these instances, a diagnosis is made primarily based on
the symptom history of the patient. Still, this can sometimes be a
challenge since some types of seizures may have ambiguous symptom
presentations, such as absence seizures that can be mistaken simply for
inattentiveness or day-dreaming.
    When looked at over a lifetime, about 4 percent of people will
develop epilepsy (Epilepsy Foundation, 2016). However, this includes
not only people who experience epilepsy because of developmental
factors such as we’ll be discussing in further sections, it also includes
people who develop seizures following head trauma, like traumatic
brain injury or stroke, or as a result of brain tumors, certain types
of dementia, and infections of the central nervous system (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016b; Kotila & Waltimo, 1992;
Palop & Mucke, 2009; Yeh et al., 2013). In addition, about 5 percent of
infants and young toddlers will experience a fever-associated (febrile)
seizure during illness or following vaccination, although this in itself is
not considered epilepsy (Stafstrom, 2002). After experiencing a febrile
seizure, the majority of children will not have any further seizures nor
go on to develop epilepsy proper.
    When we look at the prevalence of seizure history in children at
any one time, we see that epilepsy occurs in about 1 percent of the
population, which is roughly the occurrence rate of autism (1–2%)
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016a, 2016b). Autism
and epilepsy co-occur with one another about 30 percent of the time,
respectively (reviewed in Tuchman et al., 2009). Meanwhile, an additional
20 percent of individuals with autism have epileptic-like discharges but
do not appear to show any identifiable cognitive or behavioral changes
during these discharges (Hughes & Melyn, 2005). In autistic children
without intellectual disability, rates of epilepsy hover around 8 percent
(Amiet et  al., 2008; McCue et al., 2016). Rates of epilepsy further
increase with the onset of puberty (Rossi, Posar, & Parmeggiani, 2000).
    Although there is a significant relationship between autism and
epilepsy, the major risk factor for developing epilepsy in autism is
the presence of intellectual disability. Individuals with both autism
and intellectual disability are almost seven times more likely to
experience seizures, affecting about 40 percent of that subpopulation.
Meanwhile, autistic individuals without intellectual disability or other
epilepsy‑related familial risk factors, such as close relatives with a
126                                DEFINING AUTISM


      seizure disorder, share a similar rate of epilepsy to that seen in children
      with language impairment without autism (reviewed in Tuchman
      et  al., 2009). While that rate is dramatically lower than we see in
      autism with intellectual disability, it is still six times more common
      than in the general population.


      What’s going on in the brain during a seizure?
      During a seizure, excitatory neurons begin to fire excessively.
      Inhibitory cells that normally work to control these excitatory
      neurons, for various reasons, are not able to keep up with the demand
      and the excitation grows out of control. During that time, more and
      more neurons are recruited into the seizure, causing them to fire
      synchronously and allowing the seizure activity to spread to adjacent
      or distant-but-connected regions. Sometimes, as in the case of a
      generalized seizure, this activity can spread throughout the brain and
      cause a loss of consciousness and major muscle contractions (grand
      mal). The excessive, synchronous firing gives rise to the classic “spike
      and wave” formation seen on an EEG during a seizure, in which the
      term “spike” refers to the high-amplitude excitatory waveform (the
      hills), meanwhile, “waves” are the small valleys in between the spikes
      that reflect a brief drop in excitation (Engel, 2013) (Figure 6.2).




                  Figure 6.2: Diagram of the spike and wave formation
                       that is often seen on EEG during a seizure


      BRAIN MALFORMATIONS UNDERLYING EPILEPSY
      It is usually easier to understand what triggers epilepsy when seizures
      follow an acute event, like head trauma or a tumor. However, when
      it comes to identifying the roots of developmental or “idiopathic”
      epilepsy the picture becomes decidedly muddier.
                            Autism and Epilepsy                             127


     About 15 percent of childhood epilepsies are refractory (resistant)
to pharmacologic treatment. In approximately 40 percent of those
cases, clinicians are able to identify some type of cortical malformation
(Barkovich, Dobyns, & Guerrini, 2015). Of these treatment-resistant
malformations, focal cortical dysplasias (FCD), a type of lesion we
discussed in Chapter 2, make up a significant portion.
     To refresh the reader’s memory, FCD refers to a localized area
of  the brain in which neurons have failed to develop properly
(Figure  6.3). In some cases, this may be due to failed migration of
neurons, but in other instances neurons may have reached their targets
but do not have the structural features common to those regions. They
may, for instance, appear disoriented in space, failing to form the
neat rows and columns of excitatory cells characteristic of cortex. In
other cases, some excitatory cells may have grown abnormally large,
known as hypertrophic neurons. In addition, these areas may contain
unusually high numbers of glial (helper) cells and activated microglia,
probably a reflection of the stress that epileptic activity puts on these
regions, requiring help to repair frequent cellular damage (Sisodiya
et al., 2009).




        Figure 6.3: Example of a focal cortical dysplasia (arrow) in a
         portion of epileptic tissue that has been surgically removed
                       (Image based on Sisodiya et al., 2009)


On brain imaging, FCD often appear as thickening or thinning of
focal regions of the cortex. In addition, there is sometimes visible
blurring of the junction between the gray and white matter, suggesting
some cells have failed to fully migrate into the gray matter region
(Kabat & Król, 2012). Interestingly, both of these features have been
128                               DEFINING AUTISM


      found in autism, once again highlighting the causal overlap in autism
      and epilepsy (Avino & Hutsler, 2010; Casanova, El-Baz, et al., 2013).
           The brain is such a complex organ. Although it has considerable
      potential for plasticity and healing, it is also sensitive to changes in
      developmental timing. Scientists have theorized that the evolution
      of the human brain is not only rooted in the aggregation of larger
      quantities of gray matter, but in small variations in developmental
      timing between brain regions (Deacon, 2000). These differences
      in timing are known as “heterochronies” or literally “other time.”
      Most typically, the term “heterochrony” is used by biologists when
      comparing organ structures across different species, such as the
      difference in forearm structure between a mouse and a bat. However,
      it is also a useful term to describe how small changes in the timing of
      developmental events can lead to premature or delayed maturation
      of cells that results in structural and functional changes in that brain
      region. It is likely that regional mis-timing is a significant risk factor
      in the development of FCD, whether it is the result of gene mutations
      or environmental factors.


      THE GENETICS OF EPILEPSY
      Similar to autism, the genetic risk for epilepsy is complex. In
      the early days of epilepsy research, scientists focused mainly on
      “channelopathies.” Channelopathies are caused by impaired function
      in ion channels within the central nervous system and are typically
      either genetic or autoimmune in origin. Ions are charged particles,
      such as sodium and calcium, which are major players in cellular
      communication. Ion channels regulate the flow of charged ions
      into and out of the cell, dynamically changing the capacity of that
      cell to communicate with other cells. For instance, there are several
      sodium channel subunit genes that, when mutated, are strong risk
      factors for both epilepsy and autism, including SCN1A, SCN1B, and
      SCN2A. SCN1A mutations often lead to a condition known as Dravet
      syndrome, which we discussed in the previous chapter, in which the
      mutation results in a persistent inward current of sodium into the cell,
      leading to excessive excitation. Mutations in subunits of the GABA
      receptor, which are important inhibitory mechanisms of the cell, are
      also involved both in epilepsy and autism (reviewed in Poduri &
      Lowenstein, 2011).
                          Autism and Epilepsy                               129


    Scientists initially over-focused on channelopathies, primarily
because the pathology in relation to epilepsy was more easily
understood. Ion channels help control excitation; therefore, in a
condition that is partly defined by excess excitation, defects in those
channels are a logical place to look.
    Although scientists initially focused on channelopathies because
of their simplicity, we now realize that channelopathies are only the
tip of the iceberg and make up a minority of heritable epilepsies.
There are epilepsies, for instance, that are associated with mutations in
genes that control early development. These conditions typically have
congenital malformations as an associated feature. Meanwhile, there
are other forms of epilepsy that do not tend to have related physical
features but have neurodegenerative traits such as mild brain atrophy
or various movement disorders. These conditions tend to be associated
with mutations in genes that code for aspects of cell metabolism, like
enzyme functions and transporter activities (Casanova et al., 2016).
Similar to autism, epilepsies associated with rare gene mutations
tend to have cognitive impairment. On the other hand, we know
comparatively little about genetic risk for epilepsy in those with
average or above-average IQs.
    Epilepsy researchers have also come to realize that some heritable
forms of epilepsy are associated with copy number variants (CNV) that
comprise multiple genes. As with many CNVs in autism, there is no
single major effect gene but multiple genes acting in concert (reviewed
in Poduri & Lowenstein, 2011).


LOW SEIZURE THRESHOLD IN THE
INFANT AND TODDLER BRAIN
Infant and toddler brains are hyper-excitable compared with the adult
brain and are particularly prone to seizure activity. Ironically, they
have a lower risk for developing epilepsy because the brain at this
young age is poorly interconnected compared with older children
and adults, which prevents seizures from spreading and gaining a
pathological foothold. In contrast, the older child and adult brains
are comparatively less excitable, but if seizures do occur they spread
more easily into adjacent regions, triggering the classic cognitive and
behavioral manifestations of epilepsy.
130                               DEFINING AUTISM


           One major reason for the early excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in
      the infant and toddler brain is the delayed development of cells known
      as “glia.” These cells act as supports for neurons—however, in the
      young brain they are still underdeveloped. In the mature brain, glial
      cells known as astrocytes help to recycle neurotransmitters after they
      are released by neurons, which effectively limits the amount of time
      the neurotransmitters can stimulate a neighboring cell. In the young
      brain, since astrocytes are not recycling neurotransmitters as efficiently
      because of their immaturity, the neurons they are supporting may get
      over-excited, leading to seizure-like activity (Engel, 2013). With time,
      as astrocytes continue to mature, the threshold for seizure activity
      gradually rises, decreasing the likelihood of seizures.
           Another cell, the inhibitory interneuron, is also important for
      seizure propensity. Even though inhibitory neurons are some of the first
      cells to be produced in the embryonic brain, their synapses are some
      of the last to mature after birth (Engel, 2013). This invariably leads
      to lopsided excitation–inhibition between the excitatory pyramidal
      neurons and the inhibitory interneurons, with the former overpowering
      the latter. As we see with the immature astrocytes, immature inhibitory
      synapses decrease the threshold for seizure activity in the infant/
      toddler brain making excessive excitation all the more likely. However,
      as we described earlier, serious seizures are less likely to occur because
      the connections between neurons are also relatively immature, placing
      a developmental stopgap on the spread of seizure activity.
           The excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in the young brain may be
      the main reason febrile (fever-induced) seizures are typically relegated
      to this age group. Scientists believe that certain immune factors
      known as “cytokines” not only trigger the induction of a fever but
      also increase excitation within the brain, leading to isolated seizure
      events in approximately 5 percent of children (Serdaroğlu et al., 2009;
      Stafstrom, 2002). As the child ages, risk for febrile seizures decreases
      as glial cells and inhibitory interneurons continue to mature.


      How does seizure threshold relate to autism?
      Similar to epilepsy, there is an excitatory–inhibitory imbalance in
      autism (Casanova et al., 2003; Rubenstein & Merzenich, 2003).
      Interestingly, the severity of autism symptoms tends to reach its zenith
      during the late infancy/toddler period—the same time in which the
                          Autism and Epilepsy                                131


brain is especially hyper-excitable and seizure threshold is reduced.
It is also during this period that autistic regression occurs, in some
instances following an illness or other immune challenge. A notable
example includes children with autism who also have a mitochondrial
illness, in which the majority experience regression following a
fever‑associated illness or inoculation (Shoffner et al., 2010). The
majority of individuals with Dravet syndrome, mentioned earlier,
also experiences seizure onset and regression in skills following an
immunological challenge, suggesting that the immune system and
peculiarities of developmental timing as discussed above may play
deciding roles in autistic regression and seizure onset (McIntosh
et al., 2010).


EPILEPSY IN FEMALES ON THE AUTISM SPECTRUM
Hormones
The sex ratio in autism is roughly four males for every one female.
Although there are twice as many autistic males as females who
have epilepsy, this is because the absolute number of autistic boys
far exceeds the number of girls. Instead, epilepsy rates are higher in
girls by about 15% (for examples see Amiet et al., 2008; Blackmon
et al., 2016; Bolton et al., 2011). Although epilepsy shares strong ties
with intellectual disability and girls have a disproportionate rate of
diagnosis, it is unlikely that the level of cognitive functioning is the
sole reason for the discrepancy. It is well recognized, for instance, that
idiopathic epilepsy is more common in women in general (McHugh
& Delanty, 2008). And though the mechanisms of this vulnerability
are not agreed upon by doctors and scientists, hormones—especially
estrogen and progesterone—greatly affect seizure threshold.
     Estrogen and progesterone are major hormones of the female body
that help to drive the reproductive cycle. While estrogen often has
an excitatory effect on the brain, progesterone in contrast behaves in an
inhibitory manner. Therefore, the balance between progesterone and
estrogen is vital in determining seizure threshold in women. During
menstruation, for instance, a portion of women with epilepsy experience
worsening of their seizures, which seems to be directly related to
progesterone withdrawal (the inhibitory hormone) (El-Khayat et al.,
2008). Many of these women who experience a worsening of their
symptoms during menses also have a higher estrogen-to-progesterone
132                              DEFINING AUTISM


      ratio throughout their cycle compared to other women with epilepsy
      whose symptoms do not fluctuate as much with their cycles.
           Low progesterone levels seen in some epileptic women can be
      a sign of a hormonal disorder. For example, it is a major feature
      of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) (mentioned in Chapter 4),
      which is the most common cause of infertility in women, affecting
      roughly 10–12 percent of the female population (Amato et al., 2011;
      March et al., 2009). Unfortunately, there is evidence that the use of
      Depakote in the treatment of epilepsy—one of the most potent anti-
      seizure medications—can trigger PCOS in some women (Betts et al.,
      2003). However, even though drugs like Depakote have been linked
      with higher PCOS rates in epileptic women, people with epilepsy
      have higher rates of hormone disorders over all, males included
      (Herzog, 2008).
           As we discussed in Chapter 4, studies indicate that autistic women
      and their mothers have higher rates of PCOS than the general
      population, suggesting links between autism, epilepsy, and hormonal
      disorders (Ingudomnukul et al., 2007). Interestingly, however, we
      have also found that women with both autism and generalized joint
      hypermobility (GJH) have unusually high rates of PCOS compared
      to their non-GJH counterparts (25% vs. 8%). This suggests that this
      subpopulation of women could be driving some of the effects we are
      seeing in the larger female ASD population (Casanova et al., 2018).


      Male autism stereotypes and how
      they may affect prevalence rates
      It has become better recognized that the diagnostic criteria for autism
      are biased towards males because they were primarily modeled after
      male patients. Many girls and women, including those whose IQs fall
      below 70, must often exhibit exaggerated symptoms compared to their
      male counterparts in order to receive the same diagnosis (Dworzynski
      et al., 2012). This can lead to an apparent skewing of the spectrum,
      overrepresenting girls who are more severely affected and giving an
      inaccurate picture of the full range of autism in females.
          Because epilepsy and IQ share a strong relationship with one
      another, this can also lead to the appearance that epilepsy is more
      common in autistic women than in men (Bolton et al., 2011). However,
      rates of epilepsy in women with IQ > 70 are similar to those seen in
                          Autism and Epilepsy                                133


high-functioning autism in general (~6–7%) (Ingudomnukul et al.,
2007; Tuchman et al., 2009).
     Children with brain malformations, such as the focal cortical
dysplasia we discussed earlier, are more likely to develop epilepsy
that is less responsive to pharmacologic intervention. Interestingly,
scientists have found that although autistic males outnumber
autistic females by about four-to-one, the gender ratio in cases with
treatment‑resistant epilepsy is closer to two-to-one (Blackmon et al.,
2016). In addition, girls with these features are more likely to have
mild brain malformations than their male counterparts.
     While some consider this evidence that autistic females are more
severely affected than males, the gender-biased diagnostic rates and
protective effects of estrogen instead suggest that females have a higher
developmental threshold that must be met to reach autism cut‑off. In
essence, because we use “autism” as the main inclusion criteria for
our studies, we are preferentially sampling females who are more
severely affected.
     But why do women have higher rates of epilepsy in general?
Although further research is needed to fully explore this, one possibility
is sex differences in brain connectivity. We discussed earlier that the
infant/toddler brain is highly excitable and may occasionally give rise
to isolated seizures, however, it is less prone towards epilepsy because
its cells are immature and the brain is poorly connected overall. When
it comes to sex differences in the brain, scientists have found that men
tend to have poorer connectivity between the hemispheres of the brain,
meanwhile they have enhanced short-range connectivity and modularity
within the two hemispheres (a trend shared with autism). Women, on the
other hand, usually have stronger connectivity between the hemispheres
and the different modules of the brain (Ingalhalikar et al., 2014).
     This long-range connectivity may be a major risk factor in the
development of epilepsy. Significant seizures result not only from
hyperexcitable neurons but also through the synchronous spread
of activity to other regions of the brain. Male-specific connectivity
patterns may effectively limit the spread and entrenchment of
epilepsy—meanwhile, female-typical connectivity patterns provide
more avenues for seizures to spread. In addition, cyclic changes to the
female hormonal milieu, especially during times of low progesterone
(an anticonvulsant hormone), may lower seizure threshold and increase
the likelihood of seizure occurrence (Frye & Scalise, 2000).
134                                DEFINING AUTISM


      CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
      Because epilepsy occurs with such frequency within the autism
      spectrum and can confer considerable morbidity (and in rare instances
      even lead to death), there is much interest in its identification and
      treatment. Usually, treatment involves the use of typical anticonvulsants,
      however in the case of postpubertal females with epilepsy, hormone
      medications, such as birth control, may offer another useful avenue to
      complement anticonvulsant therapy.
           In a minority of people whose epilepsy is poorly controlled with
      medications, they may be candidates for surgical resection (removal of
      an area of brain tissue). This can be done provided a single focal point
      for the seizures exists, doctors are able to identify that focal point with
      certainty, and it does not occur in an area vital for brain function, such
      as Wernicke’s area that is necessary for the understanding of language.
      In certain types of extreme and uncontrolled generalized seizures,
      patients may also be helped by a corpus callosotomy, in which the
      white matter bridging the two cerebral hemispheres is cut to prevent
      excessive spread of seizures. These individuals will continue to have
      seizure activity, but the seizures are limited to a single hemisphere
      of the brain, preventing the occurrence of “drop attacks” in about
      50–75 percent of postsurgical cases.
           Many individuals who develop epilepsy may do so because of
      another disease process, such as a brain tumor or a neurodegenerative
      disease. As one would expect, mortality rates are high in these
      subpopulations—the cause generally being unrelated to the epilepsy.
      However, epilepsy itself can be deadly and approximately 1 in every
      100 persons with the condition will die prematurely (Shackleton
      et al., 1999). In a significant minority of these cases, the cause is
      unknown and is labeled as sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP).
      In these instances, it is not always obvious that the person has
      died due to convulsions. Some scientists believe that seizures may
      trigger an irregular heart rhythm leading to heart failure, meanwhile
      others suspect  impairments in breathing or even suffocation from
      bedding  may  occur, as is sometimes seen in sudden infant death
      syndrome (SIDS).
           While the causes of SUDEP are poorly understood, it is recom­
      mended that the best prevention is through seizure management.
      For these reasons, it is also important that children, teens, and
      adults on the  autism spectrum are regularly screened for signs of
                        Autism and Epilepsy                            135


epilepsy, especially  in those individuals who may have impairments
in communication and cannot describe behavioral manifestations
of the condition. Although epilepsy can arise at any time, there
are two developmental time periods of vulnerability in autism:
preschool and adolescence (Rossi et al., 2000). Therefore, screening
during and immediately after these periods is particularly important
in the identification of epilepsy and abnormal EEG discharges in
autism. In individuals with abnormal EEG but no outward signs of
epilepsy, follow-up should be performed regularly should seizures
eventually arise.
                          Chapter Seven


THE NEURODEVELOPMENTAL
       SPECTRUM
   Mental Health for the 21st Century


CONDITIONS THAT OCCUR ALONGSIDE AUTISM
Our understanding of neurodevelopmental conditions has been slowly
changing over time. With the advent of the Human Genome Project
and the progressive identification of numerous risk genes, it is now
apparent that few genetic variations produce the same phenotype
across all affected individuals. While a young boy may display
fullblown autism, his mother may have generalized anxiety, sensory
issues, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and specific
learning disability. While in the past we assumed the mother’s and
son’s conditions were different, we are now recognizing that these
phenotypic relationships may be two different sides of the same die.
    With this in mind, we will review many of the neurodevelopmental
conditions that are comorbid with autism, as well as occur at increased
frequencies in autism families. Finally, we will show how, at least with
some conditions, we are realizing that the same biological propensity
can be expressed differently across family members, varying by sex,
genetic background, and environmental stressors.


Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
People with ADHD experience challenges with inattention and/or
hyperactivity-impulsivity that are often lifelong and begin in
early childhood. Although previous editions of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) designated autism as an


                                  137
138                               DEFINING AUTISM


      exclusionary criterion for ADHD, growing awareness of their overlap
      has resulted in the removal of that criterion from DSM-5 (American
      Psychiatric Association, 2013), and the two conditions can now be
      diagnosed comorbidly.
           About 30–50 percent of individuals on the autism spectrum fulfill
      criteria for ADHD. Likewise, it is estimated that approximately two
      thirds of those with ADHD have at least some features of autism
      (Leitner, 2014). People with both autism and ADHD tend to have
      poorer adaptive functioning and quality of life than those with autism
      alone, and they are more likely to have additional comorbid psychiatric
      conditions (Mansour et al., 2017).
           Although the two conditions’ respective diagnostic criteria share
      little in common, the conditions nevertheless overlap one another
      neurobehaviorally. This overlap occurs in areas such as the use of
      pragmatic language, deficits in theory of mind, and alexithymia (the
      inability to identify and understand one’s emotions) (reviewed in
      Leitner, 2014). Children with ADHD often experience significant
      social challenges, although social problems are not considered a core
      of the condition (Friedman et al., 2003). They may be subjected to peer
      rejection due to behaviors related to their ADHD, including bossiness,
      argumentativeness, and inattention. However, there is also a significant
      minority who experience challenges in social “savoir faire,” more akin
      to the social deficits associated with autism (Cantwell, 1996).
           Executive dysfunction, on the other hand, is not a core feature
      of autism yet is central to ADHD. However, many with autism have
      challenges in transitioning between tasks, impulse control, verbal and
      spatial working memory, flexibility, and planning—all of which are
      subsumed under executive functioning (Hughes, Russell, & Robbins,
      1994; Lai et al., 2016). Impairments in cognitive flexibility (i.e.
      task switching) and planning tend to characterize individuals with
      both autism and ADHD. Meanwhile, features such as inattentiveness
      and working memory deficits are nonspecific and occur across any
      combination of these comorbid conditions (Craig et al., 2016).


      Intellectual disability and specific learning disorder
      We will be discussing autism and intellectual disability (ID) extensively
      in Chapter 9 and, therefore, won’t preview the material except to say
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century              139


that a large minority of those on the autism spectrum test within the
intellectually disabled range. However, people with autism may also
have learning disabilities.
     To the chagrin of those communicating between English-speaking
countries, we use the term, “learning disability,” to mean two different
things. Those within the Americas (the United States and Canada)
use the terms “specific learning disorder” and “learning disability/
disorder” interchangeably, referring to deficits in specific areas of
learning in an individual who has otherwise average or above-average
intelligence. People within the United Kingdom and Australia,
however, use “learning disability” to refer to those with an IQ < 70.
Instead, they use the terms, “learning difficulties,” or “specific learning
difficulties” to refer to challenges in academic learning in a person with
normal intelligence. This accidental overlap in terminology can prove
challenging to anyone studying the literature on learning disabilities.
Here, however, we elect to use the Americanized interpretation of the
term “learning disability” when referring to isolated learning deficits,
so please keep that in mind.
     The definition of “learning disability” may vary according to
context. In everyday use it refers to learning difficulties in one or more
of the following:
    •	 auditory/visual perception
    •	 sequencing, abstraction, and organization of information
    •	 working, short-term, and long-term memory
    •	 expressive language
    •	 fine or gross motor coordination.
In medicalese, “learning disability” refers to deficits in reading,
mathematics, or written expression. Within the legal realm, it includes
“such conditions as perceptual disabilities, brain injury, minimal
brain dysfunction, dyslexia, and developmental aphasia” but not “the
result of visual, hearing, or motor disabilities, of mental retardation,
of emotional disturbance, or of environmental, cultural, or economic
disadvantage” (20 U.S. Code Section 1401 (30)). As you can see, the
term describes a variety of deficits in various stages of information
processing.
140                                 DEFINING AUTISM


          Here, we will focus on the term as it is defined by the DSM-5, due
      to the research literature available on the subject. (See Table 7.1 for a
      description of the recognized learning disabilities.)

      Table 7.1: Recognized learning disabilities
       Impairment in reading   Impairment in written       Impairment in mathematics
       includes any of the     includes any of the         includes any of the
       following:              following:                  following:
         •	 word reading         •	 spelling accuracy        •	 number sense
            accuracy             •	 grammar and              •	 memorization of
         •	 reading rate or         punctuation accuracy        arithmetic facts
            fluency              •	 clarity of               •	 accurate or fluent
         •	 reading                 organization or             calculation
            comprehension           written expression       •	 accurate math reasoning


      Reading
      Most readers are likely familiar with the term “dyslexia,” which refers to
      deficits in basic phonological decoding skills (i.e. the sound of words)
      that leads to problems in both reading and writing. Though the science
      is sparse, previous research suggests that dyslexia occurs in about one
      in seven individuals with high-functioning autism (Hofvander et al.,
      2009). (Intellectual disability is an exclusionary criterion for specific
      learning disorder, therefore learning disabilities are only diagnosed in
      individuals with an IQ > 70.)
           In contrast, non-dyslexic deficits in reading comprehension
      have garnered more attention in autism research due to interest in
      the condition known as “hyperlexia.” Hyperlexia is the precocious
      ability to read—a feature sometimes accompanied by poor reading
      comprehension. Therefore, while a child may be capable of decoding
      words phonologically above his or her age level, he or she may have
      little to no understanding of what is being read.
           According to Darold Treffert (2011), a world expert on savantism,
      precocious readers with hyperlexia can be divided into three subtypes:
          •	 those without autism or autistic-like traits
          •	 those with an autism spectrum condition
          •	 those with autistic-like traits but who fail to meet full autism
             criteria.
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century             141


Like most complex conditions, the background on which hyperlexia
rests forms a spectrum of severity ranging from those with fullblown
autism to gifted children with relatively preserved sociocommuni­
cation skills.
    Though not all children with hyperlexia experience deficits in
reading comprehension, many do. They may exhibit exceptional skill
in phonological decoding yet fail to use context to aid in that decoding
(Aram, 1997). For instance, some hyperlexic children have difficulty
pronouncing homonyms correctly, which are words that are spelled
the same but sound different based on contextual meaning of the
sentence itself. An example is “lead,” which can be interpreted either as
“to go in front of ” or “a type of metal.” Similar to hyperlexic children,
children with autism may display dissociations between phonological
decoding and comprehension, though most are not precocious readers
(Jones et al., 2009; Nation et al., 2006).

Mathematics
Colloquially, deficits in mathematics are known as “dyscalculia.”
Although this condition has not been studied well in relation to autism,
there is some evidence suggesting a small minority of autistic individuals
have deficits in the ability to understand and perform mathematical
calculations. According to one study, about 6 percent of those with
autism have a mathematical deficiency in relation to their general
levels of intelligence (Jones et al., 2009). Meanwhile, roughly 16
percent of individuals exhibit particular skill in numerical operations.
Interestingly, both people with talents and deficits in numerical ability
have similar IQs (~96), while those with average math skills score
lower (~80). This suggests that autistic people with mathematical
talents and deficits may share more in common than meets the eye.


Mood disorders
Major depression
It can be a challenge to identify mood disturbances in a person who
has difficulty communicating. For this reason, it has traditionally been
easier to gauge rates of depression in children and adults with autism
who are able to clearly identify and communicate those feelings.
However, according to parent report, children with poor language skills
142                               DEFINING AUTISM


      also experience depressive symptoms similar to their communicative
      counterparts (Mayes et al., 2011).
           Major depression seems to occur in under 20 percent of children
      with an autism spectrum condition—however, parental reports
      typically shed light on a further 20–30 percent who have subclinical
      symptoms (Kim et al., 2000; Mayes et al., 2011). This suggests that
      sadness and depression are serious comorbid issues impairing quality
      of life for a large portion of those on the spectrum.
           About half of verbal adults with autism report some symptoms of
      depression and anxiety, while approximately one third of the broader
      spectrum has a comorbid diagnosis of major depression (Eaves &
      Ho, 2008; Marriage, Wolverton, & Marriage, 2009). Interestingly,
      individuals diagnosed with autism after the age of 18, who are typically
      higher-functioning than their earlier-diagnosed counterparts (in terms
      of IQ ), have almost double the rates of major depression. While this
      has sometimes been explained away by differences in capacity for
      self‑awareness and self-reflection (How can you be sad if you don’t
      know you’re different?), it may also be biology.
           Surprisingly, the occurrence of depression in autism seems to be
      linked with a familial propensity. Although it was a small pilot study,
      Ghaziuddin and Greden (1998) reported that families of autistic
      children with depression were themselves more likely to exhibit
      depression. The authors suggested that depression was therefore a
      condition distinct from autism. However, we would disagree given
      the high rates of depression, particularly in mothers of those on the
      spectrum (Mazefsky, Connor, & Oswald, 2010; Mazefsky, Folstein, &
      Lainhart, 2008). Were there no shared causal relationship, inheritance
      patterns would not likely differ so markedly from the general
      population. Clearly, autism and depression coincide in families more
      often than expected at random. And therefore autism with and without
      depression are probably two behaviorally overlapping yet unique
      biological entities. In addition, familial, and especially maternal,
      depression may be a risk factor for high-functioning autism.

      Bipolar disorder
      Bipolar disorder is characterized by alternating moods of mania and
      depression. In contrast to bipolar I disorder, bipolar II is typified not
      by manic episodes but by hypomania, which is elation or irritability that
      is less extreme and impairing than genuine mania. About 2.5 percent
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century                143


of the adult population has a diagnosis of a bipolar spectrum disorder,
with roughly equal numbers falling under the I and II category
headings (Merikangas et al., 2007). Mean age of onset is roughly
25 years.
    Although it hasn’t been well studied, it is estimated that about 7
percent of the adult autism spectrum population fulfills criteria for bipolar
disorder (Stahlberg et al., 2004). And, as with major depression,
bipolar is more common in those with high-functioning autism as well
as their families, once again suggesting a link between autism severity
and familial mood disorders (DeLong & Dwyer, 1988; DeLong, Ritch,
& Burch, 2002; Munesue et al., 2008). The relationship vaguely
reminds one of the quote by the Roman philosopher Seneca: “Nullum
magnum ingenium sine mixture dementiae fuit” – “There is no great genius
without a mixture of madness.”


Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder
There are many types of anxiety disorders, though they each share
a common core of excessive fear and anxiety. Under current DSM‑5
classification, they include: separation anxiety disorder, selective
mutism, specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder,
agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety disorder. Obsessive-compulsive
disorder, though once subsumed under “anxiety disorders,” now
comprises its own category under anxiety and trauma-based disorders.
     In contrast to many other psychiatric conditions, anxiety disorders
have been studied comparatively well in autism. About 40 percent
of children with autism have at least one anxiety disorder, the most
prevalent being specific phobia (Van Steensel, Bögels, & Perrin,
2011). Fear of needles and/or shots is the most common phobia
reported in children with autism (~30%), followed by a phobia of
loud noises (~10%). In contrast, autistic children tend to have lower
rates of phobias common to children in the general population, such
as flying, stores, standing in line, bridges, and tunnels (Leyfer et al.,
2006). Separation anxiety and social phobia are also common in
autism, together comprising about 10 percent of the subpopulation
(Leyfer et al., 2006).
     Anxiety disorders are extremely common in adults with autism.
One small pilot study estimated that more than three quarters of
the participants and one third of their first-degree relatives had
144                               DEFINING AUTISM


      some form of anxiety disorder (Mazefsky et al., 2008). Within the
      high‑functioning population, Hofvander et al. (2009) estimated
      that about half suffer from clinical anxiety. Meanwhile, those with
      autism and intellectual disability have significantly higher levels of
      panic disorder, agoraphobia, social anxiety, and generalized anxiety
      compared with individuals with ID alone (Gillot & Standen, 2007).
      Unfortunately, high levels of anxiety associate with poorer ability to
      cope with life stressors and represent a significant daily impairment in
      the lives of those on the spectrum.
           Like anxiety disorders, OCD is a common co-occurring condition
      in autism. Using an assessment adapted for communicative impairment,
      Leyfer et al. (2006) estimated that about 37 percent of children in their
      study fulfilled criteria for OCD, while another 6 percent presented
      with subclinical symptoms. Likewise, they reported that children on
      the spectrum with ID were fourteen times more likely to have OCD
      than those with ID alone. Interestingly, however, research suggests
      autism-associated OCD is less severe than those with pure OCD (Cath
      et al., 2008).


      Motor disorders
      Motor delays and developmental coordination disorder
      Mood and anxiety disorders typically fall under the purview of
      psychiatry. For this reason, developmental history does not play an
      integral part in their respective diagnoses. Some motor disorders,
      however, are defined in reference to deviations from age norms. For
      instance, if a three-year-old child exhibits the sociocommunicative
      and motor skills of a two-year-old, we would say he or she is “delayed.”
      If on the other hand that same child is a toe-walker—a feature atypical
      for most children—we would refer to the toe walking as a “divergent”
      symptom because it doesn’t normally occur during development.
      Finally, if we see a child who has age-appropriate skills in socialization
      and communication but is motorically delayed or divergent, we say
      that child has “dissociated” development (Pellegrino, 2013). Delay,
      divergence, and dissociation are helpful terms for the clinician to
      communicate a child’s deficits to parents and other clinicians as well
      as to aid in the formulation of a therapeutic plan.
          The official label used for people who have significant motor skills
      deficits, which are not otherwise due to intellectual disability, visual
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century            145


impairment, or some other neurological impairment, is developmental
coordination disorder (DCD). Often, people with this condition may
be clumsy, inaccurate, or slow when performing motor tasks. They
may have difficulty playing sports; may drop or bump into objects
frequently; and may have poor handwriting, a deficit that overlaps
with specific learning disorders of written expression.
    Not all individuals with motor delays will go on to receive the
label of DCD. For instance, one study found that while 63 percent
of young autistic children had motor deficits, similar deficits were
present in only 38 percent of older children, suggesting some outgrow
their motor delays or the deficits had become subclinical (Ming,
Brimacombe, & Wagner, 2007). Although boys and girls can differ in
the rate of acquisition of motor milestones, frequency of motor delay
is not significantly different between girls and boys on the spectrum
(Giarelli et al., 2010). Interestingly, this differs from DCD in general,
in which boys are preferentially more affected than girls (Kirby &
Sugden, 2007).

Tic disorders
Tics are sudden twitches, movements, or vocalizations. Though they
are not “involuntary” like a reflex, they are considered “unvoluntary”
and can be temporarily suppressed. Suppression, however, usually
causes the individual significant distress, leading to the re-emergence
of the tic at a later time. As described by Dr. Samuel Zinner, an
expert in the  study of tic disorders, “Tics are a semi-voluntary or
voluntary response to involuntary sensation” (Seattle Children’s
Hospital Research  Foundation, 2013). He further explains that, “If
you ask a person with a tic disorder, they can describe an unpleasant
urge/sensation right before the tic occurs.” Zinner relates this to
a similarly unpleasant sensation we have all experienced: trying
to resist the urge to blink. The longer we hold our eyes open, the
more unpleasant the sensation becomes and the more difficult it is
to resist the urge. Similar to the blinking scenario, the person with
a tic disorder experiences a sensation of relief after performing the
tic. Therefore, even though compulsions, habits, and stereotypies in
autism may appear similar to tics to an outside observer, only tics
are associated with internal sensations of initial urgency and then
relief upon completion of the tic (Seattle Children’s Hospital Research
Foundation, 2013).
146                              DEFINING AUTISM


          The DSM-5 recognizes several different tic disorders. The best
      known tic disorder is Tourette’s syndrome, in which the individual
      presents with multiple motor and vocal tics. Tourette’s occurs in
      approximately 1 percent of the general population according to
      Dr.  Zinner. The other tic disorders are similar but have fewer tics
      and/or occur for a shorter duration of time.
          Tic disorders, though not extremely common in autism, occur at
      elevated rates within the spectrum. Studies have typically reported a
      6–8 percent occurrence rate, which is several times higher than rates
      seen in the general population (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999; Bitsko
      et al., 2014; Seattle Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, 2013).
      In contrast, more than one fifth of people with Tourette’s syndrome
      meet cutoff for autism, suggesting that while Tourette’s may not be
      extremely common in autism, autism is very common in Tourette’s
      syndrome (Darrow et al., 2017). In addition, similar to autism, boys
      are more likely to have tic disorders than girls for reasons not well
      understood (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017).


      Psychotic disorders
      We have already discussed bipolar disorder, which, though considered
      a mood disorder, can also present with symptoms of psychosis during
      episodes of mania. However, it is not considered a psychotic disorder
      as such. Instead, most psychotic disorders are collected in the DSM‑5
      under the umbrella label “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
      Psychotic Disorders.” They comprise schizophrenia, schizophreniform
      disorder, schizoaffective disorder, catatonia, delusional disorder, and
      brief psychotic disorder.
          Although all of these conditions vary from one another, they share
      many of the key features that define psychotic disorders. Classically,
      these are broken down into positive and negative symptoms. According
      to the DSM-5, positive symptoms include:
         •	 hallucinations
         •	 delusions
         •	 disorganized thinking or speech
         •	 disorganized or abnormal motor behavior, such as catatonia
            (reduced reactivity to the environment; see Figure 7.1).
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century                 147




           Figure 7.1: Catatonic patients with various psychoses
               pictured around the turn of the 20th century
         (Image from Nervous and Mental Diseases by Church and Peterson, 1908)


In contrast, negative symptoms primarily include reduced emotional
expression and avolition (lack of motivation). These symptoms
account for most of the impairment in schizophrenia, even though the
psychosis itself can be extremely distressing. For instance, individuals
may sit for long periods of time, showing minimal interest in life and
everyday activities. This can lead to career loss, damage to relationships
with family and friends, and reinforce the isolation a person with
schizophrenia is likely to be feeling. Elyn Saks, a well-known lawyer
with schizophrenia who wrote her autobiography, The Center Cannot
Hold, explains some of the thought patterns that produced her poverty
of speech:
    I couldn’t speak on the phone with my family or friends in America,
    either—I decided that it cost too much, that it was therefore
    ‘forbidden.’ By whom, I couldn’t have said; there just seemed to be
    some kind of vague but absolute rule against it. Of course, my family
    would have gladly paid the phone bill, but my distorted judgment
    told me I did not deserve to spend money on myself, or to have
    others spend money on me. Besides, nothing I had to say was worth
    hearing or so said my mind. It’s wrong to talk. Talking means you
    have something to say. I have nothing to say. I am nobody, a nothing.
148                                DEFINING AUTISM


          Talking takes up space and time. You don’t deserve to talk. Keep
          quiet. Within weeks after my arrival at Oxford, almost everything I
          said came out in monosyllables. (Saks, 2007, p. 55)
      Autism and schizophrenia share a modest overlap of traits, which
      will be discussed in further detail in upcoming sections. Despite
      this overlap, reported rates of psychotic disorders and schizophrenia
      in autism are conflicting. Most studies report higher frequencies of
      psychotic disorders in autism. However, rarely are they in the form
      of fullblown schizophrenia, especially in individuals diagnosed with
      either classic autism or Asperger’s syndrome (Hofvander et al., 2009;
      Stahlberg et al., 2004). Interestingly, individuals with autism often
      score high for traits associated with schizotypal personality disorder,
      which is considered the lightest variant of the schizophrenia spectrum
      (Barnevald et al., 2011). In fact, Elyn Saks herself displayed traits
      consistent with Asperger’s syndrome. In general, however, rates of
      psychotic disorders in autism are similar to that of bipolar disorder,
      averaging approximately 8 percent (Stahlberg et al., 2004).


      CHANGING HOW WE VIEW
      NEURODEVELOPMENTAL CONDITIONS
      In their 2010 article in the British Journal of Psychiatry, Nick Craddock
      and Michael Owen wrote:
          The history of medicine suggests that therapeutic and prognostic
          decision-making are usually facilitated, often greatly, as classifications
          move closer to the underlying biological mechanisms. For this reason,
          it is desirable to move towards a classification that maps the expression
          of illness onto the underlying biological systems.
      Schizophrenia is an excellent example of how definitions and
      perceptions change over the centuries. It’s a condition that is intimately
      linked with the roots of psychiatry and the concepts that began in those
      bleak asylums of the early 19th century, concepts that still influence
      us today. Therefore, in order to understand our modern conceptual
      limitations of conditions like autism, we must look to the assumptions
      of the past.
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century           149


The Kraepelinian dichotomy
The late 19th century saw phenomenal changes in medicine. Except
for the field of surgery, medical specialism didn’t develop until the
20th century. However, there were doctors who devoted their practices
to the treatment of those with psychiatric and neurological conditions.
But it wasn’t until the 1800s that physicians realized asylums could
provide more than just confinement for the “insane” as they had done
for hundreds of years—they could in fact be therapeutic. Out of this
mindset, psychiatry was born (Shorter, 2008).
    In 1863, the Prussian psychiatrist, Karl Kahlbaum, published The
Classification of Psychiatric Diseases, which provided the first medical
taxonomic framework for psychiatric illnesses, bringing a sense of
order to an otherwise disordered field of study. Close on the heels of
Kahlbaum’s work, the German psychiatrist, Emil Kraepelin, published
his book Psychiatry: A Textbook for Students and Physicians, in which he
divided psychoses into two major divisions: the schizophrenias and
the manic-depressives (the latter now known as “bipolar disorder”)
(Kraepelin, 1899). Since that time, psychiatry has continued to apply
Kraepelin’s dichotomy, despite growing evidence of diagnostic  and
etiological overlap between the two conditions. For instance, an
entirely new condition, “schizoaffective disorder,” was coined in order
to more accurately label those individuals who had both symptoms
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. But does this mean that
schizophrenia and bipolar are as separate and unique as the early
psychiatrists liked to think? Biology suggests otherwise.


Symptoms of autism in schizophrenia
Like bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, autism and schizophrenia also
share an intertwined and convoluted past. Interestingly, Leo Kanner
originally considered autism an infantile form of schizophrenia.
However, the term “autism,” was first coined by the psychiatrist,
Eugene Bleuler, in his book Dementia Praecox, to describe symptoms of
withdrawal in his schizophrenic patients:
    The most severe schizophrenics, who have no more contact with
    the outside world, live in a world of their own. They have encased
    themselves with their desires and wishes…they have cut themselves
    off as much as possible from any contact with the external world…
150                               DEFINING AUTISM


         This detachment from reality, together with the relative and absolute
         predominance of the inner life, we term autism [our emphasis].
         (Bleuler, 1950, p. 63)
      We now view autism and schizophrenia as separate conditions,
      particularly in light of the different ages of onset: one arises during
      the first few years of life, the other usually begins in adolescence or
      early adulthood. But are they as separate as we assume? For instance,
      both conditions may exhibit:
         •	 blunted affect
         •	 poverty of speech
         •	 problems with apathy and blunted emotional experiences
         •	 social disinterest
         •	 loss of motivation.
      People with autism or schizophrenia also share sensory disturbances,
      though in schizophrenics these disturbances are more apparent in the
      early stages of psychosis:
         During the last while back I have noticed that noises all seem to be
         louder to me than they were before. It’s as if someone had turned up
         the volume. … I notice it most with background noises—you know
         what I mean, noises that are always around but you don’t notice them.
         Now they seem to be just as loud and sometimes louder than the
         main noises that are going on. … It’s a bit alarming at times because
         it makes it difficult to keep your mind on something when there’s so
         much going on that you can’t help listening to. (Description from a
         patient with schizophrenia, from Torrey, 2001, p. 34)
      Auditory hypersensitivity (also known as hyperacusis) occurs in autism
      too, as the noted autistic psychologist and author Dr. Wenn Lawson
      describes:
         Yesterday I connected my noise canceling headphones to my laptop
         so I could watch and listen to one of the videos I had downloaded
         as part of a TV series. The problem was though the lowest volume
         setting on my headphones was still too “loud” for my ears. Therefore,
         because I was in a public place with others I had to read from my
         Kindle instead. Very frustrating when it’s not what I had hoped to
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century             151


    be doing. This morning I visited the podiatrist for a “foot” check
    and she clipped my toenails. Each “clip-chunk” of her nail cutters
    upon my toenails sounded like someone had clapped loudly in
    my ears and it was hard not to jump! As a youngster I heard the
    school bus coming from a ways off, well before other children.
    Even the direction indicator lights sounded loud enough for me to
    recognise which bus it was. Living with auditory hypersensitivity
    is an overwhelming experience that I can’t escape from, even with
    earplugs in my ears and headphones over the top! It’s also very
    uncomfortable to appreciate other people (family, friends, the public)
    don’t truly get how painful auditory hypersensitivity can be. I’m not
    trying to be difficult when I complain something hurts my ears, nor
    am I doing this for attention. I’m complaining because it’s painful
    and a small thing, like turning the volume down or wearing noise
    cancelling headphones can mean the difference between being able
    to go shopping, or having to leave the shop, pub, party, classroom,
    outing and so on, and live with the gossip of being thought of as
    “difficult, not normal and/or a person with special needs”! (Dr. Wenn
    Lawson, personal communication)
Autistic people and schizophrenics share not just sensory overlap, but
deficits in socialization (Couture et al., 2010). Theory of mind (ToM)
is the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and to others. The
concept originally arose within the field of philosophy and was later
applied to psychology. In the 1980s, Uta Frith and her then-student,
Simon Baron-Cohen, began to use the term to describe deficits in
autistic children (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985). Later in the
1990s Uta Frith’s husband, Christopher Frith, applied the term to
similar deficits seen in schizophrenia (Corcoran, Mercer, & Frith,
1995; Frith, 2014).
     People with various lesions to the frontal lobes of the brain often
display a variety of social deficits (Sarazin et al., 1998). Consider
Phineas Gage, the railroad worker who was involved in a construction
accident during which a tamping spike was driven through the front
of his brain following an explosion (Figure 7.2). It was miraculous he
survived, which was largely thanks to the brilliance of the attending
physician, Dr. J. M. Harlow. Following the incident, Gage’s personality
changed so vehemently that despite his survival and recovery he was
not able to retain his former position. It took several years for him to
152                               DEFINING AUTISM


      recover some of his previous social skills and executive functioning.
      Unfortunately, he died 12 years after the accident due to repeated and
      prolonged seizures related to the head injury, finally succumbing to
      status epilepticus.




           Figure 7.2: Multiple views of the exhumed skull of Phineas Gage,
                alongside the tamping iron that so severely injured him
                           (Reproduced from Wikimedia Commons)


      Given the overlapping social deficits, it is unsurprising that studies
      have shown that autism and schizophrenia share functional similarities
      within the frontal and temporal lobes and some of the underlying
      limbic structures of the brain. Both conditions display reduced
      activation during specific social tasks within areas known as the medial
      prefrontal cortex, the superior temporal sulcus, and amygdala (Sugranyes
      et al., 2011). People with either autism or schizophrenia also tend to
      have lower gray-matter volume in various limbic circuitry, although
      they differ in regard to which specific nuclei are affected (Cheung
      et al., 2010).
           It is challenging to untangle the reasons why autism and
      schizophrenia rarely occur together and yet overlap significantly in
      symptomology. Some research suggests that schizophrenics during
      childhood exhibit high rates of autistic-like symptoms, blurring the lines
      between the two conditions (Hallerbäck, Lugnergård, & Gillberg, 2012).
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century             153


It is possible some types of autism and schizo­phrenia lie on a continuum
where symptomology differs primarily according to the age at which it
occurs. In modest support of this, a large population study performed
in Sweden reported higher rates of schizophrenia in parents of autistic
children, as well as higher rates of  mood and personality disorders
(Daniels et al., 2008).


Why are we talking about psychoses?
Although there is overlap between schizophrenia, mood disorders,
and autism, why have we chosen to focus a large portion of this
chapter on the history of psychiatry and psychotic disorders? We have
chosen to do so because the study and treatment of modern mental
health began in those 19th-century asylums. Much of our modern
diagnostic taxonomy for neurodevelopmental conditions has grown
out of those early traditions, which envisioned symptom clusters as
unique and non‑overlapping. And thus our concepts of autism have
been hemmed in by the same assumptions that reflect obsolete notions
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
    However, nowadays we know that a single genetic syndrome
can sometimes express itself in a variety of ways in different family
members. Reminiscent of the many-sided die metaphor we used at
the beginning of the chapter, this concept is known as “pleiotropy.”
Pleiotropy is the production of two or more apparently unrelated
phenotypes (expressions) from a single genotype.


Different conditions, same genes
Unfortunately, the genetics of conditions such as ADHD, Tourette’s,
OCD, and learning disabilities have been poorly studied compared to
autism, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. For that reason, we will
continue to focus on the latter three conditions as illustration, with the
expectation that we may find similar trends across all these disorders
in future.
    One of the key findings that suggests boundaries between autism,
schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder are more fluid than we thought
is the complex developmental and psychiatric backgrounds of the
families of affected individuals. For instance, when researchers studied
more than two million Swedish families with first-degree relatives
154                               DEFINING AUTISM


      with either schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, they found that family
      members were at an increased risk for developing either condition
      (Lichtenstein et al., 2009). This is in contrast to the antiquated theory
      that such conditions tend to “breed true,” an old medical wives’ tale.
      Likewise, when you look at first-degree family members of those with
      autism, they also have an increased risk for developing schizophrenia
      and bipolar (Sullivan et al., 2012).
          Another finding concerns the genetic overlap we see between these
      different conditions. For instance, certain types of rare mutations in
      schizophrenia overlap mutations found in autism, especially in genes
      involved in epigenetic patterning (McCarthy et al., 2014). Other
      researchers have also identified overlap of common gene variants
      between autism, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder, particularly
      in calcium channel genes involved in regulating the flux of calcium
      into the cell (Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics
      Consortium, 2013).
          On the other hand, some scientists have suggested that although
      autism and schizophrenia share overlapping gene targets, when they
      do overlap the effects of these mutations are quite different. For
      example, there are four known instances in which large chromosomal
      rearrangements occur in the same genetic loci in both autism and
      schizophrenia. Scientists have found that deletions in these regions
      predispose towards autism, while duplications predispose towards
      schizophrenia, suggesting that even though the same genes are affected
      in both conditions, the mutations probably affect the functions of the
      genes very differently (Crespi et al., 2010).
          Certain growth-signaling pathways also tend to be upregulated
      in autism as a result of major loss-of-function mutations. In contrast,
      schizophrenia tends to be associated with reduced activation in
      those same pathways (Crespi et al., 2010). Interestingly, however,
      there are genetic syndromes that are “polar opposites” yet both
      predispose towards autism. One notable pair is Rett syndrome and
      Lubs X-linked mental retardation. Rett syndrome is most typically
      the result of a functional loss of the MECP2 gene, meanwhile, Lubs
      is due to duplication of genetic material containing MECP2 (similar
      to the autism–schizophrenia examples above.) It is therefore possible
      that  the autism–schizophrenia dichotomy, as has been proposed by
      some researchers, may not be as simple as it sounds.
Neurodevelopmental Spectrum – Mental Health for the 21st Century               155


    In general, high-functioning autism has higher rates of comorbid
psychotic and bipolar disorders (Hofvander et al., 2009). In addition,
family members of those with high-functioning autism are also at
significant risk for these conditions. In contrast, the families of autistic
individuals with lower IQ are significantly less likely to experience
psychiatric illness than their higher-IQ counterparts, suggesting
that the underlying causes of these conditions vary according to
cognitive functioning (Robinson et al., 2014). This may also indicate
that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder share more in common with
high‑functioning autism.


CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Clinicians have realized over time that autism spectrum conditions
come  with a cornucopia of comorbid conditions. Because autism
is pervasive and affects the entirety of the brain, almost any neuro­
developmental condition can be a comorbid feature. For these reasons,
it is important not just to assess an individual for autism but to run a
full work-up on other associated conditions, as these other issues may
lead to significant daily impairment.
     For example, ADHD and other learning disabilities can significantly
impede academic achievement. Individuals with impairments in
executive function, regardless of ADHD diagnosis, experience
considerable academic challenges, and are at risk for grade retention
and overall poor academic achievement (Biederman et al., 2004).
In particular, learning disabilities in ADHD children compound the
problem and increase the likelihood of grade retention, the necessity
of in-school tutoring, and placement in special education classes
(Faraone et al., 2001).
     Most alarming of all, approximately 14 percent of children on
the autism spectrum have considered or attempted suicide (Mayes
et al., 2011). Demographics that increase the likelihood of suicide
attempts in children with autism are: age (10+ years), race (black or
hispanic), lower familial economic status, and sex (males). Children
with depression, behavior problems, and those who have been the
victims of bullying are all at significantly increased risk. It is therefore
vital to identify depressive symptoms and behavior problems, as well
as stimuli (e.g. bullying) that are driving these issues, because of the
extreme danger they pose should they go unrecognized.
                            Chapter Eight


         THE BROADER AUTISM
             PHENOTYPE


WHAT IS THE BROADER AUTISM PHENOTYPE?
The term broader autism phenotype (BAP) is not a diagnosis. Instead,
it is typically used to describe subclinical traits in relatives of those
with autism. Symptoms can include minor impairments in socialization
and communication; obsessive, rigid, and inflexible behaviors; and
problems with depression and anxiety. These individuals, however, do
not reach the cut-off for a full diagnosis of autism. BAP also carries
no apparent risk for intellectual disability and little additional risk for
epilepsy (Parr & Le Couteur, 2013).
     Although most BAP research has focused on family members of
affected individuals, there are a few investigators who have studied
subclinical traits in the general population. In general, this research has
shown that social and communicative deficits associated with autism
are continuously distributed throughout the human population and are
moderately to highly heritable. Similar to autism, females tend to be
less susceptible and are usually less affected than males (Constantino
& Todd, 2003; Hoekstra et al., 2007).


RESEARCH INTO THE BROADER
AUTISM PHENOTYPE
Kanner, Asperger, and early days
The study of BAP is as old as the study of autism itself. Leo Kanner’s
original manuscript, “Autistic disturbances of affective contact” (1943),
is littered with descriptions of families of the children who formed his
first cases studies. Hans Asperger’s manuscript, “Autistic psychopathy
in childhood” (translated in Frith, 1991), also highlighted similar

                                   157
158                               DEFINING AUTISM


      peculiarities in most of the parents in his first case studies, although
      his familial descriptions were more limited than Kanner’s. These
      descriptions foreshadow the later recognition of BAP.
           In reading Kanner’s original manuscript, a number of common
      features stand out amongst the parents. For instance, BAP traits were
      most obvious in the fathers whom Kanner was studying, a probable
      reflection of the unbalanced sex ratio in autism favoring males over
      females. The parents were also typically well educated, although there
      have been concerns raised over ascertainment bias in Kanner’s first
      cases, preferencing white, well-educated families who had the means
      to seek help from Kanner. In fact, four of the eleven fathers were
      psychiatrists themselves! We know today, however, that although
      highly educated families may be at greater risk for autism, poor
      education (e.g. lack of a high school degree) is also an associated risk
      factor. Therefore, increased familial risk can be seen on both ends of
      the economic spectrum (Rai et al., 2012; Van Meter et al., 2010).
           Interestingly, eccentricities, high achievement, and even language
      delay were noted in the families of Kanner’s original cases:
          The father is the second of five children. The oldest is a well
          known newspaper man and author of a best-seller. A married sister,
          “high‑strung and quite precocious,” is a singer. Next comes a brother
          who writes for adventure magazines. The youngest, a painter, writer,
          and radio commentator, “did not talk until he was about 6 years old,”
          and the first words he is reported to have spoken were, “When a lion
          can’t talk he can whistle.” (p. 224)
      Although Kanner recanted his support for the Refrigerator Mother
      Theory of autism—instead describing most parents in his original
      publication as well intentioned, intelligent, and educated—there was
      one family in particular, the parents of Virginia, case no. 6, who may
      have provided inspiration for the disastrous theory:
          Virginia, the younger of two siblings, was the daughter of a
          psychiatrist, who said of himself… “I have never liked children,
          probably a reaction on my part to the restraint from movement
          (travel), the minor interruptions and commotions.”
               Of Virginia’s mother, her husband said: “She is not by any means
          the mother type. Her attitude [toward a child] is more like toward a
          doll or pet than anything else.”
                     The Broader Autism Phenotype                                  159


         Virginia’s brother, Philip, five years her senior, when referred to
    us because of severe stuttering at 15 years of age, burst out in tears
    when asked how things were at home and he sobbed: “The only
    time my father has ever had anything to do with me was when he
    scolded me for doing something wrong.”
         His mother did not contribute even that much. He felt that all his
    life he had lived in “a frosty atmosphere” with two inapproachable strangers
    [our emphasis]. (p. 230)
It wasn’t Kanner, however, who popularized the Refrigerator Mother
Theory but Bruno Bettelheim in his book The Empty Fortress (1967).
Although Bettelheim held a doctorate, it was in philosophy or art
history (historians aren’t exactly certain) but certainly not psychology
for which he was later known. An Austrian-born Jew, Bettelheim was
imprisoned by the Nazis in the Dachau and Buchenwald concentration
camps for ten-and-a-half months. After he was released, he emigrated
to America, arriving in New York in late 1939. By 1944, he had passed
himself off as a trained psychologist and was hired by the University of
Chicago as professor and director of the Orthogenic School, a place for
the treatment of emotionally disturbed children. Ironically, Bettelheim
had only ever taken three introductory courses in psychology. Yet
despite the subterfuge and underqualification, Bettelheim died in
1990 with reputation relatively intact. Posthumously, however, his
work on autism has been extensively discredited and his professional
fraud revealed.
    Besides Kanner, other researchers who were steeped in a stifling
Freudian scientific culture slowly added to the Refrigerator Mother
Theory that so emboldened Bettelheim. For instance, Eisenberg
(1957) described the fathers of autistic children as portraying “cool
detachment, obsessive perfectionism and the single minded pursuit
of, often scientific, interests but without original achievements”
(reported in Wolff, Narayan, & Moyes, 1988). Creak and Ini (1960)
later described parents of autistic children as “reserved,” the mothers
as “cold,” and the fathers as “detached.” This trend of viewing the
parent–child relationship through a Freudian lens continued until
Bernard Rimland, whom we discussed in Chapters 1 and 3, wrote
his groundbreaking book, Infantile Autism. Though the change was
slow, Rimland’s book marked the beginning of the parents’ movement
and  was the first time anyone had popularized a biological cause
160                                DEFINING AUTISM


      for  autism. Kanner, an opponent of Freudian psychology, avidly
      supported Rimland’s work and even wrote the introduction to
      his tome.


      The first generation of BAP research
      In the early days of familial research, Joseph Piven perceptively wrote:
          Studies of families ascertained through a single autistic proband suggest
          that the genetic liability for autism may be expressed in nonautistic
          relatives in a phenotype that is milder but qualitatively similar to the
          defining features of autism. (Piven et al., 1997, p. 185)
      These early hereditary studies on autism were also some of the first
      addressing the broader phenotype, although the term didn’t come into
      use until the 1990s. In 1977, Folstein and Rutter reported on 21
      twin pairs in which either one or both twins were diagnosed with
      autism. In 11 of the identical twin pairs, four shared an autism
      diagnosis; in another five, one twin had autism while the other had
      subclinical traits; and finally two pairs were completely discordant.
      Meanwhile, none of the fraternal twin pairs were concordant for
      autism, and only one sibling had subclinical symptoms. We now know
      that non-identical siblings share significant risk for autism if one
      sibling is diagnosed, however, risk usually hovers between 10 and 20
      percent, whereas in identical twin pairs it ranges between 60 and 90
      percent (Bailey et al., 1995). Nowadays, those figures are based on an
      interpretation of the autism spectrum label that is decidedly broader
      than was acknowledged in the 1970s.
           This early research on inheritance patterns spurred further
      behavioral  and cognitive studies. One early study, for instance,
      found that  half of autism parents had what the researchers called
      “schizoid traits”  (Wolff et al., 1988). Interestingly, many traits
      of  schizoid  personality disorder (SPD), such as introversion, a
      preference for solitary activities, limited close friendships, and blunted
      emotional expression, all share significant overlap with symptoms
      common to autism. In fact, according to a more recent study,
      more than one third of males with Asperger’s syndrome also
      fulfill criteria for SPD, suggesting some cases of SPD may in fact
      be developmental—rather than personality—disorders (Lugnegård,
      Hallerbäck, & Gillberg, 2012).
                    The Broader Autism Phenotype                              161


     In 1994, Patrick Bolton, then at the University of Cambridge,
published the first study on what we now call the broader autism
phenotype. His team found that family members of those
with autism displayed many subclinical traits, including social
communication deficits and certain stereotyped behaviors (Bolton
et al., 1994). In addition, about 12–20 percent of siblings fulfilled
criteria for “Pervasive Developmental Disorder–Not Otherwise
Specified (PDD‑NOS),” a now-obsolete variant of autism. Piven and
colleagues went further in depth to describe the social deficits and
repetitive behaviors seen  in BAP parents (Piven et al., 1997). For
example, they found that a large minority of autism fathers had a
history of conflict with coworkers or supervisors, leading to their
resignation or discharge. By contrast, almost no fathers of children
with Down syndrome reported the same. In addition, 50 percent of
autism fathers had few or no adult friendships, compared to 3 percent
of fathers in the Down’s group. Mothers of autistic children also had
more deficits in social communication skills and had more repetitive
behaviors than mothers of those with Down’s. The differences between
the two groups of mothers were, however, less extreme than those of
the fathers, once again highlighting the female protective effect.
     Scientists have also identified differences in intellect across autism
family members. Eric Fombonne and his colleagues observed, for
instance, that autism parents and unaffected siblings tend to score
higher on tests of verbal IQ than controls. Meanwhile, siblings
with BAP generally have lower IQ scores than non-BAP siblings. In
addition, they also tend to fare more poorly in the areas of reading and
spelling (Fombonne et al., 1997).
     Many readers have probably read or heard of the WIRED
magazine article “The geek syndrome,” describing an epidemic of
autism in Silicon Valley, one of the great tech capitals of the world
(Silberman, 2001). This follows on the idea of assortative mating or
“like attracts like.” Although some have questioned the veracity of the
article’s claims as it was based primarily on anecdotal evidence, more
recent research supports the idea that autism rates are indeed higher
in tech cities and areas characterized by higher parental education
(Roelfsema et al., 2012; Van Meter et al., 2010). Research by Simon
Baron-Cohen in particular suggests that autism parents, especially
fathers, are more likely to select careers in engineering, physics,
and mathematics (Baron-Cohen, 1998; Baron-Cohen et al., 1997).
162                               DEFINING AUTISM


      It’s  difficult, however, to be certain if these tech-savvy geographic
      autism clusters are due to genuine heritability or simply to the fact that
      educated families have more resources and are therefore more likely to
      successfully seek diagnosis. But given the heritability of intelligence
      and the high rates of superior IQ in autism itself, this suggests that
      at least some of the “Silicon Valley Effect” is the result of assortative
      mating amongst people with subclinical autism who are indeed drawn
      towards STEM careers (Kim et al., 2011).


      BAP research in the 21st century
      Early studies assumed that BAP was a discrete entity, which was
      either present or absent. These studies were mostly performed using
      observation and interview and depended on qualitative data. With
      the new millennium, however, new research brought new tools such
      as the Social Responsiveness Scale, the Broader Autism Phenotype
      Questionnaire, and the Autism-Spectrum Quotient, all of which
      have provided a more quantitative measure of the BAP spectrum. In
      addition, BAP research has expanded to study subclinical traits in the
      general population. Since that time, we’ve gained a better idea about
      the range of traits that define the broader phenotype.

      Sociocommunication deficits in BAP
      Pragmatics refers to nuances of social language that include tone of
      voice, body language, and the use of situational context in order to
      communicate. Studies typically agree that deficits in social pragmatics
      best characterize language impairments in BAP parents (see Sucksmith,
      Roth, & Hoekstra, 2011, for review). For instance, using the
      Communication Checklist, scientists have found that the majority of
      BAP parents either perform poorly in the areas of pragmatic language
      or social engagement (Whitehouse et al., 2010). Specifically, BAP
      fathers tend to be more socially aloof, while BAP mothers have deficits
      in the use of pragmatics. These peculiarities are reminiscent of the
      “aloof ” vs. “active but odd” categories of autism proposed by the
      well‑known researcher Lorna Wing (Wing, 1981).
          Significant language deficits often occur in siblings of those with
      autism. Roughly one fifth of siblings experience language delay, as well
      as delays in comprehension and other aspects of language expression
      (Sucksmith et al., 2011). Some of these features are also associated
                     The Broader Autism Phenotype                               163


with delays in motor development. Interestingly, motor milestones
are typically used in developmental pediatrics as a gauge of early
neurological development, since motor delays in young infants can
often be harbingers of delays or deficits in other areas of development
still to come.
     Other social peculiarities are seen in BAP. A prime example is taken
from Hans Asperger’s own initial case study, describing the behaviors
of the mother of the boy known as “Fritz”:
    Very characteristic, for instance, was the situation when mother and
    son walked to the hospital school together, but each by themselves.
    The mother slouched along, hands held behind her back and
    apparently oblivious to the world. Beside her the boy was rushing
    to and fro, doing mischief. They gave the appearance of having
    absolutely nothing to do with each other. One could not help
    thinking that the mother found it difficult to cope not only with her
    child but with the practical matters of life. She was certainly not up to
    running the household. Even living, as she did, in the upper echelons
    of society, she always looked unkempt, unwashed almost, and was
    always badly dressed. …
         It was clear that this state of affairs was due not only to the
    boy’s own internally caused problems, but also to the mother’s
    own problems in relating to the outside world, showing as she did
    a limited intuitive social understanding. Take the following typical
    trait: whenever things became too much for her at home she would
    simply walk out on her family and travel to her beloved mountains.
    She would stay there fore a week or more at a time, leaving the rest of
    the family to struggle for themselves. (translated in Frith, 1991, p. 41)
Indeed, given this quote, one wonders not only whether Fritz’s mother
had features of BAP but also may have been autistic herself according
to today’s diagnostic criteria. However, one of the parents from
Asperger’s other case studies, “Harro,” is more typical of the aloofness
seen in BAP:
    The father, who himself comes from peasant stock, is a typical
    intellectual. He professed to be completely and painfully self-taught.
    One could make out from what he said that he had nothing to do with
    anyone in the village where he lived and where he must have been
    considered highly eccentric. He said himself that he was nervous and
164                                DEFINING AUTISM


          highly strung but that “he controlled himself to such an extent that
          he appeared to be indifferent.” (translated in Frith, 1991, pp. 51–52)
      When studying at-risk siblings of those with autism, infants and
      young children with BAP tend to engage in fewer joint attention tasks
      with caregivers compared to controls. Likewise, when BAP siblings
      are engaged in joint attention with parents or other caregivers, similar
      to autism, they’re less inclined to look at the eyes and instead tend to
      look at the mouth. Some researchers have even suggested eye-gaze
      differences could be a useful biomarker for the identification of BAP
      or autism in at-risk siblings (Sucksmith et al., 2011).
           People with BAP may also struggle with the recognition of emotional
      expression and, in particular, the identification of neutral expressions
      (Kadak et al., 2014). Parents from multiplex families (which have higher
      rates of BAP) score lower in tests that require the identification of basic
      emotions than parents of simplex families, although autism parents as a
      whole don’t differ significantly from controls (Bölte & Poutska, 2003).
      When tested on specific, isolated portions of the face, BAP parents also
      fare poorly in reading emotional expression from the eyes (Adolphs et al.,
      2008). More surprisingly, however, they fare better at reading emotions
      from the region of the mouth—the portion of the face those with BAP
      or autism tend to look at the most. Since people with BAP are still
      clearly missing important facial cues necessary for navigating the social
      world, the eyes surely convey a great deal of information necessary for
      translating human emotions.
           The recognition of emotion may also be further complicated by
      deficits in facial memory. For instance, some scientists have found
      that autism fathers tend to perform poorly on the Cambridge Face
      Memory Test (Figure 8.1), which requires participants to recognize
      faces to which they had earlier been exposed (Wilson et al., 2010).
      Interestingly, this same trend is seen in the general population: men
      who score higher on the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ ) (a positive
      measure of BAP) fare more poorly on facial memory tasks. And more
      surprisingly, women who score higher on the AQ tend to perform
      better on facial memory tasks (Rhodes et al., 2013). This suggests that
      social skills in BAP women may not be as complicated by impairments
      in facial recognition as they are in men. Similar to other savant skills
      in autism, facial recognition in BAP is characterized by extremes
      of the human spectrum of ability, with high proportions of both
      “super‑recognizers” and “prosopagnosics” (people who are face blind).
                       The Broader Autism Phenotype                                    165




             Figure 8.1: An example of one of the types of tasks
                 used in the Cambridge Face Memory Test
    The test taker is first exposed to the top row, which contains a single person’s
     face from different perspectives. The test taker is then shown another set of
         images (bottom row) and asked to identify the face previously seen.


Interestingly, people with BAP not only have greater problems
recognizing faces and emotions of others, they’re also more likely to
struggle to identify their own emotions (Szatmari et al., 2008). This
deficiency in emotional identification and understanding is known as
alexithymia. People with alexithymia often have difficulty identifying
and naming the emotional sensations they’re experiencing; they may
have a poor understanding of why they’re feeling the way they’re
feeling, and they may have difficulty expressing those feelings to other
people. Like most of the traits discussed in this chapter, alexithymia
occurs on a spectrum of severity that bleeds into normality with the
general population.
    In terms of sex differences, BAP tends to be more strongly
expressed in males for reasons still unknown but which are probably
similar to those that underlie the sex-skewed ratio in autism. When,
however, mothers are as severely affected as their BAP husbands, social
impairment tends to be more severe in the autistic child, suggesting
an additive or exponential hereditary effect (Constantino & Todd,
2005). The propensity for “like attracting like” is believed to account
for approximately 30 percent of the variation in social impairment
observed in children with autism. This suggests that BAP individuals,
based on common personality characteristics, are more likely to pair
with one another than expected at random, increasing risk for autism
in the children.
166                               DEFINING AUTISM


      Repetitive and restricted behaviors and interests
      Unfortunately, most of the few studies to date investigating restricted
      and repetitive behaviors and interests (RRBI) in families of those
      with autism have been qualitative rather than quantitative. However,
      a number of studies suggest that RRBI in parents and siblings are less
      extreme but similar in nature to those seen in autism. For instance,
      young unaffected siblings of those with autism tend to show more
      repeated play behaviors than control children (reviewed in Sucksmith
      et al., 2011). In addition, BAP parents are sometimes described as rigid
      and perfectionistic, and may exhibit intense special interests, often of
      an intellectual nature (Sucksmith et al., 2011). Leo Kanner (1943)
      describes the obsessiveness of one of the mothers of his patients:
          His mother brought with her copious notes that indicated obsessive
          preoccupation with details and a tendency to read all sorts of
          peculiar interpretations into the child’s performances. She watched
          (and recorded) every gesture and every “look,” trying to find their
          specific significance and finally deciding on a particular, sometimes
          very farfetched explanation. She thus accumulated an account that,
          though very elaborate and richly illustrated, on the whole revealed
          more of her own version of what had happened in each instance than
          it told of what had actually occurred. (p. 225)

      Cognition in BAP
      Many studies report deficits in executive functioning in first-
      degree relatives of those with autism. Executive functions are a set
      of cognitive skills important for regulating one’s behaviors that
      includes features such as the control of attention, working memory,
      self-control and planning, and cognitive flexibility. Although it’s
      clear family members of those with autism sometimes have notable
      impairments in executive functioning, results have differed markedly
      across studies and are likely a reflection of different methodologies.
      Many studies, for instance, have failed to use typical controls and have
      instead utilized other affected groups such as parents of those with
      obsessive-compulsive disorder or schizophrenia. And so although
      autism parents may not perform differently from parents of children
      with other neurodevelopmental conditions, it doesn’t address whether
      autism parents’ abilities differ from the general population and are
      comparatively impaired. Therefore, results in this area of research are
      still somewhat sketchy. However, reported differences to date include
                       The Broader Autism Phenotype                                167


deficits in: planning ability; spatial and verbal working memory; task-
shifting; and ideational fluency, which is the ability to rapidly produce
multiple ideas related to a particular object or condition (Gokcen et al.,
2009; Hughes, Plumet, & Leboyer, 1999; Koczat et al., 2002; Nydén
et al., 2011; Wong et al., 2006).
     Other studies have found that parents with the broader phenotype
are also prone to weak central coherence,1 especially when examined
using visuospatial tests like the Embedded Figures Task, in which the
individual must find a hidden figure within a drawing as quickly as
possible. Conversely, autism parents tend to have lower performance
IQ than typical controls, especially in the area of matrix reasoning,
which is a test that requires pattern recognition (Figure 8.2) (Bölte &
Poutska, 2006; Schmidt et al., 2008).




            Figure 8.2: An example of matrix reasoning similar to
                that seen in the Raven’s Progressive Matrices
          (Reproduced with permission of Life of Riley from Wikimedia Commons)


Psychiatric symptoms
Autism parents are at increased risk for the development of various
psychiatric disorders compared to parents of typically developing
children and children with conditions like Down syndrome (Yirmiya
& Shaked, 2005). Surprisingly, however, they have less psychiatric



1	 A cognitive style in which the perception of detail is enhanced yet the
   capacity to generalize that detail into a contextual gestalt is comparatively
   limited. For this reason, individuals with Weak Central Coherence tend to
   perform better on the Embedded Figures Task, which requires the ability
   to ignore the visual gestalt and identify hidden targets.
168                                DEFINING AUTISM


      risk than parents of children who have learning disabilities or children
      who later go on to develop schizophrenia.
          Additional studies have found that parents of children with
      autism are more likely to have a history of hospitalization for a
      mental disorder and to have been diagnosed with schizophrenia.
      Autism mothers are also more likely to have been diagnosed with
      depression or a personality disorder (Daniels et al., 2008). And,
      interestingly, related research has revealed that while a mother’s
      depression is in part related to the stress of caring for an autistic
      child relative to the severity of the child’s behavior, risk for depression
      increases in association with maternal autism traits (Ingersoll, Meyer,
      & Becker, 2011).
          Scientists have also found that in the general population, people
      with higher BAP scores report more loneliness and social isolation
      than their non-BAP counterparts (Jobe & White, 2007).


      BAP in multiplex vs. simplex families
      We’ve already alluded to the fact that multiplex and simplex families
      exhibit different risk patterns for BAP. These patterns suggest that
      risk inheritance is different in the two groups, although the roots
      of that variability have not been well defined. Some studies suggest,
      for instance, that children from multiplex families are more likely to
      inherit an increased load of common genetic risk variants, likely driven
      by assortative mating in the parents (Klei et al., 2012; Klusek, Losh,
      & Martin, 2014).
          In support of this hypothesis, simplex parents have lower rates of
      BAP than those of multiplex families, suggesting that BAP personalities
      tend to attract each other (Davison et al., 2014). In addition, simplex
      cases of autism are on average more severely affected, a feature that’s
      linked with higher rates of de novo (new) mutations in contrast to
      heritable forms passed from parent to child (Gerdts et al., 2013;
      Taylor et al., 2015). Unaffected siblings in multiplex families, like their
      parents, also share more BAP traits than siblings from simplex families
      (Constantino et al., 2006; Gerdts et al., 2013).
                    The Broader Autism Phenotype                             169


The BAP brain
Most BAP brain studies to date have focused on high-risk siblings, born
out of some of the “baby sibs” projects that have become popular in
the new millennium, such as the Baby Siblings Research Consortium.
Studies thus far have found that the brains of high-risk infants process
information differently than typically developing infants, even in those
cases that don’t go on to develop autism.
     For instance, nine-month-old high-risk siblings look at the mouth
and eyes in a similar pattern to that of low-risk infants, but process
this information using different brain regions. In addition, these results
seem to correlate with the child’s communication abilities: the more
abnormal the processing pattern, the more social communication
deficits are evident at this young age (Key & Stone, 2013).
     By 12 months of age, BAP infants have noticeably diverged
from typically developing children, exhibiting more extensive
delays and other abnormalities in cognition, motor development,
language development, and social skills (Ozonoff et al., 2015). By
mid-childhood, gaze fixation also diverges from controls, becoming
more similar to that of their autistic siblings. As we’ve noted earlier,
they spend more time looking at the mouth rather than the eyes, a
trait commonly reported in autism. In addition, during these tasks
high-risk siblings exhibit reduced activation of the fusiform gyrus,
an area integral to facial processing, suggesting they’re depending
more heavily on other areas of the brain during facial-processing
tasks, which may leave them at a decided social disadvantage (Dalton
et al., 2007).

Internal noise and gamma oscillations
Internal noise is a property of the brain that affects the transduction
of neural signals. In essence, it’s the culmination of many factors,
ranging  from microscopic to large modular systems such as the
regulation of attention and arousal. In concert, these variables provide
the background on which neurons communicate with one another.
Greater background noise impairs the processing of key neuronal
signals, making it more difficult for the brain to assess, plan, and
execute specific behaviors (Vilidaite, Yu, & Baker, 2017). Imagine
the difficulty we may experience attending to a conversation while
in an extremely noisy room. In this example, the noisy room is the
“internal noise” in the brain, and the conversation we’re trying to hear
170                                DEFINING AUTISM


      and be a part of is the target signal. A noisy background means that
      the brain is more likely to miss key segments of that all-important
      neural conversation.
           As you may have guessed by now, autistic people have higher
      and more variable internal noise. And so it’s harder for their brains to
      weed out all that background information and home in on predictable
      external and internal stimuli. Hypersensitivity that often accompanies
      sensory processing disorder is a prime example of when the brain isn’t
      able to dampen background signals that most people (at least most of
      the time) are able to ignore with relative ease. Instead, some sensory
      perceptions in autism can be so strong as to be painful and may cause a
      person to withdraw simply to avoid the noxious stimulus—a stimulus
      that others without autism may not even notice.
           Perhaps even more interesting is the fact that the severity of the
      brain’s internal noise varies in the general population according to
      whether a person falls within the broader phenotype: people who
      score higher on BAP scales have more internal noise as measured
      across a variety of tasks (Vilidaite et al., 2017). Abnormalities in
      sensory sensitivity also seem to be somewhat heritable in autism
      families, with autism parents (some of whom are presumably BAP)
      reporting hypersensitivities and more avoidance behaviors than
      parents of typically developing children. In particular, autism mothers
      report high sensitivity to the perceptions of taste and smell (Glod
      et al., 2017).
           The neurons of the brain communicate in waveforms, with waves
      of neural activity often acting rhythmically. These waves oscillate at
      varying frequencies. It is believed that gamma oscillations in particular are
      the means by which different areas of the brain synchronize, binding
      different types of sensory information into a larger usable gestalt
      (Tallon-Baudry & Bertrand, 1999). An example would be the way in
      which we watch and enjoy television. Our brains must bind together
      the sound of different syllables into a single word; single words into a
      sentence; sentences into dialogue; colors, shapes, and movement into
      form; and finally bind our visual and auditory percepts together so
      that all the stimuli we’re deriving are perceived as a single television
      show or movie. The way the brain knows that these stimuli relate
      to one another is that they eventually synchronize, forming gamma
      oscillations. Without this synchronicity, the brain doesn’t easily grasp
      that the stimuli are related.
                    The Broader Autism Phenotype                              171


     High levels of internal noise can make it difficult for the brain
to dissociate signal from background. In this way, the autistic
brain  remains poorly synchronized, making it more difficult for
autistic people to relate incoming sensory experiences to one another
(Casanova, Baruth, et al., 2013). For this reason, some people with
autism report challenges both in looking at and listening to a person
at the same time, sometimes preferring to look away in order to better
understand what the other person is saying. Some also report difficulty
watching television, preferring to have subtitles on to supplement
conversation they may have otherwise missed. Similar to autism,
people with BAP also exhibit high internal noise and reduced gamma
oscillations, suggesting that they struggle similarly in relating different
sensory perceptions to one another, although likely to a milder degree
(Elsabbagh et al., 2009; Rojas et al., 2011; Vilidaite et al., 2017).


CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
According to inheritance patterns, there are no clear demarcations
indicating the point at which autism ends and BAP begins, suggesting
BAP is indeed a continuation of the autism spectrum, which is itself
highly heterogeneous. However, parent and sibling studies of simplex
and multiplex families suggest that BAP shares stronger ties with
“higher-functioning” multiplex inheritance patterns, which themselves
have ties with other psychiatric and neurodevelopmental conditions,
such as mood and psychotic disorders. In summary, evidence suggests
that although there is overlap, the autism spectrum is composed of
two major entities represented by: (1) simplex cases with greater
autism severity whose families exhibit fewer BAP traits and lower
rates of major depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia; and
(2) multiplex cases with comparatively lighter autism variants whose
families have higher rates of BAP, mood, and psychotic disorders.
While this is a simplification of reported trends with cases undoubtedly
available to the contrary, it’s a useful generalization that allows us to
make important predictions about the different heritable factors that
likely underlie these two groups.
                           Chapter Nine


      AUTISM, INTELLECTUAL
      DISABILITY, AND GENIUS


AUTISM VS. INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Although the association between autism and high intelligence has
been culturally popularized, autism also shares much in common with
intellectual disability (ID). It’s estimated that about 30 percent of those
on the spectrum test at or below an intelligence quotient (IQ ) of 70,
which places them in the intellectually disabled range. An additional ~20
percent test within the borderline range (IQ = 71–85), while the other
half of the spectrum tests in the normal or above-average intelligence
ranges (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2014). However,
there are many concerns about the reliability of those numbers and
whether traditional IQ tests, such as the Wechsler and Stanford–Binet,
adequately address underlying intelligence in someone who may have
deficits in language or attention, both of which facilitate traditional
testing methods (Nader et al., 2016).
     While it’s difficult to test around severe deficits in attention,
there are, however, other ways to gauge development independent
of language in young children, such as the Bayley Scales of Infant
Development, Griffith’s Mental Development Scales, and Mullen
Scales of Early Learning. These tests address a young child’s cognitive,
language, and motor skills, giving a better estimate of how he or she
processes a variety of types of novel information and adapts to it.
Unfortunately, even during tasks that are not social- or language-based,
a significant portion of young children with autism show measurable
developmental delays (Akshoomoff, 2006).
     Nevertheless, data suggest that when cognitive abilities are
measured in autistic children prior to the age of three, more than half
of those children who score within the ID range have by age nine
lost that diagnosis, indicating that cognitive abilities in many cases
                                   173
174                                 DEFINING AUTISM


      improve with time and can genuinely be considered “delays” (Turner
      et al., 2006). Language scores also exhibit similar gains by middle
      childhood. In addition, in those cases in which ID is still present by
      later childhood, the majority score within the mildly affected range
      (Charman et al., 2011).
          Some scientists, clinicians, and stakeholders have been critical of
      the means by which we attempt to measure general intelligence in
      autism (i.e. Stanford–Binet, Wechsler). As an alternative approach,
      some scientists have applied the Raven’s Progressive Matrices as
      a measure of fluid intelligence, which doesn’t rely on language as a
      communicative medium. Testing both children and adults, they have
      found that autistic people score significantly higher on the Raven
      compared to the Wechsler (Dawson et al., 2007; Soulières et al.,
      2011). In fact, autistic children that were studied scored on average
      30 percentile points higher than they did on the Wechsler. These data
      together suggest that traditional IQ tests are not as capable of gauging
      intellectual potential as once believed.


      AUTISM, INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, AND
      OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
      As discussed, a large minority of those with autism have an additional
      diagnosis of ID, however, there are many forms of ID that don’t
      co‑occur with autism. Therefore, one may wonder what the difference
      between the two conditions is despite their similarities and comorbidity.
           Scientists have attempted to address this question from a behavioral
      standpoint. One group of researchers studied numerous cases of ID
      with and without autism, investigating which DSM autism criteria
      were most specific to the autism spectrum (Pedersen et al., 2016).
      They found that many individuals with ID and autism share speech
      and language impairments, indicating language is commonly impaired
      across all forms of ID regardless of autism diagnosis.
           In contrast, they discovered that restricted and repetitive interests
      are most characteristic of autism. In particular, stereotyped patterns of
      interest and inflexible adherence to routine are the criteria with highest
      sensitivity and specificity for the condition. Meanwhile, delays in or
      lack of development in spoken language and impairment in the ability to initiate
      and sustain conversations are the criteria with least specificity for autism.
           These data suggest that restricted and repetitive interests are
      particularly unique to the autism spectrum, regardless of comorbidity.
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                    175


However, many of the restricted and repetitive symptoms overlap
those of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)—which, like ID, often
co-occurs with autism. Therefore, if restricted and repetitive interests
are specific to autism yet also overlap symptoms of OCD, how then do
these two conditions differ?
    Although research is early, the fundamental difference between
OCD and autism seems to be the quality of the obsessions and
compulsions (Paula-Pérez, 2013). In OCD, thoughts and impulses are
intrusive and unwanted, and provide the individual with measurable
anxiety. In contrast, when an autistic person engages in restricted and
repetitive behaviors, these behaviors don’t cause the individual
anxiety—unless of course the person with autism is prevented from
performing them. As many a family member and individual with
autism knows, a meltdown can ensue if the autistic person is prevented
from engaging in his or her routine or interests.


SAVANTISM
“Idiots savants”
Beate Hermelin, a pioneering psychologist in the field of autism
research, once said that autistic savants were incapable of true human
creativity but were limited to feats of rote mimicry (Snyder, 2004).
Sadly, her ideas of autism were limited by the era in which she worked,
one which didn’t recognize Asperger’s. Her early investigations were
also biased by the preferential study of autistic savants living in
psychiatric institutions.
    More recent studies suggest that roughly 20 percent of people
diagnosed with the older nosological term “autistic disorder,” display at
least modest savant skills. A further ~10 percent show outstanding skill
on one or more of the Wechsler IQ subtests, suggesting approximately
30 percent of this population has some form of advanced skill relative
to typically developing individuals. What’s more, savantism is rarely
associated with moderate-to-profound ID, arguing against the obsolete
stereotype of the “idiot savant” (Howlin et al., 2009). Beate Hermelin
herself recognized the misnomer:
    We knew of course that accounts of ‘idiots savants’ had been given for
    over 100 years. The Frenchman Alfred Binet, who invented the first
    intelligence test, had introduced the term to describe those people
    who had great learning difficulties and could not cope with life on
176                                 DEFINING AUTISM


         their own, but yet showed an outstanding ability in a specific area. In
         fact, as only those with the very lowest intelligence levels [(IQ < 20)]
         fell into the category of ‘idiots’, the term ‘idiot savant’ was probably
         never quite appropriate. (Hermelin, 2001, p. 16)
      Bernard Rimland, a major proponent of the biological theory of
      autism and leader of the early parents’ movement, whom we covered
      in Chapter 1, called attention to misuse of the term in an article for
      Psychology Today (1978)—instead suggesting that the term be replaced
      by “autistic savant.” As he explains a few years later:
         When prodigious abilities occur in individuals who have not
         developed normally (the developmentally disabled), we employ a
         rather derogatory misnomer: the idiot savant. Most of the otherwise
         mentally handicapped individuals who have developed special skills
         are not so disabled that the term idiot would be applicable, even in its
         once legitimate usage to mean the more profoundly retarded. In our
         own usage we shall omit the term idiot, and simply use savant, which
         is not appropriate either, but serves as a compromise with tradition.
         (Rimland & Hill, 1984, p. 155)
      Rimland later provided professional expertise to the cast and crew of
      the movie Rain Man, suggesting that Dustin Hoffman’s now-famous
      character, Raymond, be rewritten as an autistic rather than an “idiot”
      savant. He also arranged for Hoffman to meet a number of savants to
      study, and upon which to base his portrayal (Rimland, 1990). One
      of these young men, who was known back then only anonymously
      as “Peter,” was in all likelihood the now-famous savant Kim Peek
      (Figure 9.1).




                        Figure 9.1: The megasavant Kim Peek
                (Reproduced with permission of Dmadeo from Wikimedia Commons)
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                  177


Laurence Kim Peek (aka Kim Peek) was born in 1951 after what
seemed a normal pregnancy. However, from the very beginning his
parents knew Kim was different. He didn’t respond to stimuli normally,
he didn’t play, he couldn’t walk until well after age four, and his eyes
moved independently of one another. Doctors diagnosed Kim with
ID and recommended his parents institutionalize him. Thankfully
for Kim, his parents refused, keeping him at home with the family.
Instead, to pass the time, they constantly read to him, as he slowly
followed the words with his fingers. According to his father, one day
Kim asked him what the term, “confidential,” meant. His father, Fran,
told the story years later:
    …without thinking, I jokingly told him to look it up in the family
    dictionary. He did. About 30 seconds after putting his head down,
    crawling like a snowplow to the dictionary, he found the word and
    read out the definition. Thereafter he never stopped reading and
    memorizing everything he could get his hands on including phone
    directories, atlases, biographies, and histories (Opitz, Smith, &
    Santoro, 2008, p. 143).
Kim Peek was what is colloquially known as a megasavant. By the end
of his life at age 58, he had read and memorized over 12,000 books,
whose text he was able to retrieve with almost perfect recall. He also
had considerable talents in music, both in terms of perfect pitch and
musical memory.
     In addition to ID, Kim was originally diagnosed with autism,
although by the end of his life that diagnosis was changed to FG
syndrome (FGS). FGS is composed of several different subtypes, each
underlayed by different mutations. However, all affected individuals
present with poor muscle tone at birth, speech delays, relative
macrocephaly, facial malformations, and severe constipation and/or
malformations of the anus (OMIM, 2014). Kim also had a missing
corpus callosum, the fibrous axons that connect the two hemispheres
of the brain—a feature that is not uncommon in FGS.
     Although most people with FGS don’t fulfill all autism criteria,
many display abnormal social skills and withdrawal, echolalia,
stereotypies, and substantial repetitive behaviors, suggesting autistic-
like features are common in this syndrome (Battaglia, Chines, & Carey,
2006; Ozonoff et al., 2000). This overlap is probably the reason Kim
received the earlier “autism” diagnosis.
178                               DEFINING AUTISM


      Savantism with normal intelligence
      Because of the “idiot savant” stereotype, much attention has been paid
      to savants who have some form of cognitive impairment—perhaps
      because the extreme dichotomy is so fascinating to us. But do autistic
      savants with normal or superior IQ exist? And if so, how common
      are they?
          When calculating the general and special education populations
      combined, roughly 63 percent of children on the autism spectrum
      score within the average to very superior ranges of IQ (Kim et al.,
      2011). Approximately 6 percent score at or above the superior
      range of intelligence (IQ ≥ 120), which is roughly three-fold more
      common than in the general population. Unfortunately, there are no
      current prevalence rates that tell us how common savantism is in this
      subpopulation. However, Darold Treffert, a world expert on savantism,
      suggests that it is:
          very common [in Asperger’s], and generally include[s] prodigious
          memory. When [savant skills] do occur, in my experience, those
          special abilities in Asperger’s tend to involve numbers, mathematics,
          mechanical and spatial skills. Many are drawn to science, inventions,
          complex machines and particularly, now, computers. (Treffert, 2004)
      Additional research has also shown that people with high-functioning
      autism are more sensitive to minute changes in auditory pitch, a
      potential precursor to musical savantism (Bonnel et al., 2003).
      Interestingly, musicians who display perfect pitch exhibit more autistic
      traits than musicians without this ability, suggesting even subclinical
      personality traits share links with enhanced perceptual processing
      (Dohn et al., 2012).
           There are many famous savants. However, most tend to have some
      mild cognitive impairment or developed savantism following brain
      injury. Daniel Tammet (Figure 9.2), however, is a notable exception:
          I was born on January 31, 1979—a Wednesday. I know it was a
          Wednesday, because the date is blue in my mind and Wednesdays are
          always blue, like the number 9 or the sound of loud voices arguing.
          I like my birth date, because of the way I’m able to visualize most of
          the numbers in it as smooth and round shapes, similar to pebbles on
          a beach. That’s because they are prime numbers: 31, 19, 197, 97, 79,
               Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                      179


    and 1979 are all divisible only by themselves and 1. I can recognize
    every prime up to 9,973 by their “pebble-like” quality. It’s just the
    way my brain works. (Tammet, 2006, p. 1)
Daniel was a shy child, enraptured by a world of numbers. The eldest
of nine children, he suffered from epilepsy, which was eventually
controlled by medications. It wasn’t until adulthood, however, after his
initial rise to fame that he was diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome by
the Autism Research Centre at Cambridge University.
     Lending to his prodigious memory feats, Daniel also has a
mixed form of synesthesia. Synesthesia is a perceptual phenomenon
in which stimulation of one sense triggers activation of another
typically unrelated sense. In the case of Daniel, he experiences
numbers associated with color, physical features like size and spatial
arrangement, and even emotion. In this way, he’s able to “walk through
a landscape” in his mind, each number up to 10,000 having a unique
identity or “personality.”




                Figure 9.2: The autistic savant Daniel Tammet
        (Reproduced with permission of MelodyNelson18 from Wikimedia Commons)


Although he became famous for incredible feats of memory, notably
memorizing and reciting pi (π) to 22,514 digits, Daniel is an equally
accomplished polyglot and author, and besides penning three
180                                  DEFINING AUTISM


      autobiographies he has written a book on language as well as his first
      novel, Mishenka, published in French. In the television documentary
      The Boy with the Incredible Brain, Daniel accepted and won the challenge
      to learn conversational Icelandic within a single week, supposedly one
      of the most difficult languages to master.

      When savantism crosses into pure genius
      Jacob (Jake) Barnett (Figure 9.3) is a mathematician currently working
      on his doctorate degree at the world-renowned Perimeter Institute for
      Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Canada. According to those around
      him, he is on the short-track to a Nobel Prize. He is also the youngest
      student to be accepted to the institute at the age of 15.




                     Figure 9.3: The autistic savant Jacob Barnett
                 (Reproduced with permission of Álvaro from Wikimedia Commons)


      Jake was diagnosed with autism at two years of age following an
      episode of regression so severe that doctors and teachers told his
      parents he would probably never talk. His parents enrolled him in the
      usual slew of behavioral therapies, hopeful he could recover the skills
      he’d lost, yet within a short time his mother, Kristine, could tell his
      therapies were only causing him to withdraw further into himself:
          Most of the time, it didn’t even feel as though he was in the room. He
          had stopped speaking entirely. He no longer made eye contact with
          anyone, nor did he respond when he was spoken to. If you hugged
          him, he’d push away. (Jack M., 2016)
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                     181


Enough was enough. Kristine took him out of therapy and began
to homeschool him, letting him focus on and indulge in the things
he loved. Even as a toddler, Jake adored math, drawing, and solving
puzzles, and within a short time he began to blossom under his
mother’s tutelage. He did so well that Kristine opened an evening
program called Little Light for local families with autism, aimed
at using the children’s strengths to improve their weaknesses, an
approach strongly advocated by Temple Grandin. The program was
a smashing success, helping children who had been written off by
the school systems achieve greater levels of integration in school
than  were ever thought possible. And more importantly, the young
people were measurably happier, eagerly allowed to take part in the
things that interested them most.
     Thanks to Kristine’s gut instincts and motherly support, by age
three Jake could speak four languages, was teaching himself Braille,
and was able to recreate street maps using only Q-tips. By age five, he
was able to enter kindergarten full-time without the need for special
education. By age eight, he was auditing classes on astronomy at Indiana
University, impressing the professors so much that the university
eventually invited him to enroll. By age ten he began college, at age
11 he was giving TED talks, and by 13 he was a published physicist.
     After Jake’s initial brush with the media following an article in The
Indiana Star, he was invited to participate in a research study on autism
and savantism run by Dr. Joanne Ruthsatz at Ohio State University.
As part of the study, she tested Jake using the Stanford–Binet, an IQ
test ideal for testing people with either low or high IQ due to the
low floor and high ceiling the test offers respectively. Shockingly, Jake
reached the Stanford–Binet’s ceiling, managing to test out on all the
subtests. Nobody had ever done that before! Even the Stanford–Binet
couldn’t measure Jake’s IQ , which was well over 170. Now at age 19
Jake is working to complete his PhD in physics and astronomy at the
Perimeter Institute and is undoubtedly slated for great things in his
future career (Andrews, 2017).
     Dr. Beate Hermelin did not believe that splinter skills in autism
reflected genuine intelligence, a case that has been argued by many.
However, there have been both modern and historical cases in which
prodigious ability in autism lends itself to true creativity and, at times,
pure genius. Daniel Tammet and Jacob Barnett are excellent modern
182                                DEFINING AUTISM


      examples and historical figures abound, such as Wolfgang Amadeus
      Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Albert Einstein, Henry Cavendish, Nikola
      Tesla, and Isaac Newton to name just a few (Fitzgerald, 2005, 2007).
      Although such profound prodigies are exceptionally rare—perhaps one in
      a million—the application of prodigious ability is limited only by an
      individual’s creative capacity. What’s more, our definitions of “creativity”
      are both variable and subjective, suggesting our concepts  of creative
      ability may be biased by our perceptions of autism.
           For example, although Stephen Wiltshire (Figure 9.4), the autistic
      savant artist, draws his incredible cityscapes true to form based on a
      prodigious memory, his drawings and paintings are still exceptional
      forms of artistic expression. No artist in the world would doubt his
      creative capacity. And his incredible memory aids that natural talent,
      but is not the source of his gift—anymore than Da Vinci’s model
      was the origin of his masterpiece, the Mona Lisa. It’s true that not
      every savant is gifted with remarkable creativity to match his or her
      prodigious ability. But neither is savantism an impassionate endeavor,
      defined by the exercising of eidetic memory. As anyone who is autistic,
      or has loved, lived, or worked with someone with autism knows, they
      can be remarkably original and creative people, regardless of their
      cognitive abilities.




                 Figure 9.4: The autistic savant artist Stephen Wiltshire
                            (Reproduced from Wikimedia Commons)
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                      183


HUMAN INTELLIGENCE
As we discussed in the first chapter of this book, Leo Kanner, the Father
of Autism, was the first to notice autistic traits in the parents and family
members of his original case studies. He also noted that most of the
parents of the children he studied had attained high educational status,
including the mothers—an occurrence especially unusual for that era.
As may be of little surprise to the reader, we now know that high
intelligence, socioeconomic status, and educational achievement share
a strong interrelationship (Deary & Johnson, 2010; Deary et al., 2007).
As we discussed in the chapter on genetics (Chapter 3), the tendency
for like attracting like is referred to as assortative mating (Hugh-Jones
et al., 2016; Plomin & Deary, 2015). In short, people with similar
backgrounds tend to intermarry more often than expected at random.
     We know that mate patterns affect intelligence and development
of the human brain in modern times. But what drove brain evolution
throughout prehistory? Is the human brain uniquely different from
those of our primate cousins? To address these questions, we’re going
to have to travel back several million years in time.


The evolution of human intelligence
The humanoid line contains all of our known ancient relatives from the
ape-like protohuman, Ardipithecus ramidus, who lived over 4.4  million
years ago (Figure 9.5), to us, Homo sapiens. As animals go, the size of
our brains isn’t unique. In fact, several lines of placental mammals
have also experienced dramatic increases in brain size relative to
body size, including certain cetaceans (e.g. dolphins) and elephants
(Herculano‑Houzel et al., 2014; Marino, 1998). We do however top the
list, having the biggest brains for our body size with an encephalization
quotient (EQ ) of roughly 6 (Boddy et al., 2012). (Any EQ greater
than 1 indicates a brain that is larger than expected with respect to its
body size.)
184                                   DEFINING AUTISM




        Figure 9.5: A reconstruction of the skull of Ardipithecus ramidus, one of our
      oldest known humanoid relatives who lived approximately 4.4 million years ago
             (Accessed on 17 July 2018 at www.hindawi.com/journals/ert/2014/582039/)


      Other primates, such as the baboon lineage, don’t appear to have
      experienced significant increases in brain volume during recent
      evolution (Elton, Bishop, & Wood, 2001). This, however, is not the case
      for the human lineage. While genera like the robust Australopithecus,
      an early  form of human-like ancestor similar to “Lucy,” experienced
      some mild increases in size, our genus, Homo, is the only one to exhibit
      substantial increases in overall brain volume (De Sousa & Wood, 2007).
      In fact, brain size in our ancestral lineage has increased nearly five-fold,
      a figure that diverges significantly from what we would expect given
      increases in body size over that same time period (Boddy et al., 2012).
            But dolphins have an EQ of 4–4.5, and although we know they’re
      very smart, why aren’t they making tools, building skyscrapers, and
      developing complex social societies? Surely our humanness isn’t
      rooted solely in our capacity to manipulate objects with our hands but
      is buried deep in our cerebrum.
            The answer may lie in connectivity. Although the surface of a
      dolphin’s brain is inordinately more complex than our own, having
      twice the gyrification index as that of the human brain, their
      interhemispheric connections are comparatively sparse. In part, this is
      due to the fact that because a dolphin is a mammal and must breathe
      air, it must continue to swim and surface at all times. In order to achieve
      this feat, similar to nesting birds, only half of the dolphin’s brain sleeps
      at any given time. Therefore, each hemisphere serves almost entirely as
      a brain unto itself, necessitating few connections to its mirror partner
      (Tarpley & Ridgway, 1994). In contrast, the human brain, though
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                    185


anatomically and functionally asymmetric, nevertheless functions
as a whole and displays considerable interconnectivity alongside
its substantial gray matter. We’ll discuss more about connectivity in
relation to human intelligence and autism in later sections.

Brain evolution at the DNA level
We share roughly 70 percent of our protein-coding genes with zebrafish,
yet our two species shared their last common ancestor over 450 million
years ago. We have a lot in common at the genetic level (Howe et al.,
2013), but, in spite of that commonality, few would deny that humans
and zebrafish look radically different. These differences are due in large
part to the evolution that’s taken place around protein-coding segments
of DNA in regions that regulate the expression of those genes. These
are known as regulatory sequences. They tell a gene when, where, and how
it should be expressed. Because mutations within coding sequences of
a gene are more likely to harm the organism, evolution preferentially
tinkers with the more dispensable regulatory sequences. Rather than
change the structure and function of the proteins themselves, variation
within regulatory DNA has allowed evolution to create different patterns
of gene expression and promote biological diversity.
     Now think of chimpanzees and humans. We share about 98 percent
of our protein-coding sequences with chimps. And though our two
species look more alike than either of us do compared to a zebrafish,
we are still radically different species with roughly 6–13 million years
of divergent evolution between us. What’s more, our encephalization
quotient is almost three-fold greater than a chimp’s (Roth & Dicke,
2005). So how can we be so similar and yet our brains so different?
     Scientists have found that both the human and chimp ancestral
lineages experienced accelerated evolution within the regulatory
DNA in and around genes associated with the central nervous system.
However, even though both species share this accelerated evolution,
there’s almost no overlap in the specific sequences affected in our two
species (Prabhakar et al., 2006). In other words, neural genes in humans
and chimps have dramatically evolved since the time both species split
but in different ways, which has led to significant differences in brain
size and function between us.
     Many regulatory sequences are derived from mobile elements
(Feschotte, 2008). These “jumping genes” are segments of DNA
that use cut/copy and paste methods to move around the genome.
186                                DEFINING AUTISM


      Mobile elements are extremely old and can be found in vertebrates
      like ourselves, in invertebrates such as fruit flies, plants, and even in
      bacteria. This means that mobile elements probably arose more than
      two to three billion years ago!
           Because these jumping genes often contain repetitive DNA
      content, once they’ve managed to insert into the genome they’re
      inherently unstable, leading to mispairings during DNA replication. These
      mispairings can result in the gain or loss of DNA material (discussed in
      Chapter 3). Sometimes that material contains regulatory DNA, which
      can change how a nearby gene functions.
           Interestingly, deletion of significant regulatory content has occurred
      in the human lineage. Scientists have identified over 500 conserved
      regulatory sequences that humans have lost since the time of our last
      common ancestor with chimpanzees, but which the chimpanzee still
      retains (McLean et al., 2011). What’s more, these sequences tend to be
      near neural genes.
           Although it may seem strange to the reader, the loss of a regulatory
      element doesn’t equate to an evolutionary regression or devolution.
      Instead, the loss of regulatory DNA may simply change when, where, or
      how that gene is expressed. Some regulatory sequences, for instance,
      aid in methylating genes, whereby a methyl group is attached to a
      target in the DNA, determining whether the gene can be expressed.
      Most typically, methylation will suppress gene expression.
           However, if a methylation target is deleted, gene expression may
      also change. Interestingly, scientists have found that humans have
      hundreds of promoter regions that are undermethylated compared to
      the chimpanzee, leading to higher gene expression levels in those genes.
      What’s more, these genes are especially enriched within the central
      nervous system (Zeng et al., 2012). So neural genes have been under
      strong selection in both humans and chimps for millions of years, yet
      evolution has worked in different ways, likely leading to the remarkable
      differences in brain size and function across our two species.

      Is it all about brain size?
      Humans have the largest brain-to-body-mass ratio of any organism
      studied to date. And though bigger brains may provide an animal with
      the ability to process more information, how the brain processes data
      is just as important. When we compare human, chimpanzee, and the
      macaque monkey, there are clear differences in brain size, with humans
              Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                     187


topping the list. However, geneticists have identified important
differences in a part of the human brain known as the frontal cortex
that differentiate us from our primate cousins.
     As the term suggests, the frontal cortex lies at the front of the
brain, directly behind the forehead and the frontal portion of the scalp.
Although it is multifunctional, this area of the brain is best known
for its involvement in “executive functions.” Executive functions
include such skills as the regulation of attention, working memory,
multitasking, self-inhibition, and planning. These are the skills with
which people with ADHD tend to have their greatest challenges.
     Interestingly, geneticists have found that gene expression patterns
in the human frontal cortex (specifically within the most anterior
region known as the “frontal pole”) are more complex than we see
in our primate cousins such as chimps and macaques (Konopka et al.,
2012). Of the gene profiles we have studied so far, about 30 percent
are differentially expressed in humans compared to apes and monkeys.
These genes span a variety of cellular functions, affecting different
stages of neuron development and communication, as well as immune
system function.
     The frontal pole is also decidedly larger in humans compared to
other primates and has an exceptional microanatomy contained within
its layers, leading to enhanced connectivity throughout the brain
(Semendeferi et al., 2001). This finding suggests that, aside from having
more processing power, the human brain is better able to integrate
incoming information compared to other animals. Think back to our
earlier example of the dolphin and its “two brains.” Interestingly, this
ability to “integrate” disparate forms of information is one of the main
impairments in autism, which we’ll talk about in the next section.
     Although the entirety of the human brain has radically evolved
over millions of years, the frontal cortex is uniquely affected. This
lobe is partly responsible for the intricacies of our social networks; our
ability to plan, build, and adapt useful tools; our capacity for complex
language that allows us to verbally inherit ideas over generations,
tinkering as we go; and our ability to work together to achieve common
goals. This is the biological counterpart of the cultural “ratchet effect,”
in which human traits are inherited behaviorally rather than genetically
(Tomasello, 2009). Our genetics provides the means for these abilities
and our culture ensures their inheritance.
188                                DEFINING AUTISM


      INTELLIGENCE IN AUTISM
      Connectivity
      Cerebral connectivity can be broken down into two major forms:
      long-range and short-range. Most of the connections within the
      cortex are short-range, linking neurons that fall within several
      hundred micrometers of one another. They are primarily responsible
      for generating information. Long-range connections on the other hand
      are necessary for linking disparate areas of the brain with one another
      so that information can be integrated into a usable gestalt (Sporns &
      Zwi, 2004). For instance, people with face blindness (prosopagnosia)
      have difficulty recognizing familiar people because they are unable to
      integrate the varied information of the human face into an identifiable
      whole. Therefore, when they are able to recognize people, it’s often
      because of select features such as hairstyle, a person’s nose, or unusual
      glasses. They have challenges integrating these different types of facial
      information due, in part, to reduced connectivity or damage between
      brain regions integral in consolidation (Thomas et al., 2009).
           Connections within the brains of infants who develop autism tend
      to develop at a faster pace than their typical counterparts. Connectivity
      initially skyrockets, particularly within the frontal cortex, but over time
      that growth plateaus compared to other children (Bashat et al., 2007;
      Wolff et al., 2012). This premature development is what evolutionary
      biologists call peramorphosis, meaning that particular stages of
      development in a specific organ or tissue have occurred earlier than
      they did in the same organs or tissues of their ancestors. The opposite
      of peramorphosis is pedomorphosis, in which select developmental
      stages have occurred later. Pedomorphosis is apparent in many aspects
      of human development. For instance, our extended childhood and
      adolescent periods are pedomorphic compared to other primates who
      reach sexual maturity at younger ages than ourselves (Marson et al.,
      1991; McNamara, 2012).
           In spite of our extended childhoods, the brains of human infants
      are in some ways peramorphic (developmentally advanced) compared
      to chimpanzees. Scientists have found that, despite the larger size of
      our brains, connectivity develops earlier and faster than in our closest
      relative, the chimp—especially within the frontal cortex (Sakai et al.,
      2011). Ultimately, this leads to an enlarged white matter volume in the
      frontal cortex of humans compared to other primates (Schoenemann,
      Sheehan, & Glotzer, 2005).
               Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                      189


     Connectivity in autism, on average, develops even earlier than
in typical infants, indicating that they may lie on the extreme end
of a human continuum that preferences early development of brain
connectivity compared to our primate ancestors. This suggests that
hereditary influences responsible for this human trend have been
under strong evolutionary pressures and may underlie aspects of
autism risk. How premature development leads to the long-range
underconnectivity and short-range overconnectivity patterns we see in
autism is uncertain. However, a few possibilities spring to mind.
     One explanation involves pruning. During early development,
subsets of neurons in the cerebral cortex form numerous connections
within the brain, connecting to regions not only within the same
hemisphere but with the contralateral (opposite) hemisphere, forming
the naïve corpus callosum. Through infancy and early childhood,
however, as experience and learning drive patterns of activity, unused
connections will be pruned. In the case of autism, peculiarities of
neural activity may preference the activity of short-range connections
over long ones, leading to more extensive pruning within white-
matter structures like the corpus callosum. This in turn would lead to
a decrease in the volume of this important structure.
     Metabolic injury could lead to a loss of connectivity within the
brain, a scenario that may be relevant in cases of autistic regression. Since
long-range fibers are less plastic than smaller ones and can’t reconnect
to their original targets due to the sheer distance they must traverse,
this connectivity is permanently lost following injury. Meanwhile,
short‑range fibers are able to recapitulate their earlier connections
more easily.
     Finally, the last scenario involves developmental mistiming.
Because nerve fibers don’t connect to targets randomly but are
guided by important molecular signals (often provided by glial cells),
premature development in autism may precede the presence of those
all-important guiding signals. In order to aid in development of
the corpus callosum, glial cells sit in the middle of the developing
cerebrum, forming a pathway between which newborn nerve fibers
are guided and eventually synapse onto neurons on the other side of
the brain. If those fibers reach the midline of the brain before the glia
are ready for them, this leads to a backlog of fiber tracts that are either
pruned away or seek out alternate targets within the same hemisphere.
190                                   DEFINING AUTISM


      Interestingly, postmortem studies in autism suggest this does occur in
      a subset of cases (Wegiel et al., 2017).




               Figure 9.6: Focal agenesis of the corpus callosum in autism
           This is evidence of disturbances to developmental connectivity, particularly
             to long fiber tracts of the brainThese impairments can lead to deficits
               in communication between distant regions of the brain involved in
                 complex cognitive processes such as socialization and language.
                                   (Courtesy of Dr. Jerzy Wegiel)



      Connectivity and cognition in autism
      A preference for short-range connections over long ones emphasizes
      information generation. When this is at the expense of long-range
      connectivity, the brain isn’t capable of integrating all the information
      it generates. This may partly explain why autistic individuals are often
      attuned to details yet struggle with skills that require the coordinated
      efforts of multiple disparate brain regions, such as socialization,
      language, and motor movements.
           However, provided cognition isn’t overly impaired, an emphasis
      on information generation may be beneficial, leading to detailed
      perception and potentially higher intelligence. This may explain some
      of the savantism, creativity, and intelligence we see in portions of
      the spectrum. It may also explain why people with high intelligence
      sometimes have autistic-like features. And in this way we can begin to
      understand how the evolution of human intelligence may share some
      of its story with conditions like autism.
               Autism, Intellectual Disability, and Genius                       191


     However, as with many things in life, cognition teeters in a delicate
balancing act: too much one way and we don’t perceive enough detail;
too much the other way and we can’t construct a coherent whole.
It is in this way that the autism spectrum can range from peaks of
incredible genius to the most intellectually impaired of individuals, all
determined by the ways in which the brain communicates within itself.


CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Intellectual delays and impairment are significant issues in the
diagnosis and treatment of people with autism. Although the majority
of individuals by middle childhood are not intellectually disabled, a
substantial minority retain the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment.
There are also some cases, often syndromic in nature, who have severe
cognitive challenges and require significant supports for the entirety
of their lives.
    On the other hand, there are individuals on the spectrum who are
eventually capable of independence, going on to hold jobs, and have
careers and families of their own. Many a parent reading this book, for
instance, may have realized his or her own autistic challenges during
the process of his or her child’s assessment and diagnosis.
    Many cultural factions have argued over what autism is and isn’t,
attempting to draw a dividing line through ever-shifting sand. And
while definitional dividing lines may be possible when addressing
rare conditions, when we are dealing with a complex condition, by
definition the causes will be numerous and the severity variable. That
is the nature of complex conditions such as autism, schizophrenia,
ADHD, heart disease, and Alzheimer’s.
    Autism isn’t a single condition, but a large collection of different
but overlapping syndromes that all share common behavioral
features. And we call those features autism. Therefore, while one
person’s “autism” may be the result of a fragile X mutation leading to
significant cognitive impairment, another person’s “autism” may be
linked with maternal immune activation during pregnancy and other
hereditary and environmental factors, leading to a milder presentation
of symptoms. The same concept can be extended to individuals with
subclinical traits.
    Autism, like the term intellectual disability, is a descriptive diagnosis,
not a single condition with a single underlying cause—even though
192                              DEFINING AUTISM


      clinicians, scientists, and laymen have usually treated it as such. And
      although there is probably a common biological underpinning that
      causes this syndrome (e.g. widespread effects to specific systems
      within the brain), the factors that lead to its phenotype are numerous.
      Therefore, we must begin to rethink how we use the term autism
      and the implications that go with it. People across the spectrum may
      have the same syndrome, but they don’t all share the same condition.
                            Chapter Ten


       TOWARD A DEFINITION
           OF AUTISM


Although Leo Kanner and Hans Asperger had published their
manuscripts in the early 1940s, “autism” was not its own official
diagnostic entity until 1980, a single year before Kanner passed
away. In the first and second editions of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), published in 1952 and 1968
respectively, autism was subsumed under the broader diagnosis of
childhood schizophrenia, used simply as an adjective to describe children
who manifested atypical withdrawal behaviors. Given the rarity of
childhood schizophrenia today, it’s likely that many of these children
were autistic by modern diagnostic standards.
     By the time of the DSM-III’s (1980) publication, infantile autism
had been inducted as an official diagnosis, although its criteria were
simplistic compared to later iterations. “Childhood Onset Pervasive
Developmental Disorders” were also included in this version of the
DSM, covering other variants of autism that supposedly had symptom
onset after 30 months of age.
     During this same period, renowned psychiatrist Dr. Lorna Wing
(Figure 10.1) was working and publishing on a diagnostic entity she
referred to as Asperger’s syndrome (Wing, 1981). Wing’s daughter
was diagnosed with Kanner’s autism in the 1950s. From that
point onwards, Wing relinquished a blossoming line of research in
electrophysiological studies of various mental health conditions and
focused her professional career on autism. In 1964, she established
the Camberwell Case Register and, alongside then-graduate student
Judith Gould, assessed children with special needs coming through
the Maudsley Hospital in southeast London (Watts, 2014).



                                  193
194                                    DEFINING AUTISM




             Figure 10.1: The renowned autism researcher Dr. Lorna Wing
                (Courtesy of Dr. Judith Gould and The Lorna Wing Centre for Autism)


      As they collected data on these young patients for the register, they
      realized that while some children had classic autism, other children
      had features of autism but also characteristics that didn’t precisely
      match Kanner’s original profile. Instead, Wing came to recognize that
      autism existed as a spectrum, appreciating that the autistic phenotype
      was more variable than Kanner had envisioned.
          Later, her husband, Dr. John Wing, happened across Hans
      Asperger’s manuscript, which described children with social impair­
      ments, poor nonverbal communication, and physical clumsiness. Lorna
      Wing realized that Asperger’s patients had features in common with
      Kanner’s original cases but they were also different in other ways.
          Although Asperger himself did not feel his patients lay on the same
      spectrum as that of Kanner’s, Wing nevertheless helped to popularize
      the concept of an autism spectrum (including Asperger’s syndrome) in
      her 1981 article “Asperger’s syndrome: A clinical account.” Interestingly,
      Wing precociously recognized in those early years of research that the
      etiological roots of autism spectrum conditions were quite variable:
          [Individuals] with the triad of symptoms all require the same kind of
          structured, organised educational approach, although the aims and
          achievements of education will vary from minimal self-care up to
          a university degree, depending on the skills available to the person
          concerned.
                    Toward a definition of Autism                             195


         This hypothesis does not suggest that there is a common
    gross aetiology. This is certainly not the case, since many different
    genetic or pre-, peri- or post-natal causes can lead to the same overt
    clinical picture (Wing & Gould, 1979). It is more likely that all the
    conditions in which the triad occurs have in common impairment
    of certain aspects of brain function that are presumably necessary
    for adequate social interaction, verbal and non-verbal communication
    and imaginative development. (Wing, 1981)
By 1992, Asperger’s syndrome was inducted into the World Health
Organization’s International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and in
1994 was subsumed in the DSM-IV-TR under the larger umbrella
“Pervasive Developmental Disorders,” alongside autistic disorder and
other conditions such as Rett syndrome.
     Although Asperger’s syndrome is still an ICD diagnosis and is in
use outside the United States, the term is currently obsolete within
the U.S., and people with the condition now fall under the umbrella
diagnosis autism spectrum disorder in the new DSM-5. Unfortunately, it
now appears more difficult for individuals who once fulfilled Asperger
criteria to garner an autism spectrum disorder diagnosis due to an
increase in the number of criteria a person is required to meet within
the sociocommunication domain. This has undoubtedly left a number
of children and adults in the lurch, with no appropriate diagnosis to
help them get the treatment and accommodations they may need.
It’s uncertain whether nosology (classification) will change again in
future—however, fluctuating criteria are a reflection of the ongoing
debate concerning the boundaries where autism ends and “normality”
(for want of a better word) begins. Since biology rarely provides such
clean delineation when it comes to complex conditions, it’s likely
these sorts of dividing lines are relatively arbitrary and may be more
heavily driven by clinician opinion than hard data.
     By now it should be clear to the reader that the etiology of autism is
complex and varies across individuals. As we concluded in the previous
chapter, “People across the spectrum may have the same syndrome, but
they don’t all share the same condition.” Like the term, “intellectual
disability,” we are coming to understand “autism” as a behavioral label
rather than a single entity—although there are undoubtedly subgroups
of people who share similar etiologies. As science continues to plod
onwards, we hope to identify these subgroups, which may afford
196                               DEFINING AUTISM


      individuals more tailored treatment options and accommodations
      should they wish.


      LOOKING AT LESION STUDIES TO
      UNDERSTAND AUTISM
      According to Lorna Wing’s friend and collaborator Judith Gould,
      Wing was “rather like a detective. She could look at the bits of a puzzle
      and put it together” (Watts, 2014, p. 658). Despite working during
      the infancy of autism research, Wing already grasped that the autism
      spectrum was not only behaviorally but etiologically heterogeneous.
      Although in the early days she may not have realized the sheer breadth
      of that heterogeneity, she understood that disturbances to specific
      regions of the brain might lead to a common syndrome:
          It is more likely that all the conditions in which the triad occurs
          have in common impairment of certain aspects of brain function that
          are presumably necessary for adequate social interaction, verbal and
          non‑verbal communication and imaginative development. (Wing,
          1981, p. 124)
      Here, we will review specific lesion studies to illustrate how regional
      effects in the brain can produce the primary symptoms associated with
      autism. Sometimes these cases are the result of brain injury, such as
      blunt trauma or stroke; other times, they are congenital. In reviewing
      this material, we can better understand which systems in the brain may
      be responsible for the criteria we consider the “core” of this complicated
      syndrome, even though different genetic and environmental factors
      drive symptomology across groups of people.


      Sociocommunication
      As we briefly discussed in Chapter 8, pragmatics is the social use of
      language. This includes what we say, how we say it, to whom we
      say it, our body language, and other aspects of context important for
      understanding the mood of the speaker and his or her likely response
      in such a situation. As you might imagine, in order to use social
      language well we must attend to and process many stimuli at once
      in order to alter our behaviors appropriately. Without that ability, we
      may be apt to tell rude jokes at the wrong time, be honest when our
                         Toward a definition of Autism                                         197


conversation partner is wanting reassurance rather than honesty, or give
away private information to a stranger. Considering the social world’s
complexity, it may be unsurprising to know that pragmatic language
continues to develop throughout childhood and well into adolescence
and early adulthood (Nippold, 1993). Deficits in pragmatic language
are also a fundamental feature of the sociocommunicative traits we see
in autism (APA, 2013).
     The frontal cortex, temporal cortex, and portions of the corpus
callosum bridging these regions are areas integral to the production
and comprehension of social language. Children who have experienced
traumatic brain injury (TBI) to any of these regions often have
deficits in social communication, particularly during the acute phase
after injury (Ryan et al., 2015). With enough time and therapy, they
may regain some of the skills they had lost, although some deficits may
be permanent.
     Individuals who are born with a congenitally missing corpus
callosum (Figure 10.2) have a condition known as agenesis of the corpus
callosum (ACC). Sometimes the agenesis is partial, affecting one or more
of the subregions of the structure. Other times, the agenesis is complete
and the entirety of the corpus callosum is missing. Interestingly, a body
of evidence suggests that people with ACC have particular difficulties
with social language, even when overall IQ is accounted for.




Figure 10.2: Coronal (left) and sagittal (right) sections of the corpus callosum,
    the white matter tract that connects the two hemispheres of the brain
(Reproduced with permission of user: Looie496 and John A. Beal, PhD, from Wikimedia Commons)


Parents often report that their children with ACC have difficulties
with the nuances of social interaction, frequently misconstruing jokes
and stories. Based on this anecdotal evidence, scientists have studied
198                              DEFINING AUTISM


      ACC children’s abilities to grasp humor, finding that while their
      comprehension of humor through the use of cartoons is relatively
      unimpaired, children with ACC do indeed have a poorer grasp of
      language-based jokes, the use of figurative language, and proverbs
      (Brown et al., 2005). Other studies have also found they have deficits
      in the perception of affective prosody, which refers to variations in
      vocal tone, rhythm, pitch, and volume that communicate emotion to
      the listener (Paul et al., 2003).
          Further research has revealed that ACC children also struggle
      with social insight, social logic, and self-perception, indicating that
      the corpus callosum is necessary in coordinating numerous aspects
      of socialization in humans. However, these same children experience
      challenges in general reasoning, problem solving, and the ability to
      abstract and generalize non-social information as well, suggesting that
      social deficits are secondary to those occurring in more foundational
      cognitive processes (Brown & Paul, 2000).
          When we compare children with ACC versus those with
      autism, those with ACC tend to be less impaired socially and have
      fewer problems with attention, anxiety, and depression than autistic
      children. However, although they experience social deficits to a lesser
      degree, the quality of impairments is similar across the two conditions.
      Meanwhile, children with ACC don’t usually display the repetitive and
      restricted behaviors that are so characteristic of the autism spectrum
      (Badaruddin et al., 2007).
          As we reviewed in Chapter 2, the corpus callosum is significantly
      smaller in autism (Casanova et al., 2011). Although we don’t yet know
      the precise cause(s), this can be due to any of a number of factors:
      (1) fewer neuronal axons traverse the hemispheres of the brain; (2) a
      similar number of axons traverse the hemispheres but the diameters
      of these axons are thinner; or (3) a similar number of axons traverse
      the hemispheres but they have less white matter insulating them.
      The prevailing theory, however, purports that there are fewer axons
      forming the corpus callosum in autism, resulting in smaller overall
      volume of this all-important structure.
          Because the corpus callosum is affected in autism and ACC and
      both conditions share similar social impairments that are separated
      by degree rather than by kind, this suggests that the structure and
      the regions of cortex it integrates are responsible for many of the
      sociocommunicative and higher-order cognitive deficits we see in
      the two conditions.
                    Toward a definition of Autism                           199


Restricted and repetitive behaviors and interests
While impairment in the frontotemporal regions and/or a loss of
connectivity within major white-matter structures like the corpus
callosum may be largely responsible for the sociocommunicative
deficits in autism, we must turn to other brain structures to understand
what could drive the restricted and repetitive behaviors and interests
(RRBI) that, as some studies suggest, are most unique to the autism
spectrum (Pedersen et al., 2016).
    Although we discussed some of the differences between autism and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in the previous chapter, there
are nevertheless obsessive-compulsive qualities that are characteristic
of autism. In addition, lesion studies on acquired OCD are plentiful
within the literature. For these reasons, we’ll draw from this area of
research to better understand aspects of RRBI in autism.
    Many neurological syndromes and TBI can result in what is
known as “acquired OCD.” In these instances, there is usually no
hereditary pattern within the extended family and OCD symptoms
begin as a result of injury or disease progression. Examples of
conditions that may result in acquired OCD include Huntington’s
disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, frontotemporal dementia,
stroke, and even streptococcal infection. In the case of acquired OCD
following a strep infection in childhood, this syndrome is known
as “Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated
with Streptococcal Infections” (PANDAS). Conditions like Tourette’s
syndrome may also occur with PANDAS.
    In general, people with OCD, regardless of whether it’s acquired
or idiopathic (of unknown cause), tend to share certain cognitive
deficits in addition to the obsessional and compulsive qualities that
characterize the condition. Most typically, they experience challenges
in attention, executive function, memory, and learning (Berthier
et al., 1996). All of these processes are rooted within the frontal and
temporal lobes of the brain.
    Interestingly, when scientists perform neuroimaging on people
with acquired OCD, they often find lesions within the frontotemporal
regions, especially in cases of severe OCD (Berthier et al., 1996, 2001).
Lesions sometimes also are found within the cingulate gyrus, a portion
of cerebral cortex that lies directly above the corpus callosum,  and
within a subcortical region known as the basal ganglia, which is a
limbic structure highly interconnected with the frontal lobes that
200                                DEFINING AUTISM


      helps to fine-tune their activities (Berthier et al., 1996; Laplane et al.,
      1989). Together, the frontal cortex, the cingulate, the basal ganglia,
      and the thalamus (a way station for neural information) all form a loop
      that regulates numerous aspects of human behavior and cognition
      (Figure 10.3). When damage occurs to any one of these structures, that
      loop is interrupted and can lead to a number of syndromes, including
      OCD. In the case of autism and idiopathic OCD, structures within this
      loop, as well as the fibers that are meant to connect them, probably
      didn’t form properly or were lost.




               Figure 10.3: The obsessive-compulsive circuit in the brain

      Stereotyped motor behavior, otherwise known as stereotypies or
      “stimming,” is repetitive rhythmic movement that is used primarily
      for the purposes of self-stimulation or self-calming. Examples include
      thumb sucking, nail/lip biting, hand flapping, body rocking, head
      nodding, and head banging. When a stereotypy occurs in a child
      without any apparent developmental condition such as autism, it is
      referred to as a primary motor stereotypy. Otherwise, stereotypies are
      typically secondary symptoms to childhood neurodevelopmental
      conditions.
          The basal ganglia, which we discussed above in relation to obsessive-
      compulsive behaviors, contain two opposing but complementary
      pathways. Through the direct or striatonigral pathway, the basal ganglia
      amplify motor and other behavioral patterns. Meanwhile, via the
      indirect or striatopallidal pathway they inhibit  undesirable  actions.
                      Toward a definition of Autism                           201


Both  of  these  pathways connect the frontal cortex with deeper
structures like the thalamus and the midbrain (Figure 10.4). Stereotyped
behaviors arise whenever either of these two pathways is unbalanced,
since they regulate one another. If the direct pathway is suppressed
or if the indirect pathway is overactivated, this will result in repetitive
mannerisms, not unlike those seen in conditions such as autism, OCD,
and Tourette’s (Langen et al., 2011).




       Figure 10.4: The direct and indirect neuronal pathways within
          the part of the limbic system known as the basal ganglia
         Dysfunction within these pathways is thought to be responsible for
          the symptoms of OCD and may also play important roles in the
             restricted and repetitive behaviors characteristic of autism.


Because RRBI are a core feature of autism, there have been many
neuroimaging studies investigating the structure of the basal ganglia
in the condition. Some of these studies report contradictory findings,
which are likely due to differences in methodology. However, in
general, the basal ganglia appear to be modestly larger in autism, even
after accounting for overall brain size (Langen et al., 2009).
202                               DEFINING AUTISM


          Unfortunately, there have been few postmortem studies to look at
      the microstructure of the basal ganglia in autism to determine what
      may be the cause of this volumetric increase. However, Jerzy Wegiel,
      a neuropathologist at the New York Institute for Basic Research in
      Developmental Disabilities, suggests that it may be due to increased
      neuron production with the subependymal layer in the basal ganglia,
      noting that a similar process occurs in the brains of people with
      Huntington’s disease, a neurodegenerative condition that can develop
      obsessive-compulsive symptoms as the disease progresses (Wegiel
      et al., 2010). This increase in overall neuron number leads to larger
      basal ganglia volume.


      Locating autism in the brain
      Autism is a pervasive condition that has the propensity to affect almost
      all areas of the brain in some way. This is especially the case when we
      examine all the possible secondary symptoms that occur alongside
      those symptoms considered the “core” of the syndrome. However, since
      the medical community uses the core symptoms to define autism, it’s
      important to identify the neural systems that underlie these cognitive
      functions in the hopes of moving closer towards a biological definition
      of these heterogeneous conditions, even if the precise impairments in
      those systems vary across people.
           Although we have only viewed the question “Where is autism
      located in the brain?” in a simplified manner, we can come to a few
      tentative conclusions (Figure 10.5). First of all, the sociocommunicative
      deficits that are considered part of the core of the syndrome are
      likely the result of functional impairments in the frontotemporal
      lobes and/or the structures (i.e. corpus callosum) that connect them.
      Poor communication between these structures limits the individual’s
      capacity to integrate different types of information, preventing him
      or her from forming a useful gestalt of social situations and reacting
      accordingly. In essence, the autistic person is only picking up parts of
      the social situation and is therefore acting on a more limited range
      of information.
           Secondly, based on lesion studies investigating OCD, Tourette’s,
      and stereotyped behaviors, we can conclude that many of the RRBI
      associated with autism are likely the result of disturbances to the
      communicative loops that connect the frontal cortex, cingulate, basal
                      Toward a definition of Autism                              203


ganglia, thalamus, and midbrain, which regulate a variety of important
behaviors. When these loops are dysregulated, this leads to different
types of repetitive behaviors. Disturbances to this system can be either
congenital or acquired.




             Figure 10.5: The circuits of the brain that are most
               likely responsible for the core features of autism
       “Social deficits” are represented by the double-headed arrow traversing
      the corpus callosum, linking the two hemispheres. Meanwhile, “restricted
           and repetitive behaviors” are represented by the circuit running
           through the frontal cortex, the limbic system, and the thalamus.


When we look at the overlap between lesions that impair social
communication and those that produce repetitive behaviors, we
can see that the frontotemporal lobes and the fibers that provide
interhemispheric, subcortical, and midbrain connections between
them are all suspect. Therefore, in theory, any condition that targets
these structures increases the likelihood of autism.


ONE SYNDROME—MANY AUTISMS
In this section we’ll review a couple of the different conditions that
claim autism as an associated feature. In this way you may begin to
see (if you don’t already) that although the term autism refers to a
single syndrome, it occurs as a primary or secondary feature of many
different conditions. And as Lorna Wing so aptly suggested, the
feature that likely draws them under a single diagnostic umbrella is an
204                                DEFINING AUTISM


      overlapping impairment in key neural systems. In the above sections,
      we hypothesized that those core systems involve the frontotemporal
      regions and their interhemispheric and subcortical connections.


      Rett syndrome
      At one point in time, Rett syndrome was considered part of the
      Pervasive Developmental Disorders. However, with the acceleration of
      genetics research, the mutated gene responsible for most cases of Rett
      syndrome was identified (MECP2) and Rett’s was removed from the
      DSM. It is now considered a “syndromic” or “genetic” form of autism,
      although hopefully in reading this book you have by now realized
      that the distinction of these labels is exceedingly gray and fuzzy.
           The course of Rett syndrome includes a period of apparently normal
      development (although subtle features can be detected), followed by
      a regression in skills and the appearance of distinctive behaviors.
      Often, language and motor abilities regress, the latter frequently
      leading to the characteristic hand-wringing movements that typify
      the condition. The children also develop dyspraxia or apraxia, which
      significantly impairs their fine and/or gross motor abilities. Finally,
      intellectual disability, autism or autistic-like features, and epilepsy are
      very common in Rett’s.
           Similar to autism, the corpus callosum in Rett syndrome is
      demonstrably smaller than expected for overall cerebral volume,
      suggesting impairments in its ability to coordinate social and other
      complex forms of information. This is especially the case within
      segments known as the genu and splenium, which connect the most
      anterior and posterior portions of the brain respectively (Mahmood
      et  al., 2010). Interestingly, Rett’s patients whose speech is impaired
      also have smaller volume in a structure known as the superior
      longitudinal fasciculus, which is a long tract of white matter that
      connects all lobes with one another within the same hemisphere. A
      similar finding occurs in people with autism who have significant
      speech impairment, suggesting this structure is vital in the production
      of language and is probably an integral part of the “cortical language
      circuit” (Friederici, 2012; Nagae et al., 2012).
           The entirety of the brain in Rett’s is hypoplastic (underdeveloped)
      (Murakami et al., 1992). It is a progressive condition whose severity
      depends on the specific mutation involved and usually results in brain
                    Toward a definition of Autism                            205


atrophy over time (Horská et al., 2009). As we find with autism, the
frontal lobes are indeed targeted in Rett’s and the hypoplasia in these
regions is also relative to the severity of the condition (Carter et al.,
2008). The frontal lobes exhibit reduced blood flow, suggesting low
oxygen intake and reduced neural activity in these areas (reviewed in
Villemagne et al., 2002).
    Like the frontal lobes, the basal ganglia in Rett’s are reduced in
overall size (Murakami et al., 1992). Interestingly, postmortem analysis
of the Rett’s brain has shown that subunits of the basal ganglia known
as the putamen and caudate nucleus express unusually low levels of
excitatory receptors (AMPA, NMDA, kainate), meanwhile the caudate
nucleus has high levels of inhibitory receptors, suggesting that the
excitatory–inhibitory balance within the basal ganglia in Rett’s is
seriously disturbed and is likely responsible for the repetitive behaviors
characteristic of the condition (Blue, Naidu, & Johnston, 1999).
    Obviously not all cases of autism have Rett syndrome. Meanwhile,
not all cases of Rett’s fulfill autism criteria. However, the extensive
overlap we see in the two conditions may be due, as we’ve discussed,
to impairments in specific systems within the brain. Rett’s shows
evidence of structural and functional impairment within the frontal
cortex, the basal ganglia, and large white-matter structures that
support interhemispheric and subcortical connectivity, all of which
may produce the core features of autism. Likewise, similar impairments
are seen in “idiopathic” autism, suggesting that the reason for their
symptom overlap is not a common etiology in the molecular sense but
dysfunction within common systems.


22q11.2 deletion syndrome
22q11.2 deletion syndrome is caused (as the name implies) by a
deletion of genetic material near the middle of the 22nd chromosome.
People with the condition often have heart abnormalities, cleft palate,
and other distinctive facial features. Many other features can occur
but vary considerably between cases. This symptom variability meant
that different groupings of clinical features were once described under
different names, including DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial
syndrome, and conotruncal anomaly syndrome. More recently,
however, they have all been subsumed under the single diagnostic
206                               DEFINING AUTISM


      label 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, based on the specific gene mutation
      that underlies this broad syndrome.
           Children with 22q11.2 deletion typically experience developmental
      delays and are at significantly increased risk for developing ADHD
      and autism. Autism and autism-like symptoms occur in approximately
      20–25 percent of children and adolescents with the condition (Fine
      et al., 2005; Schneider et al., 2014). In addition, adults with 22q11.2
      deletion are at significantly elevated risk for developing schizophrenia
      (23–43%), as well as anxiety (40–76%) and mood disorders
      (9–35%) (reviewed in Schneider et al., 2014). Overall, this deletion
      syndrome predisposes towards a variety of neurodevelopmental and
      psychiatric conditions.
           Similar to what we see with the other clinical features, brain
      abnormalities across this group of people differ considerably. And while
      there is typically an overall reduction in brain volume, effects to the
      frontal lobes, for instance, are quite variable (Zinkstok & Amelsvoort,
      2005). In people with features reminiscent of the now‑obsolete
      velocardiofacial syndrome, frontal lobe volume is typically increased in
      size, particularly within regions known as the right middle and superior
      frontal gyri (Simon et al., 2005). However, children with 22q11.2
      deletion in general have a reduction in overall white matter volume
      (connectivity) within the frontal lobes, suggesting significant potential
      impairment in these regions that may affect social communication
      skills (Campbell et al., 2006).
           People with 22q11.2 deletion also have midline defects within
      the brain, affecting structures like the corpus callosum as well as the
      cingulum bundle, which is the bilateral tract of fibers that connects
      the  cingulate with the hippocampus (Kates et al., 2015; Tan et al.,
      2009). In addition, they are likely to retain a fluid-filled embryologic
      structure known as the cavum septum pellucidum, which is a midline
      anatomical variation occurring in a minority of the typical population
      and is colloquially known as the “sixth ventricle” (Shashi et al., 2004;
      Tan et al., 2009). The basal ganglia are also affected in 22q11.2
      deletion. Not only are the caudate heads increased in volume similar
      to what we see in idiopathic autism, there is sometimes abnormal
      asymmetry within the structures, with the left side greater in volume
      than the right (Eliez et al., 2002).
           Although these brain anomalies are more variable than we noted
      with Rett syndrome, which has an extremely high incidence of
                    Toward a definition of Autism                             207


comorbid autism, some of the structures that are affected in 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (frontal lobes, cingulate, corpus callosum, basal
ganglia, etc.) are the same structures likely responsible for the core
symptoms of autism and may give rise to the high comorbidity rates
seen in this genetic syndrome.


AUTISM OR AUTISMS?
Although the core symptoms of autism may be due to dysfunction
within specific structures and systems of the brain, it’s clear that autism
has many different causes, as discussed by Lynn Waterhouse:
    In 1975 when I began studying autism I believed it was a distinct
    behavioral syndrome, and believed a unitary brain basis for it would
    soon be discovered. But by the middle of the 1990s many brain
    deficits had already been found in association with autism. Evidence
    suggested that subsets of individuals diagnosed with autism had
    deficits in one or more brain regions and brain neurochemicals,
    including the amygdala, the hippocampus, temporal and parietal
    regions of the cortex, and the neurohormone oxytocin (Waterhouse,
    Fein, & Modahl, 1996). Our research group did find evidence for
    abnormal oxytocin in autism (Green et al., 2001; Modahl et al.,
    1998). However, despite substantial financial support from the
    National Institutes of Mental Health, National Institute of Child
    Health and Human Development, and support from several private
    funding agencies, and despite the intellectual effort of all on our
    research teams, we failed to find meaningful brain-based behavioral
    subgroups of autism (Stevens et al., 2000; Waterhouse et al., 1996).
    Our problems reflected the field’s problems. (Waterhouse, 2013, p. 2)
Research suggests that this heterogeneity or variability can result in
many different anomalies within the brain and is often structurally
and functionally pervasive. Therefore, although impairments in the
frontotemporal lobes, the cingulate, the basal ganglia, and their
respective white-matter connections may underlie the core features of
autism, these findings may be lost amidst a sea of other abnormalities
that mask their relevance. In addition, the specific structural and
functional abnormalities within these core systems vary across
individuals but still inevitably lead to similar impairments. For instance,
we may envision macrocephaly (unusually large head size) and
208                               DEFINING AUTISM


      microcephaly (unusually small head size) as polar opposites yet both
      occur frequently in association with autism (Fombonne et al., 1999).
          For these reasons, it is understandable as Lynn Waterhouse
      laments in the preceding quote that it has been challenging for us
      scientists to organize autistic people into subgroups based on specific
      neuroanatomical correlates. It is also easy to become distracted by the
      superfluous findings that occur in the brain outside the systems that
      are likely responsible for the core of autism. This, in the end, has led
      to much confusion and continues to delay our understanding of these
      conditions at the biological level.
          Yet, ironically, the behavioral syndrome is robust, as even cognitive
      studies suggest that despite etiological heterogeneity autistic people
      actually have a lot in common with one another (Cantio et al., 2016).
      This indicates that the function of the brain and its resultant behaviors
      are the core of our definitions for autism, not genes, proteins, or
      compartmentalized structures of cells. While there are undoubtedly
      molecular and microscopic subgroups in autism, our definitions of
      these subgroups will likely only be realized at a broader systems level,
      not in terms of specific gene function or synaptic structure.


      CONCLUSIONS
      It is now 75 years since Leo Kanner published his original manuscript
      describing eleven children with the condition we call “autism.”
      It was almost 40 years later that the diagnostic entity was finally
      acknowledged by mainstream psychiatry. Autism, therefore, is a
      relatively young concept when compared to other neurodevelopmental
      conditions, such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. While there
      may well be hereditary and environmental variables that affect autism
      prevalence, “infantile autism” as a diagnosis is not much older than
      “Asperger’s syndrome,” the former predating the latter by 12 to
      14  years. Undoubtedly, much of the boom in autism prevalence is
      not just the recognition of a broader spectrum but the recognition of
      autism, period.
           With that in mind, we have nevertheless discussed environmental
      exigencies in Chapter 4 that have the potential to affect autism
      incidence, although to what extent is challenging to discern since we’re
      attempting to measure effects of complex and fluctuating features. We
      also cannot say how heredity, especially assortative mating, continues
                     Toward a definition of Autism                               209


to subtly alter the gene pool over time and thus autism risk. This
question may be especially poignant considering the ease with which
we now move and intermingle, which a couple hundred years ago was
unheard of. Most people lived, married, and died in their local villages.
    Besides autism prevalence, we have discussed important associated
features such as epilepsy, intellectual disability, and regression, the latter
having been painfully ignored by medical and research communities
despite its clinical significance. We also reviewed what we know of
the biology of these comorbid features, which, especially in the case
of epilepsy and regression, may share some overlap.
    Finally, we discussed the broader autism phenotype (BAP),
which shares similar though muted impairments to those we see
in autism and appears to be a significant hereditary risk factor for
having a child on the spectrum. We learned that BAP can be subtle
and, especially in women, may even be diagnosed as anxiety or
depression, illustrating an etiologically related yet phenotypically
broad neurodevelopmental spectrum.
    In summary, this book is a work in progress. We have tried our
best to present the current state of knowledge of autism research, but
this work is a reflection of our (the authors’) professional biases. In
addition, in ten or twenty years’ time scientists’ perceptions of some
of the information presented here may radically change based on new
data and paradigm shifts within the field. That is the nature of science:
a noble endeavor but inevitably colored by the humanness of  the
people pursuing it. The information reviewed here is no different.
We only hope that our perspectives may inspire others to look at
data in new imaginative ways, so that this field of work continues
to evolve in a healthy and fruitful manner and leads to measurable
positive differences in the lives of people on the autism spectrum and
their families.
                              References

Ackerman, S., Schoenbrun, S., Hudac, C., & Bernier, R. (2017). Interactive effects of
     prenatal antidepressant exposure and likely gene disrupting mutations on the
     severity of autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
     47(11), 3489–3496.
Adamo, M. P., Zapata, M., & Frey, T. K. (2008). Analysis of gene expression in fetal
     and adult cells infected with rubella virus. Virology, 370(1), 1–11.
Adolphs, R., Spezio, M. L., Parlier, M., & Piven, J. (2008). Distinct face-processing
     strategies in parents of autistic children. Current Biology, 18, 1090–1093.
Ahmad, S. F., Zoheir, K. M., Ansari, M. A., Nadeem, A., et al. (2017). Th1, Th2,
     Th17, and T regulatory cell-related transcription factor signaling in children
     with autism. Molecular Neurobiology, 54, 4390–4400.
Akshoomoff, N. (2006). Use of the Mullen Scales of Early Learning for the assessment
     of young children with autism spectrum disorders. Child Neuropsychology, 12,
     269–277.
Al Kaissi, A., Grill, F., Safi, H., Ben Ghachem, M., Ben Chehida, F., & Klaushofer, K.
     (2007). Craniocervical junction malformation in a child with oromandibular-
     limb hypogenesis-Möbius syndrome. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, 2, 2.
Alarcón, M., Abrahams, B. S., Stone, J. L., Duvall, J. A., et al. (2008). Linkage,
     association, and gene-expression analyses identify CNTNAP2 as an autism-
     susceptibility gene. American Journal of Human Genetics, 82(1), 150–159.
Aldridge, K., George, I. D., Cole, K. K., Austin, J. R., et al. (2011). Facial phenotypes
     in subgroups of prepubertal boys with autism spectrum disorders are correlated
     with clinical phenotypes. Molecular Autism, 2, 15.
Allen, L. H. (1997). Pregnancy and iron deficiency: Unresolved issues. Nutritional
     Reviews, 55, 91–101.
Amato, M. C., Verghi, M., Galluzzo, A., & Giordano, C. (2011). The oligomenorrhoic
     phenotypes of polycystic ovary syndrome are characterized by a high visceral
     adiposity index: A likely condition of cardiometabolic risk. Human Reproduction,
     26, 1486–1494.
APA (American Psychiatric Association). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
     Mental Disorders (5th edn). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Amiet, C., Gourfinkel-An, I., Bouzamondo, A., Tordjman, S., et al. (2008). Epilepsy
     in autism is associated with intellectual disability and gender: Evidence from a
     meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 64, 577–582.




                                          211
212                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Anderson, G. M., Gutknecht, L., Cohen, C. J., Brailly-Tabard, S., et al. (2002).
           Serotonin transporter promoter variants in autism: Functional effects and
           relationship to platelet hyperserotonemia. Molecular Psychiatry, 7(8), 831–836.
      Andrews, A. (2017). Jacob Barnett’s curious and computation mind. Pacific Standard,
           May 19.
      Andrews, D. S., Avino, T. A., Gudbrandsen, M., Daly, E., et al. (2017). In vivo evidence
           of reduced integrity of the gray-white matter boundary in autism spectrum
           disorder. Cerebral Cortex, 27, 877–887.
      Apostolou, P., & Fostira, F. (2013). Hereditary breast cancer: The era of new
           susceptibility genes. BioMed Research International, 747318.
      Aram, D. M. (1997). Hyperlexia: Reading without meaning in young children. Topics
           in Language Disorders, 17, 1–13.
      Arking, D. E., Cutler, D. J., Brune, C. W., Teslovich, T. M., et al. (2008). A common
           genetic variant in the neurexin superfamily member CNTNAP2 increases
           familiar risk of autism. American Journal of Human Genetics, 82(1), 160–164.
      Arnold, S. E., Louneva, N., Cao, K., Wang, L. S., et al. (2013). Cellular, synaptic, and
           biochemical features of resilient cognition in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology
           of Aging, 34, 157–168.
      Aronson, M., Hagberg, B., & Gillberg, C. (1997). Attention deficits and autistic
           spectrum problems in children exposed to alcohol during gestation: A follow-up
           study. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 39, 583–587.
      Ashwood, P., Schauer, J., Pessah, I. N., & Van de Water, J. (2009). Preliminary evidence
           of the in vitro effects of BDE-47 on innate immune response in children with
           autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 208, 130–135.
      Astiz, M., de Alaniz, M. J., & Marra, C. A. (2012). The oxidative damage and
           inflammation caused by pesticides are reverted by lipoic acid in rat brain.
           Neurochemistry International, 61, 1231–1241.
      Autier, P., Boniol, M., Pizot, C., & Mullie, P. (2014). Vitamin D status and ill health:
           A systematic review. Lancet Diabetes and Endocrinology, 2(1), 76–89.
      Avino, T. A., & Hutsler, J. J. (2010). Abnormal cell patterning at the cortical gray-white
           matter boundary in autism spectrum disorders. Brain Research, 1360, 138–146.
      Badaruddin, D. H., Andrews, G. L., Bölte, S., Schilmoeller, K. J., et al. (2007). Social
           and behavioral problems of children with agenesis of the corpus callosum. Child
           Psychiatry and Human Development, 38, 287–302.
      Baeza-Velasco, C., Pailhez, G., Bulbena, A., & Baghdadli, A. (2015). Joint
           hypermobility and the heritable disorders of connective tissue: Clinical and
           empirical evidence of links with psychiatry. General Hospital Psychiatry, 37, 24–30.
      Bailey, A., Le Couteur, A., Gottesman, I., Bolton, P., et al. (1995). Autism as a strongly
           genetic disorder: Evidence from a British twin study. Psychological Medicine, 25,
           63–77.
      Baird, G., Charman, T., Pickles, A., Chandler, S., et al. (2008). Regression,
           developmental trajectory and associated problems in disorders in the autism
           spectrum: The SNAP study. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38(10),
           1827–1836.
      Baird, G., Robinson, R. O., Boyd, S., & Charman, T. (2006). Sleep
           electrocencephalograms in young children with autism with and without
           regression. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 48, 604–608.
                                     References                                            213


Baker, J. P. (2013). Autism at 70—Redrawing the boundaries. New England Journal of
     Medicine, 369, 1089–1091.
Bandim, J. M., Ventura, L. O., Miller, M. T., Almeida, H. C., & Costa, A. E. (2003).
     Autism and Möbius sequence: An exploratory study of children in northeastern
     Brazil. Arquivos de Neuro-psiquitria, 61(2A), 181–185.
Barger, B. D., & Campbell, J. M. (2014). Developmental regression in autism spectrum
     disorders: Implications for clinical outcomes. In V. B. Patel, V. R. Preedy, & C.
     R. Martin (Eds.), Comprehensive Guide to Autism (pp. 1473–1493). New York, NY:
     Springer.
Barger, B. D., Campbell, J. M., & McDonough, J. D. (2013). Prevalence and onset of
     regression within autism spectrum disorders: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
     Autism and Developmental Disorders, 43, 817–828.
Barkovich, A. J., Dobyns, W. B., & Guerrini, R. (2015). Malformations of cortical
     development and epilepsy. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 5, a022392.
Barneveld, P. S., Pierterse, J., de Sonneville, L., van Rijn, S., et al. (2011). Overlap
     of autistic and schizotypal traits in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
     Schizophrenia Research, 126, 231–236.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1998). Does autism occur more often in families of physicists,
     engineers, and mathematicians? Autism, 2, 296–301.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2002). The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends in Cognitive
     Sciences, 6, 248–254.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have a
     “theory of mind”? Cognition, 21, 37–46.
Baron-Cohen, S., Scahill, V. L., Izaguirre, J., Hornsey, H., & Robertson, M. M. (1999).
     The prevalence of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome in children and adolescents
     with autism: A large scale study. Psychological Medicine, 29, 1151–1159.
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Stott, C., Bolton, P., & Goodyer, I. (1997). Is there
     a link between engineering and autism? Autism, 1, 101–109.
Bashat, D. B., Kronfeld-Duenias, V., Zachor, D. A., Ekstein, P. M., et al. (2007).
     Accelerated maturation of white matter in young children with autism: A high b
     value DWI study. NeuroImage, 37, 40–47.
Battaglia, A., Chines, C., & Carey, J. C. (2006). The FG syndrome: A report of a large
     Italian series. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A, 140, 2075–2079.
Bauman, M. D., Iosif, A.-M., Ashwood, P., Braunschweig, D., et al. (2013). Maternal
     antibodies from mothers of children with autism alter brain growth and social
     behavior development in the rhesus monkey. Translational Psychiatry, 3, e278.
Behnke, M., Eyler, F. D, Garvan, C. W., & Wobie, K. (2001). The search for congenital
     malformations in newborns with fetal cocaine exposure. Pediatrics, 107(5), E74.
Ben-Ari, Y. (2002). Excitatory actions of GABA during development: The nature of
     the nurture. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(9), 728–739.
Bercum, F. M., Rodgers, K. M., Benison, A. M., Smith, Z. Z., et al. (2015). Maternal
     stress combined with terbutaline leads to comorbid autistic-like behavior and
     epilepsy in a rat model. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(48), 15894–15902.
Berg, J. M., & Geschwind, D. H. (2012). Autism genetics: Searching for specificity
     and convergence. Genome Biology, 13, 247.
214                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Berthier, M. L., Kulisevsky, J., Gironell, A., & Heras, J. A. (1996). Obsessive-
           compulsive disorder associated with brain lesions: Clinical phenomenology,
           cognitive function, and anatomic correlates. Neurology, 47, 353–361.
      Berthier, M. L., Kulisevsky, J., Gironell, A., & López, O. L. (2001). Obsessive-
           compulsive disorder and traumatic brain injury: Behavioral, cognitive, and
           neuroimaging findings. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 14, 23–31.
      Betts, T., Yarrow, H., Dutton, N., Greenhill, L., & Rolfe, T. (2003). A study of
           anticonvulsant medication on ovarian function in a group of women with
           epilepsy who have only ever taken one anticonvulsant compared with a group
           of women without epilepsy. Seizure, 12, 323–329.
      Beversdorf, D. Q., Manning, S. E., Hillier, A., Anderson, L., et al. (2005). Timing of
           prenatal stressors and autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 35,
           471–478.
      Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C., Doyle, A. E., Seidman, L. J., et al. (2004). Impact of
           executive function deficits and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
           on academic outcomes in children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
           72, 757.
      Billes, S. K., Sinnayah, P., & Cowley, M. A. (2014). Naltrexone/bupropion for
           obesity: An investigational combination pharmacotherapy for weight loss.
           Pharmacological Research, 84, 1–11.
      Biswas, S. K. (2016). Does the interdependence between oxidative stress and
           inflammation explain the antioxidant paradox? Oxidative Medicine and Cellular
           Longevity, 5698931.
      Bitsko R. H., Holbrook, J. R., Visser, S. N., Mink, J. W., et al. (2014). A national
           profile of Tourette syndrome, 2011–2012. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
           Pediatrics, 35, 317.
      Blackmon, K., Bluvstein, J., MacAllister, W. S., Avallone, J., et al. (2016). Treatment
           resistant epilepsy in autism spectrum disorder: Increased risk for females. Autism
           Research, 9, 311–320.
      Blaxill, M. F. (2004). What’s going on? The question of time trends in autism. Public
           Health Reports, 119(6), 536–551.
      Bleuler, E. (1950). Dementia Praecox. New York, NY: International University Press.
      Blue, M. E., Naidu, S., & Johnston, M. V. (1999). Altered development of glutamate
           and GABA receptors in the basal ganglia of girls with Rett syndrome. Experimental
           Neurology, 156, 345–352.
      Boddy, A. M., McGowen, M. R., Sherwood, C. C., Grossman, L. I., Goodman, M.,
           & Wildman, D. E. (2012). Comparative analysis of encephalization in mammals
           reveals relaxed constraints on anthropoid primate and cetacean brain scaling.
           Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 25, 981–994.
      Bölte, S., & Poutska, F. (2003). The recognition of facial affect in autistic and
           schizophrenic subjects and their first-degree relatives. Psychological Medicine, 33,
           907–915.
      Bölte, S., & Poutska, F. (2006). The broader cognitive phenotype of autism in parents:
           How specific is the tendency for local processing and executive dysfunction?
           Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 639–645.
                                     References                                            215


Bolton, P. F., Carcani-Rathwell, I., Hutton, J., Goode, S., Howlin, P., & Rutter, M.
     (2011). Epilepsy in autism: Features and correlates. British Journal of Psychiatry,
     198, 289–294.
Bolton, P., MacDonald, H., Pickles, A., Rios, P., et al. (1994). A case-control family
     history study of autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 35, 877–900.
Bonnel, A., Mottron, L., Peretz, I., Trudel, M., Gallun, E., & Bonnel, A. M. (2003).
     Enhanced pitch sensitivity in individuals with autism: A signal detection analysis.
     Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 226–235.
Borrás, C., Sastre, J., García-Sala, D., Lloret, A., Pallardó, F. V., & Viña, J. (2003).
     Mitochondria from females exhibit higher antioxidant gene expression and
     lower oxidative damage than males. Free Radical Biology & Medicine, 34, 546–
     552.
Borsini, A., Zunszain, P. A., Thuret, S., & Pariante, C. M. (2015). The role of
     inflammatory cytokines as key modulators of neurogenesis. Trends in Neurosciences,
     38, 145–157.
Boukhris, T., Sheehy, O., Mottron, L., & Bérard, A. (2016). Antidepressant use during
     pregnancy and the risk of autism spectrum disorder in children. JAMA Pediatrics,
     170(2), 117–124.
Bren, L. (2001). Frances Oldham Kelsey: FDA medical reviewer leaves her mark on
     history. FDA Consumer Magazine, March–April.
Brodmann, K. (2006). Brodmann’s “Localization in the Cerebral Cortex”. New York, NY:
     Springer. (Original work published 1909)
Brown, H. K., Ray, J. G., Wilton, A. S., Lunsky, Y., Gomes, T., & Vigod, S. N. (2017).
     Association between serotonergic antidepressant use during pregnancy and
     autism spectrum disorder in children. JAMA, 317, 1544–1552.
Brown, J., Bianco, J. I., McGrath, J. J., & Eyles, D. W. (2003). 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
     D3 induces nerve growth factor, promotes neurite outgrowth and inhibits mitosis
     in the embryonic rat hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience Letters, 343, 139–143.
Brown, W. S., & Paul, L. K. (2000). Cognitive and psychosocial deficits in agenesis
     of the corpus callosum with normal intelligence. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 5,
     135–157.
Brown, W. S., Paul, L. K., Symington, M., & Dietrich, R. (2005). Comprehension of
     humor in primary agenesis of the corpus callosum. Neuropsychologia, 43, 906–
     916.
Buchmann, K. (2014). Evolution of innate immunity: Clues from invertebrates via
     fish to mammals. Frontiers in Immunology, 5, 459.
Burton, H. (2003). Visual cortex activity in early and late blind people. Journal of
     Neuroscience, 23, 4005–4011.
Buxhoeveden, D. P., Switala, A. E., Roy, E., Litaker, M., & Casanova, M. F. (2001).
     Morphological differences between minicolumns in human and nonhuman
     primate cortex. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 115, 361–371.
Byrnes, G. B., Southey, M. C., & Hopper, J. L. (2008). Are the so-called low penetrance
     breast cancer genes, ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, and CHEK2, high risk for women
     with strong family histories? Breast Cancer Research, 10, 208.
Callaway, E. (2012). Fathers bequeath more mutations as they age. Nature, 488(7412),
     439.
216                                    DEFINING AUTISM


      Campbell, L. E., Daly, E., Toal, F., Stevens, A., et al. (2006). Brain and behaviour
           in children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: A volumetric and voxel-based
           morphometry MRI study. Brain, 129, 1218–1228.
      Canitano, R., Luchetti, A., & Zapella, M. (2005). Epilepsy, electroencephalographic
           abnormalities, and regression in children with autism. Journal of Child Neurology,
           20, 27–31.
      Cantio, C., Jepsen, J. R. M., Madsen, G. F., Bilenberg, N., & White, S. J. (2016).
           Exploring ‘the autisms’ at a cognitive level. Autism Research, 9, 1328–1339.
      Cantwell, D. P. (1996). Attention deficit disorder: A review of the past 10 years.
           Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 978–987.
      Capone, G. T., Grados, M. A., Kaufman, W. E., Bernad-Ripoli, S., & Jewell, A. (2005).
           Down syndrome and comorbid autism-spectrum disorder: Characterization
           using the aberrant behavior checklist. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part
           A, 134, 373–380.
      Cárdenas, A. M., Ardiles, A. O., Barraza, N., Baéz-Matus, X., & Caviedes, P. (2012).
           Role of tau protein in neuronal damage in Alzheimer’s disease and Down
           syndrome. Archives of Medical Research, 43, 645–654.
      Carlsen, M. H., Halvorsen, B. L., Holte, K., Bøhn, S. K., et al. (2010). The total
           antioxidant content of more than 3100 foods, beverages, spices, herbs and
           supplements used worldwide. Nutrition Journal, 9, 3.
      Carter, C. J., & Blizard, R. A. (2016). Autism genes are selectively targeted by
           environmental pollutants including pesticides, heavy metals, bisphenol
           A, phthalates and many others in food, cosmetics or household products.
           Neurochemistry International, 101, 83–109.
      Carter, J. C., Landham, D. C., Pham, D., Bibat, G., Naidu, S., & Kaufmann, W. E.
           (2008). Selective cerebral volume reduction in Rett syndrome: A multiple-
           approach MR imaging study. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 29, 436–441.
      Carvill, G. L., Heavin, S. B., Yendle, S. C., McMahon, J. M., et al. (2013). Targeted
           resequencing in epileptic encephalopathies identifies de novo mutations in
           CHD2 and SYNGAP1. Nature Genetics, 45(7), 825–830.
      Casanova, E. L., Gerstner, Z., Sharp, J. L., Casanova, M. F., & Feltus, F. A. (2017a).
           Widespread genotype-phenotype correlations in intellectual disability. bioRxiv,
           220608.
      Casanova, E. L., Sharp, J. L., Chakraborty, H., Sumi, N. S., & Casanova, M. F. (2016).
           Genes with high penetrance for syndromic and nonsyndromic autism typically
           function within the nucleus and regulate gene expression. Molecular Autism, 7,
           18.
      Casanova, E. L., Sharp, J. L., Edelson, S. M., Kelly, D. P., & Casanova, M. F. (2018).
           A cohort study comparing women with autism spectrum disorder with and
           without generalized joint hypermobility. Behavioral Sciences, 8, 35
      Casanova, E. L., Switala, A. E., Dandamudi, S., & Casanova, M. F. (2017b). The
           feature landscape of autism risk genes suggests recent directional selection.
           Unpublished data.
      Casanova, M F., El-Baz, A., Elnakib, A., Switala, A. E., et al. (2011). Quantitative
           analysis of the shape of the corpus callosum in patients with autism and
           comparison individuals. Autism, 15, 223–238.
                                     References                                             217


Casanova, M. F. (1995) Elmer Ernest Southard (1876–1920). Biological Psychiatry,
    38, 71–73.
Casanova, M. F. (2007). The neuropathology of autism. Brain Pathology, 17, 422–433.
Casanova, M. F. (2014a). Autism as a sequence: From heterochronic germinal cell
    divisions to abnormalities of cell migration and cortical dysplasias. Medical
    Hypotheses, 83, 32–38.
Casanova, M. F. (2014b). The neuropathology of autism. In F. Volkmar, K. Pelphrey,
    R. Paul, & S. Rogers (Eds.), Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental
    Disorders: Volume I (4th edn, pp. 497–531). New York, NY: Wiley.
Casanova, M. F., Baruth, J. M., El-Baz, A., Tasman, A., Sears, L., & Sokhadze, E.
    (2012). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) modulates event-
    related potential (ERP) indices of attention in autism. Translational Neuroscience,
    3, 170–180.
Casanova, M. F., Baruth, J., El-Baz, A. S., Sokhadze, G. E., Hensley, M., & Sokhadze,
    E. M. (2013). Evoked and induced gamma-frequency oscillations in autism. In
    M. F. Casanova, A. S. El-Baz, & J. S. Suri (Eds.), Imaging the Brain in Autism (pp.
    87–106). New York, NY: Springer.
Casanova, M. F., Buxhoeveden, D. P., Switala, A. E., & Roy, R. (2002a). Minicolumnar
    pathology in autism. Neurology, 58, 428–432.
Casanova, M. F., Buxhoeveden, D. P., Switala, A. E., & Roy, R. (2002b). Asperger’s
    syndrome and cortical neuropathology. Journal of Child Neurology, 17, 142–145.
Casanova, M. F., Buxhoeveden, D., & Gomez, J. (2003). Disruption in the inhibitory
    architecture of the cell minicolumn: Implications for autism. The Neuroscientist,
    9, 496–507.
Casanova, M. F., Casanova, E. L., & Sokhadze, E. M. (2016). Leo Kanner, the anti-
    psychiatry movement and neurodiversity. Siberian Journal of Special Education, 1–2,
    6–9.
Casanova, M. F., El-Baz, A. S., Kamat, S. S., Dombroski, B. A., et al. (2013).
    Focal cortical dysplasias in autism spectrum disorders. Acta Neuropathologica
    Communications, 1, 67.
Casanova, M. F., El-Baz, A., Mott, M., Mannheim, G., et al. (2009). Reduced gyral
    window and corpus callosum size in autism: Possible macroscopic correlates of
    a minicolumnopathy. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39, 751–764.
Casanova, M. F., Sokhadze, E., Opris, I., Wang, Y., & Li, X. (2015). Autism spectrum
    disorders: Linking neuropathological findings to treatment with transcranial
    magnetic stimulation. Acta Paediatrica, 104, 346–355.
Casanova, M. F., Switala, A. E., Trippe, J., & Fitzgerald, M. (2007). Comparative
    minicolumnar morphometry of three distinguished scientists. Autism, 11, 557–569.
Casanova, M. F., Trippe, J., Tillquist, C., & Switala, A. E. (2009). Morphometric
    variability of minicolumns in the striate cortex of Homo sapiens, Macaca mulatta,
    and Pan troglodytes. Journal of Anatomy, 214, 226–234.
Casida, J. E. (2009). Pest toxicology: The primary mechanisms of pesticide action.
    Chemical Research in Toxicology, 22, 609–619.
Castillo, H., Patterson, B., Hickey, F., Kinsman, A., et al. (2008). Difference in age at
    regression in children with autism with and without Down syndrome. Journal of
    Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 29, 89–93.
218                                      DEFINING AUTISM


      Castro, V. M., Kong, S. W., Clements, C. C., Brady, R., et al. (2016). Absence of
          evidence for increase in risk for autism or attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
          following antidepressant exposure during pregnancy: A replication study.
          Translational Psychiatry, 6, e708.
      Cath, D. C., Ran, N., Smit, J. H., van Balkom, A. J., & Comijs, H. C. (2008). Symptom
          overlap between autism spectrum disorder, generalized social anxiety disorder
          and obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults: A preliminary case-controlled
          study. Psychopathology, 41, 101–110.
      Cederlöf, M., Larsson, H., Lichtenstein, P., Almqvist, C., Serlachius, E., & Ludvigsson,
          J. F. (2016). Nationwide population-based cohort study of psychiatric disorders
          in individuals with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or hypermobility syndrome and
          their siblings. BMC Psychiatry, 16, 207.
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2010). Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and
          Congenital CMV Infection. Accessed on 21 May 2018 at www.cdc.gov/cmv/
          congenital-infection.html
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Prevalence of autism spectrum
          disorder among children aged 8 years – Autism and developmental disabilities
          monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. Morbidity and Mortality
          Weekly Report. Surveillance Summaries, 63, 1–21.
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders.
          Accessed on 21 May 2018 at www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fasd/facts.html
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016a). Epilepsy Fast Facts. Accessed on
          21 May 2018 at www.cdc.gov/epilepsy/basics/fast-facts.htm
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016b). Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD):
          Data & Statistics. Accessed on 21 May 2018 at www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/
          data.html
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). Tourette Syndrome (TS): Data &
          Statistics. Accessed on 21 May 2108 at www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/tourette/data.
          html
      Charman, T., Pickles, A., Simonoff, E., Chandler, S., Loucas, T., & Baird, G. (2011).
          IQ in children with autism spectrum disorders: Data from the Special Needs and
          Autism Project (SNAP). Psychological Medicine, 41, 619–627.
      Cheeran, M. C., Lokensard, J. R., & Schleiss, M. R. (2009). Neuropathogenesis of
          congenital cytomegalovirus infection: Disease mechanisms and prospects for
          intervention. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 22(1), 99–126.
      Cheng, F., Vivacqua, G., & Yu, S. (2011). The role of α-synuclein in neurotransmission
          and synaptic plasticity. Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy, 42, 242–248.
      Chess, S. (1971). Autism in children with congenital rubella. Journal of Autism and
          Childhood Schizophrenia, 1(1), 33–47.
      Cheung, C., Yu, K., Fung, G., Leung, M., et al. (2010). Autistic disorders and
          schizophrenia: Related or remote? An anatomical likelihood estimation. PLoS
          One, 5, e12233.
      Cheung, I., & Vadas, P. (2015). A new disease cluster: Mast cell activation syndrome,
          postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Journal
          of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 135, AB65.
      Choe, S.-Y., Kim, S.-J., Kim, H.-G., Lee, J. H., et al. (2003). Evaluation of estrogenicity
          of major heavy metals. Science of the Total Environment, 312, 15–21.
                                     References                                            219


Comoletti, D., De Jaco, A., Jennings, L. L., Flynn, R. E., et al. (2004). The Arg451Cys-
    neuroligin-3 mutation associated with autism reveals a defect in protein
    processing. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 4889–4893.
Connor, K., Ramamoorthy, K., Moore, M., Mustain, M., et al. (1997). Hydroxylated
    polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) as estrogens and antiestrogens: Structure-
    activity relationships. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 145, 111–123.
Connors, S. L., Crowell, D. E., Eberhart, C. G., Copeland, J., et al. (2005). Beta2-
    adrenergic receptor activation and genetic polymorphisms in autism: Data from
    dizyogotic twins. Journal of Child Neurology, 20(11), 876–884.
Constantino, J. N., & Todd, R. D. (2003). Autistic traits in the general population.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 524–530.
Constantino, J. N., & Todd, R. D. (2005). Intergenerational transmission of
    subthreshold autistic traits in the general population. Biological Psychiatry, 57,
    655–660.
Constantino, J. N., Lajonchere, C., Lutz, M., Gray, T., et al. (2006). Autistic social
    impairment in the siblings of children with pervasive developmental disorders.
    American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 294–296.
Cooper, G. S., & Stroehla, B. C. (2003). The epidemiology of autoimmune disease.
    Autoimmunity Reviews, 2, 119–125.
Corcoran, R., Mercer, G., & Frith, C. D. (1995). Schizophrenia, symptomatology and
    social inference: Investigating “theory of mind” in people with schizophrenia.
    Schizophrenia Research, 17, 5–13.
Couture, S. M., Penn, D. L., Losh, M., Adolphs, R., Hurley, R., & Piven, J. (2010).
    Comparison of social cognitive functioning in schizophrenia and high
    functioning autism: More convergence than divergence. Psychological Medicine,
    40, 569–579.
Craddock, N., & Owen, M. J. (2010). The Kraepelinian dichotomy—going, going…
    but still not gone. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 92–95.
Craig, F., Margari, F., Legrottaglie, A. R., Palumbi, R., de Giambattista, C., &
    Margari, L. (2016). A review of executive function deficits in autism spectrum
    disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychiatric Disease and
    Treatment, 12, 1191–1202.
Creak, M., & Ini, S. (1960). Families of psychotic children. Journal of Child Psychology
    and Psychiatry, 1, 156–175.
Crespi, B., Stead, P., & Elliot, M. (2010). Evolution in health and medicine Sackler
    colloquium: Comparative genomics of autism and schizophrenia. Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences USA, 107, 1736–1741.
Croen, L. A., Connors, S. L., Matevia, M., Qian, Y., Newschaffer, C., & Zimmerman,
    A. W. (2011). Prenatal exposure to β2-adrenergic receptor agonists and risk of
    autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 3(4), 307–315.
Croen, L. A., Grether, J. K., Yoshida, C. K., Odouli, R., & Hendrick, V. (2011).
    Antidepressant use during pregnancy and childhood autism spectrum disorders.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(11), 1104–1112.
Croen, L. A., Najjar, D. V., Fireman, B., & Grether, J. K. (2007). Maternal and paternal
    age and risk of autism spectrum disorders. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
    Medicine, 161, 334–340.
220                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. (2013). Identification
          of risk loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: A genome-
          wide analysis. The Lancet, 381, 1371–1379.
      Cunningham, C. (2013). Microglia and neurodegeneration: The role of systemic
          inflammation. Glia, 61, 71–90.
      Dalton, K. M., Nacewicz, B. M., Alexander, A. L., & Davidson, R. J. (2007). Gaze-
          fixation, brain activation, and amygdala volume in unaffected siblings of
          individuals with autism. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 512–520.
      Daniels, J. L., Forssen, U., Hultman, C. M., Cnattingius, S., et al. (2008). Parental
          psychiatric disorders associated with autism spectrum disorders in the offspring.
          Pediatrics, 121, e1357-e1362.
      Darrow, S. M., Grados, M., Sandor, P., Hirschtritt, M. E., et al. (2017). Autism spectrum
          symptoms in a Tourette’s disorder sample. Journal of the American Academy of Child
          and Adolescent Psychiatry, 56, 610–617.
      Davis, E., Fennoy, I., Laraque, D., Kanem, N., Brown, G., & Mitchell, J. (1992). Autism
          and developmental abnormalities in children with perinatal cocaine exposure.
          Journal of the National Medical Association, 84(4), 315–319.
      Davison, J., Goin-Kochel, R. P., Green-Snyder, L. A., Hundley, R. J., Warren, Z., &
          Peters, S. U. (2014). Expression of the broad autism phenotype in simplex autism
          families from the Simons Simplex Collection. Journal of Autism and Developmental
          Disorders, 44, 2392–2399.
      Dawson, M., Soulières, I., Gernsbacher, M. A., & Mottron, L. (2007). The level and
          nature of autistic intelligence. Psychological Science, 18, 657–662.
      De Rubeis, S., He, X., Goldberg, A. P., Poultney, C. S., Samocha, K., Cicek, A. E., et
          al. (2014). Synaptic, transcriptional and chromatin genes disrupted in autism.
          Nature, 515(7526), 209–215.
      De Sousa, A., & Wood, B. (2007). The hominin fossil record and the emergence
          of the modern human central nervous system. In J. H. Kaas (Ed.), Evolution of
          Nervous Systems: A Comprehensive Reference (pp. 291–336). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
      Deacon, T. W. (2000). Heterochrony in brain evolution: Cellular versus morphological
          analyses. In S. T. Parker, J. Langer, & M. L. McKinney (Eds.), Biology, Brains, and
          Behavior: The Evolution of Human Development (pp. 41–88). Santa Fe, NM/Oxford:
          School of American Research Press/James Currey.
      Dean, J. C., Hailey, H., Moore, S. J., Lloyd, D. J., Turnpenny P. D., & Little, J. (2002).
          Long term health and neurodevelopment in children exposed to antiepileptic
          drugs before birth. Journal of Medical Genetics, 39(4), 251–259.
      Deary, I. J., & Johnson, T. (2010). Intelligence and education: Causal perceptions drive
          analytic processes and therefore conclusions. International Journal of Epidemiology,
          39, 1362–1369.
      Deary, I. J., Strand, S., Smith, P., & Fernandes, C. (2007). Intelligence and educational
          achievement. Intelligence, 35, 13–21.
      DeLong, G. R., Bean, S. C., & Brown, F. R. 3rd. (1981). Acquired reversible autistic
          syndrome in acute encephalopathic illness in children. Archives of Neurology,
          38(3), 191–194.
      DeLong, G. R., & Dwyer, J. T. (1988). Correlation of family history with specific
          autistic subgroups: Asperger’s syndrome and bipolar affective disease. Journal of
          Autism and Developmental Disorders, 18, 593–600.
                                     References                                              221


DeLong, G. R., Ritch, C. R., & Burch, S. (2002). Fluoxetine response in children with
     autistic spectrum disorders: Correlation with familial major affective disorder
     and intellectual achievement. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 44,
     652–659.
Dickerson, A. S., Rahbar, M. H., Bakian, A. V., Bilder, D. A., et al. (2016). Autism
     spectrum disorder prevalence and associations with air concentrations of lead,
     mercury, and arsenic. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 188, 407.
Dickerson, A. S., Rahbar, M. H., Han, I., Bakian, A. V., Bilder, D. A., Harrington, R.
     A., et al. (2015). Autism spectrum disorder prevalence and proximity to industrial
     facilities releasing arsenic, lead or mercury. Science of the Total Environment, 536,
     245–251.
DiMario, Jr., F. J. (2004). Brain abnormalities in tuberous sclerosis complex. Journal of
     Child Neurology, 19, 650–657.
Dohn, A., Garza-Villarreal, E. A., Heaton, P., & Vuust, P. (2012). Do musicians with
     perfect pitch have more autism traits than musicians without perfect pitch? An
     empirical study. PLoS One, 7, e37961.
Donvan, J., & Zuker, C. (2016). In a Different Key: The Story of Autism. New York, NY:
     Crown Publishing Group.
Dooley, J. M., Stewart, W. A., Hayden, J. D., & Therrien, A. (2004). Brainstem
     calcification in Möbius syndrome. Pediatric Neurology, 30(1), 39–41.
Dubey, D., Hays, R., Alqallaf, A., Freeman, M., et al. (2016). Evaluating the prevalence
     of neurological autoantibodies among patients with epilepsy of unknown
     etiology: Ongoing prospective study (S52. 004). Neurology, 86, S52-004.
Duncan, A. J., & Heales, S. J. (2005). Nitric oxide and neurological disorders. Molecular
     Aspects of Medicine, 26, 67–96.
Duncan, R., Muller, J., Lee, N., Esmaili, A., & Nakhasi, H. L. (1999). Rubella virus-
     induced apoptosis varies among cell lines and is modulated by Bcl-XL and
     caspase inhibitors. Virology, 255(1), 117–128.
Durand, C. M., Betancur, C., Boeckers, T. M., Bockmann, J., et al. (2006). Mutations
     in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated
     with autism spectrum disorders. Nature Genetics, 39, 25–27.
Dworzynski, K., Ronald, A., Bolton, P., & Happé, F. (2012). How different are
     girls and boys above and below the diagnostic threshold for autism spectrum
     disorders? Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51,
     788–797.
Eaves, L. C., & Ho, H. H. (2008). Young adult outcome of autism spectrum disorders.
     Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38, 739–747.
Ebert, D. H., & Greenberg, M. E. (2013). Activity-dependent neuronal signaling and
     autism spectrum disorder. Nature, 493(7432), 327–337.
Eccles, J. A., Iodice, V., Dowell, N. G., Owens, A., et al. (2014). Joint hypermobility
     and autonomic hyperactivity: Relevance to neurodevelopmental disorders.
     Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 85, e3.
Eddleston, M., Buckley, N. A., Eye, P., & Dawson, A. H. (2008). Management of acute
     organophosphorus pesticide poisoning. Lancet, 371, 597–607.
222                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Eiben, B., Bartels, I., Bähr-Porsch, S., Borgmann, S., et al. (1990). Cytogenetic
           analysis of 750 spontaneous abortions with the direct-preparation method of
           chorionic villi and its implications for studying genetic causes of pregnancy
           wastage. American Journal of Human Genetics, 47(4), 656–663.
      Eisenberg, L. (1957). The fathers of autistic children. American Journal of Psychiatry,
           127, 715–724.
      El-Khayat, H. A, Soliman, N. A., Tomoum, H. Y., Omran, M. A., El-Wakad, A. S., &
           Shatla, R. H. (2008). Reproductive hormonal changes and catamenial pattern in
           adolescent females with epilepsy. Epilepsia, 49, 1619–1626.
      Eliez, S., Barnea-Goraly, N., Schmitt, J. E., Liu, Y., & Reiss, A. L. (2002). Increased
           basal ganglia volumes in velo-cardio-facial syndrome (deletion 22q11.2).
           Biological Psychiatry, 52, 68–70.
      Elsabbagh, M., Volein, A., Csibra, G., Holmboe, K., et al. (2009). Neural correlates of
           eye gaze processing in the infant broader autism phenotype. Biological Psychiatry,
           65, 31–38.
      Elton, S., Bishop, L. C., & Wood, B. (2001). Comparative context of Plio-Pleistocene
           hominin brain evolution. Journal of Human Evolution, 41, 1–27.
      Engel, J., Jr. (2013). Seizures and Epilepsy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Englund, J., Walter, E. B., Fairchok, M. P., Monto, A. S., & Neuzil, K. M. (2005). A
           comparison of 2 influenza vaccine schedules in 6- to 23-month-old children.
           Pediatrics, 115, 1039–1047.
      Ensembl. (2016). rs1801133 SNP. Accessed on 11 February 2016 at http://useast.
           ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Variation/Phenotype?db=core;r=1:11795821-
           11796821;v=rs1801133;vdb=variation;vf=102375326
      Epilepsy Foundation. (2016). Epilepsy Statistics. Accessed on 26 May 2016 at www.
           epilepsy.com/learn/epilepsy-statistics
      Esser, N., Legrand-Poels, S., Piette, J., Scheen, A. J., & Paquot, N. (2014). Inflammation
           as a link between obesity, metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
           Research and Clinical Practice, 105, 141–150.
      Eyles, D., Burne, T., & McGrath, J. (2011). Vitamin D in fetal brain development.
           Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 22, 629–636.
      Falivelli, G., De Jaco, A., Favaloro, F. L., Kim, H., et al. (2012). Inherited genetic
           variants in autism-related CNTNAP2 show perturbed trafficking and ATF6
           activation. Human Molecular Genetics, 21(21), 4761–4773.
      Falter, C. M., Braeutigam, S., Nathan, R., Carrington, S., & Bailey, A. (2013).
           Enhanced access to early visual processing of perceptual simultaneity in autism
           spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 43, 1857–1866.
      Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M., Doyle, A. E., & Seidman, L. J. (2001).
           A psychometric measure of learning disability predicts educational failure four
           years later in boys with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of
           Attention Disorders, 4, 220–230.
      Faretra, G. (1979). Lauretta Bender on autism: A review. Child Psychiatry & Human
           Development, 10, 118–129.
      Fehlow, P., Bernstein, K., Tennstedt, A., & Walther, F. (1993). [Early infantile autism
           and excessive aerophagy with symptomatic megacolon and ileus in a case of
           Ehlers-Danlos syndrome]. Padiatrie und Grenzgebiete, 31, 259–267.
                                      References                                               223


Fernell, E., Bejerot, S., Westerlund, J., Miniscalco, C., et al. (2015). Autism spectrum
     disorder and low vitamin D at birth: A sibling control study. Molecular Autism,
     6, 3.
Ferrer, I. S., Alcantara, S., Zujar, M. J., & Cinos, C. (1993). Structure and pathogenesis
     of cortical nodules induced by prenatal X-irradiation in the rat. Acta
     Neuropathologica, 85, 205–212.
Feschotte, C. (2008). Transposable elements and the evolution of regulatory networks.
     Nature Reviews Genetics, 9, 397–405.
Fine, S. E., Weissman, A., Gerdes, M., Pinto-Martin, J., et al. (2005). Autism spectrum
     disorders and symptoms in children with molecularly confirmed 22q11.2
     deletion syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 35, 461–470.
Fitzgerald, M. (2005). The Genesis of Artistic Creativity: Asperger’s Syndrome and the Arts.
     London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Fitzgerald, M., & O’Brien, B. (2007). Genius Genes: How Asperger Talents Changed the
     World. Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Company.
Folstein, S., & Rutter, M. (1977). Infantile autism: A genetic study of 21 twin pairs.
     Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 18(4), 297–321.
Fombonne, E., Bolton, P., Prior, J., Jordan, H., & Rutter, M. (1997). A family study
     of autism: Cognitive patterns and levels in parents and siblings. Journal of Child
     Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 667–683.
Fombonne, E., Rogé, B., Claverie, J., Courty, S., & Fremolle, J. (1999). Microcephaly
     and macrocephaly in autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 29,
     113–119.
Foundation for a Drug-free World. (2016). International Statistic: The Truth about
     Cocaine. Accessed on 7 March 2016 at www.drugfreeworld.org/drugfacts/
     cocaine/international-statistics.html
Frantseva, M. V., Velazquez, J. P., Tsoraklidis, G., Mendonca, A. J., et al. (2000).
     Oxidative stress is involved in seizure-induced neurodegeneration in the kindling
     model of epilepsy. Neuroscience, 97, 431–435.
Friederici, A. D. (2012). The cortical language circuit: From auditory perception to
     sentence comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16, 262–268.
Friedman, S. R., Rapport, L. J., Lumley, M., Tzelepis, A., et al. (2003). Aspects
     of emotional competence in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
     Neuropsychology, 17, 50–58.
Frischmeyer-Guerrerio, P. A., Guerrerior, A. L., Oswald, G., Chichester, K., et al.
     (2013). TGF-beta receptor mutations impose a strong predisposition for human
     allergic disease. Science Translational Medicine, 5, 195ra94.
Frith, C. D. (2014). The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hove: Psychology
     Press.
Frith, U. (1991). Autism and Asperger Syndrome. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.
Frye, C. A., & Scalise, T. J. (2000). Anti-seizure effects of progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP
     in kainic acid and perforant pathway models of epilepsy. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
     25, 407–420.
Frye, R. E., & Rossignol, D. A. (2011). Mitochondrial dysfunction can connect the
     diverse medical symptoms associated with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatric
     Research, 69, 41R–47R.
224                                       DEFINING AUTISM


      Fujita, E., Dai, H., Tanabe, Y., Zhiling, Y., et al. (2010). Autism spectrum disorder is
           related to endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by mutations in the synaptic cell
           adhesion molecule, CADM1. Cell Death & Disease, 1, e47.
      Fullerton, P. M., & Kremer, M. (1961). Neuropathy after intake of thalidomide
           (Distaval). British Medical Journal, 2(5256), 855–858.
      Gabel, H. W., Kinde, B., Stroud, H., Gilbert, C. S., et al. (2015). Disruption of
           DNA-methylation-dependent long gene repression in Rett syndrome. Nature,
           522(7554), 89–93.
      Gerdts, J. A., Bernier, R., Dawson, G., & Estes, A. (2013). The broader autism
           phenotype in simplex and multiplex families. Journal of Autism and Developmental
           Disorders, 43, 1597–1605.
      Geschwind, D. H., & State, M. W. (2015). Gene hunting in autism spectrum disorder:
           On the path to precision medicine. Lancet Neurology, 14(11), 1109–1120.
      Ghaziuddin, M., Al-Khouri, I., & Ghaziuddin, N. (2002). Autistic symptoms following
           herpes encephalitis. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 11(3), 142–146.
      Ghaziuddin, M., & Greden, J. (1998). Depression in children with autism/pervasive
           developmental disorders: A case-control family history study. Journal of Autism
           and Developmental Disorders, 28, 111–115.
      Ghaziuddin, M., Tsai, L. Y., Eilers, L., & Ghaziuddin, N. (1992). Brief report: Autism
           and herpes simplex encephalitis. Journal of Autism and Development Disorders, 22(1),
           107–113.
      Giannotti, F., Cortesi, F., Cerquiglini, A., Miraglia, D., et al. (2008). An investigation of
           sleep characteristics, EEG abnormalities and epilepsy in developmental regressed
           and non-regressed children with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
           Disorders, 38, 1888–1897.
      Giarelli, E., Wiggins, L. D., Rice, C. E., Levy, S. E., et al. (2010). Sex differences in the
           evaluation and diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders among children. Disability
           and Health Journal, 3, 107–116.
      Gillberg, C. (1986). Onset at age 14 of a typical autistic syndrome: A case report
           of a girl with herpes simplex encephalitis. Journal of Autism and Developmental
           Disorders, 16(3), 369–375.
      Gillberg, C., & Wahlström, J. (1985). Chromosome abnormalities in infantile autism
           and other childhood psychoses: A population study of 66 cases. Developmental
           Medicine and Child Neurology, 27(3), 293–304.
      Gillberg, I. C. (1991). Autistic syndrome with onset at age 31 years: Herpes
           encephalitis as a possible model for childhood autism. Developmental Medicine
           and Child Neurology, 33(10), 920–924.
      Gillot, A., & Standen, P. J. (2007). Levels of anxiety and sources of stress in adults
           with autism. Journal of Intellectual Disabilities, 11, 359–370.
      Girirajan, S., Rosenfeld, J. A., Coe, B. P., Parikh, S., et al. (2012). Phenotypic
           heterogeneity of genomic disorders and rare copy-number variants. New England
           Journal of Medicine, 367, 1321–1331.
      Giulivi, C., Zhang, Y. F., Omanska-Klusek, A., Ross-Inta, C., et al. (2010).
           Mitochondrial dysfunction in autism. Journal of the American Medical Association,
           304, 2389–2396.
                                    References                                            225


Glessner, J. T., Wang, K., Cai, G., Korvatska, O., et al. (2009). Autism genome-wide
     copy number variation reveals ubiquitin and neuronal genes. Nature, 459(7246),
     569–573.
Glod, M., Riby, D. M., Honey, E., & Rogers, J. (2017). Sensory atypicalities in dyads
     of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their parents. Autism
     Research, 10, 531–538
Gockley, J., Willsey, A. J., Dong, S., Dougherty, J. D., Constantino, J. N., & Sanders,
     S. J. (2015). The female protective effect in autism spectrum disorder is not
     mediated by a single genetic locus. Molecular Autism, 6, 25.
Goin-Kochel, R. P., Trinh, S., Barber, S., & Bernier, R. (2017). Gene disrupting
     mutations associated with regression in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of
     Autism and Developmental Disorders, 47, 3600–3607.
Gokcen, S., Bora, E., Erermis, S., Kesikci, H., & Aydin, C. (2009). Theory of mind
     and verbal working memory deficits in parents of autistic children. Psychiatry
     Research, 166, 46–53.
Gonzalez, C. H., Marques-Dias, M. J., Kim, C. A., Sugayama, S. M., et al. (1998).
     Congenital abnormalities in Brazilian children associated with misoprostol
     misuse in first trimester of pregnancy. Lancet, 351(9116), 1624–1627.
Grant, W. B., & Soles, C. M. (2009). Epidemiologic evidence supporting the role of
     maternal vitamin D deficiency as a risk factor for the development of infantile
     autism. Dermatoendocrinology, 1, 223–228.
Gratten, J., Wray, N. R., Peyrot, W. J., McGrath, J. J., Visccher, P. M., Goddard,
     M. E. (2016). Risk of psychiatric illness from advanced paternal age is not
     predominantly from de novo mutations. Nature Genetics, 48, 718.
Guillette, L. J., Jr. (2000). Organochlorine pesticides as endocrine disruptors in
     wildlife. Central European Journal of Public Health, 8, 34–35.
Guimarães, L. E., Baker, B., Perricone, C., & Shoenfeld, Y. (2015). Vaccines, adjuvants
     and autoimmunity. Pharmacological Research, 100, 190–209.
Hagerman, P. J., & Hagerman, R. J. (2004). The fragile-X permutation: A maturing
     perspective. American Journal of Human Genetics, 74(5), 805–816.
Hallerbäck, M. U., Lugnegård, T., & Gillberg, C. (2012). Is autism spectrum disorder
     common in schizophrenia? Psychiatry Research, 198, 12–17.
Halliwell, B. (2001). Role of free radicals in the neurodegenerative diseases:
     Therapeutic implications for antioxidant treatment. Drugs and Aging, 18, 685–
     716.
Halliwell, B. (2006). Oxidative stress and neurodegeneration: Where are we now?
     Journal of Neurochemistry, 97, 1634–1658.
Hamblin, J. (2013). Why we took cocaine out of soda. The Atlantic, 31 January.
Hansson, A. C., Nixon, K., Rimondini, R., Damadzic, R., et al. (2010). Long-
     term suppression of forebrain neurogenesis and loss of neuronal progenitor
     cells following prolonged alcohol dependence in rats. International Journal of
     Neuropsychopharmacology, 13(5), 583–593.
Harris, S. R., MacKay, L. L., & Osborn, J. A. (1995). Autistic behaviors in offspring
     of mothers abusing alcohol and other drugs: A series of case reports. Alcoholism,
     Clinical and Experimental Research, 19(3), 660–665.
226                                       DEFINING AUTISM


      Harvey, L., & Boksa, P. (2014). Additive effects of maternal iron deficiency and
            prenatal immune activation on adult behaviors in rat offspring. Brain, Behavior,
            and Immunity, 40, 27–37.
      Hashemi, E., Ariza, J., Rogers, H., Noctor, S. C., & Martinez-Cerdeno, V. (2017).
            The number of parvalbumin-expressing interneurons is decreased in the medical
            prefrontal cortex in autism. Cerebral Cortex, 27, 1931–1943.
      Haykin, L. (2012). On the sacred disease: The historical significance of Hippocratic humanism,
            rationality and scientific procedure. Paper presented at the Young Historians
            Conference, Portland, OR, 26 April.
      Hazell, A. S. (2007). Excitotoxic mechanisms in stroke: An update of concepts and
            treatment strategies. Neurochemistry International, 50, 941–953.
      He, B. (2006). Viruses, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and interferon responses. Cell
            Death and Differentiation, 13, 393–403.
      Hebert, K. J., Miller, L. L., & Joinson, C. J. (2010). Association of autistic spectrum
            disorder with season of birth and conception in a UK cohort. Autism Research, 3,
            185–190.
      Herbert, M. R., Ziegler, D. A., Makris, N., Filipek, P. A., et al. (2004). Localization
            of white matter volume increase in autism and developmental language disorder.
            Annals of Neurology, 55, 530–540.
      Herculano-Houzel, S., Avelino-de-Souza, K., Neves, K., Porfírio, J., et al. (2014). The
            elephant brain in numbers. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 8, 46.
      Hermelin, B. (2001). Bright Splinters of the Mind: A Personal Story of Research with Autistic
            Savants. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
      Hernández, A. F., Parrón, & Alarcón, R. (2011). Pesticides and asthma. Current
            Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 11, 90–96.
      Herzog, A. G. (2008). Disorders of reproduction in patients with epilepsy: Primary
            neurological mechanisms. Seizure, 17, 101–110.
      Hill, D. S., Cabrera, R., Schultz, D. W., Zhu, H., Lu, W., Finnell, R. H., & Wlodarczyk,
            B. J. (2015). Autism-like behavior and epigenetic changes associated with autism
            as consequences of in utero exposure to environmental pollutants in a mouse
            models. Behavioural Neurology, 426263.
      Hoekstra, R. A., Bartels, M., Verweij, C. J., & Boomsma, D. I. (2007). Heritability
            of autistic traits in the general population. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
            Medicine, 161, 372–377.
      Hoffman, E. J., Turner, K. J., Fernandez, J. M., Cifuentes, D., et al. (2016). Estrogens
            suppress a behavioral phenotype in zebrafish mutants of the autism risk gene,
            CNTNAP2. Neuron, 89, 725–733.
      Hofvander, B., Delorme, R., Chaste, P., Nydén, A., et al. (2009). Psychiatric and
            psychosocial problems in adults with normal-intelligence autism spectrum
            disorders. BMC Psychiatry, 9, 1.
      Holland, A. J., Hon, J., Huppert, F. A., Stevens, F., & Watson, P. (1998). Population-
            based study of the prevalence and presentation of dementia in adults with
            Down’s syndrome. British Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 493–498.
      Holmes, L. B. (2002). The teratogenicity of anticonvulsant drugs: A progress report.
            Journal of Medical Genetics, 39(4), 245–247.
      Horská, A., Farage, L., Bibat, G., Nagae, L. M., et al. (2009). Brain metabolism in Rett
            syndrome: Age, clinical, and genotype correlations. Annals of Neurology, 65, 90–97.
                                      References                                               227


Howe, K., Clark, M. D., Torroja, C. F., Torrance, J., et al. (2013). The zebrafish reference
    genome sequence and its relationship to the human genome. Nature, 496, 498.
Howlin, P., Goode, S., Hutton, J., & Rutter, M. (2009). Savant skills in autism:
    Psychometric approaches and parental reports. Philosophical Transactions of the
    Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 364, 1359–1367.
Hoyme, H. E., May, P. A., Kalberg, W. O., Kodituwakku, P., et al. (2005). A practical
    clinical approach to diagnosis of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: Clarification
    of the 1996 Institute of Medicine criteria. Pediatrics, 115(1), 39–47.
Hudak, M. L., & Tan, R. C., Committee on Drugs, Committee on Fetus and Newborn,
    American Academy of Pediatrics. (2012). Neonatal drug withdrawal. Pediatrics,
    129(2), e540–560.
Hugh-Jones, D., Verqeij, K. J. H., St. Pourcain, B., & Abdellaoui, A. (2016). Assortative
    mating on educational attainment leads to genetic spousal resemblance for
    polygenic scores. Intelligence, 59, 103–108.
Hughes, C., Plumet, M.-H., & Leboyer, M. (1999). Towards a cognitive phenotype
    for autism: Increased prevalence of executive dysfunction and superior spatial
    span amongst siblings of children with autism. Journal of Child Psychology and
    Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 40, 705–718.
Hughes, C., Russell, J., & Robbins, T. W. (1994). Evidence for executive dysfunction
    in autism. Neuropsychologia, 32, 477–492.
Hughes, J. R., & Melyn, M. (2005). EEG and seizures in autistic children and
    adolescents: Further findings with therapeutic implications. Clinical EEG and
    Neuroscience, 36, 15–20.
Hunt, S., Russell, A., Smithson, W. H., Parsons, L., et al. (2008). Topiramate in
    pregnancy: Preliminary experience from the UK Epilepsy and Pregnancy
    Register. Neurology, 71(4), 272–276.
Hutsler, J. J., & Avino, T. (2015). The relevance of subplate modifications to
    connectivity in the cerebral cortex of individuals with autism spectrum disorders.
    In M. F. Casanova & I. Opris (Eds.), Recent Advances on the Modular Organization of
    the Cortex (pp. 201–224). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Hviid, A., Melbye, M., & Pasternak, B. (2013). Use of selective serotonin reuptake
    inhibitors during pregnancy and risk of autism. New England Journal of Medicine,
    369(25), 2406–2415.
Ikonomidou, C., Bittigau, P., Ishimaru, M. J., Wozniak, D. F., et al. (2000). Ethanol-
    induced apoptotic neurodegeneration and fetal alcohol syndrome. Science,
    287(5455), 1056–1060.
Ingalhalikar, M., Smith, A., Parker, D., Satterthwaite, T. D., et al. (2014). Sex
    differences in the structural connectome of the human brain. Proceedings of the
    National Academy of Sciences, 111, 823–828.
Ingemarsson, I. (1975). Effect of terbutaline on premature labour. Acta Obstetrica et
    Gynceologica Scandinavica, 54(S47), 37.
Ingersoll, B., Meyer, K., & Becker, M. W. (2011). Increased rates of depressed mood
    in others of children with ASD associated with the presence of the broader
    autism phenotype. Autism Research, 4, 143–148.
Ingudomnukul, E., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., & Knickmeyer, R. (2007).
    Elevated rates of testosterone-related disorders in women with autism spectrum
    conditions. Hormones and Behavior, 51, 597–604.
228                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Iossifov, I., O’Roak, B. J., Sanders, S. J., Ronemus, M., et al. (2014). The contribution
           of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder. Nature, 515(7526),
           216–221.
      Jack M. (2016). Jacob is 17 years old, autistic, and on his way to getting a PhD in
           theoretical physics. Plaid Zebra, 18 January.
      Jacquemont, S., Coe, B. P., Hersch, M., Duyzend, M. H., et al. (2014). A higher
           mutational burden in females supports a “female protective model” in
           neurodevelopmental disorders. American Journal of Human Genetics, 94, 415–425.
      Jamain, S., Quach, H., Betancur, C., Råstam, M., et al. (2003). Mutations of the
           X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with
           autism. Nature Genetics, 34(1), 27–29.
      Jambaque, I., Chiron, C., Dumas, C., Mumford, J., & Dulac, O. (2000). Mental and
           behavioural outcome of infantile epilepsy treated by vigabatrin in tuberous
           sclerosis patients. Epilepsy Research, 38, 151–160.
      Janssens, S., Pulendran, B., & Lambrecht, B. N. (2014). Emerging functions of the
           unfolded protein response in immunity. Nature Immunology, 15(10), 910–919.
      Jiang, Y. H., Yuen, R. K., Jin, X., Wang, M., et al. (2013). Detection of clinically
           relevant genetic variants in autism spectrum disorder by whole-genome
           sequencing. American Journal of Human Genetics, 93(2), 249–263.
      Jobe, L. E., & White, S. W. (2007). Loneliness, social relationships, and a broader
           autism phenotype in college students. Personality and Individual Differences, 42,
           1479–1489.
      Johansson, M., Wentz, E., Fernell, E., Strömland, K., Miller, M. T., & Gillberg, C.
           (2001). Autistic spectrum disorders in Möbius sequence: A comprehensive study
           of 25 individuals. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 43, 338–345.
      Jones, C. R., Happé, F., Golden, H., Marsden, A. J., et al. (2009). Reading and
           arithmetic in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders: Peaks and dips in
           attainment. Neuropsychology, 23, 718.
      Jones, K. L., Smith, D. W., Ulleland, C. N., & Streissguth, P. (1973). Pattern of
           malformation in offspring of chronic alcoholic mothers. Lancet, 1(7815), 1267–
           1271.
      Judd, L. L., & Mandell, A. J. (1968). Chromosome studies in early infantile autism.
           Archives of General Psychiatry, 18(4), 450–457.
      Kabat, J., & Król, P. (2012). Focal cortical dysplasia—Review. Polish Journal of
           Radiology, 77, 35.
      Kadak, M. T., Demirel, O. F., Yavuz, M., & Demir, T. (2014). Recognition of emotional
           facial expressions and broad autism phenotype in parents of children diagnosed
           with autistic spectrum disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55, 1146–1151.
      Kalueff, A. V., Minasyan, A., & Tuohimaa, P. (2005). Anticonvulsant effects of
           1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in chemically induced seizures in mice. Brain Research
           Bulletin, 67, 156–160.
      Kanner, L. (1941). In Defense of Mothers. New York, NY: Dood, Mead & Company.
      Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child, 2, 217–
           250.
      Kanner, L. (1949). Problems of nosology and psychodynamics in early childhood
           autism. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 19, 416–426.
                                     References                                             229


Kanner, L. (1965). Infantile autism and the schizophrenias. Behavioral Science, 10,
     412–420.
Kanner, L. (1968). Infantile autism revisited. Psychiatry Digest, 29, 17–28.
Kanner, L. (1971a). Childhood psychosis: A historical view. Journal of Autism and
     Childhood Schizophrenia, 1, 14–19.
Kanner, L. (1971b). Retrospect and prospect [Editorial]. Journal of Autism and Childhood
     Schizophrenia, 1, 453–459.
Kanner, L. (1971c). The integrative aspects of ability. Acta Paedopsychiatrica, 38, 134–
     144.
Kanner, L. (1973). The birth of early infantile autism. Journal of Autism and Childhood
     Schizophrenia, 3, 93–95.
Kanner, L., Rodriguez, A., & Ashenden, B. (1972). How far can autistic children go
     in matters of social adaptation? Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 2,
     9–33.
Kates, W. R., Olszewski, A. K., Gnirke, M. H., Kikinis, A., et al. (2015). White matter
     microstructural abnormalities of the cingulum bundle in youths with 22q11.2
     deletion syndrome: Associations with medication, neuropsychological function,
     and prodromal symptoms of psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 161, 76–84.
Kenneson, A., & Cannon, M. J. (2007). Review and meta-analysis of the epidemiology
     of congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. Reviews in Medical Virology,
     17(4), 253–276.
Kern, J. K., Geier, D. A., Sykes, L. K., & Geier, M. R. (2013). Evidence of
     neurodegeneration in autism spectrum disorder. Translational Neurodegeneration,
     2(1), 17.
Key, A. P. F., & Stone, W. L. (2013). Same but different: Nine-month-old infants at
     average and high risk for autism look at the same facial features but process them
     using different brain mechanisms. Autism Research, 5, 253–266.
Khemir, S., Halayem, S., & Azzouz, H. (2016). Autism in phenylketonuria patients:
     From clinical presentation to molecular defects. Journal of Child Neurology, 31,
     843–849.
Kim, J. A., Szatmari, P., Bryson, S. E., Streiner, D. L., & Wilson, F. J. (2000). The
     prevalence of anxiety and mood problems among children with autism and
     Asperger syndrome. Autism, 4, 117–132.
Kim, Y. S., Leventhal, B. L., Koh, Y. J., Fombonne, E., et al. (2011). Prevalence of
     autism spectrum disorders in a total population sample. American Journal of
     Psychiatry, 168, 904–912.
King, B. H. (2017). Association between maternal use of SSRI medications and autism
     in their children. Journal of the American Medical Association, 317, 1568–1569.
Kirby, A., & Sugden, D. A. (2007). Children with developmental coordination
     disorders. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 100, 182–186.
Klei, L., Sanders, S. J., Murtha, M. T., Hus, V., et al. (2012). Common genetic variants,
     acting additively, are a major source of risk for autism. Molecular Autism, 3(1), 9.
Klusek, J., Losh, M., & Martin, G. E. (2014). Sex differences and within-family
     associations in the broad autism phenotype. Autism, 18, 106–116.
Koczat, D. L., Rogers, S. J., Pennington, B. F., & Ross, R. G. (2002). Eye movement
     abnormality suggestive of spatial working memory deficit is present in parents
     of autistic probands. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 32, 513–518.
230                                       DEFINING AUTISM


      Kogan, M. D., Blumberg, S. J., Schieve, L. A., Boyle, C. A., et al. (2009). Prevalence
           of parent-reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder among children in the
           US, 2007. Pediatrics, 124(5), 1395–1403.
      Kojima, H., Takeuchi, S., Itoh, T., Iida, M., Kobayashi, S., & Yoshida, T. (2013). In
           vitro endocrine disruption potential of organophosphate flame retardants via
           human nuclear receptors. Toxicology, 314, 76–83.
      Kolevzon, A., Bush, L., Wang, A. T., Halpern, D., et al. (2014). A pilot controlled trial
           of insulin-like growth factor-1 in children with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.
           Molecular Autism, 5, 54.
      Kollodge, T., & Hinkley, S. (2015). Retinoblastoma: A scientific and clinical review.
           Vision Development & Rehabilitation, 1, 39–45.
      Konopka, G., Friedrich, T., Davis-Turak, J., Winden, K., Oldham, M. C., & Gao,
           F. (2012). Human-specific transcriptional networks in the brain. Neuron, 75,
           601–617.
      Kosidou, K., Dalman, C., Widman, L., Arver, S., Lee, B. K., Magnusson, C., &
           Gardner, R. M. (2016). Maternal polycystic ovary syndrome and the risk of
           autism spectrum disorders in the offspring: A population-based nationwide
           study in Sweden. Molecular Psychiatry, 21, 1441–1448.
      Kotila, M., & Waltimo, O. (1992). Epilepsy after stroke. Epilepsia, 33, 495–498.
      Kraepelin, E. (1899). Psychiatrie: Ein Lehrbuch für Studirende und Arzte [In 2 volumes].
           Leipzig: Vertrag von Johann Ambresius. Barth.
      Krakowiak, P., Goines, P. E., Tancredi, D. J., Ashwood, P., et al. (2015). Neonatal
           cytokine profiles associated with autism spectrum disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
           81, 442–451.
      Krüger, L., & Mandelkow, E. M. (2016). Tau neurotoxicity and rescue in animal
           models of human tauopathies. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 36, 52–58.
      Krumm, N., O’Roak, B. J., Shendure, J., & Eichler, E. E. (2014). A de novo convergence
           of autism genetics and molecular neuroscience. Trends in Neurosciences, 37(2),
           95–105.
      Kumar, S., Devendran, Y., & Devendran, R. (2017). Prevalence of autism spectrum
           disorders and its association with epileptiform activity among children with
           intellectual disability in a tertiary centre. Journal of Indian Association for Child &
           Adolescent Mental Health, 13, 26–47.
      Kuniewicz, M. W., Wi, S., Qian, Y., Walsh, E. M., Armstrong, M. A., & Croen, L.
           A. (2014). Prevalence and neonatal factors associated with autism spectrum
           disorders in preterm infants. Journal of Pediatrics, 164, 20–25.
      Kurita, H. (1985). Infantile autism with speech loss before the age of thirty months.
           Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 24, 191–196.
      Lai, C. L. E., Lau, Z., Lui, S. S., Lok, E., et al. (2016). Meta-analysis of neuropsychological
           measures of executive functioning in children and adolescents with high-
           functioning autism spectrum disorder. Autism Research, 10, 911–939.
      Lainhart, J. E., Ozonoff, S., Coon, H., Krasny, L., et al. (2002). Autism, regression,
           and the broader autism phenotype. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A,
           113, 231–237.
      Lambert, N., Strebel, P., Orenstein, W., Icenogle, J., & Poland, G. A. (2015). Rubella.
           Lancet, 385(9984), 2297–2307.
                                     References                                             231


Landgren, M., Svensson, L., Strömland, K., Andersson Grönlund, M. (2010). Prenatal
     alcohol exposure and neurodevelopmental disorders in children adopted from
     eastern Europe. Pediatrics, 125(5), e1178–e1185.
Langen, M., Kas, M. J., Staal, W. G., van Engeland, H., & Durston, S. (2011). The
     neurobiology of repetitive behavior: Of mice… . Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
     Reviews, 35, 345–355.
Langen, M., Schnack, H. G., Nederveen, H., Bos, D., et al. (2009). Changes in the
     developmental trajectories of striatum in autism. Biological Psychiatry, 66, 327–
     333.
Laplane, D., Levasseur, M., Pillon, B., Dubois, B., et al. (1989). Obsessive-
     compulsive and other behavioral changes with bilateral basal ganglia lesions:
     A neuropsychological, magnetic resonance imaging and positron tomography
     study. Brain, 112, 699–725.
Lee, Y.-H., & Pratley, R. E. (2005). The evolving role of inflammation in obesity and
     the metabolic syndrome. Current Diabetes Reports, 5, 70–75.
Legler, J., & Brouwer, A. (2003). Are brominated flame retardants endocrine
     disruptors? Environment International, 29, 879–885.
Leitner, Y. (2014). The co-occurrence of autism and attention deficit hyperactivity
     disorder in children—what do we know? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 268.
Lemoine, P., Harousseau, H., Borteyru, J. P., & Menuet, J. C. (1968). Les enfants des
     parents alcoholiques: Anomolies observes a propos de 127 cas. Ouest-Medical, 8,
     476–482.
Leung, A. K., Sauve, R. S., & Davies, H. D. (2003). Congenital cytomegalovirus
     infection. Journal of the National Medication Association, 95, 213.
Leyfer, O. T., Folstein, S. E., Bacalman, S., Davis, N. O., et al. (2006). Comorbid
     psychiatric disorders in children with autism: Interview development and rates
     of disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36, 849–861.
Li, B. M., Liu, X. R., Yi, Y. H., Deng, Y. H., et al. (2011). Autism in Dravet syndrome:
     Prevalence, features, and relationship to the clinical characteristics of epilepsy
     and mental retardation. Epilepsy & Behavior, 21, 291–295.
Lichtenstein, P., Yip, B. H., Björk, C., Pawitan, Y., et al. (2009). Common genetic
     determinants of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in Swedish families: A
     population-based study. Lancet, 373, 234–239.
Limperopoulos, C., Bassan, H., Sullivan, N. R., Soul, J. S., et al. (2008). Positive
     screening for autism in ex-preterm infants: Prevalence and risk factors. Pediatrics,
     121, 758–765.
Lugnegård, T., Hallerbäck, M. U., & Gillberg, C. (2012). Personality disorders and
     autism spectrum disorders: What are the connections? Comprehensive Psychiatry,
     53, 333–340.
Lutiger, B., Graham, K., Einarson, T. R., & Koren, G. (1991). Relationship between
     gestational cocaine use and pregnancy outcome: A meta-analysis. Teratology,
     44(4), 405–414.
MacLean, P. D. (1990). The Triune Brain in Evolution: Role in Paleocerebral Functions.
     Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
Magiorkinis, E., Diamantis, A., Sidiropoulou, K., & Panteliadis, C. (2014). Highlights
     in the history of epilepsy: The last 200 years. Epilepsy Research and Treatment.
     Accessed on 17 July 2018 at www.hindawi.com/journals/ert/2014/582039/
232                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Magoun, H. W., & Ranson, S. W. (1938). The behavior of cats following bilateral
          removal of the rostral portion of the cerebral hemispheres. Journal of
          Neurophysiology, 1, 39–44.
      Mahmood, A., Bibat, G., Zhan, A. L., Izbudak, I., et al. (2010). White matter
          impairment in Rett syndrome: Diffusion tensor imaging study with clinical
          correlations. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 31, 295–299.
      Malfait, F., Francomano, C., Byers, P., Belmont, J., et al. (2017). The 2017 international
          classification of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. American Journal of Medical Genetics
          Part C: Seminars in Medical Genetics, 175, 8–26.
      Mansour, R., Dovi, A. T., Lane, D. M., Loveland, K. A., & Pearson, D. A. (2017).
          ADHD severity as it relates to comorbid psychiatric symptomatology in children
          with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Research in Developmental Disabilities, 60,
          52–64.
      Manzo-Avalos, S., & Saavedra-Molina, A. (2010). Cellular and mitochondrial effects
          of alcohol consumption. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
          Health, 7(12), 4281–4304.
      March, W. A., Moore, V. M., Willson, K. J., Phillips, D. I., Norman, R. J., & Davies, M.
          J. (2009). The prevalence of polycystic ovary syndrome in a community sample
          assessed under contrasting diagnostic criteria. Human Reproduction, 25, 544–551.
      Marino, L. (1998). A comparison of encephalization between odontocete cetacean
          and anthropoid primates. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 51, 230–238.
      Marino, M., Galluzzo, P., & Ascenzi, P. (2006). Estrogen signaling multiple pathways
          to impact gene transcription. Current Genomics, 7, 497–508.
      Markram, H., Rinaldi, T., & Markram, K. (2007). The intense world syndrome—An
          alternative hypothesis for autism. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 1(1), 77–96.
      Marques, F., Brito, M. J., Conde, M., Pinto, M., & Moreira, A. (2014). Autism spectrum
          disorder secondary to enterovirus encephalitis. Journal of Child Neurology, 29(5),
          708–714.
      Marriage, S., Wolverton, A., & Marriage, K. (2009). Autism spectrum disorder grown
          up: A chart review of adult functioning. Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child
          and Adolescent Psychiatry, 18, 322–328.
      Marson, J., Meuris, S., Cooper, R., & Jouannet, P. (1991). Puberty in the male
          chimpanzee: Progressive maturation of semen characteristics. Biology of
          Reproduction, 44, 448–455.
      Martindale, J. L., & Holbrook, N. J. (2002). Cellular response to oxidative stress:
          Signaling for suicide and survival. Journal of Cellular Physiology, 192, 1–15.
      Matelski, L., & Van de Water, J. (2016). Risk factors in autism: Thinking outside the
          brain. Journal of Autoimmunity, 67, 1–7.
      Mayes, L. C., Granger, R. H., Bornstein, M. H., & Zuckerman, B. (1992). The problem
          of prenatal cocaine exposure. A rush to judgment. JAMA, 267(3), 406–408.
      Mayes, S. D., Calhoun, S. L., Murray, M. J., Ahuja, M., & Smith, L. A. (2011).
          Anxiety, depression, and irritability in children with autism relative to other
          neuropsychiatric disorders and typical development. Research in Autism Spectrum
          Disorders, 5, 474–485.
      Mazefsky, C. A., Conner, C. M., & Oswald, D. P. (2010). Association between
          depression and anxiety in high-functioning children with autism spectrum
          disorders and maternal mood symptoms. Autism Research, 3, 120–127.
                                      References                                              233


Mazefsky, C. A., Folstein, S. E., & Lainhart, J. E. (2008). Overrepresentation of mood
     and anxiety disorders in adults with autism and their first-degree relatives: What
     does it mean? Autism Research, 1, 193–197.
McCarthy, S. E., Gillis, J., Kramer, M., Lihm, J., et al. (2014). De novo mutations in
     schizophrenia implicate chromatin remodeling and support a genetic overlap
     with autism and intellectual disability. Molecular Psychiatry, 19, 652–658.
McCue, L. M., Flick, L. H., Twyman, K. A., Xian, H., & Conturo, T. E. (2016).
     Prevalence of non-febrile seizures in children with idiopathic autism spectrum
     disorder and their unaffected siblings: A retrospective cohort study. BMC
     Neurology, 16, 245.
McDonald, N. M., Varcin, K. J., Bhatt, R., Wu, J. Y., et al. (2017). Early autism symptoms
     in infants with tuberous sclerosis complex [Advance online publication]. Autism
     Research. doi:10.1002/aut.1846.
McHugh, J. C., & Delanty, N. (2008). Epidemiology and classification of epilepsy:
     Gender comparisons. International Review of Neurobiology, 83, 11–26.
McIntosh, A. M., McMahon, J., Dibbens, L. M., Iona, X., et al. (2010). Effects of
     vaccination on onset and outcome of Dravet syndrome: A retrospective study.
     Lancet Neurology, 9(6), 592–598.
McLean, C. Y., Reno, P. L., Pollen, A. A., Bassan, A. I., et al. (2011). Human-specific
     loss of regulatory DNA and the evolution of human specific traits. Nature, 471,
     216–219.
McLean, M. J., & MacDonald, R. L. (1986). Sodium valproate, but not ethosuximide,
     produces use- and voltage-dependent limitation of high frequency repetitive
     firing of action potentials of mouse central neurons in cell culture. Journal of
     Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 237(3), 1001–1011.
McNamara, K. J. (2012). Heterochrony: The evolution of development. Evolution:
     Education and Outreach, 5, 203–218.
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., et al. (2007). Lifetime and
     12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in the National Comorbidity
     Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 543–552.
Messinger, D. S., Young, G. S., Webb, S. J., Ozonoff, S., et al. (2015). Early sex
     differences are not autism-specific: A Baby Siblings Research Consortium
     (BSRC) study. Molecular Autism, 6, 32.
Miller, D. T., Adam, M. P., Aradhya, S., Biesecker, L. G., et al. (2010). Consensus
     statement: Chromosomal microarray is a first-tier clinical diagnostic test for
     individuals with developmental disabilities or congenital anomalies. American
     Journal of Human Genetics, 86, 749–764.
Millichap, J. G. (2002). Patterns of regression in Rett syndrome. Pediatric Neurology,
     Briefs, 16, 76–77.
Milnerwood, A. J., & Raymond, L. A. (2010). Early synaptic pathophysiology in
     neurodegeneration: Insights from Huntington’s disease. Trends in Neurosciences,
     33, 513–523.
Ming, X., Brimacombe, M., & Wagner, G. C. (2007). Prevalence of motor impairment
     in autism spectrum disorders. Brain and Development, 29, 565–570.
Mione, M. C., Cavanagh, J. F., Harris, B., & Parnavelas, J. G. (1997). Cell fate
     specification and symmetrical/asymmetrical divisions in the developing cerebral
     cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 2018–2029.
234                                      DEFINING AUTISM


      Mnif, W., Hassine, A. I. H., Bouaziz, A., Bartegi, A., Thomas, O., & Roig, B. (2011).
          Effect of endocrine disruptor pesticides: A review. International Journal of
          Environmental Research and Public Health, 8, 2265–2302.
      Molina, O., Anton, E., Vidal, F., & Blanco, J. (2011). Sperm rates of 7q11.23,
          15q11q13 and 22q11.2 deletions and duplications: A FISH approach. Human
          Genetics, 129(1), 35–44.
      Molloy, C. A., Morrow, A. L., Meinzen-Derr, J., Schleifer, K., et al. (2006).
          Elevated cytokine levels in children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of
          Neuroimmunology, 172, 198–205.
      Money, J., Bobrow, N. A., & Clarke, F. C. (1971). Autism and autoimmune disease: A
          family study. Journal of Autism and Child Schizophrenia, 1, 146–160.
      Moore, S. J., Turnpenny, P., Quinn, A., Glover, S., et al. (2000). A clinical study of 57
          children with fetal anticonvulsant syndromes. Journal of Medical Genetics, 37(7),
          489–497.
      Movsas, T. Z., Pinto-Martin, J. A., Whitaker, A. H., Feldman, J. F., et al. (2013). Journal
          of Pediatrics, 163, 73–78.
      Mufson, E. J., Malek-Ahmadi, M., Perez, S. E., & Chen, K. (2016). Braak staging,
          plaque pathology, and APOE status in elderly persons without cognitive
          impairment. Neurobiology of Aging, 37, 147–153.
      Munesue, T., Ono, Y., Mutoh, K., Shimoda, K., Nakatani, H., & Kikuchi, M. (2008).
          High prevalence of bipolar disorder comorbidity in adolescents and young
          adults with high-functioning autism spectrum disorder: A preliminary study of
          44 patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 111, 170–175.
      Murakami, J. W., Courchesne, E., Haas, R. H., Press, G. A., & Yeung-Courchesne, R.
          (1992). Cerebellar and cerebral abnormalities in Rett syndrome: A quantitative
          MR analysis. American Journal of Roentgenology, 159, 177–183.
      Murphy, M., Bolton, P. F., Pickles, A., Fombonne, E., Piven, J., & Rutter, M. (2000).
          Personality traits of the relatives of autistic probands. Psychological Medicine, 30,
          1441–1424.
      Myers, L., Anderlid, B. M., Nordgren, A., Willfors, C., et al. (2017). Minor physical
          anomalies in neurodevelopmental disorders: A twin study. Child and Adolescent
          Psychiatry and Mental Health, 1, 57.
      Nader, A. M., Courchesne, V., Dawson, M., & Soulières, I. (2016). Does WISC-
          IV underestimate the intelligence of autistic children? Journal of Autism and
          Developmental Disabilities, 46(5), 1582–1589.
      Nagae, L. M., Zarnow, D. M., Blaskey, L., Dell, J., et al. (2012). Elevated mean
          diffusivity in the left hemisphere superior longitudinal fasciculus in autism
          spectrum disorders increases with more profound language impairment. American
          Journal of Neuroradiology, 33, 1720–1725.
      Nakaya, H. I., Wrammert, J., Lee, E. K., Racioppo, L., et al. (2011). Systems biology
          of vaccination for seasonal influenza in humans. Nature Immunology, 12(8), 786–
          795.
      Nanson, J. L. (1992). Autism in fetal alcohol syndrome: A report of six cases.
          Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 16(3), 558–565.
      Napoli, E., Wong, S., & Giulivi, C. (2013). Evidence of reactive oxygen species-
          mediated damage to mitochondrial DNA in children with typical autism.
          Molecular Autism, 4, 2.
                                     References                                              235


Nation, K., Clarke, P., Wright, B., & Williams, C. (2006). Patterns of reading ability
    in children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental
    Disorders, 36, 911–919.
Nava, C., Dalle, C., Rastetter, A., Striano, P., et al. (2014). De novo mutations in
    HCN1 cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. Nature Genetics, 46(6),
    640–645.
Nippold, M. A. (1993). Clinical forum: Adolescent language developmental markers
    in adolescent language: Syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Language, Speech, and
    Hearing Services in Schools, 24, 21–28.
Niu, D.-K., & Yang, Y.-F. (2011). Why eukaryotic cells use introns to enhance gene
    expression: Splicing reduces transcription-associated mutagenesis by inhibiting
    topoisomerase I cutting activity. Biology Direct, 6, 24.
Nolan, T., McIntyre, P., Robertson, D., & Descamps, D. (2002). Reactogenicity and
    immunogenicity of a live attenuated tetravalent measles-mumps-rubella-varicella
    (MMRV) vaccine. Vaccine, 21, 281–289.
Nordsletten, A. E., Larsson, H., Crowley, J. J., Almqvist, C., Lichtenstein, P., & Mataix-
    Cols, D. (2016). Patterns of nonrandom mating within and across 11 major
    psychiatric disorders. JAMA Psychiatry, 73, 354–361.
Numis, A. L., Major, P., Montenegro, M. A., Muzkewicz, D. A., Pulsifer, M. B., Thiele,
    E. A. (2011). Identification of risk factors for autism spectrum disorders in
    tuberous sclerosis complex. Neurology, 76, 981–987.
Nydén, A., Hagberg, B., Goussé, V., & Rastam, M. (2011). A cognitive endophenotype
    of autism in families with multiple incidence. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders,
    5, 191–200.
O’Neil, E. (2011). The discovery of fetal alcohol syndrome. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.
    Accessed on 21 May 2018 at http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/2100
Oberman, L. M., Enticott, P. G., Casanova, M. F., Rotenberg, A., Pascual-Leone, A., &
    McCracken, J. T. (2016). Transcranial magnetic stimulation in autism spectrum
    disorder: Challenges, promise, and roadmap for future research. Autism Research,
    9, 184–203.
Oliveira, G., Diogo, L., Grazina, M., Garcia, P., et al. (2005). Mitochondrial dysfunction
    in autism spectrum disorders: A population-based study. Developmental Medicine
    and Child Neurology, 47, 185–189.
OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man). (2014). FG Syndrome. Accessed
    on 13 December 2017 at www.omim.org/entry/300321?search=fg%20
    syndrome&highlight=syndromic%20syndrome%20fg
Oosterbaan, A. M., Steegers, E. A., & Ursem, N. T. (2012). The effects of homocysteine
    and folic acid on angiogenesis and VEGF expression during chicken vascular
    development. Microvascular Research, 83(2), 98–104.
Opitz, J. M., Smith, J. F., & Santoro, L. (2008). The FG Syndrome (Online Mendelian
    Inheritance in Man 305450): Perspective in 2008. Advances in Pediatrics, 55,
    123–170.
Oslejsková, H. Dusek, L., Makovska, Z., Pejcochova, J., Autrata, R., & Slapak, I.
    (2008). Complicated relationship between autism with regression and epilepsy.
    Neuroendocrinology Letters, 29, 558–570.
236                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Ozonoff, S., Williams, B. J., Rauch, A. M., & Opitz, J. O. (2000). Behavior phenotype
           of FG syndrome: Cognition, personality, and behavior in eleven affected boys.
           American Journal of Medical Genetics, 97, 112–118.
      Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Belding, A., Hill, M., et al. (2015). The broader autism
           phenotype in infancy: When does it emerge? Journal of the American Academy of
           Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53, 398–407.
      Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Carter, A., Messinger, D., et al. (2011). Recurrence risk for
           autism spectrum disorders: A baby siblings research consortium study. Pediatrics,
           128, e448–e495.
      Palop, J. J., & Mucke, L. (2009). Epilepsy and cognitive impairments in Alzheimer’s
           disease. Archives of Neurology, 66, 435–440.
      Paravar, T., & Lee, D. J. (2008). Thalidomide: Mechanisms of action. International
           Reviews of Immunology, 27(3), 111–135.
      Park, S. Y., Kim, J. W., Kim, Y. M., Kim, J. M., et al. (2001). Frequencies of fetal
           chromosomal abnormalities at prenatal diagnosis: 10 years experiences in a
           single institution. Journal of Korean Medical Science, 16(3), 290–293.
      Parr, J., & Le Couteur, A. S. (2013). Broader autism phenotype. Encyclopedia of Autism
           Spectrum Disorders (p. 478) New York, NY: Springer.
      Paul, L. K., Van Lancker-Sidtis, D., Schieffer, B., Dietrich, R., & Brown, W. S. (2003).
           Communicative deficits in agenesis of the corpus callosum: Nonliteral language
           and affective prosody. Brain and Language, 85, 313–324.
      Paula-Pérez, I. (2013). Differential diagnosis between obsessive compulsive disorder
           and restrictive and repetitive behavioural patterns, activities and interests in
           autism spectrum disorders. Revista de Psiquiatría y Salud Mental, 6, 178–186.
      Pedersen, A. L., Pettygrover, S., Lu, Z., Andrews, J., et al. (2016). DSM criteria that
           best differentiate intellectual disability from autism spectrum disorder. Child
           Psychiatry and Human Development, 48, 537–545.
      Pellegrino, L. (2013). Patterns in development and disability. In M. L. Batshaw,
           N. J. Roizen, & G. R. Lotrecchiano (Eds.), Children with Disabilities (7th edn).
           Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
      Phiel, C. J., Zhang, F., Huang, E. Y., Guenther, M. G., Lazar, M. A., & Klein,
           P.  S. (2001). Histone deacetylase is a direct target of valproic acid, a potent
           anticonvulsant, mood stabilizer, and teratogen. Journal of Biological Chemistry,
           276(39), 36734–36741.
      Pinto, D., Pagnamenta, A. T., Klei, L., Anney, R., et al. (2010). Functional impact
           of global rare copy number variation in autism spectrum disorder. Nature,
           466(7304), 368–372.
      Piven, J., Chase, G. A., Landa, R., Wzorek, M., et al. (1991). Psychiatric disorders
           in the parents of autistic individuals. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
           Adolescent Psychiatry, 30, 471–478.
      Piven, J., Palmer, P., Jacobi, D., Childress, D., & Arndt, S. (1997). Broader autism
           phenotype: Evidence from a family history study of multiple-incidence autism
           families. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 185–190.
      Plomin, R., & Deary, I. J. (2015). Genetics and intelligence differences: Five special
           findings. Molecular Psychiatry, 20, 98–108.
      Poduri, A., & Lowenstein, D. (2011). Epilepsy genetics: Past, present, and future.
           Current Opinion in Genetic Development, 21, 325–332.
                                      References                                               237


Prabhakar, S., Noonan, J. P., Pääbo, S., & Rubin, E. M. (2006). Accelerated evolution
     of conserved noncoding sequences in humans. Science, 314, 786.
Prakash, Prabhu, L. V., Rai, R., Pai, M. M., et al. (2008). Teratogenic effects of the
     anticonvulsant gabapentin in mice. Singapore Medical Journal, 49(1), 47–53.
Puschel, A. W., & Betz, H. (1995). Neurexins are differentially expressed in the
     embryonic nervous system of mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 15(4), 2849–2856.
Rai, D., Lee, B. K., Dalman, C., Golding, J., Lewis, G., & Magnusson, C. (2013).
     Parental depression, maternal antidepressant use during pregnancy, and risk of
     autism spectrum disorders: Population based case-control study. British Medical
     Journal, 346, f2059.
Rai, D., Lewis, G., Lundberg, M., Araya, R., et al. (2012). Parental socioeconomic
     status and risk of offspring autism spectrum disorders in a Swedish population-
     based study. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51,
     467–476.
Rais-Bahrami, K., & Short, B. L. (2013). Premature and small-for-dates infants. In
     M. L. Batshaw, N. J. Roizen, & G. R. Lotrecchiano (Eds.), Children with Disabilities
     (7th edn, pp. 87–104). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Rajagopalan, P., Jahanshad, N., Stein, J. L., Hua, X., et al. (2012). Common folate gene
     variant, MTHFR C677T, is associated with brain structure in two independent
     cohorts of people with mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage: Clinical, 1(1),
     179–187.
Rasalam, A. S., Hailey, H., Williams, J. H., Moore, S. J., et al. (2005). Characteristics of
     fetal anticonvulsant syndrome associated autistic disorder. Developmental Medicine
     and Child Neurology, 47(8), 551–555.
Reiter, R. J. (1996). Antioxidant actions of melatonin. Advances in Pharmacology, 38,
     103–117.
Rhodes, G., Jeffrey, L., Taylor, L., & Ewing, L. (2013). Autistic traits are linked to
     reduced adaptive coding of face identity and selectively poorer face recognition
     in men but not women. Neuropsychologia, 51, 2702–2708.
Rimland, B. (1964). Infantile Autism: The Syndrome and Its Implications for a Neural Theory
     of Behavior. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Rimland, B. (1978). Inside the mind of the autistic savant. Psychology Today, August,
     pp. 69–80.
Rimland, B. (1990). Rain Man and the savant’s secrets. Autism Research Review
     International, 2, 3.
Rimland, B., & Hill, A. L. (1984). Idiot savants. In Mental Retardation and Developmental
     Disabilities (pp. 155–169). Springer: Boston.
Roberts, E. M., English, P. B., Grether, J. K., Windham, G. C., Somberg, L., & Wolff,
     C. (2007). Maternal residence near agricultural pesticide applications and autism
     spectrum disorders among children in the California central valley. Environmental
     Health Perspectives, 115, 1482–1489.
Robinson, E. B., Lichtenstein, P., Anckarsäter, H., Happé, F., & Ronald, A. (2013).
     Examining and interpreting the female protective effect against autistic behavior.
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 110, 5258–5262.
238                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Robinson, E. B., Samocha, K. E., Kosmicki, J. A., McGrath, L., et al. (2014). Autism
          spectrum disorder severity reflects the average contribution of de novo and
          familial influences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 15161–
          15165.
      Robison, J. E. (2016). Switched On: A Memoir of Brain Change and Emotional Awakening.
          New York, NY: Spiegel & Grau.
      Rodier, P. M., Ingram, J. L., Tisdale, B., Nelson, S., & Romano, J. (1996). Embryological
          origin for autism: Developmental anomalies of the cranial nerve motor nuclei.
          Journal of Comparative Neurology, 370, 247–261.
      Roelfsema, M. T., Hoekstra, R. A., Allison, C., Wheelwright, S., et al. (2012). Are
          autism spectrum conditions more prevalent in an information-technology
          region? A school-based study of three regions in the Netherlands. Journal of
          Autism and Developmental Disorders, 42, 734–739.
      Rogers, S. J. (2004). Developmental regression in autism spectrum disorders. Mental
          Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 10(2), 139–143.
      Rojas, D. C., Teale, P. D., Maharajh, K., Kronberg, E., et al. (2011). Transient and
          steady-state auditory gamma-band responses in first-degree relatives of people
          with autism spectrum disorder. Molecular Autism, 2, 11.
      Rojko, J. L., & Price-Schiavi, S. (2008). Physiologic IgG biodistribution, transport,
          and clearance: Implications for monoclonal antibody products. In J. A. Cavagnaro
          (Ed.), Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biopharmaceuticals (pp. 241–276). New York,
          NY: Wiley.
      Ronald, A., Pennell, C. E., & Whitehouse, A. J. O. (2010). Prenatal maternal stress
          associated with ADHD and autistic traits in early childhood. Frontiers in
          Psychology, 1, 223.
      Ross, L. E., Grigoriadis, S., Mamisashvili, L., VonderPorten, E. H., et al. (2013).
          Selected pregnancy and delivery outcomes after exposure to antidepressant
          medication: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 436–
          443.
      Rossi, P. G., Posar, A., & Parmeggiani, A. (2000). Epilepsy in adolescents and young
          adults with autistic disorder. Brain and Development, 22, 102–106.
      Roth, G., & Dicke, U. (2005). Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends in
          Cognitive Sciences, 9, 250–257.
      Rubenstein, J. L. R., & Merzenich, M. M. (2003). Model of autism: Increased ratio
          of excitation/inhibition in key neural systems. Genes, Brain and Behavior, 2, 255–
          267.
      Russell, G., Steer, C., & Golding, J. (2011). Social and demographic factors that
          influence the diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorders. Social Psychiatry and
          Psychiatric Epidemiology, 46, 1283–1293.
      Rutter, M. (2000). Genetic studies of autism: From the 1970s into the millennium.
          Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 28, 3–14.
      Ryan, L., Ehrlich, S., & Finnegan, L. (1987). Cocaine abuse in pregnancy: Effects on
          the fetus and newborn. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 9(4), 295–299.
      Ryan, N. P., Catroppa, C., Beare, R., Coleman, L., et al. (2015). Predictors of
          longitudinal outcome and recovery of pragmatic language and its relation to
          externalizing behaviour after pediatric traumatic brain injury. Brain and Language,
          142, 86–95.
                                      References                                              239


Safe, S. (2003). Cadmium’s disguise dupes the estrogen receptor. Nature Medicine, 9,
     1000–1001.
Sakai, T., Mikami, A., Tomonaga, M., Matsui, M., Suzuki, J., Hamada, Y., et al. (2011).
     Differential prefrontal white matter development in chimpanzees and humans.
     Current Biology, 21, 1397–1402.
Sakamoto, A., Moriuchi, H., Matsuzaki, J., Motoyama, K., & Moriuchi, M. (2015).
     Retrospective diagnosis of congenital cytomegalovirus infection in children
     with autism spectrum disorder but no other major neurologic deficit. Brain and
     Development, 37(2), 200–205.
Saks, E. R. (2007). The Center Cannot Hold: My Journey through Madness. Hachette
     Books: New York.
Salzano, S., Checconi, P., Hanschmann, E. M., Lillig, C. H., et al. (2014). Linkage of
     inflammation and oxidative stress via release of glutathionylated peroxiredoxin-2,
     which acts as a danger signal. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111,
     12157–12162.
Samoilova, E. B., Horton, J. L., Hilliard, B., Liu, T. S., & Chen, Y. (1998). IL-6-
     deficient mice are resistant to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis:
     Roles of IL-6 in the activation and differentiation of autoreactive T cells. Journal
     of Immunology, 161, 6480–6486.
Sanders, S. J., He, X., Willsey, A. J., Ercan-Sencicek, A. G., et al. (2015). Insights into
     autism spectrum disorder genomic architecture and biology from 71 risk loci.
     Neuron, 87(6), 1215–1233.
Sarazin, M., Pillon, B., Giannakopoulos, P., Rancurel, G., Samson, Y., & Dubois, B.
     (1998). Clinicometabolic dissociation of cognitive functions and social behavior
     in frontal lobe lesions. Neurology, 51, 142–148.
Sarnat, H. B., & Flores-Sarnat, L. (2015). Infantile tauopathies: Hemimegalencephaly;
     tuberous sclerosis complex; focal cortical dysplasia 2; gangiolglioma. Brain and
     Development, 37, 553–562.
Schmidt, G. L., Kimel, L. K., Winterrowd, E., Pennington, B. F., Hepburn S. L., &
     Rojas, D. C. (2008). Impairments in phonological processing and nonverbal
     intellectual function in parents of children with autism. Journal of Clinical and
     Experimental Neuropsychology, 30, 557–567.
Schmidt, R. J., Hansen, R. L., Hartiala, J., Allayee, H., et al. (2015). Selected vitamin
     D metabolic gene variants and risk for autism spectrum disorder in the CHARGE
     study. Early Human Development, 91(8), 483–489.
Schmidt, R. J., Tancredi, D. J., Krakowiak, P., Hansen, R. L., & Ozonoff, S. (2014).
     Maternal intake of supplemental iron and risk of autism spectrum disorder.
     American Journal of Epidemiology, 180, 890–900.
Schmidt, R. J., Tancredi, D. J., Ozonoff, S., Hansen, R. L., et al. (2012). Maternal
     periconceptional folic acid intake and risk of autism spectrum disorders and
     developmental delay in the CHARGE (CHildhood Autism Risks from Genetics
     and Environment) case-control study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 96(1),
     80–89.
Schneider, M., Debbané, M., Bassett, A. S., Chow, E. W., et al. (2014). Psychiatric
     disorders from childhood to adulthood in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: Results
     from the International Consortium on Brain and Behavior in 22q11.2 Deletion
     Syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 627–639.
240                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Schoenemann, P. T., Sheehan, M. J., & Glotzer, L. D. (2005). Prefrontal white matter
           volume is disproportionately larger in humans than in other primates. Nature
           Neuroscience, 8, 242–252.
      Scholl, T. O., & Johnson, W. G. (2000). Folic acid: Influence on the outcome of
           pregnancy. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71(5 Suppl), 1295S–1303S.
      Scott, O., Richer, L., Forbes, K., Sonnenberg, L., et al. (2014). Anti-N-methyl-D-
           aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis: an unusual cause of autistic regression
           in a toddler. Journal of Child Neurology, 29(5), 691–694.
      Scott, O., Shi, D., Andriashek, D., Clark, B., & Goez, H. R. (2017). Clinical cues
           for autoimmunity and neuroinflammation in patients with autistic regression.
           Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 59, 947–951.
      Seattle Children’s Hospital Research Foundation. (2013). Autism and tic disorders. The
           Autism Blog, 23 September. Accessed on 22 May 2018 at http://theautismblog.
           seattlechildrens.org/autism-and-tic-disorders
      Sebat, J., Lakshmi, B., Malhotra, D., Troge, J., et al. (2005). Strong association of de
           novo copy number mutations with autism. Science, 316(5823), 445–449.
      Semendeferi, K., Armstrong, E., Schleicher, A., Zilles, K., & Van Hoesen, G. W.
           (2001). Prefrontal cortex in humans and apes: A comparative study of area 10.
           American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 114, 224–241.
      Serdaroğlu, G., Alpman, A., Tosun, A., Pehlıvan, S., et al. (2009). Febrile seizures:
           Interleukin 1beta and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist polymorphisms. Pediatric
           Neurology, 40, 113–116.
      Shackleton, D. P., Westendorp, R. G. J., Trenité, D. K. N., & Vandenbroucke, J. P.
           (1999). Mortality in patients with epilepsy: 40 years of follow up in a Dutch
           cohort study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry, 66, 636–640.
      Shashi, V., Muddasani, S., Santos, C. C., Berry, M. N., et al. (2004). Abnormalities of
           the corpus callosum in nonpsychotic children with chromosome 22q11 deletion
           syndrome. Neuroimage, 21, 1399–1406.
      Shelton, J. F., Geraghty, E. M., Tancredi, D. J., Delwiche, L. D., et al. (2014).
           Neurodevelopmental disorders and prenatal residential proximity to agricultural
           pesticides: The CHARGE study. Environmental Health Perspectives, 122, 1103.
      Shetreat-Klein, M., Shinnar, S., & Rapin, I. (2014). Abnormalities of joint mobility
           with autism spectrum disorders. Brain Development, 36, 91–96.
      Shoffner, J., Hyams, L., Langley, G. N., Cossette, S., et al. (2010). Fever plus
           mitochondrial disease could be risk factors for autistic regression. Journal of Child
           Neurology, 25, 429–434.
      Shorter, E. (2008). History of psychiatry. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 21, 593.
      Silberman, S. (2001). The geek syndrome. WIRED, 1 December 2001.
      Simon, T. J., Ding, L., Bish, J. P., McDonald-McGinn, D. M., Zackai, E. H., & Gee,
           J. (2005). Volumetric, connective, and morphologic changes in the brains of
           children with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: An integrative study.
           Neuroimaging, 25, 169–180.
      Singer, H. S., Morris, C. M., Williams, P. N., Yoon, D. Y., Hong, J. J., & Zimmerman,
           A. W. (2006). Antibrain antibodies in children with autism and their unaffected
           siblings. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 178, 149–155.
                                     References                                              241


Sisodiya, S. M., Fauser, S., Cross, J. H., & Thom, M. (2009). Focal cortical dysplasia
     type II: Biological features and clinical perspectives. Lancet Neurology, 8, 830–
     843.
Smalley, S. L. (1998). Autism and tuberous sclerosis. Journal of Autism and Developmental
     Disorders, 28, 407–414.
Smith, I. M., Nichols, S. L., Issekutz, K., & Blake, K. (2005). Behavioral profiles
     and symptoms of autism in CHARGE syndrome: Preliminary Canadian
     epidemiological data. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A, 133, 248–256.
Snyder, A. (2004). Autism and creativity: Is there a link between autism and
     exceptional ability? [Book review]. Nature, 428, 470–471.
Sokhadze, E. M., Bartuh, J. M., Sears, L., Sokhadze, G. E., El-Baz, A. S., & Casanova,
     M. F. (2012). Prefrontal neuromodulation using rTMS improves error monitoring
     and correction function in autism. Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, 37,
     91–102.
Sokhadze, E. M., El-Baz, A. S., Baruth, J., Mathai, G., Sears, L., & Casanova, M.
     F. (2009). Effects of low frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
     (rTMS) on gamma frequency oscillations and event-related potentials during
     processing of illusory figures in autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
     Disorders, 39, 619–634.
Sokhadze, E. M., El-Baz, A. S., Sears, L. L., Opris, I., & Casanova, M. F. (2014a). rTMS
     neuromodulation improves electrocortical functional measures of information
     processing and behavioral responses in autism. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience,
     8, 134.
Sokhadze, E. M., El-Baz, A. S., Tasman, A., Sears, L. L., et al. (2014b). Neuromodulation
     integrating rTMS and neurofeedback for the treatment of autism spectrum
     disorder: An exploratory study. Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, 39,
     237–257.
Soorya, L., Kolevzon, A., Zweifach, J., Lim, T., et al. (2013). Prospective investigation
     of autism and genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q13 deletion syndrome
     and SHANK3 deficiency. Molecular Autism, 4(1), 18.
Soulières, I., Dawson, M., Gernsbacher, M. A., & Mottron, L. (2011). The level and
     nature of autistic intelligence II: What about Asperger syndrome? PLoS One, 6,
     e25372.
Soultanis, K. C., Payatakes, A. H., Chouliaras, V. T., Mandellos, G. C., et al. (2007).
     Rare causes of scoliosis and spine deformity: Experience and particular features.
     Scoliosis, 2, 15
Spence, S. J., & Schneider, M. T. (2009). The role of epilepsy and epileptiform EEGs
     in autism spectrum disorders. Pediatric Research, 65, 599–606.
Šponer, J., Burda, J. V., Sabat, M., Leszczynski, J., & Hobza, P. (1998). Interaction
     between the guanine- cytosine Watson-crick DNA base pair and hydrated Group
     IIa (Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+) and Group IIb (Zn2+, Cd2+, Hg2+) metal
     cations. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1, 102, 5951–5957.
Sporns, O., & Zwi, J. D. (2004). The small world of the cerebral cortex. Neuroinformatics,
     2, 145–162.
Stafstrom, C. E. (2002). The incidence and prevalence of febrile seizures. In T. Z.
     Baram, & S. Shinnar (Eds.), Febrile Seizures (pp. 1–25). San Diego, CA: Academic
     Press.
242                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      Stahlberg, O., Soderstrom, H., Rastam, M., & Gillberg, C. (2004). Bipolar disorder,
           schizophrenia, and other psychotic disorders in adults with childhood onset
           AD/HD and/or autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Neural Transmission, 111,
           891–902.
      Stegmann, B. J., & Carey, J. C. (2002). TORCH infections. Toxoplasmosis, other
           (syphilis, varicella-zoster, parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and
           herpes infections. Current Women’s Health Reports, 2(4), 253–258.
      Stevens, H. E., Su, T., Yanagawa, Y., & Vaccarino, F. M. (2013). Prenatal stress
           delays inhibitory neuron progenitor migration in the developing neocortex.
           Psychoneuroendocrinology, 38, 509–521.
      Stiles, J. (2008). The Fundamentals of Brain Development: Integrating Nature and Nurture.
           Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Stouffer, M. A., Woods, C. A., Patel, J. C., Lee, C. R., et al. (2015). Insulin enhances
           striatal dopamine release by activating cholinergic interneurons and thereby
           signals reward. Nature Communications, 6, 8543.
      Strauss, K. A., Puffenberger, E. G., Huentelman, M. J., Gottlieb, S., et al. (2006).
           Recessive symptomatic focal epilepsy and mutation contactin-associated protein-
           like 2. New England Journal of Medicine, 354(13), 1370–1377.
      Strömland, K., Nordin, V., Miller, M., Akerström, B., & Gillberg, C. (1994). Autism in
           thalidomide embryopathy: A population study. Developmental Medicine and Child
           Neurology, 36(4), 351–356.
      Stubbs, E. G. (1978). Autistic symptoms in a child with congenital cytomegalovirus
           infection. Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 8(1), 37–43.
      Sucksmith, E., Roth, I., & Hoekstra, R. A. (2011). Autistic traits below the clinical
           threshold: Re-examining the broader autism phenotype in the 21st century.
           Neuropsychology Review, 21, 360–389.
      Sugranyes, G., Kyriakopoulos, M., Corrigall, R., Taylor, E., & Frangou, S. (2011).
           Autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia: Meta-analysis of the neural
           correlates of social cognition. PLoS One, 6, e25322.
      Sujan, A. C., Rickert, M. E., Öberg, A. S., Quinn, P. D., et al. (2017). Associations of
           maternal antidepressant use during the first trimester of pregnancy with preterm
           birth, small for gestational age, autism spectrum disorders, and attention-deficit/
           hyperactivity disorder in offspring. Journal of the American Medical Association,
           317, 1553–1562.
      Sullivan, L. H. (1896). The tall office building artistically considered. Lippincott’s
           Magazine, March, pp. 403–409.
      Sullivan, P. F., Magnusson, C., Reichenberg, A., Boman, M., et al. (2012). Family
           history of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder as risk factors for autism. Archives
           of General Psychiatry, 69, 1099–1103
      Suskind, R. (2014). Reaching my autistic son through Disney. The New York
           Times Magazine. 7 March 2014. Accessed on 22 May 2018 at www.nytimes.
           com/2014/03/09/magazine/reaching-my-autistic-son-through-disney.html
      Szatmari, P., Georgiades, S., Duku, E., Zwaigenbaum, L., & Goldberg, J. (2008).
           Alexithymia in parents of children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of
           Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38, 1859–1865.
      Taga, T., & Fukuda, S. (2005). Role of IL–6 in the neural stem cell differentiation.
           Clinical Reviews in Allergy & Immunology, 28, 249–256.
                                        References                                                243


Takei, A., Mera, K., Sato, Y., & Haraoka, Y. (2011). High-functioning autistic disorder
     with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 65, 605–606.
Tallon-Baudry, C., & Bertrand, O. (1999). Oscillatory gamma activity in humans and
     its role in object representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 151–162.
Tammet, D. (2006). Born on a Blue Day. New York, NY: Free Press.
Tan, D. W., Gilani, S. Z., Maybery, M. T., Lian, A., et al. (2017). Hypermasculinized
     facial morphology in boys and girls with autism spectrum disorder and its
     association with symptomatology. Scientific Reports, 7, 9348.
Tan, G. M., Arnone, D., McIntosh, A. M., & Ebmeier, K. P. (2009). Meta-analysis of
     magnetic resonance imaging studies in chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
     (velocardiofacial syndrome). Schizophrenia Research, 115, 173–181.
Tarpley, R. J., & Ridgway, S. H. (1994). Corpus callosum size in delphinid cetaceans.
     Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 44, 156–165.
Taylor, L. J., Maybery, M. T., Wray, J., Ravine, D., Hunt, A., & Whitehouse, A. J.
     (2015). Are there differences in the behavioural phenotypes of autism spectrum
     disorder probands from simplex and multiplex families? Research in Autism
     Spectrum Disorders, 11, 56–62.
Temkin, O. (1945). The Falling Sickness. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
     Press.
Temkin, S. (1994) The Falling Sickness: A History of Epilepsy from the Greeks to the Beginnings
     of Modern Neurology (Rev. edn). Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD.
Thomas, C., Avidan, G., Humphreys, K., Jung, K. J., Gao, F., & Behrmann, M.
     (2009). Reduced structural connectivity in ventral visual cortex in congenital
     prosopagnosia. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 29–31.
Thomas, M. S., Davis, R., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Knowland, V. C., & Charman, T.
     (2016). The over-pruning hypothesis of autism. Developmental Science, 19, 284–
     305.
Thurm, A., Manwaring, S. S., Luckenbaugh, D. A., Lord, C., & Swedo, S. E. (2014).
     Patterns of skill attainment and loss in young children with autism. Developmental
     Psychopathology, 26(1), 203–214.
Tillonen, J. (2000). Ethanol, Acetaldehyde and Gastrointestinal Flora: Regulatory Factors
     and Pathophysiological Consequences of Microbial Ethanol Oxidation and Acetaldehyde
     Production in the Digestive Tract. Helsinki: University of Helsinki,.
Tomasello, M. (2009). The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.
Torrey, E. F. (2001). Surviving Schizophrenia: A Manual for Families, Consumers, and
     Providers. New York, NY: HarperPerennial.
Torrey, E. F., Miller, J., Rawlings, R., & Yolken, R. H. (1997). Seasonality of births
     in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: A review of the literature. Schizophrenia
     Research, 28, 1–38.
Tran, P. V., Carlson, E. S., Fretham, S. J., & Georgieff, M. K. (2008). Early-life iron
     deficiency anemia alters neurotrophic factor expression and hippocampal neuron
     differentiation in male rats. Journal of Nutrition, 138, 2495–2501.
Treffert, D. A. (2004). Asperger’s disorder and savant syndrome. The New York Times,
     29 April.
Treffert, D. A. (2011). Hyperlexia III: Separating ‘autistic-like’ behaviors from autistic
     disorder: Assessing children who read early or speak late. WMJ, 110, 281–286.
244                                      DEFINING AUTISM


      Tuchman, R., Moshé, S. L., & Rapin, I. (2009). Convulsing toward the pathophysiology
           of autism. Brain and Development, 31, 95–103.
      Turner, L. M., Stone, W. L., Pozdol, S. L., & Coonrod, E. E. (2006). Follow-up of
           children with autism spectrum disorders from age 2 to age 9. Autism, 10, 243–
           265.
      U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2011). FDA drug safety communication: New
           warnings against use of terbutaline to treat preterm labor. Accessed on 23 May 2018 at
           www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm243539.htm
      Uban, K. A., Sliwowska, J. H., Lieblich, S., Ellis, L. A., et al. (2010). Prenatal alcohol
           exposure reduces the proportion of newly produced neurons and glia in the
           dentate gyrus of the hippocampus in female rats. Hormones and Behavior, 58(5),
           835–843.
      Uhari, M., Rantala, H., Vainionpää, L., & Kurttila, R. (1995). Effect of acetaminophen
           and of low intermittent doses of diazepam on prevention of recurrences of
           febrile seizures. Journal of Pediatrics, 126, 991–995.
      Vajda, F. J., Graham, J. E., Hitchcock, A. A., O’Brien, T. J., Lander, C. M., & Eadie,
           M. J. (2010). Is lamotrigine a significant human teratogen? Observations from
           the Australian Pregnancy Register. Seizure, 19(9), 558–561.
      Valente, K. D., Koiffmann, C. P., Fridman, C., Varella, M., et al. (2006). Epilepsy
           in patients with Angelman syndrome caused by deletion of the chromosome
           15q11-q13. Archives of Neurology, 63(1), 122–128.
      Vallières, L., Campbell, I. L., Gage, F. H., & Sawchenko, P. E. (2002). Reduced
           hippocampal neurogenesis in adult transgenic mice with chronic astrocytic
           production of interleurkin-6. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 486–492.
      Van der Jeugd, A., Hochgräfe, K., Ahmed, T., Decker, J. M., et al. (2012). Cognitive
           defects are reversible in inducible mice expressing pro-aggregant full-length
           human Tau. Acta Neuropathologica, 123, 787–805.
      Van Meter, K. C., Christiansen, L. E., Delwiche, L. D., Azari, R., Carpenter, T. E., &
           Hertz-Picciotto, I. (2010). Geographic distribution of autism in California: A
           retrospective birth cohort. Autism Research, 3, 19–29.
      Van Steensel, F. J., Bögels, S. M., & Perrin, S. (2011). Anxiety disorders in children
           and adolescents with autistic spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. Clinical Child
           and Family Psychology Review, 14, 302–317.
      Vauzelle, C., Beghin, D., Cournot, M.-P., & Elefant, E. (2013). Birth defects after
           exposure to misoprostol in the first trimester of pregnancy: Prospective follow-
           up study. Reproductive Toxicology, 36, 98–103.
      Verity, C. M., Winstone, A., Stellitano, L., Krishnakumar, D., Will, R., & McFarland,
           R. (2009). The clinical presentation of mitochondrial diseases in children with
           progressive intellectual and neurological deterioration: A national, prospective,
           population-based study. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 52, 434–440.
      Vezzani, A., Maroso, M., Balosso, S., Sanchez, M. A., & Bartfai, T. (2011). IL-1
           receptor/Toll-like receptor signaling in infection, inflammation, stress and
           neurodegeneration couples hyperexcitability and seizures. Brain, Behavior, and
           Immunity, 25(7), 1281–1289.
      Vilidaite, G., Yu, M., & Baker, D. H. (2017). Internal noise estimates correlate with
           autistic traits. Autism Research, 10, 1384–1391.
                                       References                                               245


Villemagne, P. M., Naidu, S., Villemagne, V. L., Yaster, M., et al. (2002). Brain glucose
     metabolism in Rett syndrome. Pediatric Neurology, 27, 117–122.
Vincent, A., & Crino, P. B. (2011). Systemic and neurologic autoimmune disorders
     associated with seizures or epilepsy. Epilepsia, 52, 12–17.
Volkmar, F. R., & Rutter, M. (1995). Childhood disintegrative disorder: Results of the
     DSM-IV autism field trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
     Psychiatry, 34, 1092–1095.
Vorstman, J. A., Staal, W. G., van Daalen, E., van Engeland, H., Hochstenbach, P. F.,
     & Franke, L. (2006). Identification of novel autism candidate regions through
     analysis of reported cytogenetic abnormalities associated with autism. Molecular
     Psychiatry, 11(1), 18–28.
Ward, P. (2006). Out of Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and Earth’s Ancient Atmosphere.
     Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Warren, R. P., Yonk, L. J., Burger, R. A., Cole, P., et al. (1990). Deficiency of suppressor-
     inducer (CD4+CD45RA+) T cells in autism. Immunological Investigations, 19,
     245–251.
Waterhouse, L. (2013). Rethinking Autism: Variation and Complexity. San Diego, CA:
     Academic Press.
Watts, G. (2014). Lorna Wing. The Lancet, 384, 658.
Wegiel, J., Flory, M., Kaczmarski, W., Brown, W. T., et al. (2017). Partial agenesis and
     hypoplasia of the corpus callosum in idiopathic autism. Journal of Neuropathology
     and Experimental Neurology, 7, 225–237.
Wegiel, J., Kuchna, I., Nowicki, K., Imaki, H., et al. (2010). The neuropathology of
     autism: Defects of neurogenesis and neuronal migration, and dysplastic changes.
     Acta Neuropathologica, 119, 755–770.
Weissman, J. R., Kelley, R. I., Bauman, M. L., Cohen, B. H., et al. (2008). Mitochondrial
     disease in autism spectrum disorder patients: A cohort analysis. PLoS One, 3,
     e3815.
Werling, D. M., Parikshak, N. N., & Geschwind, D. H. (2016). Gene expression
     in human brain implicates sexually dimorphic pathways in autism spectrum
     disorders. Nature Communications, 7, 10717.
Werner, E., & Dawson, G. (2005). Validation of the phenomenon of autistic regression
     using home videotapes. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 889–895.
Whitehouse, A. J., Coon, H., Miller, J., Salisbury, B., & Bishop, D. V. (2010). Narrowing
     the broader autism phenotype: A study using the Communication Checklist –
     Adult Version (CC-A). Autism, 14, 559–574.
Williams, E. L., & Casanova, M. F. (2010). Autism and dyslexia: A spectrum of
     cognitive styles as defined by minicolumnar morphometry. Medical Hypotheses,
     74, 59–62.
Willingham, E. (2014). Does regressive autism exist? Forbes – Pharma &
     Healthcare, 27 March 2014. Accessed 23 May 2018 at www.forbes.
     com/sites/emilywillingham/2014/03/27/does-regressive-autism-
     exist/#656fe5275520
Wills, S., Cabanlit, M., Bennett, J., Ashwood, P., Amaral, D., & Van De Water, J.
     (2007). Autoantibodies in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Annals of the New
     York Academy of Sciences, 1107, 79–91.
246                                      DEFINING AUTISM


      Wilson, C. E., Freeman, P., Brock, J., Burton, A. M., & Palermo, R. (2010). Facial
           identity recognition in the broader autism phenotype. PLoS One, 5, e12876.
      Wing, L. (1981). Asperger’s syndrome: A clinical account. Psychological Medicine, 11,
           115–129.
      Wishart, T. M., Parson, S. H., & Gillingwater, T. H. (2006). Synaptic vulnerability in
           neurodegenerative disease. Journal of Neuropathology & Experimental Neurology,
           65, 733–739.
      Wolff, J. J., Gu, H., Gerig, G., Elison, J. T., et al. (2012). Differences in white matter
           fiber tract development present from 6 to 24 months in infants with autism.
           American Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 589–600.
      Wolff, S., Narayan, S., & Moyes, B. (1988). Personality characteristics of parents of
           autistic children: A controlled study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 29,
           143–153.
      Wong, D., Maybery, M., Bishop, D. V. M., Maley, A., & Hallmayer, J. (2006). Profiles
           of executive function in parents and siblings of individuals with autism spectrum
           disorders. Genes, Brain and Behavior, 5, 561–576.
      Woolfe, A., & Elgar, G. (2008). Organization of conserved elements near key
           developmental regulators in vertebrate genomes. Advances in Genetics, 61, 307–
           338.
      WHO (World Health Organization). (2016). Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals:
           Rubella – the disease. Accessed on 4 March 2016 at www.who.int/immunization/
           topics/rubella/en/index1.html
      Worley, G., Crissman, B. G., Cadogan E., Milleson, C., Adkins, D. W., & Kishnani, P. S.
           (2015). Down syndrome disintegrative disorder: New-onset autistic regression,
           dementia, and insomnia in older children and adolescents with Down syndrome.
           Journal of Child Neurology, 30, 1147–1152.
      Xu, G., Bowers, K., Liu, B., & Bao, W. (2015). Maternal diabetes and the risk of
           autism spectrum disorders in the offspring: A systematic review and meta-
           analysis. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 44, 766–775.
      Xu, L. M., Li, J. R., Huang, Y., Zhao, M., Tang, X., & Wei, L. (2012). AutismKB:
           An evidence-based knowledgebase of autism genetics. Nucleic Acids Research, 40,
           D1016–D1022.
      Yamashita, Y., Fujimoto, C., Nakajima, E., Isagai, T., & Matsuishi, T. (2003). Possible
           association between congenital cytomegalovirus infection and autistic disorder.
           Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 33(4), 455–459.
      Yan, G. M., Ni, B., Weller, M., Wood, K. A., & Paul, S. M. (1994). Depolarization or
           glutamate receptor activation blocks apoptotic cell death of cultured cerebellar
           granule neurons. Brain Research, 656, 43–51.
      Yeh, C. C., Chen, T. L., Hu, C. J., Chiu, W. T., & Liao, C. C. (2013). Risk of epilepsy
           after traumatic brain injury: A retrospective population-based cohort study.
           Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 84, 441–445.
      Yirmiya, N., & Shaked, M. (2005). Psychiatric disorders in parents of children with
           autism: A meta-analysis. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46, 69–83.
      Zaretsky, M., Alexander, J. M., Byrd, W., & Bawdon, R. E. (2004). Transfer of
           inflammatory cytokines across the placenta. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 103, 546–
           550.
                                    References                                           247


Zeng, J., Konopka, G., Hunt, B. G., Preuss, T. M., Geschwind, D., & Yi, S. V. (2012).
    Divergent whole-genome methylation maps of human and chimpanzee brains
    reveal epigenetic basis of human regulatory evolution. American Journal of Human
    Genetics, 91, 455–465.
Zerbo, O., Leong, A., Barcellos, L., Bernal, P., Fireman, B., & Croen, L. A. (2015).
    Immune mediated conditions in autism spectrum disorders. Brain, Behavior, and
    Immunity, 46, 232–236.
Zhang, C., Milunsky, J. M., Newton, S., Ko, J., et al. (2009). A neuroligin-4 missense
    mutation associated with autism impairs neuroligin-4 folding and endoplasmic
    reticulum export. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(35), 10843–10854.
Zinkstok, J., & Amelsvoort, T. V. (2005). Neuropsychological profile and neuroimaging
    in patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: A review. Child Neuropsychology, 11,
    21–37.
Zoghbi, H. Y. (2003). Postnatal neurodevelopmental disorders: Meeting at the
    synapse? Science, 302(5646), 826–830.
Zwaigenbaum, P., Szatmari, P., Mahoney, W., Bryson, S., Bartolucci, G., & MacLean,
    J. (2000). Case report: High functioning autism and childhood disintegrative
    disorder in half brothers. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 121–
    126.
                        Subject Index


22q11.2 deletion syndrome 205–7               connectivity in the cerebral cortex
                                                    36–7, 190–1
                                              definition of autism 193–6
ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity
                                              epilepsy in autism 123–4
     disorder) 61, 67, 137–8, 187, 191
                                              epilepsy in females on the autism
agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC)
                                                    spectrum 131–3
     197–8
                                              fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) 77
alcohol 76–8
                                              fetal valproate syndrome (FVS) 68, 100
alexithymia 138, 165
                                              heritability 43–5
Alzheimer, Alois 11
                                              how does seizure threshold relate to
Alzheimer’s disease 86, 92, 116, 117,
                                                    autism? 130–1
     118, 191
                                              Kanner’s conundrum 14–22
American Psychiatric Association (APA)
                                              locating autism in the brain 202–3
     12–13
                                              looking at lesion studies to understand
anaclitic depression 19
                                                    autism 196–203
anencephaly 80
                                              male autism stereotypes and how they
Angelman syndrome 90
                                                    may affect prevalence rates 132–3
anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) 67–8
                                              neocortical minicolumns in autism
anti-seizure medications 67–8
                                                    31–4
antidepressants 69–71
                                              one syndrome — many autisms 203–7
antioxidants 110–11
                                              physical features associated with autism
anxiety disorders 99, 143–4
                                                    59–62
apoptosis 87, 110
                                              postmortem brain studies 37–40
Ardipithecus ramidus 183, 184
                                              symptoms of autism in schizophrenia
Aristotle 122
                                                    149–53
Asperger, Hans 25, 58, 157–8, 163, 193,
                                            Autism Research Institute 25
     194
                                            autism risk genes 45–8, 102, 118, 129
Asperger’s syndrome 58, 148, 160, 175,
                                              22q11.2 deletion syndrome 205–7
     179, 193, 194, 195, 208
                                              diagnostic gender bias and the female
assortative mating 57–8, 161–2, 168,
                                                    protective effect 58–9
     183, 208
                                              different conditions, same genes 153–5
astrocytes 112, 130
                                              gain-of-function mutations and cell
autism 14, 27, 208–9
                                                    stress 49–50
   autism or autisms? 207–8
                                              inherited risk for developing mutations
   autism spectrum disorder 195
                                                    57
   biological conundrum 22–5
                                              like attracts like 57–8, 161–2, 183


                                          249
250                                    DEFINING AUTISM


      autism risk genes cont.                       clinical considerations 40–2
        mutations and variations 53–5               connectivity 34–7, 106, 184–5,
        parents, new mutations, and old                    188–91
              mutations 55–7                        corpus callosum 36–7, 177, 189–90,
        simplex and multiplex families 54–5                197–9, 202–3, 204, 206
        synapses 48–9                               evolution of human intelligence 183–5
        vitamin D receptor gene 82                  fever-inducing factors, epilepsy, and the
        what protein structure tells us about              brain 90–1
              function 50–3                         FG syndrome (FGS) 177
      Autism Society of America 16, 25              frontal lobes 151–2
      Autism-Spectrum Quotient 162, 164             immune system 85–6
      autism vs. intellectual disability 173–4      internal noise and gamma oscillations
        autism, intellectual disability, and               169–71
              obsessive compulsive disorder         is it all about brain size? 186–7
              174–5                                 locating autism in the brain 202–3
        clinical considerations 191–2               looking at lesion studies to understand
        human intelligence 183–7                           autism 196–203
        intelligence in autism 188–91               low seizure threshold in the infant and
        savantism 175–82                                   toddler brain 129–31
      autoantibodies 86, 107–8                      postmortem studies 37–40
      autoimmune disorders 62, 93, 115              traumatic brain injury (TBI) 125, 197,
        inflammation and autoimmunity 107–9                199
                                                    what’s going on in the brain during a
                                                           seizure? 126
      Baby Siblings Research Consortium 169
                                                  broader autism phenotype (BAP) 16, 17,
      Baker, Sidney 23
                                                       99, 105–6, 157, 209
      Barnett, Jacob 180–2
                                                    BAP brain 168–71
      Barnett, Kristine 180–1
                                                    BAP in multiplex vs. simplex families
      Bauman, Margaret 23
                                                           168, 171
      Bayley Scales of Infant Development 173
                                                    BAP research in the 21st century 162
      Beethoven, Ludwig van 182
                                                    Broader Autism Phenotype
      behavioral problems 40, 67, 68, 75
                                                           Questionnaire 162
        restricted and repetitive behaviors 58,
                                                    clinical considerations 171
              166, 174–5, 198, 199–202
                                                    cognition in BAP 166–7
      Bender-Gestalt Visual Motor Test 21
                                                    first generation of BAP research 160–2
      Bender, Lauretta 13–14, 20–1
                                                    Kanner, Asperger, and early research
      Bettelheim, Bruno 16–17, 24–5, 159
                                                           157–60
      biological view of autism 22–5
                                                    psychiatric symptoms 167–8
      bipolar disorder 142–3, 146, 148, 149,
                                                    repetitive and restricted behaviors and
           153, 171, 208
                                                           interests 166
        different conditions, same genes 153–5
                                                    sociocommunication deficits in BAP
      Bleuler, Eugene 20, 149–50
                                                           162–5
      brain 27–8, 106
        BAP brain 168–9
        brain evolution 28–9                      Calmeil 122
        brain evolution at the DNA level 185–6    Camberwell Case Register 193
        brain malformations 88, 99                Cambridge Face Memory Test 164–5
        brain malformations underlying            cancer 12, 71, 74, 78, 114
              epilepsy 126–8                        breast cancer 45, 94
        cerebral cortex 29–37                     Cavendish, Henry 182
                                    Subject Index                                        251


cell stress 49–50                             copy number variations (CNVs) 53–5,
   illness, inoculation and cellular stress        129
         91–2                                 corpus callosum 36–7, 177, 189–90,
   immune system 86                                197–9, 202–3, 204, 206
Centers for Disease Control and               Cullen, William 122
      prevention 93                           cytokines 85, 94, 107–8, 112, 130
cerebral cortex 28–9                          cytomegalovirus (CMV) 40–1, 44, 86,
   connectivity 34–7, 106, 184–5,                  88–9, 100
         188–91                               cytotoxicity 91
   minicolumns in autism 31–4
   neocortical minicolumns 29–31
                                              Da Vinci, Leonardo 182
cerebral palsy 84
                                              Darwin, Charles 29
Charcot, Jean-Martin 12
                                              DDT 97
CHARGE syndrome 96
                                              dementia 108, 117–18, 125, 199
chemical exposure 67–79
                                                dementia praecox see schizophrenia
Chemie Grünenthal 71, 72
                                              Depakote 68–9
Child Behavior Checklist 84
                                              depression 19, 141–2, 155, 168, 171,
childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD)
                                                   209
      19, 102, 103
                                              Despert 21
chromosomal abnormalities 46, 53–4, 56,
                                              developmental coordination disorder
      154, 205
                                                   (DCD) 144–5
cleft palate 67, 71, 205
                                              developmental delay 67, 77, 87, 88,
Coca Cola 78–9
                                                   102–3, 116, 169, 173, 206
cocaine 78–9
                                              diabetes 93–4, 100
cognition in BAP 166–7
                                              Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM)
Communication Checklist 162
                                                   13, 137–8, 193, 204
conditions that occur alongside autism
                                                DSM-III 193
      137
                                                DSM-5 138, 140, 143, 146, 146, 195
   anxiety disorders and obsessive-
                                                DSM-IV 19
         compulsive disorder 143–4
                                                DSM-IV-TR 19, 195
   attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
                                              DNA 45, 47, 53–4, 59, 65, 111, 112
         137–8
                                                brain evolution at the DNA level 185–6
   changing how we view
                                                copy number variations (CNVs) 53–5,
         neurodevelopmental conditions
                                                      129
         148–55
                                                fragile X syndrome (FXS) 57
   clinical considerations 155
                                                regulatory DNA 52
   intellectual disability and specific
                                                vitamin B9 80–1
         learning disorder 138–41
                                              Down’s syndrome 54, 88, 117, 161, 167
   mood disorders 141–3
                                              Dravet syndrome 90, 108–9, 115, 128,
   motor disorders 144–5
                                                   131
   psychotic disorders 146–8
                                              drug abuse 76–9
   tic disorders 145–6
                                              dyscalculia 141
congenital malformations 60, 62, 67, 70
                                              dyslexia 37, 139, 140
   alcohol 76–7
   misoprostol 75
   thalidomide 71–4                           echolalia 14, 177
congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) 87–8        Edelson, Stephen 23
connective tissue disorders 61–2              Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) 61–2
connectivity 34–7, 106, 184–5, 188–91         Einstein, Albert 182
252                                      DEFINING AUTISM


      electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 91             facial features 60
      electroencephalogram (EEG) 123                 facial memory 164–5
         EEG activity 124–5, 126, 135                fetal alcohol syndrome 60, 76–7, 88
      Embedded Figures Task 167                      fetal anti-convulsant syndrome 67
      emotions 28                                    fetal valproate syndrome (FVS) 68, 100
         recognition of emotions 28, 164–5           fever 90–1, 108, 115, 125, 130
      encephalitis 88, 89–90                         FG syndrome (FGS) 177
      encephalopathies 90, 108, 115                  flame retardants 98
      endocrine disruptors 94–5                      folate deficiency 80–1, 83
         flame retardants 98                         Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
         heavy metal exposure 95–6                         72, 74
         pesticides 96–8                             Forel, Auguste 12
      environmental factors 65–6                     fragile X syndrome (FXS) 44, 45, 57, 60,
         chemicals 67–79                                   191
         clinical considerations 99–100              free radicals 110–11
         disclaimer 66–7                             Freud, Sigmund 20
         hormones 92–8                               Freudian psychology 16, 18, 22, 25,
         immune system 85–6                                159–60
         maternal stress 98–9                        Fritsch, Gustav 122–3
         nutrition 80–4
         prematurity 84
                                                     GABA receptors 98, 128
         TORCH infections 86–90
                                                     gabapentin 67–8
      epigenetic patterning 96, 154
                                                     Gage, Phineas 151–2
      epigenetic regulators 47, 48
                                                     gamma oscillations 170–1
      epilepsy 69, 75, 121–23, 107, 108
                                                     gender ratio of autism 24
         brain malformations underlying
                                                       diagnostic gender bias and the female
               epilepsy 126–8
                                                             protective effect 58–9
         clinical considerations 134–5
                                                     generalized joint hypermobility (GJH) 62
         epilepsy and regression 114–16
                                                     genetics 43–5
         epilepsy in autism 123–4
                                                       autism risk genes 45–53
         epilepsy in females on the autism
                                                       brain evolution at the DNA level 185–6
               spectrum 131–3
                                                       clinical relevance of genetics 62–3
         fever-inducing factors, epilepsy, and the
                                                       different conditions, same genes 153–5
               brain 90–1
                                                       genetics of epilepsy 128–9
         genetics of epilepsy 128–9
                                                       physical features associated with autism
         low seizure threshold in the infant and
                                                             59–62
               toddler brain 129–31
                                                       rare mutations, common variations
         male autism stereotypes and how they
                                                             53–9
               may affect prevalence rates 132–3
                                                     German measles 87
         sudden unexpected death in epilepsy
                                                     German School 11–13, 14, 16
               (SUDEP) 134–5
                                                     Gould, Judith 193, 196
         what is a seizure? 124–6
                                                     Grandin, Temple 23, 181
      Esquirol 122
                                                     Griffith’s Mental Development Scales 173
      estrogen 59, 81, 94–5, 114, 131–2, 133
         estrogen receptors 95–6, 98
      eukaryotes 85, 110                             Harlow, J. M. 151
      exons 51                                       heart defects 60, 67
      extreme male brain theory of autism 56         heavy metal exposure 95–6
                                     Subject Index                                           253


Heller’s disease/syndrome 19, 102              intellectual disability 59–60, 87, 102,
heritability 43–5                                    103, 108, 125–6
  simplex and multiplex families 54–5             autism vs. intellectual disability 173–4
Hermelin, Beate 175–6, 181                        autism, intellectual disability, and
herpes 86, 89–90                                        obsessive compulsive disorder
heterotopias 38–40, 49                                  174–5
Hippocrates 121–2                                 cytomegalovirus 88–9
Hitzig, Eduard 122–3                              human intelligence 183–7
Hoffman, Dustin 176                               intellectual disability and specific
homocysteine 80, 81                                     learning disorder 138–41
hormones 58–9, 92–3                               savantism 175–82
  endocrine disruptors 94–8                    intelligence 183–7
  epilepsy in females on the autism               intelligence in autism 188–91
         spectrum 131–2                        interests, special 166, 174–5, 199
  metabolic syndrome 93–4                      interleukin-1 (IL-1) 90–1
Human Genome Project 137                       interleukin-6 (IL-6) 107
human intelligence 183                         internal noise 169–70
  brain evolution at the DNA level 185–6       International League Against Epilepsy
  evolution of human intelligence 183–5              (ILAE) 124
  is it all about brain size? 186–7            introns 51–2
Huntington’s disease 116, 118, 199, 202        iron deficiency 83–4
Huxley, Thomas Henry 29                        ischemia 74, 75, 81, 84
hyperacusis 150–1
hyperlexia 140–1
                                               Jackson, John Hughlings 12, 122–3
hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
                                               Jarrett, Mary 12
     (HEDS) 61–2
hypermobility 61–2
hypersensitivity 69, 150–1, 170                Kahlbaum, Karl 149
                                               Kanner, Leo 9–11, 12, 23, 24, 25, 58,
                                                    101, 157–60, 193, 194, 208
illness 90
                                                 Kanner at the crossroads 13–14
   fever-inducing factors, epilepsy, and the
                                                 Kanner’s conundrum 14–22
         brain 90–1
                                               karyotyping 53–4
   illness, inoculation, and cellular stress
                                               Kelsey, Frances Oldham 72, 73
         91–2
                                               Kennedy, John F. 72, 73
immune system 62, 85–6
                                               Kleinfelter’s syndrome 56
   inflammation and autoimmunity 107–9
                                               Kraepelin, Emil 11, 12–13, 149
Immunoprin 71
                                                 Kraepelinian dichotomy 139
Indiana Star, The 181
infantile proteopathy 116–17
inflammation 50, 81, 82, 83–4, 85–6, 93,       lamotrogine 68
      94, 97                                   Landau-Kleffner syndrome 90, 115–16
   epilepsy and regression 114–15              language impairment 14, 67, 90, 115,
   immune response 85, 86                            117
   inflammation and autoimmunity 107–9            developmental language delay 36, 158,
   oxidative stress 111–13                             162
inoculation 91–2                                  regression 101–3
insulin 93–4, 100                              Lawson, Wenn 150–1
                                               learning difficulties 67, 68, 77, 83, 145
                                                  terminology 139
254                                     DEFINING AUTISM


      learning disabilities 87, 137, 153, 155,     anxiety disorders and obsessive-
            168                                          compulsive disorder 143–4
         intellectual disability and specific      clinical considerations 155
               learning disorder 138–41            different conditions, same genes 153–5
         mathematics 141                           intellectual disability and specific
         reading 140–1                                   learning disorder 138–41
      Lincoln, Abraham 10                          Kraepelinian dichotomy 149
      Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) 62                mood disorders 141–3
      Lovaas, Ivor 14                              motor disorders 144–5
      Lutz 21                                      psychotic disorders 146–8
                                                   symptoms of autism in schizophrenia
                                                         149–53
      macrocephaly 60, 177, 207
                                                   tic disorders 145–6
      Maisonneuve 122
                                                   why are we talking about psychoses?
      Marfan syndrome (MFS) 61, 62
                                                         153
      maternal mutations 56
                                                 Newton, Isaac 182
      maternal stress 98–9
                                                 nosology 21, 175, 195
      mathematics 141
                                                 nutrition 80–4
      metabolic syndrome 93–4
      metalloestrogens 95–6
      Meyer, Adolf 12–14                         obesity 93–4
      microcephaly 30, 40, 78, 87, 88, 207       obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
      minor physical anomalies (MPAs) 61              143–4, 199–201
      misoprotostol 74, 75                         autism, intellectual disability, and
      mitochondrial dysfunction 110–11                   obsessive compulsive disorder
        mitochondrial diseases and dysfunction           174–5
             in autism 113–14                    organic brain syndrome 12
      Moebius syndrome 68–9, 71, 72–5            organophosphates 98
      mood disorders 141–3, 171                  over-pruning hypothesis 106
      motor disorders 27, 144–5                  oxidation 109–10, 114–15
      motor skills 102, 103, 173, 204              how oxidative stress damages the brain
      Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 182                       111–13
      Mullen Scales of Early Learning 173          mitochondrial diseases and dysfunction
      multiple congenital abnormalities (MCA)            in autism 113–14
           60                                      mitochondrial dysfunction and reactive
      multiple system atrophy 118                        oxygen species 110–11
      multiplex families 54–5, 106, 164          oxidative stress 97, 111–13, 115
        BAP in multiplex vs. simplex families    oxygen 65
             168, 171
      mutations 53–9, 112, 154, 185
                                                 Parkinson’s disease 118
                                                 parvovirus B19 86
      Neher, Erwin 123                           paternal mutations 55–6, 57
      neocortical minicolumns 29–31              Peek, Kim 176–7
        minicolumns in autism 31–4               Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDD)
      neurexins 47, 53                                19, 195
      neurodegeneration 80, 86, 92, 113,           Pervasive Developmental Disorder–Not
           116–18, 134, 202                              Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS)
      neurodevelopmental conditions 137, 148             58, 161
        ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity    pesticides 96–8
             disorder) 137–8
                                     Subject Index                                          255


Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) 63,             restricted and repetitive behaviors 58,
     90                                              166, 174–5, 198
phenotypes 17                                     brain lesions 199–202
phenylketonuria (PKU) 63                       Rett syndrome 81, 102–3, 154, 195,
physical features associated with autism             204–5, 206
     59–61                                     Rimland, Bernard 22–5, 43, 159–60,
   Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and                        176
        hypermobility spectrum disorders       Rodier, Patricia 68–9
        61–2                                   rubella 86, 87–8, 100
Plato 122                                      Rush, Benjamin 11, 20
pleiotropy 153                                 Ruthsatz, Joanne 181
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) 98
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) 94,
                                               Sakmann, Bert 123
     100, 132
                                               savantism 140, 175–81
Pope, Alexander 124
                                                  savantism with normal intelligence
pragmatics 162, 196–7
                                                        178–80
Precision Medicine 63
                                                  when savantism crosses into pure genius
prematurity 84
                                                        180–2
prescription medications 67–75
                                               Schilder, Paul 14, 20
progressive supranuclear palsy 199
                                               schizoid personality disorder (SPD) 160
prokaryotes 85
                                               schizophrenia 11, 12, 20, 57, 146–8,
protein structure and function 50–3
                                                     149, 168, 171, 191, 208
proteopathies 116–17
                                                  childhood schizophrenia 15, 20–1,
psychogenic view of autism 23–5, 43
                                                        101, 168, 193
psychotic disorders 146–8, 153, 171
                                                  different conditions, same genes 153–5
                                                  symptoms of autism in schizophrenia
Rain Man 176                                            149–53
Raven’s Progressive Matrices 167, 174          seizures 33, 34, 38, 40, 77, 108, 114–16
reactive oxygen species (ROS) 109                 cytomegalovirus 88
   mitochondrial dysfunction and reactive         fever 90–1, 115, 125, 130
         oxygen species 110–11                    low seizure threshold in the infant and
reading 140–1                                           toddler brain 129–31
Refrigerator Mother Theory 16–17, 22,             vitamin D 81–2
      24–5, 159                                   what’s going on in the brain during a
regression 90, 101–3, 113                               seizure? 126
   are autistic children “normal” before       Seneca 143
         they regress? 104–5                   sensory hypersensitivity 69, 150–1, 170
   call for research 103                       serotonin 69–70, 79
   clinical considerations 118–19              simplex families 54–5, 105–6, 164
   does autistic regression exist? 104–5          BAP in multiplex vs. simplex families
   epilepsy-induced regression 115–16                   168, 171
   fever-inducing factors, epilepsy, and the      Simons Simplex Collection 70
         brain 90–1                            single nucleotide variants (SNVs) 55
   infantile proteopathy 116–17                sleep problems 103, 110
   inflammation and autoimmunity 107–9         Social Responsiveness Scale 162
   oxidation 109–14                            sociocommunication 117, 141, 144, 195
   synapses 117–18                                brain lesions 196–8
   what causes regression? 105–6                  sociocommunication deficits in BAP
repetitive transcranial magnetic                        162–5
      stimulation (rTMS) 41–2                  somatic mosaicism 102
256                                   DEFINING AUTISM


      Southard, Elmer Ernest 11–12              toxoplasmosis 86
      speech 67, 146, 174, 177, 204             Tramer 21
         loss of speech 104, 105                traumatic brain injury (TBI) 125, 197,
         poverty of speech 147–8, 150                 199
      spina bifida 67, 68, 80                   triple hit hypothesis 39, 70
      Stanford–Binet Test 173, 174, 181         tuberous sclerosis (TSC) 34, 40, 44, 45,
      steroids 59, 81, 95, 97, 115                    116–17, 123
      stimming 200                              twin studies 24, 43–5, 61, 160
      streptococcal infections 199
      stress 93
                                                vaccinations 96, 100, 108–9, 113, 125
         stressors 106, 137, 144
                                                   altering vaccination schedules 119
      strokes 93, 112, 125, 196, 199
                                                valproic acid 65–6, 68–9
      Strömland, Kerstin 72–3
                                                varicella-zoster 86
      sudden unexpected death in epilepsy
                                                Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale 84
            (SUDEP) 134–5
                                                vitamin B9 80–1
      suicide 155
                                                vitamin D 81–2
      Sukhareva 21
                                                Vitruvius 50
      Sullivan, Louis 50, 53
      synapses 47–9, 117–18
      synesthesia 179                           Waterhouse, Lynn 207, 208
      syphilis 12, 13, 86                       weak central coherence 167
                                                Wechsler Test 173, 174, 175
                                                Wellbutrin 69, 100
      Tammet, Daniel 178–80, 181–2
                                                Wiltshire, Stephen 182
      tauopathies 116–17
                                                Wing, John 194
      terbutaline 74–5
                                                Wing, Lorna 193–5, 196
      Tesla, Nikola 182
                                                WIRED 161
      thalidomide 71–4
                                                World Health Organization (WHO) 87
      tic disorders 145–6
                                                  International Classification of Diseases
      Tissot, Samuel-Auguste 122
                                                        (ICD) 12–13, 195
      topiramate 67–8
      TORCH infections 86–7
         cytomegalovirus 88–9                   xenoestrogens 95, 96
         herpes 89–90
         rubella 87–8
      Tourette’s syndrome 146, 153, 199, 201,   Zinner, Samuel 145–6
            202
                         Author Index


Ackerman, S. 70                            Baird, G. 102, 103, 115
Adamo, M. P. 88                            Baker, D. H. 169
Adolphs, R. 164                            Bandim, J. M. 75
Ahmad, S. F. 62                            Barger, B. D. 102, 103
Akshoomoff, N. 173                         Barkovich, A. J. 127
Al Kaissi, A. 69                           Baron-Cohen, S. 57, 146, 151, 161
Al-Khouri, I. 89                           Baruth, J. 171
Alarcón, M. 48                             Bashat, D. B. 188
Alarcón, R. 97                             Battaglia, A. 177
Aldridge, K. 60                            Bauman, M. D. 86, 107
Allen, L. H. 83                            Bean, S. C. 89–90
Amato, M. C. 132                           Becker, M. W. 168
Amelsvoort, T. V. 206                      Behnke, M. 79
APA (American Psychiatric Association)     Ben-Ari, Y. 47
     138, 197                              Bercum, F. M. 74, 75
Amiet, C. 125, 131                         Berg, J. M. 46, 54, 55
Anderson, G. M. 48                         Berthier, M. L. 199, 200
Andrews, A. 181                            Bertrand, O. 170
Andrews, D. S. 40                          Betts, T. 132
Apostolou, P. 45                           Beversdorf, D. Q. 98
Aram, D. M. 141                            Biederman, J. 155
Arking, D. E. 48                           Billes, S. K. 100
Arnold, S. E. 118                          Bishop, L. C. 184
Aronson, M. 77                             Biswas, S. K. 114, 115
Ascenzi, P. 57                             Bitsko R. H. 146
Ashenden, B. 20                            Blackmon, K. 131, 133
Ashwood, P. 98                             Blaxill, M. F. 87
Astiz, M. 97                               Bleuler, E. 149–50
Autier, P. 81                              Blizard, R. A. 96
Avino, T. A. 38, 40, 128                   Blue, M. E. 205
Azzouz, H. 63                              Boddy, A. M. 183, 184
                                           Boksa, P. 84
                                           Bölte, S. 164, 167
Badaruddin, D. H. 198
                                           Bolton, P. 44, 161
Baeza-Velasco, C. 61
                                           Bolton, P. F. 131, 132
Bailey, A. 44, 160


                                         257
258                                    DEFINING AUTISM


      Bonnel, A. 178                            Cheung, C. 152
      Borrás, C. 114                            Cheung, I. 62
      Borsini, A. 85                            Chines, C. 177
      Boukhris, T. 70                           Choe, S. -Y. 93
      Bren, L. 72                               Comoletti, D. 50
      Brimacombe, M. 145                        Conner, C. M. 142
      Brodmann, K. 28                           Connor, K. 98
      Brouwer, A. 98                            Connors, S. L. 74, 75
      Brown, F. R. 89–90                        Constantino, J. N. 157, 165, 168
      Brown, H. K. 70                           Cooper, G. S. 93
      Brown, J. 81                              Corcoran, R. 151
      Brown, W. S. 198                          Couture, S. M. 151
      Buchmann, K. 85                           Cowley, M. A. 100
      Burch, S. 143                             Craddock, N. 148
      Burne, T. 81                              Craig, F. 138
      Burton, H. 32                             Creak, M. 159
      Buxhoeveden, D. P. 32, 39                 Crespi, B. 154
      Byrnes, G. B. 45                          Crino, P. B. 115
                                                Croen, L. A. 56, 58, 70, 74
                                                Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric
      Callaway, E. 55
                                                     Genomics Consortium 154
      Campbell, J. M. 102, 103
                                                Cunningham, C. 108
      Campbell, L. E. 206
      Canitano, R. 115
      Cannon, M. J. 88                          Dalton, K. M. 169
      Cantio, C. 208                            Daniels, J. L. 153, 168
      Cantwell, D. P. 138                       Darrow, S. M. 146
      Capone, G. T. 117                         Davis, E. 79
      Cárdenas, A. M. 117                       Davison, J. 106, 168
      Carey, J. C. 87, 177                      Dawson, G. 105
      Carlsen, M. H. 109                        Dawson, M. 174
      Carter, C. J. 96                          de Alaniz, M. J. 97
      Carter, J. C. 205                         De Rubeis, S. 47
      Carvill, G. L. 90                         De Sousa, A. 184
      Casanova, E. L. 16, 46, 47, 51, 52, 53,   Deacon, T. W. 128
           60, 61, 62, 118, 132                 Dean, J. C. 67
      Casanova, M. F. 11, 12, 16, 31, 33, 37,   Deary, I. J. 183
           39, 41, 42, 70, 99, 128, 130, 171,   Delanty, N. 131
           198                                  DeLong, G. R. 89–90, 143
      Casida, J. E. 97                          Devendran, R. 115
      Castillo, H. 117                          Devendran, Y. 115
      Castro, V. M. 70                          Dicke, U. 185
      Cath, D. C. 144                           Dickerson, A. S. 96
      Cederlöf, M. 61                           DiMario, F. J. , Jr. 40
      Centers for Disease Control and           Dobyns, W. B. 127
           Prevention 77, 88, 125, 146, 173     Dohn, A. 178
      Charman, T. 174                           Donvan, J. 25, 43
      Cheeran, M. C. 88                         Dooley, J. M. 74
      Cheng, F. 118                             Dubey, D. 115
      Chess, S. 44, 87                          Duncan, A. J. 113
                                 Author Index                                 259


Duncan, R. 87                           Frye, R. E. 113
Durand, C. M. 48                        Fujita, E. 50
Dworzynski, K. 132                      Fukuda, S. 107
Dwyer, J. T. 143                        Fullerton, P. M. 71


Eaves, L. C. 142                        Gabel, H. W. 81
Ebert, D. H. 49                         Galluzzo, P. 57
Eccles, J. A. 61                        Gerdts, J. A. 168
Eddleston, M. 98                        Geschwind, D. H. 46, 47, 54, 55, 59
Ehrlich, S. 79                          Ghaziuddin, M. 89, 142
Eiben, B. 54                            Ghaziuddin, N. 89
Eisenberg, L. 159                       Giannotti, F. 115
El-Baz, A. S. 128                       Giarelli, E. 145
El-Khayat, H. A. 131                    Gillberg, C. 44, 77, 89, 152, 160
Elgar, G. 51                            Gillberg, I. C. 89
Eliez, S. 206                           Gillingwater, T. H. 118
Elsabbagh, M. 171                       Gillot, A. 144
Elton, S. 184                           Girirajan, S. 46
Engel, J., Jr. 124, 126, 130            Giulivi, C. 113, 114
Englund, J. 119                         Glessner, J. T. 47
Ensembl 80                              Glod, M. 170
Epilepsy Foundation 125                 Glotzer, L. D. 188
Esser, N. 94                            Gockley, J. 59
Eyles, D. 81                            Goin-Kochel, R. P. 118
                                        Gokcen, S. 167
                                        Golding, J. 58
Falivelli, G. 50
                                        Gomez, J. 39
Falter, C. M. 36
                                        Gonzalez, C. H. 75
Faraone, S. V. 155
                                        Grant, W. B. 82
Faretra, G. 20
                                        Gratten, J. 56
Fehlow, P. 61
                                        Greden, J. 142
Fernell, E. 82
                                        Greenberg, M. E. 49
Ferrer, I. S. 39
                                        Grether, J. K. 70
Feschotte, C. 185
                                        Guerrini, R. 127
Fine, S. E. 206
                                        Guillette, L. J., Jr. 98
Finnegan, L. 79
                                        Guimarães, L. E. 96
Fitzgerald, M. 182
Flores-Sarnat, L. 116
Folstein, S. 43–4, 160                  Hagberg, B. 77
Fombonne, E. 161, 207                   Hagerman, P. J. 57
Fostira, F. 45                          Hagerman, R. J. 57
Foundation for a Drug-free World 79     Halayem, S. 63
Frantseva, M. V. 114                    Hallerbäck, M. U. 152, 160
Friederici, A. D. 204                   Halliwell, B. 111, 112, 113
Friedman, S. R. 138                     Hamblin, J. 79
Frischmeyer-Guerrerio, P. A. 62         Hansson, A. C. 78
Frith, C. D. 151                        Harris, S. R. 77
Frith, U. 151, 157, 163, 164            Harvey, L. 84
Frye, C. A. 133                         Hashemi, E. 40
260                                  DEFINING AUTISM


      Haykin, L. 121                         Johansson, M. 73
      Hazell, A. S. 112                      Johnson, T. 183
      He, B. 92                              Johnson, W. G. 80
      Hebert, K. J. 82                       Johnston, M. V. 205
      Heales, S. J. 113                      Joinson, C. J. 82
      Herbert, M. R. 36                      Jones, C. R. 141
      Herculano-Houzel, S. 183               Jones, K. L. 76
      Hermelin, B. 175–6                     Judd, L. L. 43
      Hernández, A. F. 97
      Herzog, A. G. 132
                                             Kabat, J. 127
      Hill, A. L. 176
                                             Kadak, M. T. 164
      Hill, D. S. 96
                                             Kalue , A. V. 81
      Hinkley, S. 70
                                             Kanner, L. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
      Ho, H. H. 142
                                                  101, 157–9, 166
      Hoekstra, R. A. 157, 162
                                             Kates, W. R. 206
      Hofvander, B. 140, 144, 148, 155
                                             Kenneson, A. 88
      Holbrook, N. J. 110
                                             Kern, J. K. 92
      Holland, A. J. 117
                                             Key, A. P. F. 169
      Holmes, L. B. 68
                                             Khemir, S. 63
      Hopper, J. L. 45
                                             Kim, J. A. 142
      Horská, A. 204
                                             Kim, Y. S. 162, 178
      Howe, K. 185
                                             King, B. H. 70
      Howlin, P. 175
                                             Kirby, A. 145
      Hoyme, H. E. 76
                                             Klei, L. 168
      Hudak, M. L. 67
                                             Klusek, J. 168
      Hugh-Jones, D. 183
                                             Koczat, D. L. 167
      Hughes, C. 167
                                             Kogan, M. D. 56
      Hughes, C. 138
                                             Kojima, H. 98
      Hughes, J. R. 125
                                             Kolevzon, A. 63
      Hunt, S. 68
                                             Kollodge, T. 70
      Hutsler, J. J. 38, 40, 128
                                             Konopka, G. 187
      Hviid, A. 70
                                             Kosidou, K. 94
                                             Kotila, M. 125
      Ikonomidou, C. 78                      Kraepelin, E. 149
      Ingalhalikar, M. 133                   Krakowiak, P. 82
      Ingemarsson, I. 74                     Kremer, M. 71
      Ingersoll, B. 158                      Król, P. 127
      Ingudomnukul, E. 132, 133              Krüger, L. 117
      Ini, S. 159                            Krumm, N. 47
      Iossifov, I. 47                        Kumar, S. 115
                                             Kuniewicz, M. W. 84
                                             Kurita, H. 102
      Jack, M. 180
      Jacquemont, S. 59
      Jamain, S. 48                          Lai, C. L. E. 138
      Jambaque, I. 34                        Lainhart, J. E. 106
      Janssens, S. 92                        Lambert, N. 87
      Jiang, Y. H. 55, 56                    Lambrecht, B. N. 92
      Jobe, L. E. 168                        Landgren, M. 77
                           Author Index                          261


Langen, M. 201                    McCue, L. M. 125
Laplane, D. 200                   McDonald, N. M. 40
Le Couteur, A. S. 157             McDonough, J. D. 102
Leboyer, M. 167                   McGrath, J. 81
Lee, D. J. 74                     McHugh, J. C. 131
Lee, Y. -H. 94                    McIntosh, A. M. 90, 108, 131
Legler, J. 98                     McLean, C. Y. 186
Leitner, Y. 138                   McLean, M. J. 68
Lemoine, P. 76                    McNamara, K. J. 188
Leslie, A. M. 151                 Melbye, M. 70
Leung, A. K. 40                   Melyn, M. 125
Leyfer, O. T. 143, 144            Mercer, G. 151
Li, B. M. 108                     Merikangas, K. R. 143
Lichtenstein, P. 154              Merzenich, M. M. 99, 130
Limperopoulos, C. 84              Messinger, D. S. 58
Losh, M. 168                      Meyer, K. 168
Lokensard, J. R. 88               Miller, D. T. 55
Lowenstein, D. 128, 129           Miller, L. L. 82
Luchetti, A. 115                  Millichap, J. G. 103
Lugnegård, T. 152, 160            Milnerwood, A. J. 118
Lutiger, B. 79                    Minasyan, A. 81
                                  Ming, X. 145
                                  Mione, M. C. 29
MacKay, L. L. 77
                                  Mnif, W. 96, 97
MacDonald, R. L. 68
                                  Molina, O. 57
MacLean, P. D. 28
                                  Molloy, C. A. 62
Magiorkinis, E. 122, 123
                                  Money, J. 107
Magoun, H. W. 28
                                  Moore, S. J. 65, 67, 68
Mahmood, A. 204
                                  Moshé, S. L. 123
Malfait, F. 62
                                  Movsas, T. Z. 84
Mandelkow, E. M. 117
                                  Moyes, B. 159
Mandell, A. J. 43
                                  Mucke, L. 125
Mansour, R. 138
                                  Mufson, E. J. 118
Manzo-Avalos, S. 78
                                  Munesue, T. 143
Marra, C. A. 97
                                  Murakami, J. W. 204, 205
March, W. A. 132
                                  Murphy, M. 99
Marino, L. 183
                                  Myers, L. 61
Marino, M. 57
Markram, H. 69
Marques, F. 90                    Nader, A. M. 59, 173
Marriage, K. 142                  Nagae, L. M. 204
Marriage, S. 142                  Naidu, S. 205
Marson, J. 188                    Nakaya, H. I. 92
Martin, G. E. 168                 Nanson, J. L. 77
Martindale, J. L. 110             Napoli, E. 114
Matelski, L. 107                  Narayan, S. 159
Mayes, L. C. 79                   Nation, K. 141
Mayes, S. D. 142, 155             Nava, C. 90
Mazefsky, C. A. 142, 144          Nippold, M. A. 197
McCarthy, S. E. 154               Niu, D. -K. 51
262                                 DEFINING AUTISM


      Nolan, T. 119                           Rajagopalan, P. 80
      Nordsletten, A. E. 57                   Ranson, S. W. 28
      Numis, A. L. 117                        Rapin, I. 61, 123
      Nydén, A. 167                           Rasalam, A. S. 65, 68
                                              Raymond, L. A. 118
                                              Reiter, R. J. 110
      O’Neil, E. 76
                                              Rhodes, G. 164
      Oberman, L. M. 42
                                              Ridgway, S. H. 184
      Oliveira, G. 113
                                              Rimland, B. 23–4, 43, 159–60, 176
      OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in
                                              Ritch, C. R. 143
           Man) 177
                                              Robbins, T. W. 138
      Oosterbaan, A. M. 81
                                              Roberts, E. M. 97
      Opitz, J. M. 177
                                              Robinson, E. B. 59, 155
      Osborn, J. A. 77
                                              Robison, J. E. 42
      Oslejsková, H. 115
                                              Rodier, P. M. 68
      Oswald, D. P. 142
                                              Rodriguez, A. 20
      Owen, M. J. 148
                                              Roelfsema, M. T. 161
      Ozonoff, S. 58, 169, 177
                                              Rogers, S. J. 104
                                              Rojas, D. C. 171
      Palop, J. J. 125                        Rojko, J. L. 86
      Paravar, T. 74                          Ronald, A. 98
      Parikshak, N. N. 59                     Ross, L. E. 70
      Park, S. Y. 53                          Rossi, P. G. 125
      Parmeggiani, A. 125                     Rossignol, D. A. 113
      Parr, J. 157                            Roth, G. 185
      Parrón 97                               Roth, I. 162
      Parson, S. H. 118                       Rubenstein, J. L. R. 99, 130
      Pasternak, B. 70                        Russell, G. 58
      Paul, L. K. 198                         Russell, J. 138
      Paula-Pérez, I. 175                     Rutter, M. 43–4, 45, 103, 160
      Pedersen, A. L. 174                     Ryan, L. 79
      Pellegrino, L. 144                      Ryan, N. P. 197
      Pennell, C. E. 98
      Phiel, C. J. 68
                                              Saavedra-Molina, A. 78
      Pinto, D. 55
                                              Safe, S. 95, 96
      Piven, J. 99, 160, 161
                                              Sakai, T. 188
      Plomin, R. 183
                                              Sakamoto, A. 89
      Plumet, M. -H. 167
                                              Saks, E. R. 147–8
      Poduri, A. 128, 129
                                              Salzano, S. 114
      Posar, A. 125
                                              Samoilova, E. B. 107
      Poutska, F. 164, 167
                                              Sanders, S. J. 59
      Prabhakar, S. 185
                                              Santoro, L. 177
      Prakash 68
                                              Sarazin, M. 151
      Pratley, R. E. 94
                                              Sarnat, H. B. 115
      Price-Schiavi, S. 86
                                              Scalise, T. J. 133
      Pulendran, B. 92
                                              Schleiss, M. R. 88
      Puschel, A. W. 47
                                              Schmidt, G. L. 167
                                              Schmidt, R. J. 81, 82, 83
      Rai, D. 70, 158                         Schneider, M. 206
      Rais-Bahrami, K. 84                     Schneider, M. T. 124
                                   Author Index                                   263


Schoenemann, P. T. 188                    Sucksmith, E. 162, 164, 166
Scholl, T. O. 80                          Sugden, D. A. 145
Scott, O. 90, 108                         Sugranyes, G. 152
Seattle Children’s Hospital Research      Sujan, A. C. 70
      Foundation 145, 146                 Sullivan, L. H. 50
Sebat, J. 54, 55, 59                      Sullivan, P. F. 154
Serdarogğlu, G. 130                       Suskind, R. 105
Shackleton, D. P. 134                     Szatmari, P. 165
Shaked, M. 167
Shashi, V. 206
                                          Taga, T. 197
Sharp, J. L. 46, 47
                                          Takei, A. 61
Sheehan, M. J. 188
                                          Tallon-Baudry, C. 170
Shelton, J. F. 98
                                          Tammet, D. 178–9
Shetreat-Klein, M. 61
                                          Tan, D. W. 60
Shinnar, S. 61
                                          Tan, G. M. 206
Shoffner, J. 113
                                          Tarpley, R. J. 184
Short, B. L. 84
                                          Taylor, L. J. 168
Shorter, E. 149
                                          Temkin, O. 121, 122
Silberman, S. 161
                                          Thomas, C. 188
Simon, T. J. , 206
                                          Thomas, M. S. 106
Singer, H. S. 107
                                          Thurm, A. 104
Sinnayah, P. 100
                                          Tillonen, J. 77
Sisodiya, S. M. 127
                                          Todd, R. D. 157, 165
Smalley, S. L. 44
                                          Tomasello, M. 187
Smith, I. M. 96
                                          Torrey, E. F. 82, 150
Smith, J. F. 177
                                          Tran, P. V. 83
Snyder, A. 175
                                          Treffert, D. A. 140, 178
Sokhadze, E. M. 16, 41, 42
                                          Trippe, J. 33
Soles, C. M. 82
                                          Tuchman, R. 123, 124, 125, 126
Soorya, L. 90
                                          Tuohimaa, P. 81
Soulières, I. 174
                                          Turner, L. M. 174
Southey, M. C. 45
Spence, S. J. 124
Šponer, J. 65                             U. S. Food and Drug Administration 74
Sporns, O. 188                            Uban, K. A. 78
Stafstrom, C. E. 125, 130                 Uhari, M. 90
Stahlberg, O. 143, 148                    Ursem, N. T. 81
Standen, P. J. 144
State, M. W. 47
Steegers, E. A. 81                        Vadas, P. 62
Steer, C. 58                              Vajda, F. J. 68
Stegmann, B. J. 87                        Valente, K. D. 90
Stevens, H. E. 99, 207                    Vallières, L. 107
Stiles, J. 34                             Van de Water, J. 107
Stone, W. L. 169                          Van der Jeugd, A. 118
Stouffer, M. A. 93                        Van Meter, K. C. 158, 161
Strauss, K. A. 49                         Van Steensel, F. J. 143
Stroehla, B. C. 93                        Vauzelle, C. 75
Strömland, K. 72–3                        Verity, C. M. 113
Stubbs, E. G. 44, 88                      Vezzani, A. 90, 115
                                          Vilidaite, G. 169, 170, 171
264                                DEFINING AUTISM


      Villemagne, P. M. 205                Wolverton, A. 142
      Vincent, A. 115                      Wong, D. 167
      Vivacqua, G. 118                     Wong, S. 114
      Volkmar, F. R. 103                   Wood, B. 184
      Vorstman, J. A. 54                   Woolfe, A. 51
                                           Worley, G. 117
      Wagner, G. C. 145
      Wahlström, J. 44                     Xu, G. 94
      Waltimo, O. 125                      Xu, L. M. 46
      Ward, P. 65
      Warren, R. P. 107
                                           Yamashita, Y. 40, 88
      Waterhouse, L. 207, 208
                                           Yan, G. M. 82
      Watts, G. 193, 196
                                           Yang, Y. -F. 51
      Wegiel, J. 38, 39, 190, 202
                                           Yeh, C. C. 125
      Weissman, J. R. 113
                                           Yirmiya, N. 167
      Werling, D. M. 59
                                           Yu, M. 169
      Werner, E. 105
                                           Yu, S. 118
      White, S. W. 168
      Whitehouse, A. J. 162
      Whitehouse, A. J. O. 98              Zapella, M. 115
      WHO (World Health Organization) 87   Zaretsky, M. 107
      Williams, E. L. 37                   Zeng, J. 186
      Willingham, E. 104                   Zerbo, O. 62
      Wills, S. 107                        Zhang, C. 50
      Wilson, C. E. 164                    Zinkstok, J. 206
      Wing, L. 194–5                       Zoghbi, H. Y. 48
      Wishart, T. M. 118                   Zucker, C. 25, 43
      Wolff, J. J. 188                     Zwaigenbaum, P. 103
      Wolff, S. 159, 160                   Zwi, J. D. 188
