EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
        CASTRO. CORPUZ. MANIQUIS. MARTIN
EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
   Existential therapy is more a way of thinking, or an attitude about
    psychotherapy, than a particular style of practicing psychotherapy.
   Existential therapy described as a philosophical approach that influences a
    counselor’s therapeutic practice.
   Existential therapy focuses on exploring themes such as mortality, meaning,
    freedom, responsibility, anxiety and aloneness as these relate to a person’s
    current struggle. The goal of existential therapy is to assist clients in their
    exploration of the existential “given of life”.
   Existential therapists believe we retain the freedom to choose how we
    respond to such events.
   Existential therapy is grounded on the assumption that we are free and
    therefore responsible for our choices and actions.
EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
The first step in therapeutic journey is for clients to accept
responsibility. As Yalom (2003) puts it, “once individuals recognize
their role in creating their own life predicament, they also realize
that they, and only they, have the power to change that situation”.
One of the aim of existential therapy is to challenge people to stop
deceiving themselves regarding their lack of responsibility for what is
happening to them and their excessive demands on life (van Deurzen,
2002b)
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND IN PHILOSOPHY AND
EXISTENTIALISM
   The existential therapy movement was not founded by any
    particular person or group; many streams od thought contributed
    to it.
   Existential therapy arose spontaneously in different parts of
    Europe. Many Europeans found that their lives been devastated by
    World War II, and they struggled with existential issues including
    feelings of isolation, alienation, and meaninglessness.
   The thinking of existential psychologist and psychiatrists was
    influences by a number of philosophers, and writers during the 19th
    century.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND IN PHILOSOPHY AND
EXISTENTIALISM
   Soren Kierkegaard (1813-1855) a Danish philosopher and Christian theologian,
    Kierkegaard was particularly concerned with angst-a Danish and German word
    whose meaning lies between English words dread and anxiety. And he
    addressed the role of anxiety and uncertainty in life.
   Ludwig Binswanger (1881-1966) an existential analyst, Binswanger proposed a
    holistic model of self that addresses the relationship between the person and
    his or her environment. He used phenomenological approach to explore
    significant features to the self, including choice, freedom, and caring.
   Medard Boss (1903-1991) both Binswanger and Boss were early existential
    psychoanalyst and significant figures in the development of existential
    psychotherapy. They made reference to dasein or being-in-the-world, which
    pertains to our ability to reflect on life events and attribute meaning to
    events.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND IN PHILOSOPHY AND
EXISTENTIALISM
   Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980) a philosopher and novelist, Sartre was
    convinced, in part by his years in the French Resistance in World
    War II, that humans are even more free than earlier existentialists
    had believed. “Our values are what we choose”. Sartre’s view was
    that at every moment, by our actions, we are choosing who we are
    being.
KEY FIGURES IN CONTEMPORARY EXISTENTIAL
PSYCHOTHERAPY
 Viktor Frankl (1905-1997) was a central figure in developing
  existential therapy in Europe and also in bringing it to the United
  States. Frankl was deeply influenced by Freud, but he became a
  student of Adler.
 He was fond of quoting Nietzsche: “He who has a why to live for can
bear with almost any how”
Frankl developed logotherapy, which means “therapy through
meaning.”
Frankl, the most powerful motivation for humans is the “will to
meaning”.
KEY FIGURES IN CONTEMPORARY EXISTENTIAL
PSYCHOTHERAPY
   Rollo May (1909-1994) was deeply influenced by the existential
    philosophers, by the concept of Freudian psychology, and by many
    aspects of Alfred Adler’s Individual Psychology.
   Irvin Yalom (1931-) Yalom has developed his approach to individual and
    group psychotherapy based on the notion that existentialism deals with
    basic “givens of existence”: isolation and relationship with others;
    death ad living fully: and meaninglessness and meaning.
   James Bugental (1915-2008) coined the term “existential-humanistic”
    psychotherapy, and he was a leading spokesman for this approach. He
    developed techniques to assist client in deepening inner exploration, or
    searching. The therapist’s primary task involved helping clients to make
    new discoveries about themselves in the living moment.
KEY FIGURES
   OF EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
Proposition 1: The Capacity for Self-
Awareness
   freedom, choice, and responsibility creates the
    foundation of self-awareness (Corey, 2012). This
    concept tells us that we can either limit or
    expand our conscious depending on our
    awareness. By expanding our self-awareness
    allows to grow in our life and in the things we do
    in life.
Proposition 2: Freedom and
Responsibility
this concept deals wit a person to having freedom
 to choose whatever they want for shaping their
 own destiny (Corey, 2012).
 This meaning we are responsible for our actions
 and everything else we choose to do with our life.
 According to Frankl, freedom and responsibility
 are often linked together (Corey, 2012).
 It is very important to consider culture
 backgrounds when counseling someone and
 assisting them with their choices.
Proposition 3: Striving for Identity and
Relationship to Others
   this concepts deals with people being concerned
    about themselves but also likes to relate to other
    human beings.
    Everyone wants to create their own personal identity
    (Corey, 2012).
    We often look for answer, try to choose our values
    and beliefs from other people not truly from within
    ourselves.
    According to Corey, we are constantly looking at
    what others are expecting from us rather than just
    trusting our own instinct (Corey, 2012).
Proposition 4: The Search for Meaning
   according to Corey, it is a constant struggle to
    find a purpose in life (p. 151). In existential
    therapy this is often the goal to find the meaning
    or challenge the meaning of their life.
   The questions often ask when trying to find the
    meaning of life are why am I here, what do i want
    from life, what gives my life purpose, and where
    is the source of meaning in my life (Corey, 2012).
Proposition 5: Anxiety as a Condition of
Living
   This concept says anxiety is something that
    becomes greater as we realize our freedoms and
    consequences of accepting or rejecting that
    freedom (Corey, 2012).
   Anxiety comes from a person's strive to survive
    and this often makes a person feel anxiety.
    Anxiety can often be a sign one is desiring
    personal change in which can help with personal
    growth.
Proposition 6: Awareness of Death and Nonbeing as
a Condition of Living
   according to Corey, a existentialist does not think
    of death as a negative thing but gives significance
    to living.
    A important human characteristic is the ability to
    understand the reality of death and dying. Death
    should not be considered a bad thing but
    something to motivate one to appreciate the
    present time and not worry about the future.
THERAPEUTIC PROCESS
            OF EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
THERAPEUTIC GOALS
   Existential therapy is best considered as an
    invitation to clients to recognize the ways in
    which they are not living fully authentic and to
    make choices that will lead to their becoming
    what they are capable of being.
   An aim of this therapy is to assist clients in
    moving toward authenticity and learning to
    recognize when they are deceiving themselves.
   Existential therapy aims at helping clients face
    anxiety and engage in action that is based on the
    authentic purpose of creating a worthy existence.
THERAPIST’S FUNCTION AND ROLE
   Existential therapists are primarily concerned with
    understanding the subjective world of clients to help
    them come to new understanding and options.
   A therapist’s function is to assist clients in seeing the
    ways in which they constrict their awareness and the
    cost of such constrictions (Bugental, 1997).
   Existential therapists encourage experimentation not
    only within the therapy office but also outside the
    therapy setting, based on the belief that life outside
    therapy is what counts.
CLIENT’S EXPERIENCE ON THERAPY
   Clients in existential therapy is clearly encouraged to
    assume responsibility for they are currently choosing to
    be in their own world.
   Clients wedge open the closed doors and they also
    begin to loosen the deterministic shackles that have
    kept them psychologically bound.
   Individuals should take small steps.
   Confronting ultimate concerns rather than coping with
    immediate problems.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THERAPIST AND CLIENT
   The quality of person-to-person encounter in the therapeutic
    situation is the stimulus for positive change.
   Basic attitudes toward the client and their own personal
    characteristics of honesty, integrity and courage are what
    the therapist has to offer.
   I/Thou relationship is essential for connecting the self to the
    spirit to achieve true dialogue.
   The core of the therapeutic relationship is respect, which
    implies faith in client’s potential to cope authentically with
    troubles and ability to discover alternative ways of being.
   THERAPEUTIC
TECHNIQUES AND
    PROCEDURES
       OF EXISTENTIAL THERAPY
   Existential approach is unlike most other therapies in that is
    not technique-oriented.
   Interventions are made within the context of striving to
    understand the subjective world of the client.
   The interventions existential practitioners employ are based
    on philosophical views about the nature of human existence.
   “Existential therapists prefer to be thought of as
    philosophical companions, not as people who repair psyches”
    –Vontress, 2008
   Van Deurzen stated that the starting point for existential
    work is for practitioners to clarify their views on life and
    living.
   The importance of therapists should reach sufficient depth
    and openness in their own lives to venture into the client’s
    murky waters without getting lost.
   “Existential therapy is a collaborative adventure in which
    both client and therapist will be transformed if they allow
    themselves to be touched by life.” –Van Deurzen
PHASES OF EXISTENTIAL COUNSELING
   Initial Phase
       Therapists assist clients in identifying and clarifying their
        assumptions about the world.
       Clients are invited to define and question the ways in which they
        perceive and make sense of their existence.
       They examine their values, beliefs, and assumptions to determine
        their validity.
PHASES OF EXISTENTIAL COUNSELING
 Middle    Phase
     Clients are assisted in more fully examining the source and
      authority of their present value system.
     This process of self-exploration typically leads to new
      insights and some restructuring of values and attitudes
PHASES OF EXISTENTIAL COUNSELING
 Final   Phase
     The final phase of existential counseling focuses on
      helping people take what they are learning about
      themselves and put it into action.
     Transformation is not limited to what takes place during
      the therapy hour.
     The therapeutic hour is a small contribution to a person’s
      renewed engagement with life, or a rehearsal for life.
CLIENTS APPROPRIATE FOR EXISTENTIAL COUNSELING
   Existential practice has been applied in a variety of
    settings and with a diverse population of clients including
    those with substance abuse issues, ethnic and racial
    minorities, gay and lesbian clients, and psychiatric
    inpatients.
   For people who are coping with developmental crises,
    experiencing grief and loss, contemplating suicide, or
    facing a major life decision, existential therapy is
    appropriate.
   Also appropriate for people who feel alienated from the
    current expectations of society and people who are
    searching for meaning in their lives.
APPLICATION FOR BRIEF THERAPY
   Existential approach can focus clients on
    significant areas such as assuming the personal
    responsibility, making a commitment to deciding
    and acting, and expanding their awareness of
    their current situation.
   It is important for individuals to evaluate what
    they have accomplished and what issues may
    need to be addressed later.
APPLICATION FOR GROUP COUNSELING
   An existential group can be described as people making a
    commitment to a lifelong journey of self-exploration with
    these goals:
    1.   Enabling members to become honest with themselves
    2.   Widening their perspectives on themselves and the
         world around them
    3.   Clarifying what gives meaning to their present and
         future life


   Yalom (1980) contends that the group provides the
    optimal conditions for therapeutic work on responsibility.
APPLICATION FOR GROUP COUNSELING
   Through feedback, members learn to view themselves through
    others’ eyes and they learn the ways in which their behavior
    affects others
   The group experience provides the opportunity to participants to
    relate to others in meaningful ways, to learn to be themselves in
    the company of other people, and to establish rewarding,
    nourishing relationships.
   In existential group counseling, members come to terms with the
    paradoxes of existence.
   Members experience anxiety when they recognize the realities of
    the human condition
APPLICATION FOR GROUP COUNSELING
   Members can openly share their fears related to living in
    unfulfilling ways and come to recognize how they have
    compromised their integrity.
   Members can gradually discover ways in which they have
    lost their direction and can begin to be more true to
    themselves
   Members learn that it is not in others that they find the
    answers to questions about significance and purpose in
    life
