 
                            wIDJI1II

     The MasterMinds series:

These concise and accessible books present cutting-edge ideas by
leading thinkers in a highly readable format, each title a crystallization of
a lifetime's work and thought.




     Other books in the MasterMinds series include:

After God: The Future of Religion by DON CUPITT

Extraordinary Minds by HOWARD GARDNER

Machine Beauty: Elegance and the Heart of Computing by DAVID
GELERNTER




     Future contributors include:

STEVEN PINKER

STEWART BRAND

JOHN MADDOX

JOHN SEARLE

SHERRY TURKLE
     Praise for Basic Books' Science Masters series:

"This is good publishing. PBS, eat your heart out."

                                                          -Kirkus Reviews

"Aimed at busy, nonmathematical readers, this precise series evinces
solid quality control and begins under highly favorable auspices."

                                                          A. L. A. Booklist

"If this standard is maintained, the Science Masters series looks set to
play a major role in the responsible popularization of sciences."

                                                            -New Scientist




 
MIHALY CSIKSZENTMIHALYI
For Isa, again




 
:CONTENTS
                    Acknowledgments ix

i The Structures of Everyday Life i

2 The Content of Experience 17

3 How We Feel When Doing Different Things 35

4 The Paradox of Work 49

5 The Risks and Opportunities of Leisure 64

6 Relationships and the Quality of Life 78

7 Changing the Patterns of Life 97

8 The Autotelic Personality 116

9 The Love of Fate 131

                    Notes 149

                    References 159

                    Index 169




 
           ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



The results discussed in this book are based on research supported by the
Spencer Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. A great number
of colleagues and students have given invaluable help in the
investigation of flow. I would like to thank especially Kevin Rathunde at
the University of Utah; Samuel Whalen at Northwestern University;
Kiyoshi Asakawa at Shikoku-Gakuen University in Japan; Fausto
Massimini and Antonella Delle Fave at the University of Milan, Italy;
Paolo Inghilleri at the University of Perugia, Italy; and at my own
University of Chicago Wendy Adlai-Gail, Joel Hektner, Jeanne
Nakamura, John Patton, and Jennifer Schmidt.

       Of the many colleagues whose friendship has been such an
invaluable support I want to give special thanks to Charles Bidwell,
William Damon, Howard Gardner, Geoffrey Godbey, Elizabeth Noelle-
Neumann, Mark Runco, and Barbara Schneider.




 
                                                                      ONE

The Structures of
Everyday Life
     If we really want to live, we'd better start at once to try; If we don't,
     it doesn't matter, but we'd better start to die.

                                                                -W. H. Auden




The lines by Auden reproduced above compress precisely what this book
is about. The choice is simple: between now and the inevitable end of our
days, we can choose either to live or to die. Biological life is an automatic
process, as long as we take care of the needs of the body. But to live in the
sense the poet means it is by no means something that will happen by
itself. In fact everything conspires against it: if we don't take charge of its
direction, our life will be controlled by the outside to serve the purpose of
some other agency. Biologically programmed instincts will use it to
replicate the genetic material we carry; the culture will make sure that we
use it to propagate its values and institutions; and other peo ple will try to
take as much of our energy as possible to further their own agenda-all of
this without regard to how any of this will affect us. We cannot expect
anyone to help us live; we must discover how to do it by ourselves.

        So what does "to live" mean in this context? Obviously, it doesn't
refer simply to biological survival. It must mean to live in fullness,
without waste of time and potential, expressing one's uniqueness, yet
participating intimately in the complexity of the cosmos. This book will
explore ways of living in this manner, relying as much as possible on
findings in contemporary psychology and my own research, as well as on
the wisdom of the past, in whatever form it was recorded.
       I will reopen the question of "What is a good life?" in a very
modest fashion. Instead of dealing in prophecies and mysteries I will try
to stay as close to reasonable evidence as possible, focusing on the
mundane, the everyday events that we typically encounter throughout a
normal day.

        A concrete example may illustrate best what I mean by leading a
good life. Years ago my students and I studied a factory where railroad
cars were assembled. The main workplace was a huge, dirty hangar where
one could hardly hear a word because of the constant noise. Most of the
welders who worked there hated their jobs, and were constantly watching
the clock in anticipation of quitting time. As soon as they were out of the
factory they hurried to the neighborhood saloons, or took a drive across
the state line for more lively action.

        Except for one of them. The exception was Joe, a barely literate
man in his early sixties, who had trained himself to understand and to fix
every piece of equipment in the factory, from cranes to computer
monitors. He loved to take on machinery that didn't work, figure out what
was wrong with it, and set it right again. At home, he and his wife built a
large rock garden on two empty lots next to their house, and in it he built
misty fountains that made rainbows-even at night. The hundred or so
welders who worked at the same plant re spected Joe, even though they
couldn't quite make him out. They asked his help whenever there was any
problem. Many claimed that without Joe the factory might just as well
close.

        Throughout the years I have met many CEOs of major companies,
powerful politicians, and several dozen Nobel Prize-winners-eminent
people who in many ways led excellent lives, but none that was better
than Joe's. What makes a life like his serene, useful, and worth living?
This is the crucial question this book will address. Three main
assumptions underlie my approach. The first is that prophets, poets, and
philosophers have gleaned important truths in the past, truths that are
essential for our continued survival. But these have been expressed in the
conceptual vocabulary of their time, so that to be useful, their meaning
has to be rediscovered and reinterpreted every generation. The sacred
books of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and the Veda are the
best repositories of the ideas that mattered most to our ancestors, and to
ignore them is an act of childish conceit. But it is equally naive to believe
that whatever was written down in the past contains an absolute truth that
lasts forever.

        The second plank on which this book is built is that currently
science provides the most vital information to humankind. Scientific truth
is also expressed in terms of the worldview of the times, and therefore
will change and might be discarded in the future. There is probably as
much superstition and misunderstanding embedded in modern science as
there was in the old myths, but we are too close in time to tell the
difference. Perhaps eventually ESP and spiritual energy will lead us to
immediate truth without the need for theories and laboratories. But
shortcuts are dangerous; we cannot delude ourselves that our knowledge
is further along than it actually is. For better or for worse, at this time
science is still the most trustworthy mirror of reality, and we ignore it
only at our peril.

        The third assumption is that if we wish to understand what real
"living" entails, we should listen to the voices of the past, and integrate
their messages with the knowledge that science is slowly accumulating.
Ideological gestures-such as Rousseau's project of returning to nature,
which was a precursor to the Freudian faith-are just empty posturing
when one has no idea what human nature is. There is no hope in the past.
There is no solution to be found in the present. Nor will we be better off
by jumping ahead into an imaginary future. The only path to finding out
what life is about is a patient, slow attempt to make sense of the realities
of the past and the possibilities of the future as they can be understood in
the present.

        Accordingly, in this book "life" will mean what we experience
from morning to night, seven days a week, for about seventy years if we
are lucky, for even longer if we are very fortunate. This might seem a
narrow perspective when compared to the much more exalted views of
life that myths and religions have made us familiar with. But to turn
Pascal's wager on its head, it seems that, when in doubt, the best strategy
is to assume that these seventy or so years are our only chance to
experience the cosmos, and we should make the fullest use of it. For if we
don't, we might lose everything; whereas if we are wrong and there is life
beyond the grave, we lose nothing.

       What this life will amount to is in part determined by the chemical
processes in our body, by the biological interaction among organs, by the
tiny electrical currents jumping between the synapses of the brain, and by
the organization of information that the culture imposes on our mind. But
the actual quality of life-what we do, and how we feel about it-will be
determined by our thoughts and emotions; by the interpretations we give
to chemical, biological, and social processes. Studying the stream of
consciousness passing through the mind is the province of
phenomenological philosophy. My work in the past thirty years has
consisted in developing a systematic phenomenology that makes use of
the tools of the social sciences-primarily psychology and sociology-in
order to answer the question: What is life like? And the more practical
question: How can each person create an excellent life?

        The first step in answering such questions involves getting a good
grasp of the forces that shape what we can experience. Whether we like it
or not, each of us is constrained by limits on what we can do and feel. To
ignore these limits leads to denial and eventually to failure. To achieve
excellence, we must first understand the reality of the everyday, with all
its demands and potential frustrations. In many of the ancient myths, a
person who wanted to find happiness, love, or eternal life, had to first
travel through the netherworld. Before being allowed to contemplate the
splendors of heaven, Dante had to wander through the horrors of hell so
he could understand what kept us from entering the pearly gates. The
same is true of the more secular quest we are about to begin.




Baboons who live in the African plains spend about one-third of their life
sleeping, and when awake they divide their time between traveling,
finding and eating food, and free leisure time-which basically consists in
interacting, or grooming each other's fur to pick out lice. It is not a very
exciting life, yet not much has changed in the million years since humans
evolved out of common simian ancestors. The requirements of life still
dictate that we spend our time in a way that is not that different from the
African baboons. Give and take a few hours, most people sleep one-third
of the day, and use the remainder to work, travel, and rest in more or less
the same proportions as the baboons do. And as the historian Emmanuel
Le Roy Ladurie has shown, in thirteenth century French villages-which
were among the most advanced in the world at the time-the most common
leisure pursuit was still that of picking lice out of each other's hair. Now,
of course, we have television.

        The cycles of rest, production, consumption, and interaction are as
much a part of how we experience life as our senses-vision, hearing, and
so forth-are. Because the ner vous system is so constructed that it can
only process a small amount of information at any given moment, most of
what we can experience must be experienced serially, one thing after the
other. It is often said of a rich and powerful man that "Like the rest of us,
he must pull his trousers on one leg at a time." We can swallow only one
bite, hear only one song, read one paper, have one conversation at a time.
Thus the limitations on attention, which determines the amount of psychic
energy we have for experiencing the world, provide an inflexible script
for us to live by. Across time and in different cultures, what people do and
for how long is astonishingly similar.

        Having just said that in some important respects all lives are
similar, one must hasten to recognize the obvious differences. A
Manhattan stockbroker, a Chinese peasant, and a bushman of the Kalahari
will play out the basic human script in ways that at first will seem to have
nothing in common. Writing about Europe in the sixteenth to eighteenth
centuries, the historians Natalie Zemon Davis and Arlette Farge
comment: "Daily life unfolded within the frame of enduring gender and
social hierarchies." This is true of all social groups we have knowledge
of. How a person lives depends in large part on sex, age, and social
position.

        The accident of birth puts a person in a slot that greatly determines
what sorts of experiences his or her life will consist of. A boy of six or
seven years, born into a poor family in one of the industrial regions of
England two hundred years ago, was likely to wake up around five in the
morning, rush to the mill to service the clanking mechanical looms till
sunset, six days a week. Often he would die of exhaustion before reaching
his teens. A girl of twelve in the silk-making regions of France around the
same time would sit next to a tub all day, dipping silkworm cocoons in
scalding water to melt the sticky substance that held the threads together.
She was likely to succumb to respiratory diseases as she sat in wet clothes
from dawn to dusk, and her fingertips eventually lost all feeling from the
hot water. In the meantime, the children of the nobility learned to dance
the minuet and to converse in foreign languages.
         The same differences in life-chances are still with us. What can a
child born into an urban slum in Los Angeles, Detroit, Cairo, or Mexico
City expect to experience during a lifetime? How is that going to differ
from the expectations of a child born into an affluent American suburb, or
a well-todo Swedish or Swiss family? Unfortunately there is no justice,
nor any rhyme or reason, in one person being born into a starving
community, perhaps even with a congenital physical defect, while another
starts life with good looks, good health, and a large bank account.

         So while the main parameters of life are fixed, and no person can
avoid resting, eating, interacting, and doing at least some work, humanity
is divided into social categories that determine to a large extent the
specific content of experience. And to make it all more interesting, there
is, of course, the matter of individuality.

        If we look out of a window in winter, we might see millions of
identical snowflakes cavorting by. But if we took a magnifying glass and
looked at the flakes separately, we would soon discover that they were not
identical-in fact, that each had a shape that no other flake duplicated
exactly. The same is true of human beings. We can tell quite a lot about
what Susan will experience just by the fact that she is human. We can tell
even more by knowing she is an American girl, living in a certain specific
community, with parents of such and such an occupation. But after
everything is said and done, knowing all the external parameters will not
allow us to predict what Susan's life will be like. Not only because
random chance might throw all bets off, but more importantly, because
Susan has a mind of her own with which she can either decide to
squander her opportunities, or conversely overcome some of the
disadvantages of her birth.

       It is because of this flexibility of human consciousness that a book
such as this can be written. If everything was deter mined by the common
human condition, by social and cultural categories, and by chance, it
would be useless to reflect on ways to make one's life excellent.
Fortunately there is enough room for personal initiative and choice to
make a real difference. And those who believe this are the ones with the
best chance to break free from the grip of fate.
To live means to experience-through doing, feeling, thinking. Experience
takes place in time, so time is the ultimate scarce resource we have. Over
the years, the content of experience will determine the quality of life.
Therefore one of the most essential decisions any of us can make is about
how one's time is allocated or invested. Of course, how we invest time is
not our decision alone to make. As we have seen earlier, stringent
constraints dictate what we should do either as members of the human
race, or because we belong to a certain culture and society. Nevertheless,
there is room for personal choices, and control over time is to a certain
extent in our hands. As the historian E. P. Thompson noted, even in the
most oppressive decades of the Industrial Revolution, when workers
slaved away for more than eighty hours a week in mines and factories,
there were some who spent their few precious free hours in literary
pursuits or political action instead of following the majority into the pubs.

        The terms we use in talking about time-budgeting, investing,
allocating, wasting-are borrowed from the language of finance.
Consequently some people claim that our attitude toward time is colored
by our peculiar capitalist heritage. It is true that the maxim "Time is
money" was a favorite of that great apologist of capitalism, Benjamin
Franklin, but the equation of the two terms is certainly much older, and
rooted in the common human experience, rather than in our culture alone.
In fact it could be argued that it is money that gets its value from time,
rather than the other way around. Money is simply the most generally
used counter for measuring the time invested in doing or making
something. And we value money because to a certain extent it liberates us
from the constraints of life by making it possible to have free time to do
in it what we want.

         What, then, do people do with their time? Table i gives a general
notion of how we spend the sixteen or so hours a day in which we are
awake and conscious. The figures are by necessity approximate, because
depending on whether a person is young or old, man or woman, rich or
poor, vastly different patterns might result. But by and large, the numbers
in the table can begin to describe what an average day in our society looks
like. They are in many ways quite similar to those obtained by time
budgets in other industrialized countries.
Sources: Csikszentmihalyi and Graef 1980; Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi
                  199o; Larson and Richards 1994•


        What we do during an average day can be divided into three major
kinds of activities. The first and largest includes what we must do in order
to generate energy for survival and comfort. Nowadays this is almost
synonymous with "making money," since money has become the medium
of exchange for most things. However, for young people still in school,
learning might be included among these productive activities, because for
them education is the equivalent of adult work, and the first will lead into
the second.

         Between a quarter to more than half of our psychic energy goes
into such productive activities, depending on the kind of job, and whether
one works full or part time. Although most full-time workers are on the
job about forty hours a week, which is 3 5 percent of the i 12 waking
hours of the week, the figure does not reflect reality exactly, because of
the forty hours per week spent on the job workers actually work only
about thirty, the remainder being spent in talking, daydreaming, making
lists, and other occupations irrelevant to work.

        Is this much time or little? It depends on what we compare it to.
According to some anthropologists, among the least technologically
developed societies, such as the tribesmen of the Brazilian jungles or the
African deserts, grown men rarely spend more than four hours a day
providing for their livelihood-the rest of the time they spend resting,
chatting, singing, and dancing. On the other hand, during the hundred
years or so of industrialization in the West, before the unions were able to
regulate working time, it was not unusual for workers to spend twelve or
more hours a day in the factory. So the eight-hour workday, which is
currently the norm, is about halfway between the two extremes.

         Productive activities create new energy; but we need to do a great
deal of work just to preserve the body and its possessions. Therefore
about a fourth of our day is involved in various sorts of maintenance
activities. We keep the body in shape by eating, resting, grooming; our
possessions by cleaning, cooking, shopping, and doing all sorts of
housework. Traditionally women have been burdened by maintenance
work while men have taken on the productive roles. This difference is still
quite strong in the contemporary U.S.: while men and women spend equal
amounts of time eating (about 5 percent), women devote twice as much
time as men do to all the other maintenance activities.

        The gender-typing of household tasks is of course even more
severe practically everywhere else. In the former Soviet Union, where
gender equality was a matter of ideology, married women doctors and
engineers still had to do all the housework in addition to their paying jobs.
In most of the world, a man who cooks for his family or does the dishes
loses his self-respect as well as the respect of others.

        This division of labor seems to be as old as humanity itself. In the
past, however, the maintenance of the household often required
enormously strenuous labor from women. One historian describes the
situation in Europe four centuries ago:


     Women carried water to steep mountain terraces in areas ... where
     water was scarce.... They cut and dried turf, collected kelp, firewood,
     weeds by the roadside to feed rabbits. They milked cows and goats,
     grew vegetables, collected chestnuts and herbs. The commonest
     source of heating for British and some Irish and Dutch farmers was
     animal Curds, which were gathered by hand by women and received
     their final drying out stacked near the family fire....

        Plumbing and electronic appliances have certainly made a
difference in the amount of physical effort it takes to run a household, just
as technology has eased the physical burden of productive work. But most
women in Asia, Africa, and South America-in other words, most women
in the worldstill have to devote a major part of their lives to keeping the
material and emotional infrastructure of their families from collapsing.

        Time left over from productive and maintenance necessities is free
time, or leisure, which takes up about another fourth of our total time.
According to many past thinkers, men and women could only realize their
potential when they had nothing to do. It is during leisure, according to
the Greek philosophers, that we become truly human by devoting time to
self-development-to learning, to the arts, to political activity. In fact the
Greek term for leisure, scholea, is the root from which our word "school"
comes from, since the idea was that the best use for leisure was to study.
        Unfortunately this ideal is seldom realized. In our society free
time is occupied by three major sorts of activities-none being quite up to
what the Greek scholars, or men of leisure, had in mind. The first is
media consumption-mostly television, with a sprinkling of newspaper and
magazine reading. The second is conversation. The third is a more active
use of free time, and therefore the closest to the old ideal: it involves
hobbies, making music, doing sports and exercise, going to restaurants
and movies. Each of these three major kinds of leisure takes at least four
and as much as twelve hours each week.

         Watching TV, which on the average takes up the most psychic
energy of all leisure pursuits, is probably also the most novel form of
activity in human experience. Nothing men and women have done so far
during the millions of years of evolution has been as passive, as addictive
in the ease with which it attracts attention and keeps hold of it-unless we
count staring into space, taking a siesta, or going into a trance as the
Balinese were wont to do. The apologists for the medium claim that all
sorts of interesting information is provided by television. This is true, but
as it is much easier to produce programs that titillate rather than elevate
the viewer, what most people watch is unlikely to help in developing the
self.

        These three main functions-production, maintenance, and leisure-
absorb our psychic energy. They provide the information that goes
through the mind day after day, from birth to the end of life. Thus, in
essence, what our life is consists in experiences related to work, to
keeping things we already have from falling apart, and to whatever else
we do in our free time. It is within these parameters that life unfolds, and
it is how we choose what we do, and how we approach it, that will
determine whether the sum of our days adds up to a formless blur, or to
something resembling a work of art.




Everyday life is defined not only by what we do, but also by who we are
with. Our actions and feelings are always influenced by other people,
whether they are present or not. Ever since Aristotle it has been known
that humans were social animals; both physically and psychologically we
depend on the company of others. Cultures differ in terms of how much a
person is influenced by others, or by the internalized opinion of others
when they are alone. For example, traditional Hindu persons were not
considered to be separate individuals as we think of them, but rather
nodes in an extended social network. One's identity was determined not
so much by one's unique thoughts and actions, but rather by whose child,
sibling, cousin, parent one was. In our time also, compared to Caucasian
children, those from East Asian backgrounds are much more aware of
parental expectations and opinions even when they are alone-in
psychoanalytic terms, we might say that they have a stronger superego.
But no matter how individualistic a culture might become, other people
still determine to a large extent the quality of a person's life.

        Most people spend roughly equal amounts of time in three social
contexts. The first is made up of strangers, coworkers, or-for young
people-fellow students. This "public" space is where one's actions are
evaluated by others, where one competes for resources, and where one
might establish collaborative relationships with others. It has been argued
that this public sphere of action is the most important for developing one's
potential, the one where the highest risks are run but the greatest growth
occurs.

       The second context is made up of one's family-for children their
parents and siblings, for adults their partners, spouses, and children.
While recently the very notion of "family" as a recognizable social unit
has been severely criticized, and while it is true that no one kind of
arrangement fits this definition in time and space, it is also true that
always and everywhere there has been a group of people with whom one
reckoned special bonds of kinship, with whom one felt safer, and for
whom one felt a greater sense of responsibility than for others. No matter
how strange nowadays some of our reconstituted families are in
comparison with an ideal nuclear family, close relatives still provide a
unique kind of experience.

        Then there is the context defined by the absence of other people-
solitude. In technological societies we spend about one-third of the day
alone, a much greater proportion than in most tribal societies, where
being alone is often considered to be very dangerous. Even for us being
alone is undesirable; the vast majority of people try to avoid it as much as
possible. Although it is possible to learn to enjoy solitude, it is a rare
acquired taste. But whether we like it or not, many of the obligations of
daily life require for us to be alone: children have to study and practice by
themselves, housewives take care of the home alone, and many jobs are at
least in part solitary. So even if we don't enjoy it, it is important to learn to
tolerate solitude, or else the quality of our lives is bound to suffer.




In this chapter and the next one, I talk about how people use their time,
how much of it they spend alone or with others, and how they feel about
what they do. What is the evidence on which such assertions are based?

        The most prevalent way to find out about what people do with
their time is through polls, surveys, and time budgets. These methods
usually ask people to fill out a diary at the end of a day or a week; they
are easy to administer, but because they are based on recollection, are not
very precise. Another method is the Experience Sampling Method, or
ESM, which I developed at the University of Chicago in the early
seventies. The ESM uses a pager or a programmable watch to signal
people to fill out two pages in a booklet they carry with them. Signals are
programmed to go off at random times within two-hour segments of the
day, from early morning to i i P.M. or later. At the signal the person writes
down where she is, what she is doing, what she is thinking about, who she
is with, and then rates her state of consciousness at the moment on
various numerical scales-how happy she is, how much she is
concentrating, how strongly she is motivated, how high her self-esteem is,
and so on.

       At the end of a week, each person will have filled out up to fifty-
six pages of the ESM booklet, providing a virtual film strip of his or her
daily activities and experiences. We can trace a person's activities from
morning to night day by day over the week, and we can follow his or her
mood swings in relation to what the person does and who he is with.

       At our Chicago laboratory, we have collected over the years a total
of more than seventy thousand pages from about twenty-three hundred
respondents; investigators at universities in other parts of the world have
more than tripled these figures. Large numbers of responses are important
because they allow us to look into the shape and quality of daily life in
great detail and with considerable precision. It allows us to see, for
example, how often people eat meals, and how they feel when they do so.
Furthermore, we can see whether teenagers, adults, and old people feel
the same way about meals, and whether eating is a similar experience
when one eats alone or in company. The method also allows compar isons
among Americans, Europeans, Asians, and any other culture where the
method can be used. In what follows, I will be using results obtained by
surveys and polls interchangeably with ESM results. The notes at the end
of the book will indicate the sources from which the data were obtained.




 
                                                                :TWO

The Content of
Experience



We have seen that work, maintenance, and leisure take up most of our
psychic energy. But one person might love work and the other hate it;
one person might enjoy free time and the other be bored when there is
nothing to do. So while what we do day in and day out has a lot to do
with what kind of life we have, how we experience what we do is even
more important.

        Emotions are in some respect the most subjective elements of
consciousness, since it is only the person himself or herself who can tell
whether he or she truly experiences love, shame, gratitude, or happiness.
Yet an emotion is also the most objective content of the mind, because
the "gut feeling" we experience when we are in love, or ashamed, or
scared, or happy, is generally more real to us than what we observe in the
world outside, or whatever we learn from science or logic. Thus we often
find ourselves in the paradoxical posi tion of being like behavioral
psychologists when we look at other people, discounting what they say
and trusting only what they do; whereas when we look at ourselves we
are like phenomenologists, taking our inner feelings more seriously than
outside events or overt actions.

        Psychologists have identified up to nine basic emotions that can
reliably be identified by facial expressions among people living in very
different cultures; thus it seems that just as all humans can see and can
speak, so they also share a common set of feeling states. But to simplify
as much as possible, one can say that all emotions share in a basic
duality: they are either positive and attractive, or they are negative and
repulsive. It is because of this simple feature that emotions help us
choose what should be good for us. A baby is attracted to a human face,
and is happy when she sees her mother, because it helps her bond with a
caretaker. We feel pleasure when eating, or when with a member of the
opposite sex, because the species would not survive if we didn't seek out
food and sex. We feel an instinctive revulsion at the sight of snakes,
insects, rotten smells, darkness-all things that in the evolutionary past
might have presented serious dangers to survival.

        In addition to the simple genetically wired emotions, humans
have developed a great number of more subtle and tender, as well as
debased, feelings. The evolution of self-reflective consciousness has
allowed our race to "toy" with feelings, to fake or manipulate feelings in
ways that no other animal can. The songs, dances, masks of our
ancestors evoked dread and awe, joy and intoxication. Horror movies,
drugs, and music do the same thing now. But originally emotions served
as signals about the outside world; now they are often detached from any
real object, to be indulged in for their own sake.

        Happiness is the prototype of the positive emotions. As many a
thinker since Aristotle has said, everything we do is ultimately aimed at
experiencing happiness. We don't really want wealth, or health, or fame
as such-we want these things because we hope that they will make us
happy. But happiness we seek not because it will get us something else,
but for its own sake. If happiness is really the bottom line of life, what do
we know about it?

        Until mid-century, psychologists were reluctant to study
happiness because the reigning behaviorist paradigm in the social
sciences held that subjective emotions were too flimsy to be proper
subjects of scientific research. But as the "dustbowl empiricism" in
academia has cleared in the last few decades so that the importance of
subjective experiences could again be recognized, the study of happiness
has been pursued with renewed vigor.

        What has been learned is both familiar and surprising. It is
surprising, for instance, that despite problems and tragedies, all over the
world people tend to describe themselves as much more happy than
unhappy. In America, typically onethird of respondents from
representative samples say that they are "very happy," and only one in
ten that they are "not too happy." The majority rate themselves above the
halfway mark, as "pretty happy." Similar results are reported from
dozens of other countries. How can this be, when thinkers through the
ages, reflecting on how short and painful life can be, have always told us
that the world is a vale of tears, and we were not made to be happy?
Perhaps the reason for the discrepancy is that prophets and philosophers
tend to be perfectionists, and the imperfections of life offend them.
Whereas the rest of humankind is glad to be alive, imperfections and all.

        Of course there is a more pessimistic explanation, namely, that
when people say they are pretty happy they are deceiving either the
researcher who is taking the poll, or more likely, they are whistling in the
dark. After all, Karl Marx has accustomed us to think that a factory
worker can feel he is perfectly happy, but this subjective happiness is a
selfdeception that means nothing because objectively the worker is
alienated by the system that exploits his labor. Jean-Paul Sartre has told
us that most people live with "false consciousness," pretending even to
themselves that they are living in the best of all possible worlds. More
recently Michel Foucault and the postmodernists have made it clear that
what people tell us does not reflect real events, but only a style of
narrative, a way of talking that refers only to itself. While these critiques
of self-perception illuminate important issues that have to be recognized,
they also suffer from the intellectual arrogance of scholars who believe
their interpretations of reality should take precedence over the direct
experience of the multitude. The profound doubts of Marx, Sartre, and
Foucault notwithstanding, I still think that when a person says he is
"pretty happy," one has no right to ignore his statement, or interpret it to
mean the opposite.

        Another set of familiar yet surprising findings has to do with the
relationship between material well-being and happiness. As one would
expect, people who live in nations that are materially better off and
politically more stable rate themselves happier (e.g., the Swiss and
Norwegians say they are happier than Greeks and Portuguese)-but not
always (e.g., the poorer Irish claim to be happier than the wealthier
Japanese). But within the same society there is only a very weak
relationship between finances and satisfaction with life; billionaires in
America are only infinitesimally happier than those with average
incomes. And while personal income in the U.S. more than doubled
between i 96o and the 19gos in constant dollars, the proportion of people
saying they are very happy remained a steady 30 percent. One
conclusion that the findings seem to justify is that beyond the threshold
of poverty, additional resources do not appreciably improve the chances
of being happy.

        A number of personal qualities are related to how happy people
describe themselves to be. For instance, a healthy extrovert with strong
self-esteem, a stable marriage, and religious faith will be much more
likely to say he is happy than a chronically ill, introverted, and divorced
atheist with low self-esteem. It is in looking at these clusters of
relationships that the skepticism of the postmodernist critique might
make sense. It is likely, for instance, that a healthy, religious person will
construct a "happier" narrative about his or her life than one who is not,
regardless of the actual quality of experience. But since we always
encounter the "raw" data of experience through interpretive filters, the
stories we tell about how we feel are an essential part of our emotions. A
woman who says she is happy to work two jobs to keep a roof over her
children's head is probably in fact happier than a woman who doesn't see
why she should have to bother with even a single job.

         But happiness is certainly not the only emotion worth
considering. In fact, if one wants to improve the quality of everyday life,
happiness may be the wrong place to start. In the first place, self-reports
of happiness do not vary from person to person as much as other feelings
do; no matter how empty a life otherwise might be, most persons will be
reluctant to admit being unhappy. Furthermore, this emotion is more a
personal characteristic than a situational one. In other words, over time
some people come to think of themselves as happy regardless of external
conditions, while others will become used to feeling relatively less happy
no matter what happens to them. Other feelings are much more
influenced by what one does, who one is with, or the place one happens
to be. These moods are more amenable to direct change, and because
they are also connected to how happy we feel, in the long run they might
lift our average level of happiness.

        For instance, how active, strong, and alert we feel depends a lot
on what we do-these feelings become more intense when we are
involved with a difficult task, and they get more attenuated when we fail
at what we try to do, or when we don't try to do anything. So these
feelings can be directly affected by what we choose to do. When we feel
active and strong we are also more likely to feel happy, so that in time
the choice of what we do will also affect our happiness. Similarly most
people feel they are more cheerful and sociable when they are with
others than when they are alone. Again, cheerfulness and sociability are
related to happiness, which probably explains why extroverts on the
average tend to be happier than introverts.

        The quality of life does not depend on happiness alone, but also
on what one does to be happy. If one fails to develop goals that give
meaning to one's existence, if one does not use the mind to its fullest,
then good feelings fulfill just a fraction of the potential we possess. A
person who achieves contentment by withdrawing from the world to
"cultivate his own garden," like Voltaire's Candide, cannot be said to lead
an excellent life. Without dreams, without risks, only a trivial semblance
of living can be achieved.




Emotions refer to the internal states of consciousness. Negative emotions
like sadness, fear, anxiety, or boredom produce "psychic entropy" in the
mind, that is, a state in which we cannot use attention effectively to deal
with external tasks, because we need it to restore an inner subjective
order. Positive emotions like happiness, strength, or alertness are states
of "psychic negentropy" because we don't need attention to ruminate and
feel sorry for ourselves, and psychic energy can flow freely into
whatever thought or task we choose to invest it in.

       When we choose to invest attention in a given task, we say that
we have formed an intention, or set a goal for ourselves. How long and
how intensely we stick by our goals is a function of motivation.
Therefore intentions, goals, and motivations are also manifestations of
psychic negentropy. They focus psychic energy, establish priorities, and
thus create order in consciousness. Without them mental processes
become random, and feelings tend to deteriorate rapidly.

        Goals are usually arranged in a hierarchy, from trivial ones, like
getting to the corner store to buy some ice cream, to risking one's life for
the country. In the course of an average day, about one-third of the time
people will say that they do what they do because they wanted to do it,
one-third because they had to do it, and the last third because they had
nothing better to do. These proportions vary by age, gender, and activity:
children feel they have more choice than their fathers, and men more
than their wives; whatever a person does at home is perceived to be more
voluntary than at work.

        Quite a bit of evidence shows that whereas people feel best when
what they do is voluntary, they do not feel worst when what they do is
obligatory. Psychic entropy is highest instead when persons feel that
what they do is motivated by not having anything else to do. Thus both
intrinsic motivation (wanting to do it) and extrinsic motivation (having to
do it) are preferable to the state where one acts by default, without
having any kind of goal to focus attention. The large part of life many
people experience as being thus unmotivated leaves a great deal of room
for improvement.

        Intentions focus psychic energy in the short run, whereas goals
tend to be more long-term, and eventually it is the goals that we pursue
that will shape and determine the kind of self that we are to become.
What makes Mother Theresa the nun radically different from Madonna
the singer are the goals into which they have invested their attention
throughout their lives. Without a consistent set of goals, it is difficult to
develop a coherent self. It is through the patterned investment of psychic
energy provided by goals that one creates order in experience. This
order, which manifests itself in predictable actions, emotions, and
choices, in time becomes recognizable as a more or less unique "self."

        The goals one endorses also determine one's self-esteem. As
William James pointed out over a hundred years ago, selfesteem depends
on the ratio of expectation to successes. A person may develop low self-
esteem either because he sets his goals too high, or because he achieves
too few successes. So it is not necessarily true that the person who
achieves most will have the highest self-esteem. Contrary to what one
would expect, Asian-American students who get excellent grades tend to
have lower self-esteem than other minorities who are academically less
successful, because proportionately their goals are set even higher than
their success. Mothers who work full-time have lower self-esteem than
mothers who do not work at all, because although they accomplish more,
their expectations still outpace their achievements. From this it follows
that contrary to popular wisdom, increasing children's self-esteem is not
always a good idea-especially if it is achieved by lowering their
expectations.

        There are other misconceptions concerning intentions and goals.
For instance, some point out that Eastern religions, such as the various
forms of Hinduism and Buddhism, prescribe the abolition of
intentionality as a prerequisite for happiness. They claim that only by
relinquishing every desire, by achieving a goalless existence, can we
hope to avoid unhappiness. This line of thought has influenced many
young people in Europe and America to attempt to reject all goals, in the
belief that only completely spontaneous and random behavior leads to an
enlightened life.

        In my opinion this reading of the Eastern message is rather
superficial. After all, to try abolishing desire is itself a tremendously
difficult and ambitious goal. Most of us are so thoroughly programmed
with genetic and cultural desires that it takes an act of almost
superhuman will to still them all. Those who expect that by being
spontaneous they will avoid setting goals, usually just follow blindly the
goals set down for them by instincts and education. They often end up
being so mean, lecherous, and prejudiced as to stand a good Buddhist
monk's hair on end.

        The true message of the Eastern religions, it seems to me, is not
the abolition of all goals. What they tell us is that most intentions we
form spontaneously are to be mistrusted. To make sure that we survive in
a dangerous world dominated by scarcity, our genes have programmed
us to be greedy, to want power, to dominate over others. For the same
reason, the social group into which we are born teaches us that only
those who share our language and religion are to be trusted. The inertia
of the past dictates that most of our goals will be shaped by genetic or by
cultural inheritance. It is these goals, the Buddhists tell us, that we must
learn to curb. But this aim requires very strong motivation.
Paradoxically, the goal of rejecting programmed goals might require the
constant investment of all one's psychic energy. A Yogi or a Buddhist
monk needs every ounce of attention to keep programmed desires from
irrupting into consciousness, and thus have little psychic energy left free
to do anything else. Thus the praxis of the religions of the East is almost
the opposite of how it has usually been interpreted in the West.
        Learning to manage one's goals is an important step in achieving
excellence in everyday life. To do so, however, does not involve either
the extreme of spontaneity on the one hand, or compulsive control on the
other. The best solution might be to understand the roots of one's
motivation, and while recognizing the biases involved in one's desires, in
all humbleness to choose goals that will provide order in one's
consciousness without causing too much disorder in the social or
material environment. To try for less than this is to forfeit the chance of
developing your potential, and to try for much more is to set yourself up
for defeat.




The third content of consciousness are cognitive mental operations.
Thinking is such a complex subject that it is entirely out of the question
to deal with it systematically here-instead it makes sense to simplify the
subject so that we can talk about it in relation to everyday life. What we
call thinking is also a process whereby psychic energy gets ordered.
Emotions focus attention by mobilizing the entire organism in an
approach or an avoidance mode. Goals do it by providing images of
desired outcomes. Thoughts order attention by producing sequences of
images that are related to each other in some meaningful way.

        For instance, one of the most basic mental operations consists in
the linking of cause and effect. How this begins in a person's life can be
easily observed when an infant first discovers that by moving her hand
she can ring the bell hanging over the crib. This simple connection is the
paradigm on which much of later thinking is based. With time, however,
the steps from causes to effects become increasingly more abstract and
removed from concrete reality. An electrician, a musical composer, a
stockbroker consider simultaneously hundreds of possible connections
between the symbols on which they are operating in their minds-watts
and ohms, notes and beats, the buying and selling prices of stocks.

       By now it is probably apparent that emotions, intentions, and
thoughts do not pass through consciousness as separate strands of
experience, but that they are constantly interconnected, and modify each
other as they go along. A young man falls in love with a girl, and
experiences all the typical emotions that love implies. He intends to win
her heart, and begins to think of how to reach this goal. He figures that
getting himself a snazzy new car will win the girl's attention. So now the
goal of earning money to buy a new car becomes embedded in the goal
of wooing-but having to work more may interfere with going fishing and
produce negative emotions, which generate new thoughts, which in turn
may bring the boy's goals in line with his emotions ... the stream of
experience always carries many such bits of information concurrently.

        To pursue mental operations to any depth, a person has to learn to
concentrate attention. Without focus, consciousness is in a state of chaos.
The normal condition of the mind is one of informational disorder:
random thoughts chase one another instead of lining up in logical causal
sequences. Unless one learns to concentrate, and is able to invest the
effort, thoughts will scatter without reaching any conclusion. Even
daydreaming-that is, the linking together of pleasant images to create
some sort of mental motion picture-requires the ability to concentrate,
and apparently many children never learn to control their attention
sufficiently to be able to daydream.

        Concentration requires more effort when it goes against the grain
of emotions and motivations. A student who hates math will have a hard
time focusing attention on a calculus textbook long enough to absorb the
information it contains, and it will take strong incentives (such as
wanting to pass the course) for him to do so. Usually the more difficult a
mental task, the harder it is to concentrate on it. But when a person likes
what he does and is motivated to do it, focusing the mind becomes
effortless even when the objective difficulties are great.

        Generally, when the issue of thinking comes up, most people
assume it must have to do with intelligence. They are interested in
individual differences in thinking, such as: "What's my IQ?" or: "He is a
genius at math." Intelligence refers to a variety of mental processes; for
instance, how easily one can represent and manipulate quantities in the
mind, or how sensitive one is to information indexed in words. But as
Howard Gardner has shown, it is possible to extend the concept of
intelligence to include the ability to differentiate and to use all kinds of
information, including muscle sensations, sounds, feelings, and visual
shapes. Some children are born with an above-average sensitivity to
sound. They can discriminate tones and pitches better than others, and as
they grow up they learn to recognize notes and produce harmonies more
easily than their peers. Similarly small advantages at the beginning of
life can develop into large differences in visual, athletic, or mathematical
abilities.

        But innate talents cannot develop into a mature intelligence
unless a person learns to control attention. Only through extensive
investments of psychic energy can a child with musical gifts turn into a
musician, or a mathematically gifted child into an engineer or physicist.
It takes much effort to absorb the knowledge and the skills that are
needed to do the mental operations an adult professional is supposed to
perform. Mozart was a prodigy and a genius, but if his father hadn't
forced him to practice as soon as he was out of diapers, it is doubtful his
talent would have blossomed as it did. By learning to concentrate, a
person acquires control over psychic energy, the basic fuel upon which
all thinking depends.




In everyday life, it is rare for the different contents of experience to be in
synchrony with each other. At work my attention might be focused,
because the boss gave me a job to do that requires intense thinking. But
this particular job is not one I ordinarily would want to do, so I am not
very motivated intrinsically. At the same time, I am distracted by
feelings of anxiety about my teenage son's erratic behavior. So while part
of my mind is concentrated on the task, I am not completely involved in
it. It is not that my mind is in total chaos, but there is quite a bit of
entropy in my consciousness-thoughts, emotions, and intentions come
into focus and then disappear, producing contrary impulses, and pulling
my attention in different directions. Or, to consider another example, I
may enjoy a drink with friends after work, but I feel guilty about not
going home to the family and mad at myself for wasting time and money.

        Neither of these scenarios is particularly unusual. Everyday life is
full of them: rarely do we feel the serenity that comes when heart, will,
and mind are on the same page. Conflicting desires, intentions, and
thoughts jostle each other in consciousness, and we are helpless to keep
them in line.

        But now let us consider some alternatives. Imagine, for instance,
that you are skiing down a slope and your full attention is focused on the
movements of the body, the position of the skis, the air whistling past
your face, and the snow shrouded trees running by. There is no room in
your awareness for conflicts or contradictions; you know that a
distracting thought or emotion might get you buried facedown in the
snow. And who wants to get distracted? The run is so perfect that all you
want is for it to last forever, to immerse yourself completely in the
experience.

        If skiing does not mean much to you, substitute your favorite
activity for this vignette. It could be singing in a choir, programming a
computer, dancing, playing bridge, reading a good book. Or if you love
your job, as many people do, it could be when you are getting immersed
in a complicated surgical operation or a close business deal. Or this
complete immersion in the activity may occur in a social interaction, as
when good friends talk with each other, or when a mother plays with her
baby. What is common to such moments is that consciousness is full of
experiences, and these experiences are in harmony with each other.
Contrary to what happens all too often in everyday life, in moments such
as these what we feel, what we wish, and what we think are in harmony.

         These exceptional moments are what I have called flow
experiences. The metaphor of "flow" is one that many people have used
to describe the sense of effortless action they feel in moments that stand
out as the best in their lives. Athletes refer to it as "being in the zone,"
religious mystics as being in "ecstasy," artists and musicians as aesthetic
rapture. Athletes, mystics, and artists do very different things when they
reach flow, yet their descriptions of the experience are remarkably
similar.

        Flow tends to occur when a person faces a clear set of goals that
require appropriate responses. It is easy to enter flow in games such as
chess, tennis, or poker, because they have goals and rules for action that
make it possible for the player to act without questioning what should be
done, and how. For the duration of the game the player lives in a
selfcontained universe where everything is black and white. The same
clarity of goals is present if you perform a religious ritual, play a musical
piece, weave a rug, write a computer program, climb a mountain, or
perform surgery. Activities that induce flow could be called "flow
activities" because they make it more likely for the experience to occur.
In contrast to normal life, flow activities allow a person to focus on goals
that are clear and compatible.

        Another characteristic of flow activities is that they provide
immediate feedback. They make it clear how well you are doing. After
each move of a game you can tell whether you have improved your
position or not. With each step, the climber knows that he has inched
higher. After each bar of a song you can hear whether the notes you sang
matched the score. The weaver can see whether the last row of stitches
fits the pattern of the tapestry as it should. The surgeon can see as she
cuts whether the knife has avoided cutting any arteries, or whether there
is sudden bleeding. On the job or at home we might go for long periods
without a clue as to how we stand, while in flow we can usually tell.

         Flow tends to occur when a person's skills are fully involved in
overcoming a challenge that is just about manageable. Optimal
experiences usually involve a fine balance between one's ability to act,
and the available opportunities for action (see figure i). If challenges are
too high one gets frustrated, then worried, and eventually anxious. If
challenges are too low relative to one's skills one gets relaxed, then
bored. If both challenges and skills are perceived to be low, one gets to
feel apathetic. But when high challenges are matched with high skills,
then the deep involvement that sets flow apart from ordinary life is likely
to occur. The climber will feel it when the mountain demands all his
strength, the singer when the song demands the full range of her vocal
ability, the weaver when the design of the tapestry is more complex than
anything attempted before, and the surgeon when the operation involves
new procedures or requires an unexpected variation. A typical day is full
of anxiety and boredom. Flow experiences provide the flashes of intense
living against this dull background.
Figure 1




The quality of experience as a function of the relationship between
challenges and skills. Optimal experience, or flow, occurs when both
variables are high.




  Sources: Adapted from 'VIassimini & Carli 1988; Csikszentmihalyi
                               199o.
When goals are clear, feedback relevant, and challenges and skills are in
balance, attention becomes ordered and fully invested. Because of the
total demand on psychic energy, a person in flow is completely focused.
There is no space in consciousness for distracting thoughts, irrelevant
feelings. Self-consciousness disappears, yet one feels stronger than
usual. The sense of time is distorted: hours seem to pass by in minutes.
When a person's entire being is stretched in the full functioning of body
and mind, whatever one does becomes worth doing for its own sake;
living becomes its own justification. In the harmonious focusing of
physical and psychic energy, life finally comes into its own.

         It is the full involvement of flow, rather than happiness, that
makes for excellence in life. When we are in flow, we are not happy,
because to experience happiness we must focus on our inner states, and
that would take away attention from the task at hand. If a rock climber
takes time out to feel happy while negotiating a difficult move, he might
fall to the bottom of the mountain. The surgeon can't afford to feel happy
during a demanding operation, or a musician while playing a challenging
score. Only after the task is completed do we have the leisure to look
back on what has happened, and then we are flooded with gratitude for
the excellence of that experience-then, in retrospect, we are happy. But
one can be happy without experiencing flow. We can be happy
experiencing the passive pleasure of a rested body, a warm sunshine, the
contentment of a serene relationship. These are also moments to treasure,
but this kind of happiness is very vulnerable and dependent on favorable
external circumstances. The happiness that follows flow is of our own
making, and it leads to increasing complexity and growth in
consciousness.

        The graph in figure i can also be read to indicate why flow leads
to personal growth. Suppose a person is in the area marked "Arousal" on
the graph. This is not a bad condition to be in, in arousal a person feels
mentally focused, active, and involved-but not very strong, cheerful, or
in control. How can one return to the more enjoyable flow state? The
answer is obvious: by learning new skills. Or let us look at the area
labeled "Control." This is also a positive state of experience, where one
feels happy, strong, satisfied. But one tends to lack concentration,
involvement, and a feeling that what one does is important. So how does
one get back to flow? By increasing challenges. Thus arousal and control
are very im portant states for learning. The other conditions are less
favorable. When a person is anxious or worried, for example, the step to
flow often seems too far, and one retreats to a less challenging situation
instead of trying to cope.

        Thus the flow experience acts as a magnet for learningthat is, for
developing new levels of challenges and skills. In an ideal situation, a
person would be constantly growing while enjoying whatever he or she
did. Alas, we know this is not the case. Usually we feel too bored and
apathetic to move into the flow zone, so we prefer to fill our mind with
readymade, prepackaged stimulation off the video shelf or some other
kind of professional entertainment. Or we feel too overwhelmed to
imagine we could develop the appropriate skills, so we prefer to descend
into the apathy engendered by artificial relaxants like drugs or alcohol. It
takes energy to achieve optimal experiences, and all too often we are
unable, or unwilling, to put out the initial effort.

       How often do people experience flow? That depends on whether
we are willing to count even mild approximations of the ideal condition
as instances of flow. For example, if one asks a sample of typical
Americans: "Do you ever get involved in something so deeply that
nothing else seems to matter, and you lose track of time?" roughly one in
five will say that yes, this happens to them often, as much as several
times a day; whereas about 15 percent will say that no, this never
happens to them. These frequencies seem to be quite stable and
universal. For instance, in a recent survey of a representative sample of
6,469 Germans the same question was answered in the following way:
Often, 23 percent; Sometimes, 40 percent; Rarely, 25 percent; Never or
Don't Know, 12 percent. Of course if one were to count only the most
intense and exalted flow experiences, then their frequency would be
much more rare.

        Flow is generally reported when a person is doing his or her
favorite activity-gardening, listening to music, bowling, cooking a good
meal. It also occurs when driving, when talk ing to friends, and
surprisingly often at work. Very rarely do people report flow in passive
leisure activities, such as watching television or relaxing. But because
almost any activity can produce flow provided the relevant elements are
present, it is possible to improve the quality of life by making sure that
clear goals, immediate feedback, skills balanced to action opportunities,
and the remaining conditions of flow are as much as possible a constant
part of everyday life.




 
                                                             THREE




How We Feel When
Doing Different Things



The quality of life depends on what we do in the seventy or so years we
are allotted, and on what passes in consciousness during that time.
Different activities typically affect the quality of experience in rather
predictable ways. If all through life we only do depressing things, it is
unlikely that we will end up having lived a very happy life. Usually each
activity has both positive and negative qualities. When we eat, for
instance, we tend to feel more positive affect than usual; a graph of a
person's level of happiness during the day resembles the profile of the
Golden Gate Bridge across San Francisco Bay, with the high points
corresponding to mealtimes. At the same time, mental concentration tends
to be rather low when a person eats, and one rarely experiences flow.

        The psychological effects of activities are not linear, but depend
on their systemic relation to everything else we do. For instance, even
though food is a source of good moods, we cannot achieve happiness by
eating around the clock. Meals raise the level of happiness, but only when
we spend around 5 percent of our waking time eating; if we spent ioo
percent of the day eating, food would quickly cease to be rewarding. The
same is true of most of the other good things in life: sex, relaxation,
television watching, in small doses, tend to improve the quality of daily
life considerably, but the effects are not additive; a point of diminishing
returns is quickly reached.




A very condensed view of how people typically experience the various
components of their daily life is presented in table 2. As we see, when
adults work (or when children do schoolwork) they tend to be less happy
than average and their motivation is considerably below normal. At the
same time their level of concentration is relatively quite high, so their
mental processes seem to be engaged more than they are the rest of the
day. Surprisingly, work also often produces flow, presumably because
challenges and skills tend to be high when working, and goals and
feedback are often clear and immediate.

       Of course "work" is such a broad category that it seems
impossible to make an accurate generalization about it. In the first place,
it makes sense to think that the quality of experience when working
would depend on the kind of job one has. A traffic controller must
concentrate much more on his job than a night watchman. A self-
employed entrepreneur presumably is much more motivated to work than
a clerk in a government office. While this is true, the characteristic
signature of work persists despite the very real differences. For example,
the experience of managers when they are on the job resembles that of
assembly-line workers much more than it resembles their own experience
when they are at home.

        Another problem of generalizing about work is that the same job
will have many aspects that are experienced differ ently. A manager
might love to work on a project but hate to sit in conferences, while an
assembler might love to set up a machine but hate to take inventory.
Nevertheless, it is still possible to talk about the distinctive quality of the
work experience in comparison with other general activity categories. The
more it resembles a flow activity, the more involved we become, and the
more positive the experience. When the job presents clear goals,
unambiguous feedback, a sense of control, challenges that match the
worker's skills, and few distractions, the feelings it provides are not that
different from what one experiences in a sport or an artistic performance.
        Maintenance activities are quite varied in terms of their
experiential profile. Few people enjoy housework, which tends to be
generally negative or neutral along all dimensions. If one were to look in
finer detail, however, it would turn out that cooking is often a positive
experience, especially compared to cleaning the house. Personal care-
washing, dressing, and so forth-is usually neither positive nor negative.
Eating, as mentioned earlier, is one of the most positive parts of the day in
terms of affect and motivation, whereas it is low in cognitive activity and
seldom an occasion of flow.

       Driving a car, which is the last major component of the
maintenance category, is a surprisingly positive part of life. While neutral
in terms of happiness and motivation, it requires skill and concentration,
and some people experience flow more often while driving than in any
other part of their lives.

        As one would expect, leisure tends to include the more positive
experiences of the day. Leisure is when people feel the most motivated,
when they say that they want to do whatever they are doing. Yet here too,
we find some surprises. Passive leisure, which includes media
consumption and resting, while it is a motivating and reasonably happy
activity, involves little mental focus, and rarely produces flow.
Socializing-talking with people without much ulterior purpose except the
interaction itself-is generally highly positive even though it seldom
involves high mental concentration. Romance and sex provide some of
the best moments of the day, but for most people these activities are rather
rare, so they fail to make much of a difference in the overall quality of life
unless they are embedded in a context of an enduring relationship that
provides emotional and intellectual rewards as well.

         Active leisure is another source of extremely positive experiences.
When people do a hobby, get involved in exercise, play a musical
instrument, or go out to a movie or restaurant, they tend to be more happy,
motivated, concentrated, and more often in flow than in any other part of
the day. It is in these contexts that all the various dimensions of
experience are most intensely focused and in harmony with each other. It
is important to remember, however, that active leisure usually takes up
only between a fourth and a fifth of a person's free time, and for many it
is vastly overshadowed by the amount of time spent in passive leisure
activities such as watching television.
         Another way to look at the pattern in table 2 is to ask, Which
activities are happiest? Which are most motivated? If we do that, we see
that happiness is highest when eating, when in active leisure, and when
talking with people; it is lowest when working on the job or around the
house. Motivation follows a similar pattern, with the addition that passive
leisure, which does not make one happy, is something we usually want to
do anyway. Concentration is highest on the job, when driving, and in
active leisure-these are the activities that during the day require the most
mental effort. The same activities also provide the highest rates of flow,
and so does socializing with others. When we look at the pattern this way,
it again shows that active leisure provides the best experience overall,
while housework, personal care, and idling provide the worst.

        So the first step in improving the quality of life consists in
engineering daily activities so that one gets the most rewarding
experiences from them. This sounds simple, but the inertia of habit and
social pressure are so strong that many people have no idea which
components of their lives they actually enjoy, and which contribute to
stress and depression. Keeping a diary or reflecting on the past day in the
evening are ways to take stock systematically of the various influences on
one's moods. After it is clear which activities produce the high points in
one's day, it becomes possible to start experimenting-by increasing the
frequency of the positive ones, and decreasing that of the others.

        A somewhat extreme example of how this might work was
reported by Marten DeVries, a psychiatrist in charge of a large
community mental health center in the Netherlands. In his hospital,
patients are routinely given the ESM to find out what they do all day,
what they think about, and how they feel. One of the patients, a chronic
schizophrenic woman who had been hospitalized for over ten years,
showed the usual confused thought patterns and low affect of severe
mental pathology. But during the two weeks of the ESM study, she
reported quite positive moods twice. In both cases she had been taking
care of her fingernails. Thinking that it was worth a try, the staff had a
professional manicurist teach her the skills of her trade. The patient took
eagerly to the instruction, and she was soon caring for the nails of the rest
of the patients. Her disposition changed so drastically that she was
released into the community under supervision; she hung a shingle on her
door, and within the year she was selfsufficient. No one knows why
paring nails was the challenge this woman needed, and if one interpreted
this story psychoanalytically, perhaps no one would want to know. The
fact is that for this one person at this stage in life, being a manicurist
allowed at least a pale semblance of flow to enter her life.

        Professor Fausto Massimini and his staff at the University of
Milan, Italy, have also adapted the ESM as a diagnostic tool, and use it to
tailor-make interventions that by changing the pattern of activities may
improve well-being. If a patient is always alone, they find work or
volunteer activities that will bring him in social contact. If she is terrified
of people, they take her for walks in the crowded streets of the city, or to
spectacles and dances. The comforting presence of the therapist in the
problematic situation, as opposed to the safe office, often helps to remove
the obstacles to the patients' involvement with activities that improve the
quality of their lives.

       Creative people are especially good at ordering their lives so that
what they do, when, and with whom will enable them to do their best
work. If what they need is spontaneity and disorder, then they make sure
to have that, too. The novelist Richard Stern's description of the
"rhythms" of his daily life is quite typical:


     My guess is that it resembles other people's rhythms. Anybody who
     does work either has a routine or imposes on his life certain periods
     in which he can be alone or in which he collaborates. At any rate, he
     works out a sort of schedule for himself and this is not simply an
     external, exoskeletal phenomenon. It seems to me it has much to do
     with the relationship of your own physiological, hormonal, organic
     self and its relationship to the world outside. Components can be so
     ordinary as: do you read the newspaper in the morning. I used to do
     that years ago, and I stopped for years and years, which altered the
     rhythm of my day, and so on. One drinks a glass of wine in the
     evenings at certain times, when the blood sugar's low, and one looks
     forward to it. And then of course those hours in which one works.

        A major feature of daily rhythms is going in and out of solitude.
Over and over, our findings suggest that people get depressed when they
are alone, and they revive when they rejoin the company of others. Alone
a person generally reports low happiness, aversive motivation, low
concentration, apathy, and an entire string of other negative states such as
passivity, loneliness, detachment, and low self-esteem. Being alone
affects most those individuals who have the fewest resources: those who
have been unable to get an education, who are poor, single, or divorced.
Pathological states are often invisible as long as the person is with others;
they take effect mostly when we are alone. The moods that people
diagnosed with chronic depression or with eating disorders experience are
indistinguishable from those of healthy people-as long as they are in
company and doing something that requires concentration. But when they
are alone with nothing to do, their minds begin to be occupied by
depressing thoughts, and their consciousness becomes entropic. This is
also true, to a less pronounced extent, of everyone else.

        The reason is that when we have to interact with another person,
even a stranger, our attention becomes structured by external demands.
The presence of the other imposes goals and provides feedback. Even the
simplest interaction-like that of asking another person the correct time-
has its own challenges, which we confront with our interpersonal skills.
Our tone of voice, a smile, our bearing and demeanor are part of the skills
we need in stopping a stranger on the street, and making a good
impression. In more intimate encounters, the level of both challenges and
skills can grow very high. Thus interactions have many of the
characteristics of flow activities, and they certainly require the orderly
investment of psychic energy. By contrast, when we are alone with
nothing to do there is no reason to concentrate, and what happens then is
that the mind begins to unravel, and soon finds something to worry about.

        Being with friends provides the most positive experiences. Here
people report being happy, alert, sociable, cheerful, motivated. This is
especially true of teenagers, but it also holds for retired seniors in their
seventies and eighties. The importance of friendships on well-being is
difficult to overestimate. The quality of life improves immensely when
there is at least one other person who is willing to listen to our troubles,
and to support us emotionally. National surveys find that when someone
claims to have five or more friends with whom they can discuss important
problems, they are 6o percent more likely to say that they are "very
happy."

        Experience while with the family tends to be average, not as good
as with friends, not as bad as when alone. But this average is also the
result of wide swings; one can get extremely aggravated at home one
moment and be thoroughly ecstatic the next. On the job, adults tend to
have greater concentration and cognitive involvement, but they are more
motivated when at home, and are happier there. The same holds true for
children in school compared to home. Family members often experience
their interactions differently from each other. For instance, when fathers
are with their children, they typically report positive moods. So do their
children up to grade 5. Afterwards, children report increasingly negative
moods when with their fathers (at least until grade 8, after which there are
no data available).

        The strong effects of companionship on the quality of experience
suggest that investing psychic energy in relationships is a good way to
improve life. Even the passive, superficial conversations at a
neighborhood bar can stave off depression. But for real growth, it is
necessary to find people whose opinions are interesting and whose
conversation is stimulating. A more difficult, but in the long run even
more useful, skill to acquire is the ability to tolerate solitude, and to even
enjoy it.




Everyday life unfolds in various locations-the home, the car, the office,
streets, and restaurants. In addition to activities and companionships,
locations also have an effect on the quality of experience. Teenagers, for
instance, feel best when they are furthest away from adult supervision,
such as in a public park. They feel most constrained in school, in
churches, and other places where their behavior must conform to others'
expectations. Adults also prefer public places, where they are likely to be
with their friends and involved in voluntary leisure activities. This is
especially true for women, for whom being out of the house often means
a relief from drudgery, whereas for men being in public is more often
related to work and other responsibilities.

       For many people, driving a car gives the most consistent sense of
freedom and control; they call it their "thinking machine" because while
driving they can concentrate on their problems without interruptions, and
resolve emotional conflicts in the protective cocoon of their personal
vehicle. One Chicago steelworker, whenever his personal problems
become too stressful, jumps into his car after work, and drives west until
he reaches the Mississippi River. He spends a few hours at a picnic site on
the banks, watching the silent waters drift by. Then he returns to the car,
and by the time he gets home, with the dawn rising over Lake Michigan,
he feels at peace. For many families, the car has also become the location
for togetherness. At home parents and children are often dispersed in
different rooms, doing different things; when on an outing in the car, they
talk, sing, or play games together.

        Different rooms of the house also have their peculiar emotional
profile, in large part because each is the setting for a different kind of
activity. For instance, men report good moods when they are in the
basement, whereas women do not; probably because men go to the
basement to relax or work on hobbies, whereas their wives are more
likely to go there to do the laundry. Women report some of their best
moods in the house when they are in the bathroom, where they are
relatively free from the demands of the family, and in the kitchen, where
they are in control and involved in cooking, which is an activity that is
relatively pleasant. (Men actually enjoy cooking much more than women,
no doubt because they do it less than one-tenth as often, and thus can
choose to do it when they feel like it.)

        Although much has been written about how the environment in
which one lives affects one's mind, there is actually very little systematic
knowledge on this topic. Since time immemorial, artists, scholars, and
religious mystics have chosen carefully the surroundings that best
allowed serenity and inspiration. Buddhist monks settled down at the
sources of the Ganges River, Chinese scholars wrote in pavilions on
picturesque islands, Christian monasteries were built on the hills with the
best views. In contemporary America, research institutes and corporate
R&D laboratories are generally sited among rolling hills, with ducks in
the reflecting ponds or the ocean across the horizon.

        If we are to trust the reports of creative thinkers and artists,
congenial surroundings are often the source of inspiration and creativity.
They often echo Franz Liszt's words, which he wrote on romantic Lake
Como: "I feel that the various features of Nature around me ... provoke an
emotional reaction in the depth of my soul, which I have tried to
transcribe in music." Manfred Eigen, who won the Nobel Prize in
chemistry in 1967, says that some of his most important insights came
from winter trips to the Swiss Alps, where he invited colleagues from all
over the world to ski and talk about science. If one reads the biographies
of physicists like Bohr, Heisenberg, Chandrashekhar, and Bethe, one gets
the impression that without hikes in the mountains and the vision of night
skies their science would not have amounted to much.

        To make a creative change in the quality of experience, it might be
useful to experiment with one's surroundings as well as with activities and
companions. Outings and vacations help to clear the mind, to change
perspectives, to look at one's situation with a fresh eye. Taking charge of
one's home or office environment-throwing out the excess, redecorating
to one's taste, making it personal and psychologi- tally comfortable, could
be the first step in reordering one's life.

        We often hear of how important biorhythms are, and how
differently we feel on Blue Mondays as compared to weekends. In fact,
the way each day is experienced changes considerably from morning to
night. Early mornings and late nights are low on many of the positive
emotions, mealtimes and afternoons are high. The largest changes occur
when children leave school and when adults come home from work. Not
all the contents of consciousness travel in the same direction: when out
with friends in the evening teenagers report increasing excitement hour
after hour, but at the same time they also feel that they are gradually
losing control. In addition to these general trends, there are a number of
individual differences: morning persons and night persons relate to time
of day in opposite ways.

        Despite the bad reputation of certain days of the week, on the
whole people seem to experience each day more or less like the next.
True, as one would expect, Friday afternoons and Saturdays are
marginally better than Sunday evenings and Monday mornings, but the
differences are less than one would expect. Much depends on how we
plan our time: Sunday mornings can be quite depressing if one has
nothing to do, but if we look forward to a scheduled activity or a familiar
ritual such as going to a church service, then it can be a high point of the
week.

        One interesting finding is that people report significantly more
physical symptoms, such as headaches and backaches, on weekends and
at times when they are not studying or working. Even the pain of women
with cancer is tolerable when they are with friends, or involved in an
activity; it flares up when they are alone with nothing to do. Apparently
when psychic energy is not committed to a definite task it is easier to
notice what goes wrong in our bodies. This fits with what we know about
the flow experience: when playing a close tournament, chess players can
go for hours without noticing hunger or headache; athletes in a
competition can ignore pain and fatigue until the event is over. When
attention is focused, minor aches and pains have no chance to register in
consciousness.

        Again, with time of day as with the other parameters of life, it is
important to find out what rhythms are most congenial to you personally.
There is no day or hour that is best for everyone. Reflection helps to
identify one's preferences, and experimentation with different
alternatives-getting up earlier, taking a nap in the afternoon, eating at
different timeshelps to find the best set of options.




In all of these examples, we proceeded as if persons were passive objects
whose internal states are affected by what they do, who they are with,
where they are, and so forth. While this is true in part, in the last analysis
it is not the external conditions that count, but what we make of them. It
is perfectly possible to be happy doing housework with nobody around, to
be motivated when working, to concentrate when talking to a child. In
other words, the excellence of daily life finally depends not on what we
do, but on how we do it.

       Nevertheless, before looking at how one can control the quality of
experience directly by transforming information in consciousness, it is
important to reflect on the effects that the daily environment-the places,
people, activities, and times of day-has on us. Even the most
accomplished mystic, detached from all influences, will prefer to sit under
one particular tree, eat a certain food, and be with one companion rather
than another. Most of us are much more responsive to the situations in
which we find ourselves.

         Thus the first step in improving the quality of life is to pay close
attention to what we do every day, and to notice how we feel in different
activities, places, times of day, and with different companions. Although
the general trends will probably apply also in your case-you'll find
yourself happier at mealtimes and most often in flow when in active
leisure there might be also surprising revelations. It may turn out that you
really like being alone. Or that you like working more than you thought.
Or that reading makes you feel better afterwards than watching television.
Or vice versa on all these counts. There is no law that says we have to
experience life in the same way. What is vital is to find out what works
out best in your case.




 
                                                                 FOUR




Work generally takes up a third of the time available for living. Work is a
strange experience: it provides some of the most intense and satisfying
moments, it gives a sense of pride and identity, yet it is something most of
us are glad to avoid. On the one hand, recent surveys report that 84
percent of American men and 77 percent of women say they would
continue to work even if they inherited enough money so they no longer
needed a job. On the other hand, according to several ESM studies, when
people are signaled at work they endorse the item "I wish I was doing
something else" more than at any other time of the day. Another example
of this contradictory attitude is a book in which two eminent German
social scientists, using the same survey results, developed opposite
arguments. One claimed, among other things, that German workers
disliked work, and those who disliked it more were happier overall. The
second responded that workers only dislike work because they are
brainwashed by the media on ideo logical grounds, and those who like
their work lead richer lives. The point is that there was reasonable
evidence for both conclusions.

         Because work is so important in terms of the amount of time it
takes and the intensity of effects it produces in consciousness, it is
essential to face up to its ambiguities if one wishes to improve the quality
of life. A first step in that direction is to briefly review how work
activities evolved in history, and the contradictory values that were
attributed to it, which still now affect our attitudes and experiences.
Work as we know it now is a very recent historical development. It didn't
exist before the great agricultural revolutions that made intensive farming
possible about twelve thousand years ago. During the previous millions of
years of human evolution, each man and woman provided for self and
kin. But there was no such thing as working for someone else; for hunter-
gatherers work was seamlessly integrated with the rest of life.

        In the classical Western civilizations of Greece and Rome,
philosophers reflected the public opinion about work, which was that it
should be avoided at all costs. Idleness was considered a virtue.
According to Aristotle, only a man who did not have to work could be
happy. Roman philosophers agreed that "wage labor is sordid and
unworthy of a free man .. . craft labor is sordid, and so is the business of
retailing." The ideal was to conquer or buy productive land, and then hire
a staff of stewards to supervise its cultivation by slaves or indentured
serfs. In Imperial Rome, about 20 percent of the finale adult population
did not have to work. By having attained a life of idleness, they believed
that they had reached excellence in their lives. In Republican times, there
was some substance to this belief: members of the ruling class
volunteered their time to fill military and administrative duties that helped
the community and gave room for personal potential to expand. But after
centuries of ease, the idle classes withdrew from public life and used their
free time to consume luxury and entertainment instead.

        Work, for the majority of people, started to change radically in
Europe about five hundred years ago. It took another quantum jump two
hundred years ago, and still continues to change at a rapid rate right now.
Until the thirteenth century, almost all energy for work depended on
human or animal muscle. Only a few primitive engines, such as water-
mills, helped to alleviate the burden. Then slowly windmills with a
variety of gears began to take over the chore of grinding grains, hauling
water, blasting furnaces where metals were forged. The development of
steam engines, and later electricity, further revolutionized the way we
transform energy and make a living.

        An offshoot of these technological breakthroughs has been that
work, instead of being seen as simply a physical effort that an ox or a
horse could do better, began to be seen as a skilled activity, a
manifestation of human ingenuity and creativity. By Calvin's time, it
made sense to take the "work ethic" seriously. And it is for this reason
also that Karl Marx could later reverse the classical evaluation of labor,
and claim that only through productive activity can we realize our human
potential. His position did not contradict the spirit of Aristotle's opposite
claim, that only leisure made men free. It is just that, by the nineteenth
century, work seemed to offer more creative options than idleness did.

        During the decades of affluence following World War II, most
jobs in America might have been boring and bland, but on the whole they
provided decent conditions and reasonable security. There was much talk
about a new era in which work would be abolished, or at least
transformed into purely white-collar supervisory tasks that would take
only a few hours a week to accomplish. It didn't take long to see how
utopian these forecasts had been. The global competition that allowed the
underpaid populations of Asia and South America to compete in the labor
market is again giving work in the United States a grim reputation.
Increasingly, as the social safety net is in danger of unraveling, people
have to work more often in arbitrary conditions and without much
security about the future. So even now, at the close of the twentieth
century, the deep ambiguity of work still haunts us. We know it is one of
the most important elements of our lives, yet while we do it we would
rather not be doing it.




How do we learn these conflicting attitudes toward work? And how do
young people these days learn the skills and discipline required to do
adult productive work? These questions are by no means trivial. With
each generation, work becomes an increasingly fuzzy concept, and it
becomes harder for young people to know what jobs will be waiting for
them when they grow up, and to learn how to prepare for them.

        In the past, and to a certain extent even now, in hunting or fishing
societies in Alaska or Melanesia, we can still see what the pattern used to
be everywhere else in the world: children from an early age participated
in their parents' work, and gradually found themselves performing as
productive adults without missing a beat along the way. An Inuit boy was
given a toy bow at age two, and he started practicing shooting right away.
By four he might be expected to shoot a ptarmigan, at six a rabbit, and
from there he graduated to caribou and seal. His sister went through a
similar progression helping the women of her kin group to cure hides,
cook, sew, and care for younger siblings. There was no question about
what one should do when one grew up-there were no options to choose
from, there was only a single path to productive adulthood.

        When the agricultural revolution made cities possible about ten
thousand years ago, specialized jobs started to appear, and a degree of
choice opened up for young people. Still, most of them ended up doing
what their parents did, which until a few centuries ago was mainly
farming. It was not until the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that a
large number of young people began to move from farms to cities, to try
their luck in the burgeoning urban economy. According to some
estimates, by age twelve as many as 8o percent of country girls in some
parts of Europe left their farmer parents, whereas boys left on the average
two years later. Most of the jobs waiting in London or Paris were in what
now would be called the service industries, as charwomen, coachmen,
porters, or laundresses.

        The situation is very different now. In a recent study, we asked a
few thousand representative American teenagers what jobs they expected
to have when they grew up. The results are presented in table 3. What it
shows is that adolescents have unrealistically high expectations of
becoming professionals: 15 percent of them expect to become either
doctors or lawyers, which is almost fifteen times higher than the actual
proportion of doctors and lawyers in the labor force according to the 1990
Census. Most of the 244 adolescents who expect to become professional
athletes will also be disappointed, since they overestimate their chances
by about Soo-fold. Minority children from the inner city look forward to
professional careers at the same rate as affluent suburban children, despite
the fact that the unemployment rate for young African-Americans in some
cities has been near 5o percent.

        The lack of realism about future career options is in part due to the
rapidly changing nature of adult jobs, but it is also caused by many young
people's isolation from meaningful job opportunities and adult working
models. Contrary to what one might expect, affluent teenagers actually
work more often in high school than poorer students, even though they
don't have to. And exposure to productive tasks in the home, the
neighborhood, and the community is much greater for children who grow
up in wealthy and stable environments. There one can actually find fifteen
year olds who plan to become architects and who have learned to draft in
a realtive's architectural firm, who have helped design an extension to a
neighbor's house, who have interned with a local construction company-
although overall such opportunities are infrequent. In an inner city high
school, the most popular informal career counselor was a school guard
who helped sharp young boys find jobs with the gangs, and directed
good-looking girls toward so-called modeling jobs.

        According to the ESM results, it seems that young people learn
their elders' ambivalence toward work quite early. By age ten or eleven,
they have internalized the pattern that is typical of society at large. When
they are asked to say whether what they are doing is more like "work" or
more like "play" (or like "both" or "neither") sixth graders almost
invariably say that academic classes in school are work, and doing sports
is play. The interesting thing is that whenever adolescents are doing
something they label as work, they typically say that what they do is
important for their future, requires high concentration, and induces high
self-esteem. Yet they are also less happy and motivated than average
when what they do is like work. On the other hand, when they are doing
something they label as play, they see it as having low importance and
requiring little concentration, but they are happy and motivated. In other
words, the split between work that is necessary but unpleasant, and
pleasant but useless play, is well established by late childhood. It does get
even more pronounced as adolescents go through high school.
Source: Adapted from Bidwell, Csikszentmihalvi, Hedges, and Schneider
                          1997, in press.


        When the same adolescents eventually start working, they report
exactly the same pattern of experience from their workplace. In the U.S.,
almost nine out of ten teenagers are employed sometime during high
school, a much higher proportion than in other technologically advanced
countries like Germany or Japan, where there are fewer opportunities for
part-time work-and where parents prefer their children to spend as much
time as possible studying, rather than being distracted by jobs irrelevant
to their future careers. In our study, 57 percent of tenth graders and 86
percent of twelfth graders have held paying jobs, usually serving fast
food, as clerks or salespersons, or as baby-sitters. When teenagers are
paged on their jobs, they report very elevated self-esteem. They see what
they do as important and requiring great concentration. But they are less
happy than usual (although not as unhappy as in school), and they don't
enjoy themselves. In other words, the pattern of ambivalence is set by the
very first steps of their working lives.

        But work is definitely not the worst thing adolescents experience.
The worst condition they report is when what they do is neither like work
nor like play. When this is the caseusually in maintenance activities,
passive leisure, or socializing-their self-esteem is lowest, what they do
has no importance, and their happiness and motivation are also below
average. Yet for adolescents "neither work nor play" takes up on the
average 35 percent of the day. Some, espe cially children whose parents
have little education, feel that half or more of what they do is of this kind.
A person who grows up experiencing most of the day as neither important
nor enjoyable is unlikely to find much meaning in the future.




The attitudes set in the early years continue to color how we experience
work during the rest of our lives. On the job, people tend to use their
mind and body to its fullest, and consequently feel that what they do is
important, and feel good about themselves while doing it. Yet their
motivation is worse than when they are at home, and so is the quality of
their moods. Despite huge differences in salary, prestige, and freedom,
managers tend to feel only somewhat more creative and active on the job,
while clerical and assembly-line workers are no more unhappy and
dissatisfied.

        Men and women, however, tend to experience work outside the
home in different ways. Traditionally, men's identity and self-respect have
been based on the ability to obtain energy from the environment for their
own and their families' use. Whether the satisfaction a man gets from
doing a necessary job is partly genetically programmed, or is entirely
learned from the culture, the fact is that more or less everywhere a man
who is not a provider is to some extent a misfit. Women's self-esteem, on
the other hand, has traditionally been based on their ability to create a
physical and emotional environment suitable for the rearing of children
and the comfort of grown-ups. No matter how enlightened we have
become in terms of trying to avoid these gender stereotypes, they are far
from gone. Teenage boys still wish to become police officers, firefighters,
and engineers, while girls look forward to becoming homemakers, nurses,
and teachers-although girls nowadays also expect to become
professionals, such as doctors and lawyers, at a rate that is even higher
than for boys.

        Because of the different role of paid work in the psychic economy
of men and women, the response of the two gen ders to their jobs is
generally different. Leaving aside those still relatively few career women
whose primary identification is with their jobs, most women who work at
clerical, service, and even managerial occupations tend to think of their
outside job as something they want to do rather than something they have
to do. Work is more voluntary for many women; it is more like play,
something that they could take or leave. Many of them feel that whatever
happens on the job is not that important-and thus, paradoxically, they can
enjoy it more. Even if things go wrong and they are laid off it will not
hurt their self-esteem. As opposed to men, their selfimage depends more
heavily on what happens to their families. Having a destitute parent or a
child who has trouble in school is a much greater load on their minds than
whatever can happen at work.

        As a result, and especially in comparison with the work they have
to do around the house, women generally experience employment more
positively than men. For instance, in an ESM study conducted with
couples where both partners worked, Reed Larson found that women
reported relatively more positive emotions than men when doing clerical
work, computer work, sales, meetings, working on the phone, reading
work-related material, and so on. The only job-related activity women
experienced less positively than men was when they worked at home on
projects brought back from the office, no doubt because in those
situations they felt responsible also for the household tasks in addition to
those related to the job.

       The double jeopardy a family and a career imposes can be a heavy
burden on the self-esteem of women. In a study of mothers of small
children who worked either full time, part time, or only a few hours a
week, Anne Wells found that the highest levels of self-esteem were
reported by women who worked least, and the lowest by those who
worked mostthis despite the fact that all women enjoyed working outside
for pay more than they enjoyed working at home. Again this finding
suggests the ambiguous meaning of self-esteem. Full-time, professional
women with families might have lower self-esteem not because they are
accomplishing less, but because they expect more from themselves than
they can possibly deliver.

        These issues bring into focus how arbitrary the division is between
work done for pay, and the housework women have been traditionally
expected to do for their families. As Elise Boulding and other social
economists have pointed out, maintenance work might not be productive,
but if it had to be paid for as a service, the bill would run close to the
GNP. The cost of mothers' nurturance of children, care of the sick,
cooking, cleaning, and so forth at the market rate would double the
national payroll, and perhaps force us to adopt a more humane economy.
In the meantime, however, while doing housework may bolster a married
woman's self-esteem, it does not contribute much to her emotional well-
being. Cooking, shopping, driving the family around, and caring for
children are accompanied by only average emotions. But cleaning the
house, cleaning the kitchen, doing laundry, fixing things around the
house, and balancing the checkbook are generally among the most
negative experiences in a woman's day.

       Work has severe drawbacks, but its lack is worse. The ancient
philosophers had much good to say in favor of idleness, but what they had
in mind was the idleness of a landowner with many serfs and slaves.
When idleness is forced on someone without a handsome income, it just
produces a severe drop in self-esteem, and general listlessness. As John
Hayworth, a psychologist at the University of Manchester, has shown,
young men out of work, even when paid relatively generous
unemployment compensation, have a very hard time finding satisfaction
in their lives. In a compilation of studies involving 170,000 workers in
sixteen nations, Ronald Ingelhart found that 83 percent of white-collar
workers, 77 percent of manual workers, but only 6i percent of the unem
ployed said that they were satisfied with their lives. The Bible's
suggestion that man was made to enjoy the bounty of creation without
having to work for it does not seem to jibe with the facts. Without the
goal and the challenges usually provided by a job, only a rare self-
discipline can keep the mind focused intensely enough to insure a
meaningful life.




The finding through our ESM studies that if one looks at the sources of
flow in the lives of adults, one finds more occasions of it on the job than
in free time, seemed quite surprising at first. The moments when a person
is in a high-challenge, high-skill situation, accompanied by feelings of
concentration, creativity, and satisfaction, were reported more often at
work than at home. After further thought, however, this finding is not that
surprising. What often passes unnoticed is that work is much more like a
game than most other things we do during the day. It usually has clear
goals and rules of performance. It provides feedback either in the form of
knowing that one has finished a job well done, in terms of measurable
sales, or through an evaluation by one's supervisor. A job usually
encourages concentration and prevents distractions; it also allows a
variable amount of control, and-at least ideally-its difficulties match the
worker's skills. Thus work tends to have the structure of other intrinsically
rewarding activities that provide flow, such as games, sports, music, and
art. In comparison, much of the rest of life lacks these elements. When
spending time at home with the family or alone, people often lack a clear
purpose, do not know how well they are doing, are distracted, feel that
their skills are underutilized, and as a result feel bored or-more
rarelyanxious.
        So it is no wonder that the quality of experience at work is
generally more positive than one would expect. Nevertheless, if we had
the chance we would like to work less. Why is this so? Two major reasons
seem to be involved. The first is based on the objective conditions of
work. It is true that since time immemorial those who paid another
person's wages were not particularly concerned with the well-being of
their employees. It takes extraordinary inner resources to achieve flow
while digging a mile below ground in a South African mine, or cutting
sugarcane on a sweltering plantation. Even in our enlightened days, with
all the emphasis on "human resources," management is all too often
disinterested in how employees experience work. Therefore it is not
surprising that many workers assume that they cannot count on work to
provide the intrinsic rewards in their lives, and that they have to wait until
they are out of the factory or office before they can begin to have a good
time-even though this turns out not to be true.

        The second reason is complementary to the first one, but is based
less on contemporary reality, and more on the historical disrepute of
work, which is still transmitted by the culture and learned by each of us as
we grow up. There is no question that during the Industrial Revolution of
two and a half centuries ago factory workers had to labor under inhuman
conditions. Free time was so rare that it became one of the most precious
of commodities. Workers assumed that if only they had more of it, they
would automatically be happier. The trade unions fought heroically to
shorten the work week, and their success is one of the bright
accomplishments in the history of humankind. Unfortunately, while free
time might be a necessary condition for happiness, by itself it is not
sufficient to guarantee it. Learning how to use it beneficially turns out to
be more difficult than expected. Nor does it seem that more of a good
thing is necessarily better; as is true of so many other things, what
enriches life in small quantities might impoverish it in larger doses. This
is why by mid-century psychiatrists and sociologists were putting up
warning signals to the effect that too much free time was threatening to
become a social disaster.

        Both of these reasons-the objective work environments and the
subjective attitudes we learn toward them-conspire to make it difficult for
many persons to admit, even to themselves, that work can be enjoyable.
Yet when approached without too many cultural prejudices and with a
determination to shape it so as to make it personally meaningful, even the
most mundane job can enhance the quality of life, rather than detract from
it.

         But of course the intrinsic rewards of work are easiest to see in the
highly individualized professions, where a person is free to choose his or
her goals and set the difficulty of the task. Highly productive and creative
artists, entrepreneurs, statesmen, and scientists tend to experience their
jobs like our hunting ancestors did theirs-as completely integrated with
the rest of their lives. One of the most common tropes in the nearly
hundred interviews I conducted with such persons as Nobel Prize-winners
and other creative leaders in different fields was: "You could say that I
worked every minute of my life, or you could say with equal justice that I
never worked a day." The historian John Hope Franklin expressed this
blending of work and leisure most concisely when he said: "I have always
subscribed to the expression: `Thank God it's Friday' because to me
Friday means I can work for the next two days without interruptions."

          For such individuals, flow is a constant part of their professional
activity. Even though operating at the edges of knowledge must
necessarily include much hardship and inner turmoil, the joy of extending
the mind's reach into new territories is the most obvious feature of their
lives, even past the age when most people are usually content to retire.
The inventor Jacob Rabinow, with over two hundred patents to his name,
describes his work at age eighty-three: "You have to be willing to pull the
ideas, because you're interested.... [P]eople like myself like to do it. It's
fun to come up with an idea, and if nobody wants it, I don't give a damn.
It's just fun to come up with something strange and different."

        Ed Asner of "Lou Grant" fame was still looking for new
challenges to his acting skills at age sixty-three: "I thirst to ... burst at the
seams, eager for the chase." The double Nobel laureate Linus Pauling,
interviewed when he was eightynine, said: "I don't think I ever sat down
and asked myself, now what am I going to do in life? I just went ahead
doing what I liked to do." The eminent psychologist Donald Campbell
advised young scholars: "Don't go into science if you are interested in
money. Don't go into science if you will not enjoy it even if you do not
become famous. Let fame be something that you accept graciously if you
get it, but make sure that it is a career that you can enjoy." And Mark
Strand, former poet laureate of the United States, describes flow well in
the pursuit of his vocation: "you're right in the work, you lose your sense
of time, you're completely enraptured, you're completely caught up in
what you are doing ... when you are working on something and you are
working well, you have the feeling that there's no other way of saying
what you're saying."

        Of course, people like these are very fortunate in having attained
the pinnacle of glamorous professions. But it would also be easy to find a
great number of famous and successful people who hate their jobs,
whereas one can find businessmen, plumbers, ranchers, and even
assembly-line workers who love their work and describe it in lyrical
terms. It is not the external conditions that determine how much work will
contribute to the excellence of one's life. It is how one works, and what
experiences one is able to derive from confronting its challenges.

         No matter how satisfying, work alone cannot make a life
complete. Most creative individuals we interviewed said that their
families were more important to them than their careers-even though their
actual habits often belied these sentiments. Stable, emotionally rewarding
marriages were the norm among them. When asked what
accomplishments in life they were most proud of, one of the most typical
responses echoed that of the physicist Freeman Dyson: "I suppose it is
just to have raised six kids, and brought them up, as far as one can see, all
to be interesting people. I think that's what I am most proud of, really."
John Reed, CEO of Citicorp, claimed that the best investment he ever
made was the year he took off from his successful career to spend with
his children as they were growing up: "Raising kids is far more rewarding
than earning money for a company, in terms of a sense of satisfaction."
And most such individuals fill whatever free time they have with
interesting leisure activities, from playing public concerti to collecting
rare nautical maps, from taking up cooking and cookbook writing to
volunteering to teach in underdeveloped countries.

        Thus love and dedication to one's calling does not have to have the
negative connotations of "workaholisin." That term could legitimately be
applied to a person who is so immersed in work as to give up other goals
and responsibilities. A workaholic runs the risk of seeing only the
challenges related to his job, and learning only the skills appropriate to it;
he is unable to experience flow in any other activity. Such a person misses
a great deal of the opportunities that contribute to the excellence of life,
and often ends life miserably, when after an all-consuming addiction to
work, he is left with nothing he can do. Fortunately there are many
examples of persons who, although dedicated to their work, have more
multifaceted lives.



 
                                                                     FIVE




The Risks and
Opportunities of Leisure



It sounds somewhat ridiculous to say that one of the problems we face at
this point in history is that we haven't learned how to spend free time in a
sensible way. Yet this is a concern that many have expressed ever since
the mid-century. In 1958, the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry
ended its annual report with the conclusion: "For many Americans,
leisure is dangerous." Others have claimed that whether America
succeeds as a civilization will depend on the way we use free time. What
could justify such grave warnings', But before answering this question
about the effects of leisure on society, it makes sense to reflect on how a
typical person is affected by leisure. The historical effects in this case are
the sum of individual experiences, so in order to understand the former it
helps to understand the latter.

        For a variety of reasons discussed earlier, we have come to assume
that free time is one of the most desirable goals we can aspire to. While
work is seen as a necessary evil, being able to relax, to have nothing to
do, seems to most people the royal road to happiness. The popular
assumption is that no skills are involved in enjoying free time, and that
anybody can do it. Yet the evidence suggests the opposite: free time is
more difficult to enjoy than work. Having leisure at one's disposal does
not improve the quality of life unless one knows how to use it effectively,
and it is by no means something one learns automatically.

        The psychoanalyst Sandor Ferenczi at the turn of the century
already noticed that on Sundays his patients came down with bouts of
hysteria and depression more often than during the rest of the week; he
called the syndrome "Sunday neurosis." Ever since, it has been reported
that holidays and vacations are periods of increased mental disturbance.
For workers who have identified with their jobs all their lives, retirement
is often a transition to chronic depression. In our ESM studies we find
that even physical health is better when a person focuses on a goal. On
weekends, when alone, and with nothing to do, people report more
symptoms of illness.

        All of this evidence points to the fact that the average person is ill
equipped to be idle. Without goals and without others to interact with,
most people begin to lose motivation and concentration. The mind begins
to wander, and more often than not it will focus on unresolvable problems
that cause anxiety. In order to avoid this undesirable condition, the person
resorts to strategies that will ward off the worst of psychic entropy.
Without necessarily being aware of it, one will seek out stimulation that
will screen out the sources of anxiety from consciousness. This might be
watching TV, or reading redundant narratives such as romances or
mysteries, or engaging in obsessive gambling or promiscuous sexuality,
or getting drunk or taking drugs. These are quick ways to reduce chaos in
consciousness in the short run, but usually the only residue they leave
behind is a feeling of listless dissatisfaction.

        Apparently, our nervous system has evolved to attend to external
signals, but has not had time to adapt to long periods without obstacles
and dangers. Few people have learned to structure their psychic energy
autonomously, from the inside. In those successful societies where adults
had time on their hands, elaborate cultural practices evolved to keep the
mind busy. These included complex cycles of ceremonial rituals, dancing,
and competitive tournaments that occasionally lasted for days and weeks
on end-such as the Olympic games that started toward the dawn of
European history. Even if lacking religious or aesthetic activities, at least
each village provided endless opportunities for gossip and discussion;
under the largest tree of the square, men not otherwise occupied sat
smoking their pipes or chewing mildly hallucinogenic leaves and nuts,
and kept their minds ordered through redundant conversation. This is still
the pattern followed by men at leisure in the coffee shops of the
Mediterranean, or the beer halls of northern Europe.

        Such methods of avoiding chaos in consciousness work to a
certain extent, but they rarely contribute to a positive quality of
experience. As we have seen earlier, human beings feel best in flow, when
they are fully involved in meeting a challenge, solving a problem,
discovering something new. Most activities that produce flow also have
clear goals, clear rules, immediate feedback-a set of external demands
that focuses our attention and makes demands on our skills. Now these
are exactly the conditions that are most often lacking in free time. Of
course, if one uses leisure to engage in a sport, an art form, or a hobby,
then the requirements for flow will be present. But just free time with
nothing specific to engage one's attention provides the opposite of flow:
psychic entropy, where one feels listless and apathetic.




Not all free-time activities are the same. One major distinction is between
active and passive leisure, which have quite different psychological
effects. For example, U.S. teenagers experience flow (defined as high-
challenge, high-skill moments) about 13 percent of the time that they
spend watching television, 34 percent of the time they do hobbies, and 44
percent of the time they are involved in sports and games (see table 4).
This suggests that hobbies are about two and a half tunes more likely to
produce a state of heightened enjoyment than TV does, and active games
and sports about three times more. Yet these same teenagers spend at least
four times more of their free hours watching TV than doing hobbies or
sports. Similar ratios are also true for adults. Why would we spend four
times more time doing something that has less than half the chance of
making us feel good?

        When we ask the participants of our studies this question, a
consistent explanation begins to appear. The typical teenager admits that
biking, or playing basketball, or playing the piano are more enjoyable
than roaming through the mall or watching TV. But, they say, to get
organized for a basketball game takes time-one has to change clothes,
make arrangements. It takes at least half an hour of often dull practice
each time one sits down at the piano before it begins to be fun. In other
words, each of the flow-producing activities requires an initial investment
of attention before it begins to be enjoyable. One needs such disposable
"activation energy" to enjoy complex activities. If a person is too tired,
anxious, or lacks the discipline to overcome that initial obstacle, he or she
will have to settle for something that, although less enjoyable, is more
accessible.
Source: Bidwell, Csikszentmihalyi, Hedges, and Schneider 1997, in press.


        This is where "passive leisure" activities come in. To just hang out
with friends, read an unchallenging book, or turn on the TV set does not
require much in the way of an upfront energy outlay. It does not demand
skills or concentration. Thus the consumption of passive leisure becomes
all too often the option of choice, not only for adolescents, but for adults
as well.

         In table 4, we can see a comparison of the major types of leisure
activities in terms of how frequently they provide flow to a cross section
of American teenagers. We see that games and sports, hobbies, and
socializing-the three active and/or social activities-provide more flow
experiences than the three more solitary and less structured activities,
listening to music, thinking, and watching TV. At the same time, the
activities that produce flow, being more demanding and difficult, also
occasionally produce conditions of anxiety. The three passive leisure
activities, on the other hand, seldom cause anxiety: their contribution is to
provide mainly relaxation and apathy. If you fill your leisure time with
passive leisure you won't find much enjoyment, but you will also avoid
getting in over your head. Apparently this is a bargain that many find
worth making.

         It is not that relaxing is bad. Everyone needs time to unwind, to
read trashy novels, to sit on the couch staring in space or watching a TV
program. As with the other ingredients of life, what matters is the dosage.
Passive leisure becomes a problem when a person uses it as the principal-
or the only-strategy to fill up free time. As these patterns turn into habits,
they begin to have definite effects on the quality of life as a whole. Those
who learn to rely on gambling to pass the time, for instance, may find
themselves caught in a habit that interferes with their job, their family,
and eventually with their own well-being. People who view television
more often than the average tend also to have worse jobs and worse
relationships. In a large-scale study in Germany, it was found that the
more often people report reading books, the more flow experiences they
claim to have, while the opposite trend was found for watching television.
The most flow was reported by individuals who read a lot and watched
little TV, the least by those who read seldom and watched often.
         Of course, such correlations do not necessarily mean that habits of
passive leisure cause bad jobs, bad relationships, and so on. It is likely
that the causal links start from the other end: lonely people with
dissatisfying jobs will fill their free time with passive leisure. Or those
who cannot find flow otherwise in their lives turn to undemanding leisure
activities. But in human development causation is usually circular: what
was an effect in the beginning eventually turns into a cause. An abusive
parent may force his child to adopt a defense based on repressed
aggression; as the child grows up, it is this style of defense rather than the
initial trauma that might make it easy for him in turn to become an
abusive parent. So adopting habits of passive leisure is not just an effect
of previous problems, but becomes a cause in its own right, which cuts off
further options for improving the quality of life.




The phrase "bread and circuses" has become a commonplace to describe
how the Roman Empire managed to keep the populace contented during
the long centuries of its decline. By providing enough food to keep the
bodies satisfied, and enough spectacles to keep the minds entertained, the
ruling classes were able to avoid social unrest. It is unlikely that this
policy was consciously adopted, but its widespread applica tion seems to
have worked. It would not have been either the first or the last time that
providing leisure opportunities kept a community from unraveling. In the
Persian Wars, the first historian of the West, the Greek Herodotus,
describes how Atys, king of Lydia in Asia Minor, introduced ball games
some three thousand years ago as a way to distract his subjects when a
series of bad crops caused unrest in the hungry population. "The plan
adopted against the famine was to engage in games one day so entirely as
not to feel any craving for food" he wrote, "and the next day to eat and
abstain from games. In this way they passed eighteen years."

       A similar pattern developed in Constantinople during the waning
of the Byzantine Empire. To keep the citizens happy, great chariot races
were held in the city. The best drivers became rich and famous, and they
were automatically elected to the Senate. In Central America before the
Spanish conquest, the Maya developed elaborate games similar to
basketball, which kept spectators busy for weeks on end. In our times,
disenfranchised minorities depend on sports and entertainment as avenues
to social mobility-basketball, baseball, boxing, and popular music absorb
surplus psychic energy while promising wealth and fame. Depending on
one's perspective, one can interpret this in two quite opposite ways. One
can see in these instances leisure being used as an "opiate of the masses,"
to paraphrase what Marx said about religion. Or one can see them as
creative responses to dangerous situations impervious to more effective
solutions.

        The record seems to suggest that a society begins to rely heavily
on leisure-and especially on passive leisure-only when it has become
incapable of offering meaningful productive occupation to its members.
Thus "bread and circuses" is a ploy of last resort that postpones the
dissolution of society only temporarily. Contemporary examples provide
some insight into what happens in such instances. For example, many
indigenous people in North America have lost the opportunity to
experience flow in work and communal life, and seek to recapture it in
leisure activities that mimic the earlier enjoyable lifestyle. Young Navajo
men used to feel at their best when riding after their sheep over the mesas
of the Southwest, or when participating in week-long ceremonial singing
and dancing. Now that such experiences are less relevant, they attempt to
recapture flow by drinking alcohol and then racing down the desert
highways in souped-up cars. The number of traffic fatalities may not be
higher than those sustained earlier in tribal warfare or while shepherding,
but they seem more pointless.

         The Inuit are going through a similar dangerous transition. Young
people who can no longer experience the excitement of hunting seal and
trapping bear turn to the automobile as a tool for escaping boredom and
focusing on a purposeful goal. Apparently there are communities in the
Arctic that have no roads connecting them to any other place, but have
built miles of roads for the exclusive purpose of drag racing. In Saudi
Arabia the spoiled young scions of oil barons find riding camels passe,
and try to revive their interest by racing brand-new Cadillacs in the
trackless desert, or on the sidewalks of Riyadh. When productive
activities become too routine and meaningless, leisure will pick up the
slack. It will take up progressively more time, and rely on increasingly
more elaborate artificial stimulation.
        There are individuals who, confronted with the sterility of their
jobs, escape productive responsibilities altogether to pursue a life of flow
in leisure. This does not necessarily require a great deal of money. There
are well-trained engineers who leave their jobs and wash dishes in
restaurants during the winter so they can afford to do rock climbing all
summer. There are colonies of surfers on all the beaches with good waves
who live hand-to-mouth so they can cram in as much flow as possible on
their boards.

        An Australian social scientist, Jim Macbeth, interviewed dozens
of ocean sailors who spend year after year navigating among the islands
of the South Pacific, many of them own ing nothing except the boat into
which they've invested all their savings. When they run out of money for
food or repairs, they stop in a port to do odd jobs until they can replenish
their supplies, then they cast off on the next journey. "I was able to throw
off responsibility, cast off a humdrum life, be a bit adventurous. I had to
do something with life besides vegetate," says one of these modern
argonauts. "It was a chance to do one really big thing in my life; big and
memorable," says another. Or, in the words of another sailor:


     Modern civilization has found radio, TV, nightclubs and a huge
     variety of mechanized entertainment to titillate our senses and help
     us escape from the apparent boredom of the earth and the sun and
     wind and stars. Sailing returns to these ancient realities.

        Some individuals do not abandon jobs altogether, but shift the
emphasis from work to leisure as the center of their lives. One serious
rock climber describes the exhilarating selfdiscipline of his sport as
training for the rest of life: "If you win these battles enough, that battle
against yourself ... it becomes easier to win the battles in the world." And
another former businessman who moved to the mountains to be a
carpenter:


     I would have made a great deal of money in corporate life, but I
     realized one day that I wasn't enjoying it. I wasn't having the kind of
     experiences that make life rewarding. I saw that my priorities were
     mixed up, spending most of my hours in the office.... The years were
     slipping by. I enjoy being a carpenter. I live where it's quiet and
     beautiful, and I climb most every night. I figure that my own
    relaxation and availability will mean more to my family than the
    material things I can no longer give them.

         The career move from businessman to carpenter is an example of
the kind of creative readjustment that some people are able to bring to
their lives. They search until they find a productive endeavor that also
allows them to build as much flow as possible into their lives. The other
options seem less satisfying; there is just too much one misses by
becoming a workaholic, or by escaping into leisure full time. Most of us,
however, are content to compartmentalize our lives into boring jobs and
routine entertainment. An interesting example of how flow seeps out of
work and into leisure is provided in the study of an Alpine community by
Antonella Delle Fave and Fausto Massimini of the University of Milan.
They interviewed forty-six members of an extended family in Pont
Trentaz, a remote mountain village where people have cars and television
sets, but still work at traditional tasks such as herding cattle, growing
orchards, and woodworking. The psychologists asked the three
generations of villagers to describe when and how they experienced flow
in their lives (see figure 2).


Figure 2

Distribution of Flow Activities in a Three-Generational Family (N=46)
from Pont Trentaz, Gressoney Valley, Italy
         Source: Adapted from Delle Fave and Massimini 1988.


        The oldest generation reported the most frequent flow
experiences, and the majority of them involved work: cutting hay in the
meadows, fixing the barn, baking bread, milking cows, working in the
garden. The middle generation-which included those between forty and
sixty years old-reported equal amounts of flow from work and from
leisure activities, such as watching movies, going on vacations, reading
books, or skiing. The grandchildren in the youngest generation showed a
pattern opposite to that of their grandparents: they reported the fewest
occurrences of flow, and most of it came from leisure. Dancing,
motorcycle racing, and watching TV were some of the most frequent
avenues of enjoyment. (Figure 2 does not show how much flow each
group reported; it only shows the percentage of flow that was reported in
either work or leisure.)

        Not all of the generational differences in Pont Trentaz are due to
social change. Some of it is a feature of normal developmental patterns
that every generation passes through: young people are always more
dependent for enjoyment on artificial risk and stimulation. But it is almost
certain that these normal differences are magnified in communities
undergoing social and economic transition. In such cases the older
generations still find a meaningful challenge in traditional productive
tasks, whereas their children and grandchildren, increasingly bored by
what they see as irrelevant chores, turn to entertainment as a way of
avoiding psychic entropy.

        In the United States, traditional communities like the Amish and
the Mennonites have been able to keep work and flow from getting
separated. In the everyday routines of their farming life, it is difficult to
know when work stops and leisure begins. Most "free time" activities,
such as weaving, carpentry, singing, or reading are useful and productive
either in a material, social, or spiritual sense. Of course this achievement
has been at the price of remaining embalmed in amber, as it were, arrested
at a point of technological and spiritual development that now seems
quaint. Is this the only way to preserve the integrity of a joyful and
productive exis tence? Or is it possible to reinvent a lifestyle that
combines these traits within continuing evolutionary change?
        To make the best use of free time, one needs to devote as much
ingenuity and attention to it as one would to one's job. Active leisure that
helps a person grow does not come easy. In the past leisure was justified
because it gave people an opportunity to experiment and to develop skills.
In fact, before science and the arts became professionalized, a great deal
of scientific research, poetry, painting, and musical composition was
carried out in a person's free time. Gregory Mendel did his famous
genetic experiments as a hobby; Benjamin Franklin was led by interest,
not a job description, to grind lenses and experiment with lightning rods;
Emily Dickinson wrote her superb poetry to create order in her own life.
Nowadays only experts are supposed to be interested in such issues;
amateurs are derided for venturing into fields reserved for the specialist.
But amateurs-those who do something because they love to do it-add
enjoyment and interest to their own life, and to everybody else's.

        It is not just extraordinary individuals who are able to make
creative use of leisure. All folk art-the songs, the fabrics, the pottery and
carvings that give each culture its particular identity and renown-is the
result of common people striving to express their best skill in the time left
free from work and maintenance chores. It is difficult to imagine how dull
the world would be if our ancestors had used free time simply for passive
entertainment, instead of finding in it an opportunity to explore beauty
and knowledge.

        Currently about 7 percent of all the nonrenewable energy we use-
electricity, gasoline, paper, and metal products-is being used primarily for
leisure. Constructing and watering golf courses, printing magazines,
flying jets to vacation resorts, producing and distributing TV shows,
building and fueling powerboats and skidoos takes up a good deal of
planetary resources. Ironically, it seems that how much happiness and
enjoyment we get from leisure has no relation at all-if anything, a
negative relation-to the amount of material energy consumed while doing
it. Low-key activities that require investments of skill, knowledge, and
emotions on our part are just as rewarding as those that use up a lot of
equipment and external energy, instead of our own psychic energy.
Having a good conversation, gardening, reading poetry, volunteering in a
hospital, or learning something new exhaust few resources and are at least
as enjoyable as things that consume ten times as many resources.

        Just as the excellence of an individual life depends to a large
extent on how free time is used, so the quality of a society hinges on what
its members do in their leisure time. Suburban communities can be so
depressingly bland because one has reason to believe that behind the
impressive facades rising from the emerald lawns nobody is doing
anything interesting. There are entire countries where one gets the
impression from talking even with members of the societal elite that
besides money, family, fashion, vacations, and gossip there is not that
much else that engages their attention. Whereas there are still some areas
in the world where one finds retired professionals enchanted with
classical poetry who collect ancient volumes in their library, or farmers
who play musical instruments or write down the stories of their village,
preserving the best creations of their ancestors while adding to them.

        In any case, we have seen that at the social as well as the
individual level habits of leisure act as both effects and as causes. When
the lifestyle of a social group becomes obsolete, when work turns into a
boring routine and community responsibilities lose their meaning, it is
likely that leisure will become increasingly more important. And if a
society becomes too dependent on entertainment, it is likely that there
will be less psychic energy left to cope creatively with the technological
and economic challenges that will inevitably arise.

         It may seem contrarian to raise alarms about the entertainment
industry at a time when it is so successful in the U.S. Music, movies,
fashion, and television bring in hard currency from all over the world.
Video stores mushroom on practically every block, reducing the ranks of
the unemployed. Our children look to media celebrities as models to steer
their lives by, and our consciousness is filled with information about the
doings of athletes and movie stars. How can all this success be harmful?
If we assess trends only from the point of view of a financial bottom line,
then there is nothing wrong. But if one counts also the long-term effects
of generations addicted to passive entertainment, the rosy picture will
look grim indeed.

        How to avoid the danger of polarizing life into work that is
meaningless because it is unfree, and leisure that is meaningless because
it has no purpose? One possible way out is suggested by the example of
the creative individuals discussed in the previous chapter. In their lives,
work and play are indivisible, as they are for people living in traditional
societies. But unlike the latter, creative persons have not retrenched into a
frozen moment in time. They use the best knowledge from the past and
the present to discover a better way of being in the future. To the extent
that we can learn from them, there is no longer any reason to dread free
time. Work itself becomes as enjoyable as leisure, and when one needs a
break from it, leisure is likely to be true recreation instead of a scheme for
dulling the mind.

        If one's job is beyond redemption, the other solution is to make
sure that free time at least will be a real opportunity for flow-for
exploring the potential of the self and the environment. Luckily, the world
is absolutely full of interesting things to do. Only lack of imagination, or
lack of energy, stand in the way. Otherwise each of us could be a poet or
musician, an inventor or explorer, an amateur scholar, scientist, artist, or
collector.



 
                                                                    SIX

Relationships and the
Quality of Life



When thinking about what causes the best and the worst moods in life,
chances are you would think of other people. A lover or spouse can make
you feel wonderfully elated but also irritated and depressed; children can
be a blessing or a pain; a word from the boss can make or break a day. Of
all the things we normally do, interaction with others is the least
predictable. At one moment it is flow, the next apathy, anxiety,
relaxation, or boredom. Because of the power that interactions have on
our mind, clinicians have developed forms of psychotherapy that depend
on maximizing pleasant encounters with others. There is no doubt that
well-being is deeply attuned to relationships, and that consciousness
resonates to the feedback we receive from other people.

        For example, Sarah, one of the people we studied with the
Experience Sampling Method, at quo on a Saturday morn ing was sitting
alone in her kitchen, having breakfast and reading the paper. When the
pager signaled, she rated her happiness 5 on a scale where i is sad and 7
very happy. When the next signal arrived at i 1: 30, she was still alone,
smoking a cigarette, saddened by the thought that her son was about to
move away to a different city. Now her happiness had fallen to a 3. At
i:oo in the afternoon, Sarah was alone, vacuuming the living room,
happiness down to i. By 2:30 P.M. she is in the backyard, swimming
with the grandchildren; happiness is a perfect 7. But less than an hour
later, as she is taking the sun and trying to read a book while her
grandchildren splash her with water, the happiness rating is down to 2
again: "My daughter-in-law should take those brats in hand more," she
writes on the ESM response sheet. As we move through the day, thinking
about people and interacting with them play constant riffs on our moods.
In most societies, people depend on the social context to an even greater
extent than in the technological West. We believe that the individual
should be left free to develop his or her potential, and at least since
Rousseau we have come to think of society as a perverse obstacle to
personal fulfillment. In contrast, the traditional view, especially in Asia,
has been that the individual is nothing until shaped and refined through
interaction with others. India provides one of the clearest examples of
how this works. The classical Hindu culture has taken great pains to
ensure that from infancy to old age its members conform to appropriate
ideals of behavior. "The Hindu person is produced consciously and
deliberately during a series of collective events. These events are
samskaras, life cycle rituals that are fundamental and compulsory in the
life of a Hindu," writes Lynn Hart. Samskaras help to shape children and
adults by giving them new rules of conduct for each successive step in
life.

      As the Indian psychoanalyst Sadhir Kakar wrote half facetiously,
samskaras are the right rite at the right time:


     The conceptualization of the human life cycle unfolding in a series
     of stages, with each stage having its unique "tasks" and the need for
     an orderly progression through the stages, is an established part of
     traditional Indian thought ... one of the major thrusts of these rituals
     is the gradual integration of the child into society, with the
     samskaras, as it were, beating time to a measured movement that
     takes the child away from the original mother-infant symbiosis into
     the full-fledged membership of his community.

        But socialization not only shapes behavior, it also molds
consciousness to the expectations and aspirations of the culture, so that
we feel shame when others observe our failings, and guilt when we feel
that we have let others down. Here too cultures differ enormously in
terms of how deeply the self depends on internalized community
expectations; for instance, the Japanese have several words to describe
fine shadings of dependence, obligations, and responsibility that are
difficult to translate into English because in our social environment we
have not learned to experience such feelings to the same extent. In Japan,
according to Shintaro Ryu, a perceptive Japanese journalist, the typical
individual "wants to go wherever others go; even when he goes to the
beach to swim, he avoids the uncrowded place but chooses a spot where
people are practically on top of one another."

        It is not difficult to see why we are so enmeshed in our social
milieu, both mentally and physically. Even our primate relations, the
apes that live in the African jungles and savannas, have learned that
unless they are accepted by the group they won't live long; a solitary
baboon will soon fall prey to leopards or hyenas. Our ancestors realized
a long time ago that they were social animals, that they depended on the
group not only for protection but also for learning the amenities of life.
The Greek word "idiot" originally meant someone who lived by himself;
it was assumed that cut off from com munity interaction such a person
would be mentally incompetent. In contemporary preliterate societies
this knowledge is so deeply ingrained that a person who likes to be alone
is assumed to be a witch, for a normal person would not choose to leave
the company of others unless forced to do so.

        Because interactions are so important for keeping consciousness
in balance, it is important to understand how they affect us, and to learn
how to turn them into positive rather than negative experiences. As with
everything else, one cannot enjoy relationships for free. We must expend
a certain amount of psychic energy to reap their benefits. If we do not,
we risk finding ourselves in the shoes of Sartre's character in No Fait
who concluded that hell was other people.

        A relationship that leads to order in consciousness instead of
psychic entropy has to meet at least two conditions. The first is to find
some compatibility between our goals and that of the other person or
persons. This is always difficult in principle, given that each participant
in the interaction is bound to pursue his or her self-interest. Nevertheless,
in most situations, if one looks for it, one can discover at least a shred of
shared goals. The second condition for a successful interaction is that
one be willing to invest attention in the other person's goals-not an easy
task either, considering that psychic energy is the most essential and
scarce resource we own. When these conditions are met, it is possible to
get the most valuable result from being with other people-to experience
the flow that comes from optimal interaction.
The most positive experiences people report are usually those with
friends. This is especially true for adolescents (see figure 3), but it
remains true also in the later years of life. People are generally much
happier and more motivated when with friends, regardless of what they
are doing. Even studying and household chores, which depress moods
when done alone or with the family, become positive experiences when
done with friends. It is not difficult to see why this should be the case.
With friends the conditions for an optimal interaction are usually
maximized. We choose them because we see their goals as compatible
with ours, and the relationship is one of equality. Friendships are
expected to provide mutual benefits, with no external constraints that
might lead to exploitation. Ideally, friendships are never static: they
provide ever new emotional and intellectual stimulation, so that the
relationship does not fade into boredom or apathy. We try new things,
activities, and adventures; we develop new attitudes, ideas, and values;
we get to know friends more deeply and intimately. While many flow
activities are enjoyable only in the short run, because their challenges are
soon exhausted, friends offer potentially infinite stimulation throughout
life, honing our emotional and intellectual skills.

        Of course, this ideal is not achieved very often. Instead of
promoting growth, friendships often provide a safe cocoon where our
self-image can be preserved without ever having to change. The
superficial sociability of teenage peer groups, suburban clubs and coffee
klatches, professional associations, drinking buddies, gives a soothing
sense of being part of a like-minded set of people without demanding
effort or growth. One indication of this trend is shown in figure 3, where
we see that concentration is usually significantly lower with friends than
in solitude. Apparently mental effort is rarely involved in typical friendly
interactions.

        In the worst cases, when a person without other close ties comes
to depend exclusively on other rootless individuals for emotional
support, friendship can be destructive. Urban gangs, delinquent groups,
and terrorist cells are usually made up of individuals who-either because
of their own fault or because of circumstances-have not found a niche in
any community and have only each other to confirm their identities. In
such cases growth also happens as a result of the relationship, but from
the point of view of the majority it is a malignant growth.
Figure 3

How Teenagers' Quality of Experience Changes in Different Social
Contexts




               Source: Csikszentrnihalyi and Larson 1984•


        Compared to the other main features of the social environment,
however, friendships offer both the most emotionally rewarding contexts
in the immediate present, and the greatest opportunities for developing
one's potential in the long run. Contemporary life, however, is not very
suitable for sustaining friendships. In more traditional societies a person
remains in contact throughout all of his or her life with the friends made
in childhood. The geographical and social mobility in the United States
makes this almost impossible. Our high school friends are not the same
as those we made in grade school, and in college friendships are
reshuffled once more. Then one moves from one job to another, from one
city to the next, and with age, transient friendships become ever more
superficial. Lack of true friends is often the main complaint of people
confronting an emotional crisis in the second half of life.

        Another frequent cause of complaint is the lack of rewarding
sexual relationships. One of the cultural achievements of this century has
been the rediscovery of the importance of "good sex" for a good life.
However, as usual, the pendulum has swung too far: sexuality has been
decontextualized from the rest of experience, and people have accepted
the erroneous notion that liberal doses of sex will make them happy.
Variety and frequency of sexual encounters have taken precedence over
the depth and intensity of the relationship in which they are embedded. It
is ironic that on this issue the traditional teachings of the churches are
closer to a scientific position than the up-to-date beliefs of the populace,
for an evolutionary approach confirms that the original purpose of
sexuality is making children and binding the parental couple. Of course
this does not mean that these functions need to be the only purpose of
sex. For example, the adaptive function of taste buds was to distinguish
between wholesome and spoiled food, but with time we developed
complex culinary arts based on subtle nuances of taste. So also whatever
were the original reasons for sexual pleasure, it can always be used to
yield new possibilities for enriching life. But just as gluttony that has no
relationship to hunger seems unnatural, an obsession with sex that is
divorced from other human needs such as intimacy, caring, and
commitment becomes equally aberrant.

        When the daring pioneers of instinctual liberation hailed free sex
as the solution to the repression of society, they did not dwell on the
possibility that half a century later sex would be used to sell deodorants
and soft drinks. As Herbert Marcuse and others ruefully noted, Eros was
bound to be exploited one way or another; its energy was too strong for it
not to be co-opted by the powers of church, state, or if neither of these,
then the advertising industry. In the past, sexuality was repressed so that
the psychic energy attracted to it could be channeled into productive
goals. Now sexuality is encouraged so that people will channel their
psychic energy into consumption that gives them the illusion of sexual
fulfillment. In either case, a force that could result in some of the deepest
and most intimate joys of life is taken over and manipulated by outside
interests.
         What can one do? As with other aspects of life, the important
thing is to decide for oneself, to realize what is at stake, and what are the
interests that try to control our sexuality for their own ends. It helps to
realize how vulnerable we are in this respect. It is a very universal
condition: we were told in our part of the Rockies that coyotes
sometimes send a female in heat to lure unsuspecting male farm dogs
into the ambush of the pack. When realizing our vulnerability, the danger
is falling into the opposite extreme and becoming paranoid about sex.
Neither celibacy nor promiscuity are necessarily to our advantage; what
counts is how we wish to order our lives, and what part we wish
sexuality to play in it.




In partial compensation for the difficulty of having friends, we have
discovered in the United States a new possibility: to be friends with
parents, spouses, and children. In the European tradition of courtly love,
friendship with one's husband or wife was considered an oxymoron.
When marriages were largely at the service of economic or political
alliances, and children depended on their parents for inheritance and
status, the conditions of equality and reciprocity that make friendships
possible were lacking. In the last few generations, however, the family
has lost most of its role as an economic necessity. And the less we
depend on it for material benefits, the more we can enjoy its potential for
emotional rewards. Thus the modern family, with all its problems, opens
up new possibilities for optimal experiences that were much more
difficult to come by in previous times.

       In the last few decades, we have come to realize that the image of
the family we have been cherishing since at least Victorian times is only
one of many possible alternatives. According to the historian Le Roy
Ladurie, a rural French fam ily in the late Middle Ages was made up by
whoever lived under the same roof and shared the same meals. This
might have included people actually related by blood, but also farmhands
and other persons who strayed in to help with the farm work and were
given shelter. Apparently no further distinction was made among these
individuals; whether related or not they were seen to belong to the same
domus, or house made of stone and mortar, which was the unit that really
mattered, rather than the biological family. A thousand years earlier, the
Roman family was a very different social arrangement. Here the
patriarch had the legal right to kill his children if they displeased him,
and biological descent mattered almost as much as it did later for the
aristocratic families of the nineteenth century.

        And these variations were still within the same cultural tradition.
In addition, anthropologists have made us familiar with a huge variety of
other family forms, from the enormously extended Hawaiian family
where every woman of the older generation is considered to be one's
"mother," to various forms of polygamous and polyandrous
arrangements. All of which has prepared us to see the dissolution of the
nuclear family, with 50 percent divorce rates and the majority of children
growing up in father-absent or reconstituted families, as not so much a
tragedy as a normal transition to new forms adapted to changing social
and economic conditions. At the extremes, we hear claims that the
family is an obsolete, reactionary institution destined to disappear.

        An opposite view is proposed by conservatives who aim to
uphold "family values," meaning a return to the conventional patterns
enshrined in mid-century television sitcoms. Who is right in this
controversy? Clearly both sides are right to some extent, and both are
wrong in taking a rigid view of an evolving pattern. On the one hand, it
is disingenuous to argue that an ideal family pattern ever existed, and
that we can hold on to this chimera while the rest of social conditions are
changing. On the other hand it is equally mistaken to argue that a healthy
social system can exist without the emotional support and nurturance that
parents alone seem able to give growing children. For no matter how
much variety there is in the form families have taken, one constant has
been that they included adults of the opposite sex who took on
responsibilities for each others' welfare, and for that of their offspring.

        It is for this reason that marriage is such a complex institution in
all societies. The negotiations involved in it, which have included fine
calculations of dowries and bride-price, were intended to guarantee that
children born of the union would not become a public burden. In all
societies, the parents and relatives of the bride and groom took on the
responsibility of supporting and training the offspring of the union, both
in terms of material needs and of socialization into community values
and rules. So far no society-not the Soviet Union, not Israel, not
Communist China-has been able to finesse the family and substitute
other social institutions in its stead. It is one of the great ironies of our
times that with all good intentions liberal capitalism has succeeded in
weakening families more than they ever had been before-without being
able to invent a substitute for them.

        The effects of family relationships on the quality of life are so
extensive that volumes could be written about it. In fact many great
works of literature, from Oedipus Rex to Hamlet, Madame Bovaiy to
Desire Under the Elms have it as their theme. Family interactions affect
the quality of experience in different ways for each member. Fathers,
mothers, and children will respond to the same event according to their
perception of the situation, and the history of past vicissitudes in their
relationship. But to make a very broad generalization, the family acts as
a flywheel for the emotional ups and downs of the day. Moods at home
are rarely as elated as with friends, and rarely as low as when one is
alone. At the same time, it is at home that one can release pent-up
emotions with relative safety, as shown by the unfortunate abuse and
violence that are a feature of dysfunctional families.

         In an extensive study of family dynamics with the Experience
Sampling Method, Reed Larson and Maryse Richards found several
interesting patterns. For instance, when both parents are employed,
husbands' moods are low at work, but improve when they get home,
while the opposite is true for wives who have to face household chores
when they return from the outside job, thus creating opposite cycles of
emotional well-being. Contrary to what one would expect, there are more
arguments in families that are emotionally close; when the family is in
real trouble, parents and children avoid each other instead of arguing.
Even in contemporary families gender differences among the spouses are
still strong: the moods of the father affect the moods of the rest of the
family, and the children's moods affect the mother, but the mothers'
moods have little discernible effect on the rest of the family. Also, about
40 percent of the fathers and less than io percent of the mothers say that
their teenagers' achievement puts them in a good mood; whereas 45
percent of the mothers and only 20 percent of the fathers say that the
teenagers' being in a good mood improves their own. Clearly men are
still more concerned about what their children do, and women about how
their children feel, as gender roles require.
        Much has been written about what makes families work. The
consensus is that families that support the emotional well-being and
growth of their members combine two almost opposite traits. They
combine discipline with spontaneity, rules with freedom, high
expectations with unstinting love. An optimal family system is complex
in that it encourages the unique individual development of its members
while uniting them in a web of affective ties. Rules and discipline are
needed to avoid excessive waste of psychic energy in the negotiation of
what can or cannot be done-when the children should come home, when
to do homework, who is to wash the dishes. Then the psychic energy
released from bickering and arguing can be invested in the pursuit of
each member's goals. At the same time, each person knows that he or she
can draw on the collective psychic energy of the family if needed.
Growing up in a complex family, children have a chance to develop
skills and recognize challenges, and thus are more prepared to
experience life as flow.




In our society, the average person spends about one-third of his or her
waking time alone. Persons who spend much more or much less time by
themselves often have problems. Teenagers who always hang out with
peers have trouble in school and are unlikely to learn to think for
themselves, while those who are always alone are easy prey to
depression and alienation. Suicide is more frequent among people whose
work isolates them physically, such as lumbermen in the North, or
emotionally, like psychiatrists. The exceptions involve situations where
the days are so strictly programmed that psychic entropy has no chance
to take hold of consciousness. Chartousian monks may spend most of
their lives in their secluded cells without ill effects, or, at the other
extreme of sociability, the same is true of submarine crews, where the
sailors might never have any privacy for months on end.

       In many preliterate societies, the optimal amount of solitude was
zero. The Dobuans of Melanesia described by the anthropologist Reo
Fortune are typical in that they tried to avoid being alone like the plague.
In Dobu, when people had to go into the bush to relieve themselves, they
always went with a friend or relative, for fear of being harmed by
witchcraft if they went alone. That sorcery is most effective against a
lonely person is not an entirely fanciful idea. What it describes is a real
fact, although its explanation is allegorical. It describes what many social
scientists have noted, namely that the mind of a solitary individual is
vulnerable to delusions and irrational fears. When we talk to another
person, even about the most trivial subjects such as the weather or last
night's ball game, the conversation introduces a shared reality into our
consciousness. Even a greeting such as "Have a nice day" reassures us
that we exist because other people notice us, and are concerned about our
welfare. Thus the fundamental function of even the most routine
encounters is reality maintenance, which is indispensable, lest
consciousness disintegrate into chaos.

        In line with such reasons, people in general report much lower
moods when alone than when they are with others. They feel less happy,
less cheerful, less strong, and more bored, more passive, more lonely.
The only dimension of experience that tends to be higher alone is
concentration. When first hearing about these patterns, many thoughtful
persons are incredulous: "This cannot be true," they say, "I love to be
alone and seek out solitude when I can." In fact it is possible to learn to
like solitude, but it does not come easily. If one is an artist, scientist, or
writer; or if one has a hobby, or a rich inner life, then being alone is not
only enjoyable but necessary. Relatively few individuals, however,
master the mental tools that will make this possible.

        Most people also overestimate their ability to tolerate solitude. A
survey conducted in Germany by Elizabeth NoelleNeumann shows the
amusing lengths to which we go to delude ourselves in this respect. She
showed thousands of respondents two pictures of a mountain landscape.
One picture featured a meadow crowded with hikers, the other the same
scene but with only a few people. Then she asked two questions. The
first was: "In which of these two places would you prefer to spend your
holidays?" About 6o percent chose the deserted meadow and only 34
percent the crowded one. The second question was: "In which of these
two places do you think most Germans would prefer to spend their
holidays?" To this, 61 percent answered that the crowded scene would be
their compatriots' first choice, and 2 3 percent the lonely one. Here as in
many similar situations, one can learn more about true preferences by
listening to what people say others want, rather than to what they claim
they want themselves.

        Whether we like solitude or not, however, in our times we must
be able to put up with some of it. It is difficult to learn math, or practice
the piano, or program a computer, or figure out the purpose of one's life
when other people are around. The concentration required to order
thoughts in consciousness is easily interrupted by an extraneous word, by
the necessity to pay attention to another person. Thus we find that
adolescents who feel that they must always be with friends-and these are
usually youngsters whose families provide little emotional support-tend
not to have the psychic energy necessary for complex learning. Even
with superior mental aptitude, the dread of solitude prevents them from
developing their talents.




If it is true that loneliness has been a constant threat to humankind,
strangers have been no less of a problem. Generally we assume that
people who differ from us-by kinship, language, race, religion,
education, social class-will have goals at cross-purposes from ours, and
therefore must be watched with suspicion. Early human groups usually
assumed that they were the only true humans, and those who did not
share their culture were not. Even though genetically we are all related,
cultural differences have served to reinforce our isolation from each
other.

        Because of this, whenever different groups have come into
contact, they have been all too often able to ignore each other's humanity
and treat the "Other" as an enemy that in case of need could be destroyed
without too much compunction. This is true not only of headhunters in
New Guinea, but of Bosnian Serbs and Muslims, Irish Catholics and
Protestants, and an infinity of other conflicts between races and creeds
barely simmering under the surface of civilization.

        The first real melting pots of diverse tribal identities were the
great cities that arose about eight thousand years ago in many different
parts of the world, from China to India to Egypt. Here for the first time
people from different backgrounds learned to cooperate and to tolerate
foreign ways. But even the cosmopolitan metropolis has been unable to
eliminate the fear of strangers. In medieval Paris, students as young as
seven years old had to wear daggers when they walked to and from the
cathedral schools, to defend themselves against kidnappers and thieves;
now students in the inner city wear guns. In the seventeenth century, it
was extremely common for women walking the city streets to be raped
by gangs of roaming youth. In the urban jungle, a man with a different
skin color, different clothes and demeanor is still a potential predator.

        In this case too, however, there is another side to the coin. For
while we are repelled by differences, we are also fascinated by the
strange and the exotic. The metropolis is so attractive in part because the
clash of cultures sets up an atmosphere of excitement, freedom, and
creativity that is difficult to find in an isolated, homogeneous culture. As
a result, people report some of their most positive experiences in public
spaces where they are surrounded by strangersparks, streets, restaurants,
theaters, clubs, and beaches. As long as we can presume that the
"Others" will share our basic goals, and will behave predictably within
certain limits, their presence adds a great deal of spice to the quality of
life.

        The current push toward pluralism and a global culture
(admittedly not the same thing, but both tending toward integration
rather than differentiation) is one way to reduce the strangeness of
strangers. Another is the "restoration" of communities. The quotation
marks in the previous sentence are there to indicate that ideal
communities, like ideal families, may never have really existed. When
reading histories of private lives, one is hard put to find any place, at any
time, where people went about their business in serene cooperation,
without fear of enemies from inside or outside the community. There
might have been no racial minorities or organized crime in small
Chinese, Indian, or European towns, but one found misfits, deviants,
heretics, inferior castes, political or religious animosities that exploded in
civil war, and so on. In the United States the earliest communities must
have had a great deal of cohesion-provided they were not split by witch
hunts, Indian wars, conflicts between those for and against the British
Crown, or for and against slavery.
        In other words, the ideal community that inspired Norman
Rockwell's brushes was no more typical than his pink, well-fed families
sitting with bowed heads and complacent smiles around the
Thanksgiving dinner table. Nevertheless, this does not mean that trying
to create wholesome communities is a bad idea. Rather, it suggests that
instead of looking for models in the past, we should figure out what a
safe yet stimulating social environment could be like in the future.




From the beginnings of Western philosophy, thinkers have conceived of
two main ways of fulfilling human potentials. The first involved the vita
activa, or the expression of one's being through action in the public
arena-paying attention to what goes on in the social environment,
making decisions, engaging in politics, arguing for one's convictions,
taking a stand even at the cost of one's comfort and reputation. This is
what some of the most influential Greek philosophers saw as the ultimate
fulfillment of one's essence. Later, under the influence of Christian
philosophy, the vita contemplativa gained ascendancy as the best way to
spend one's life. It was through solitary reflection, prayer, communion
with the supreme being, that one was thought to achieve the most
complete fulfillment. And these two strategies were usually seen as
mutually exclusive-one could not be a doer and a thinker at the same
time.

         This dichotomy still pervades our understanding of human
behavior. Carl Jung introduced the concepts of extroversion versus
introversion as fundamental and opposite traits of the psyche. The
sociologist David Riesman described a historical change from inner-
directed to outer directed personalities. In current psychological research,
extroversion and introversion are considered the most stable personality
traits that differentiate people from each other and that can be reliably
measured. Usually each of us tends to be one or the other, either loving
to interact with people but feeling lost when alone, or finding delight in
solitude but unable to relate to people. Which one of these types is the
most likely to get the best out of life?
         Current studies provide consistent evidence that outgoing,
extroverted people are happier, more cheerful, less stressed, more serene,
more at peace with themselves than introverts. The conclusion seems to
be that extroverts-who are thought to be born, not made-get a better deal
in life allaround. In this case, however, I have some reservations about
how the data have been interpreted. One of the manifestations of
extroversion is to put a positive spin on things, while introverts are more
prone to be reserved in describing their inner states. So the quality of
experience might be similar in both groups, and only the reporting
differs.

        A better solution is suggested by the study of creative
individuals. Instead of being either extroverts or introverts, such people
seem to express both traits in the process of going about their lives. True,
the stereotype of the "solitary genius" is strong and does have a basis in
fact. After all, one must generally be alone in order to write, paint, or do
experiments in a laboratory. Yet over and over again creative individuals
stress the importance of seeing people, hearing people, exchanging ideas,
and getting to know another person's work. The physicist John Archibald
Wheeler expresses this point with great directness: "If you don't kick
things around with people, you are out of it. Nobody, I always say, can
be anybody without somebody being around."

        Another outstanding scientist, Freeman Dyson, expresses with a
fine nuance the opposite phases of this dichotomy in his work. He points
to the door of his office and says:


     Science is a very gregarious business. It is essentially the difference
     between having this door open and having it shut. When I am doing
     science I have the door open.... You want to be, all the time, talking
     with people ... because it is only by interacting with other people
     that you get anything interesting done. It is essentially a communal
     enterprise. There are new things happening all the time, and you
     should keep abreast and keep yourself aware of what is going on.
     You must be constantly talking. But, of course, writing is different.
     When I am writing I have the door shut, and even then too much
     sound comes through, so very often when I am writing I go and hide
     in the library. It is a solitary game.
        John Reed, the CEO of Citicorp who has led his company
successfully through some turbulent times, has built the alternation
between inner-directed reflection and intense social interaction into his
daily routine:


     I'm an early morning guy. I get up at 5 always, get out of the shower
     about 5:30, and I typically try to work either at home or at the
     office, and that's when I do a good bit of my thinking and priority
     setting.... I try to keep a reasonably quiet time until 9:30 or io:oo.
     Then you get involved in lots of transactions. If you are chairman of
     the company it's like being a tribal chieftain. People come into your
     office and talk to you.

        Even in the very private realm of the arts the ability to interact is
essential. The sculptor Nina Holton describes well the role of sociability
in her work:


     You really can't work entirely alone in your place. You want to have
     a fellow artist come and talk things over with you: "How does that
     strike you?" You have to have some sort of feedback. You can't be
     sitting there entirely by yourself... And then eventually, you know,
     when you begin to show, you have to have a whole network. You
     have to get to know gallery people, you have to get to know people
     who work in your field who are involved. And you may want to
     find out whether you wish to be part of it or not be part of it, but
     you cannot help being part of a fellowship, you know?

        The way these creative individuals confront life suggests that it is
possible to be both extroverted and introverted at the same time. In fact,
expressing the full range from innerto outer-directedness might be the
normal way of being human. What is abnormal is to get boxed in at one
of the ends of this continuum, and experience life only as a gregarious,
or only as a solitary being. Certainly temperament and socialization will
push us in one or the other direction, and after a while it becomes easy to
fall in with these conditioning forces and learn to relish either social
interaction or solitude, but not both. To do so, however, curtails the full
range of what humans can experience, and diminishes the possibilities of
enjoyment in life.
 
                                                              ;SEVEN




Changing the Patterns
of Life



A few years ago, an eighty-three-year-old man wrote one of the most
touching letters I have ever received from a reader. After World War I, he
wrote, he had been a soldier in the field artillery, stationed in the South.
They used horses to pull the gun carriages, and after maneuvers they
often unhitched them and played games of polo. During those games he
felt an exhilaration that he had never felt before or after; he assumed that
only playing polo could make him feel so good. The next sixty years
were routine and uneventful. Then he read Flow, and realized that the
thrill he had experienced as a young man on horseback was not
necessarily limited to the game of polo, and began to do some things he
had thought might be fun to do, but never tried. He took up gardening,
listening to music, and other activities that, lo and behold, revived the
excitement of his youth.

        It is good that in his eighties this man had discovered that he need
not accept passively a boring life. Still, the intervening sixty years seem
to have been unnecessarily barren. And how many people never realize
that they can shape their psychic energy so as to get the most out of
experience? If the finding that about 15 percent of the population are
never in flow is accurate, that means that just in this country tens of
millions of people are depriving themselves of what makes life worth
living.

        Of course, in many cases one can well understand why a person
may experience flow rarely, or not at all. A deprived childhood, abusive
parents, poverty, and a host of other external reasons may make it
difficult for a person to find joy in everyday life. On the other hand, there
are so many examples of individuals who overcame such obstacles that
the belief that the quality of life is determined from the outside is hardly
tenable. Some of the most vocal disagreements to what I have written
about flow came from readers who claimed to have been abused, and
who wanted me to know that contrary to what I had said, it was perfectly
possible for abused children to enjoy their adult lives.

        Examples are too many to mention. One of my favorites involves
Antonio Gramsci, the philosopher of humanistic socialism that had such
a strong influence on the development of European thought in this
century, and on the eventual demise of Leninism-Stalinism. Born in 1891
to a destitute family on the poor island of Sardinia, Antonio had a
deformed spine and was sickly all through childhood. Their poverty
became almost intolerable when his father, arrested on false charges, was
imprisoned and could no longer support his large family. In an
unsuccessful attempt to cure his hunchback, Antonio's uncle would hang
the child by his ankles from the rafters of the hovel in which they lived.
Antonio's mother was so sure that the child was eventually going to pass
away in his sleep that every night she set out his one good suit and a pair
of candles on the dresser so that the funeral preparations would take less
time. Given these facts, it would have come as no surprise that Gramsci
grew up full of hatred and spite. Instead he dedicated his life to helping
the oppressed, by becoming a subtle writer and brilliant theoretician.
Although one of the founders of the Italian Communist Party, he never
compromised his humanitarian values for the sake of expediency or party
dogma. Even after Mussolini had him imprisoned in a medieval jail so
that he would die in solitary confinement, he kept writing letters and
essays full of light, hope, and compassion. All of the external factors
conspired to twist Gramsci's life; he must take all the credit for achieving
the intellectual and emotional harmony that he left as his heritage.

         Another example, from my own researches this time, concerns
the life of Linus Pauling. He was born in Portland, Oregon, at the turn of
the century; his father died when Linus was nine years old, leaving the
family impoverished. Although he was an omnivorous reader and
collected minerals, plants, and insects, Linus did not think he would go
past high school. Fortunately, the parents of one of his friends almost
forced him to enroll in college. Then he received a scholarship to get into
Cal Tech, became involved in research, was awarded the Nobel prize in
chemistry in 1954, and the Nobel peace prize in 1962. He describes his
college years as follows:


     I made a little money by odd jobs, working for the college, killing
     dandelions on the lawn by dipping a stick in a bucket containing
     sodium arsenate solution and then stabbing the stick into the
     dandelion plant. Every day I chopped wood, a quarter of a cord
     perhaps, into lengthsthey were already sawed-into a size that would
     go into the wood-burning stoves in the girls' dormitory. Twice a
     week I cut up a quarter of a beef into steaks or roasts, and every day
     I mopped the big kitchen, the very large kitchen area. Then at the
     end of my sophomore year, I got a job as a paving engineer, laying
     blacktop pavement in the mountains of Southern Oregon.

       What was so amazing about Linus Pauling is that even at ninety
years of age he kept the enthusiasm and curiosity of a young child.
Everything he did or said was bubbling with energy. Despite the early
adversity and the later hardships, he exuded an obvious joie de vivre.
And there was no secret about how he did it; in his own words: "I just
went ahead doing what I liked to do."

        Some will find such an attitude irresponsible: how can someone
afford the self-indulgence of doing only what he likes to do? But the
point is that Pauling-and the many others who share his attitude-like to
do almost everything, no matter how difficult or trivial, including the
things they are forced to do. The only thing they definitely don't like is
wasting time. So it is not that their life is objectively better than yours or
mine, but that their enthusiasm for it is such that most of what they do
ends up providing them with flow experiences.

        Recently there has been a lot written about how people are born
either with a happy or a sad temperament, and there is not that much one
can do to change it. If you happen to be a happy person, you will stay
that way no matter how much bad luck you encounter. If you are not, a
strike of good luck may lift your mood for a short while, but you will
soon return to the lukewarm, average moroseness doomed by the genes.
If this were true, then it would be hopeless to try changing the quality of
one's life. But this deterministic scenario is correct only insofar as the
extroverted exuberance that is often mistaken for happiness is concerned.
That seems indeed to be a fairly stable trait of a person's character. It is a
different story, however, if by happiness we mean the less obvious
enjoyment of life that flow provides.

        In a rare ESM longitudinal study of teenagers, for instance, Joel
Hektner found that about 6o percent of the adolescents reported the same
frequency of flow over a one-week period measured two years apart;
those who had much of it earlier still had it later, and those who had little
early had little two years later. But the remaining 40 percent changed
over the same period, half reporting significantly more flow (measured
as high-challenge, high-skill experiences), half less. Those whose
frequency of flow increased two years later spent more time studying
and less in passive leisure, and their levels of concentration, self-esteem,
enjoyment, and interest was significantly higher than that of the
teenagers whose frequency of flow decreased-although two years earlier
the two groups had reported the same quality of experience. It is
important to note that the teens whose flow increased did not report
being "happier" than the ones who decreased. But because of the great
differences in the other dimensions of experience, it is safe to conclude,
that the happiness reported by the low flow group was more shallow and
less authentic. This suggests that it is indeed possible to improve the
quality of one's life by investing psychic energy in activities that are
more likely to produce flow.




Because for most of us a job is such a central part of life, it is essential
that this activity be as enjoyable and rewarding as possible. Yet many
people feel that as long as they get decent pay and some security, it does
not matter how boring or alienating their job is. Such an attitude,
however, amounts to throwing away almost 40 percent of one's waking
life. And since no one else is going to take the trouble of making sure
that we enjoy our work, it makes sense for each of us to take on this
responsibility.

         Generally there are three main reasons that jobs are resented. The
first is that the job is pointless-it does no good to anyone, and in fact it
may be harmful. Some government employees, high-pressure salesmen,
and even scientists working in fields like armaments or the tobacco
industry have to engage in some heavy denial to tolerate what they do for
a living. The second reason is that the work is boring and routine; it
provides no variety or challenge. After a few years, one can do it in one's
sleep, and all it provides is a feeling of stagnation rather than growth.
The third problem with jobs is that they are often stressful; especially
when one can't get along with one's supervisor or colleagues who expect
too much or do not recognize one's contributions. Contrary to popular
opinion, concerns for more money and security are usually not as
important as these three in determining whether one will be satisfied
with one's job or not.

          Even if we don't want to admit it, the ability to overcome most
obstacles is within our hands. We can't blame family, society, or history
if our work is meaningless, dull, or stressful. Admittedly, there are not
too many options when we realize that our job is useless, or actually
harmful. Perhaps the only choice is to quit as quickly as possible, even at
the cost of severe financial hardship. In terms of the bottom line of one's
life, it is always a better deal to do something one feels good about than
something that may make us materially comfortable but emotionally
miserable. Such decisions are notoriously difficult, and require great
honesty with oneself. As Hannah Arendt has shown with regard to Adolf
Eichmann and the other employees of the Nazi extermination camps, it is
easy to disguise the responsibility for even the cold-blooded murder of
thousands with the excuse: "I only work here."

        The psychologists Ann Colby and William Damon have
described many individuals who have gone to extreme lengths to make
their work meaningful, people who have left a "normal" existence in
order to dedicate themselves to making a difference in the lives of others.
One such person is Susie Valdez, who was drifting from one low-paying
and boring service job to another on the West Coast, with no prospects
for anything better. Then during a visit to Mexico she saw the garbage
hills at the outskirts of Ciudad Juarez, where hundreds of homeless
urchins survived by scavenging. Susie found here people who were even
more desperate than she was, and discovered she had the power to show
the children a better way to live; she built a mission house among the
refuse, started a school and a clinic, and became known as the "Queen of
the Dumps."

         Short of making such a dramatic switch, there are a great many
ways to make one's job more meaningful by adding value to it. A
supermarket clerk who pays genuine attention to customers, a physician
concerned about the total well-being of patients rather than specific
symptoms only, a news reporter who considers truth at least as important
as the sensational interest when writing a story, can transform a routine
job with ephemeral consequences into one that makes a difference. With
increasing specialization, most occupational activities have become
repetitive and one-dimensional. It is difficult to build a positive self-
concept if all one does is stock supermarket aisles or fill out forms from
morning to night. By taking the whole context of the activity into
account, and understanding the impact of one's actions on the whole, a
trivial job can turn into a memorable performance that leaves the world
in a better shape than it was before.

       Like everyone else, I could make a long list of encounters with
workers who, in addition to doing their job, helped reduce entropy
around them. A service station attendant who fixed a windshield wiper
with a smile and refused to be paid for such a minor effort; a real-estate
salesman who kept helping years after he sold the house; a flight
attendant who was willing to stay after the rest of the crew left the airport
to locate a missing wallet ... In all such cases, the value of the job
performance was increased because the worker was willing to invest
extra psychic energy into it, and thus was able to withdraw from it
additional meaning. But the meaning we derive from a job does not
come free. As these examples show, one must do some thinking and
caring beyond what the job description calls for. And this in turn requires
additional attention, which, as has been said again and again, is the most
precious resource we have.

       A similar argument holds for turning a job that lacks challenge
and variety into one that satisfies our need for novelty and achievement.
Here too one needs to expend additional psychic energy to reap the
desired benefits. Without some effort a dull job will just stay dull. The
basic solution is quite simple. It involves paying close attention to each
step involved in the job, and then asking: Is this step necessary? Who
needs it? If it is really necessary, can it be done better, faster, more
efficiently? What additional steps could make my contribution more
valuable? Our attitude to work usually involves spending a lot of effort
trying to cut corners and do as little as possible. But that is a short-
sighted strategy. If one spent the same amount of attention trying to find
ways to accomplish more on the job, one would enjoy working moreand
probably be more successful at it, too.

        Even some of the most important discoveries come about when
the scientist, paying attention to a routine process, notices something
new and unusual that needs to be explained. Wilhelm C. Roentgen
discovered radiation when he noticed that some photographic negatives
showed signs of being exposed even in the absence of light; Alexander
Fleming discovered penicillin when he noticed that bacterial cultures
were less dense on dishes that had not been cleaned and were moldy;
Rosalyn Yalow discovered the radioimmunoassay technique after she
noticed that diabetics absorbed insulin slower than normal patients,
instead of faster, as it had been assumed. In all these cases-and the
records of science are full of similar ones-a humdrum event is
transformed into a major discovery that changes the way we live because
someone paid more attention to it than the situation seemed to warrant. If
Archimedes, lowering himself into the bath, had only thought, "Darn, I
got the floor wet again, what will the missus say?" humankind might
have had to wait another few hundred years to understand the principle
of fluid displacement. As Yalow describes her own experience:
"Something comes up, and you recognize that it has happened." Sounds
simple, but most of us are usually too distracted to recognize when
something happens.

        As minute changes can result in great discoveries, so small
adjustments can turn a routine job one dreads into a professional
performance one can look forward to with anticipation each morning.
First, one must pay attention so as to understand thoroughly what is
happening and why; second, it is essential not to accept passively that
what is happening is the only way to do the job; then one needs to
entertain alternatives and to experiment with them until a better way is
found. When employees are promoted to more challenging positions, it is
usually because they followed these steps in their previous jobs. But
even if no one else notices, the worker who uses psychic energy this way
will have a more satisfying job.

        One of the clearest examples I have ever seen was when I did
research in a factory where audiovisual equipment was being assembled
on a production line. Most of the workers on the line were bored and
looked down on their job as something beneath them. Then I met Rico,
who had a completely different take on what he was doing. He actually
thought his job was difficult, and that it took great skill to do it. It turned
out he was right. Although he had to do the same sort of boring task as
everyone else, he had trained himself to do it with the economy and the
elegance of a virtuoso. About four hundred times each day a movie
camera would stop at his station, and Rico had forty-three seconds to
check out whether the sound system met specifications. Over a period of
years, experimenting with tools and patterns of motion, he had been able
to reduce the average time it took him to check each camera to twenty-
eight seconds. He was as proud of this accomplishment as an Olympic
athlete would he if, after the same number of years spent preparing, he
could break the forty-four second mark in the 400 meter sprint. Rico did
not get a medal for his record, and reducing the time to do his job did not
improve production, because the line still kept moving at the old speed.
But he loved the exhilaration of using his skills fully: "It's better than
anything else-a whole lot better than watching TV." And because he
sensed that he was getting close to his limit in the present job, he was
taking evening courses for a diploma that would open up new options for
him in electronic engineering.

        It will come as no surprise that the same type of approach is
needed for solving the problem of stress at work, since stress is
detrimental to achieving flow. In common usage, the word "stress"
applies both to the tension we feel, and to its external causes. This
ambiguity leads to the erroneous assumption that external stress must
inevitably result in psychic discomfort. But here again, there is no one-
to-one relation between the objective and the subjective; external stress
(which to avoid confusion we might call "strain") need not lead to
negative experiences. It is true that people feel anxious when they
perceive the challenges in a situation as far exceeding their skills, and
that they want to avoid anxiety at all cost. But the perception of
challenges and skills rests on a subjective evaluation that is amenable to
change.
         At work, there are as many sources of strain as there are in life
itself: unexpected crises, high expectations, insoluble problems of all
sorts. How does one keep them from becoming stressful? A first step
consists in establishing priorities among the demands that crowd into
consciousness. The more responsibilities one has, the more essential it
becomes to know what is truly important and what is not. Successful
people often make lists, or flowcharts of all the things they have to do,
and quickly decide which tasks they can delegate, or forget about, and
which ones they have to tackle personally, and in what order. Sometimes
this activity takes the form of a ritual, which like all rituals serves in part
as a reassurance that things are under control. John Reed, CEO of
Citicorp, spends time each morning setting his priorities. "I am a great
lister," he says, "I have twenty lists of things to do all the time. If I ever
have five free minutes I sit and make lists of things that I should be
worrying about. . . ." But it is not necessary to be so systematic; some
people trust their memory and experience, and make their choices more
intu itively. The important thing is to develop a personal strategy to
produce some kind of order. After priorities are set, some people will
confront first the easiest tasks on the list and clear the desk for the more
difficult ones; others proceed in reverse order because they feel that after
dealing with the tough items the easier ones will take care of themselves.
Both strategies work, but for different people; what's important is for
each person to find out which one fits best.

        Being able to create order among the various demands that crowd
upon consciousness will go a long way toward preventing stress. The
next step is to match one's skills with whatever challenges have been
identified. There will be tasks we feel incompetent to deal with-can they
be delegated to someone else? Can you learn the skills required in time?
Can you get help? Can the task be transformed, or broken up into simpler
parts? Usually the answer to one of these questions will provide a
solution that transforms a potentially stressful situation into a flow
experience. None of this will happen, however, if one responds to the
strain passively, like a rabbit frozen by the headlights of an oncoming
car. One must invest attention into the ordering of tasks, into the analysis
of what is required to complete them, into the strategies of solution. Only
by exercising control can stress be avoided. And while everyone has the
psychic energy needed to cope with strain, few learn to use it effectively.
        The careers of creative individuals give some of the best
examples of how one can shape work to one's own requirements. Most
creative persons don't follow a career laid out for them, but invent their
job as they go along. Artists invent their own style of painting,
composers their own musical styles. Creative scientists develop new
fields of science, and make it possible for their successors to have
careers in them. There were no radiologists before Roentgen, and there
was no nuclear medicine before Yalow and her colleagues pioneered that
field. There were no auto workers before entrepreneurs like Henry Ford
built up the first production lines. Obviously very few people can start
entirely new lines of work; most of us will follow the job description of
conventional careers. But even the most routine job can benefit from the
kind of transforming energy that creative individuals bring to what they
do.

        George Klein, a tumor biologist who heads a renowned research
department at the Karolinska Institute in Stock- holin, illustrates well
how such people approach their work. Klein likes what he does
enormously, yet there are two aspects of his job that he hates. One is
waiting at airport terminals, which he has to do often because of his very
busy schedule of international meetings. The other aspect he detests is
writing the inevitable grant proposals to government agencies that
provide the funding for his research team. These two boring tasks were
depleting his psychic energy, and building up dissatisfaction with his
work. Yet they could not be avoided. Then Klein had a flash of
inspiration: What if he combined these two tasks? If he could write his
grant applications while waiting for planes, he would save half the time
previously devoted to boring tasks. To implement this strategy he bought
the best pocket tape recorder he could find, and started to dictate grant
proposals while waiting or inching forward at airport customs lines.
These aspects of his job are still objectively what they were before, but
because he took control Klein transformed them almost into a game. It is
now a challenge to dictate as much as possible while waiting, and instead
of feeling that he is wasting time at a boring task, he feels energized.

       On every airline flight one sees dozens of men and women
working on their laptop computers, or adding columns of figures, or
highlighting technical articles they are reading. Does it mean that like
George Klein they feel energized by having combined travel with work?
It depends on whether they feel obliged to do so, or whether they have
adopted this strategy to save time or gain efficiency. In the first case,
working on the plane is likely to be stressful rather than flow-producing.
If it is something one feels one has to do, it would perhaps be better to
look at the clouds below, read a magazine, or chat with a fellow
passenger instead.




Besides work, the other major area that impacts on the quality of life is
the kind of relationships we have. And there is often a conflict between
these two, so that a person who loves work may neglect family and
friends, and vice versa. The inventor Jacob Rabinow, in describing how
his wife feels often ignored, echoes what all people devoted to their work
would say:


     I'm so involved in an idea I'm working on, I get so carried away,
     that I'm all by myself. I'm not listening to what anybody says....
     [Y]ou're not paying attention to anybody. And you tend to drift
     away from people.... [I]t could be that if I were not an inventor but
     had a routine job, I'd spend more time at home and I'd pay more
     attention to them.... So maybe people who don't like their jobs love
     their home more.

        There is quite a bit of truth to this remark, and the reason is
simple. Given that attention is a limited resource, when one goal takes up
all our psychic energy, there is none left over.

        Nevertheless, it is difficult to be happy if one neglects either one
of these two dimensions. Many people married to their jobs are aware of
it, and find ways of compensating either by choosing an understanding
spouse, or by being very careful in rationing their attention. Linus
Pauling was very open about this issue: "I was fortunate, I believe, that
my wife felt her duty in life and her pleasure in life would come from her
family-her husband and children. And that the way she could best
contribute would be to see to it that I would not be bothered by the
problems involved in the household; that she would settle all of these
problems in such a way that I could devote all of my time to my work."
But few people-and especially few women-could call themselves as
fortunate as Pauling in this respect.

         A more realistic venue is to find ways to balance the
meaningfulness of the rewards we get from work and from relationships.
For despite the fact that almost everyone claims the family is the most
important concern in their lives, very few-especially few men-behave as
if this were the case. True, most married men are convinced that their
lives are dedicated to the family, and from a material standpoint this
might be true. But it takes more than food in the fridge and two cars in
the garage to keep a family going. A group of people is kept together by
two kinds of energy: material energy provided by food, warmth, physical
care, and money; and the psychic energy of people investing attention in
each other's goals. Unless parents and children share ideas, emotions,
activities, memories, and dreams, their relationship will survive only
because it satisfies material needs. As a psychic entity, it will exist only
at the most primitive level.

         Amazingly enough, many people refuse to see this point. The
most widespread attitude seems to be that as long as material needs are
provided for, a family will take care of itself; it will be a warm,
harmonious, permanent refuge in a cold and dangerous world. It is very
common to meet successful men in their late forties and fifties who are
stunned when their wives suddenly leave or their children get into
serious trouble. Didn't they always love their family? Didn't they invest
all their energy to make them happy? True, they never had more than a
few minutes each day to talk, but how could they have done otherwise,
with all the demands from the job...

       The usual assumption we make is that to achieve career success
requires a great deal of continuous investment of thought and energy.
Family relationships, by contrast, are "natural," so they demand little
mental effort. A spouse will continue to be supportive, children will keep
minding their parents-more or less-because that is how families are
supposed to be. Businessmen know that even the most successful
company needs constant attention, because external and internal
conditions are always changing, and need to be adjusted to. Entropy is a
constant factor, and if it is not attended to, the company will dissolve.
Yet many of them assume that families are somehow different-entropy
cannot touch them and so they are immune to change.

        There were some grounds for such a belief when families were
kept together by external bonds of social control, and by internal bonds
of religious or ethical commitment. Contractual obligations have the
advantage of making relationships predictable and saving energy by
excluding options and the need for constant negotiation. When marriage
was supposed to be forever, it did not need constant effort to maintain.
Now that the integrity of the family has become a matter of personal
choice, it cannot survive except through the regular infusion of psychic
energy.

        The new kind of family is very vulnerable unless it can provide
intrinsic rewards to its members. When family interaction provides flow,
it is in the self-interest of everyone to continue the relationship. Yet
because families are taken so much for granted, few people have learned
to transform the old ties that bound because of external obligations into
new ones that hold because of the enjoyment they provide. When parents
come home exhausted from their jobs they hope that being with the
family will be an effortless, relaxing, invigorating experience. But to find
flow in family relations requires as much skill as in any other complex
activity.

       The Canadian author Robertson Davies describes one of the
reasons his marriage of fifty-four years has been so rewarding:


     Shakespeare has played an extraordinary role in our marriage as a
     source of quotations and jokes and references, which are
     fathomless. I feel that I am uncommonly lucky because we've had
     such a terribly good time together. It's always been an adventure
     and we haven't come to the end yet. We haven't finished talking, and
     I swear that conversation is more important to marriage than sex.

        For Davies and his wife, the skill that made joint flow possible
was a common love and knowledge of literature. But one could
substitute almost anything for Shakespeare. A couple in their sixties
revived their relationship by starting to run marathons together; others
have done it through travel, gardening, or breeding dogs. When people
pay attention to each other, or to the same activity together, the chances
of flow binding the family increases.

        Parenting is supposed to be one of the most rewarding
experiences in life; but it isn't, unless one approaches it with the same
attention as one would a sport or an artistic performance. In a study of
flow in motherhood, Maria Allison and Margaret Carlisle Duncan
described several examples of how the psychic energy invested in a
child's growth can produce enjoyment in parenting. Here a mother
describes the times she achieves flow:


     ... when I'm working with my daughter; when she's discovering
     something new. A new cookie recipe that she has accomplished,
     that she has made herself, and artistic work that she has done that
     she's proud of. Her reading is one thing that she's really into, and we
     read together. She reads to me, and I read to her, and that's a time
     when I sort of lose touch with the rest of the world, I'm totally
     absorbed in what I'm doing....

        To experience such simple pleasures of parenting, one has to pay
attention, to know what the child is "proud of," what she is "into"; then
one has to devote more attention to share those activities with her. Only
when there is harmony between the goals of the participants, when
everyone is invest ing psychic energy into a joint goal, does being
together become enjoyable.

        The same holds true for any other type of interaction. For
instance, when there is reason to think that we are appreciated, job
satisfaction is usually high; whereas the greatest source of stress in the
workplace is the feeling that no one is interested in supporting our goals.
Infighting among coworkers, inability to communicate with superiors
and subordinates are the bane of most jobs. The roots of interpersonal
conflict are often an excessive concern for oneself, and an inability to
pay attention to the needs of others. It is sad to see how often people ruin
a relationship because they refuse to recognize that they could serve their
own interests best by helping others achieve theirs.

       In American corporate culture, the hero is a ruthless, competitive
person with a huge ego. Unfortunately some top entrepreneurs and CEOs
do conform to that image. Yet it is also reassuring that aggressive
selfishness is not the only path to success. In fact in most stable and
well-run companies, leaders try to promote subordinates who don't invest
all their psychic energy in self-advancement, but use some of it to
advance corporate goals. They know that if top management is filled
with greedy egotists the company will eventually suffer for it.

        Keith is one example of many managers I have met who have
spent a decade or more desperately trying to impress their superiors in
order to get promoted. He worked seventy hours and more a week even
when he knew it was not necessary, neglecting his family and his own
personal growth in the process. To increase his competitive advantage
Keith hoarded all the credit he could for his accomplishments, even if it
meant making colleagues and subordinates look bad. But despite all his
efforts, he kept being passed over for important promotions. Finally
Keith resigned himself to having reached the ceiling of his career, and
decided to find his rewards elsewhere. He spent more time with the
family, took up a hobby, became involved in community activities.
Because he was no longer struggling so hard, his behavior on the job
became more relaxed, less selfish, more objective. In fact, he began to
act more like a leader whose personal agenda takes second place to the
well-being of the company. Now the general manager was finally
impressed. This is the kind of person we need at the helm. Keith was
promoted soon after he had let go of his ambition. His case is by no
means rare: To be trusted in a position of leadership, it helps to advance
other people's goals as well as one's own.

        Congenial relations on the job are important, but the quality of
life depends also on innumerable encounters with other people outside of
work. This is not as simple as it sounds: each time we stop to speak to
another person it takes up some psychic energy, and we become
vulnerable to being ignored, ridiculed, or exploited. Most cultures
develop their own peculiar patterns for facilitating social interaction. In
groups where kinship is the main principle of organization, you may be
expected to joke with your sisters-in-law but never talk to your mother-
in-law. In traditional hierarchical societies like that of ancient China,
complex forms of greetings and conventional conversational formulae
insured that people could communicate without having to waste time
figuring out what to say and how to say it. Americans have perfected a
form of easy conversation that fits the mobile and democratic nature of
our society; its superficial heartiness, however, is just as formulaic as
those of an African tribe. To gain something from talking to a person,
one has to learn something new, either in knowledge or emotions. That
requires both participants to concentrate on the interaction, which in turn
demands psychic energy that generally we are unwilling to invest. Yet a
genuine flow of conversation is one of the highlights of existence.

        The secret of starting a good conversation is really quite simple.
The first step is to find out what the other person's goals are: What is he
interested in at the moment? What is she involved in? What has he or she
accomplished, or is trying to accomplish? If any of this sounds worth
pursuing, the next step is to utilize one's own experience or expertise on
the topics raised by the other person-without trying to take over the
conversation, but developing it jointly. A good conversation is like a jam
session in jazz, where one starts with conventional elements and then
introduces spontaneous variations that create an exciting new
composition.

       If work and relationships are able to provide flow, the quality of
everyday life is bound to improve. But there are no gimmicks, no easy
shortcuts. It takes a total commitment to a fully experienced life, one in
which no opportunities are left unexplored and no potential undeveloped,
to achieve excellence. The organization of the self that makes this
possible is the topic of the next chapter.




 
                                                              EIGHT

The Autotelic
Personality



Other things being equal, a life filled with complex flow activities is
more worth living than one spent consuming passive entertainment. In
the words of a woman describing what her career means to her: "To be
totally absorbed in what you are doing and to enjoy it so much that you
don't want to be doing anything else. I don't see how people survive if
they don't experience something like that. . . ." Or as the historian C.
Vann Woodward says of his work, which involves trying to understand
the dynamics of the American South:


    It interests me. It is a source of satisfaction. Achieving something
    that one thinks is important. Without such a consciousness or
    motivation it seems to me that life could be rather dull and
    purposeless, and I wouldn't want to attempt that kind of life. Of
    complete leisure, say, of having absolutely nothing to do that one
    felt was worth doingthat strikes me as a rather desperate situation to
    be in.

       When we are able to confront life with such involvement and
enthusiasm, we can be said to have achieved an autotelic personality.
"Autotelic" is a word composed of two Greek roots: auto (self), and telos
(goal). An autotelic activity is one we do for its own sake because to
experience it is the main goal. For instance, if I played a game of chess
primarily to enjoy the game, that game would be an autotelic experience
for me; whereas if I played for money, or to achieve a competitive
ranking in the chess world, the same game would be primarily exotelic,
that is, motivated by an outside goal. Applied to personality, autotelic
denotes an individual who generally does things for their own sake,
rather than in order to achieve some later external goal.

         Of course no one is fully autotelic, because we all have to do
things even if we don't enjoy them, either out of a sense of duty or
necessity. But there is a gradation, ranging from individuals who almost
never feel that what they do is worth doing for its own sake, to others
who feel that most anything they do is important and valuable in its own
right. It is to these latter individuals that the term autotelic applies.

         An autotelic person needs few material possessions and little
entertainment, comfort, power, or fame because so much of what he or
she does is already rewarding. Because such persons experience flow in
work, in family life, when interacting with people, when eating, and even
when alone with nothing to do, they are less dependent on the external
rewards that keep others motivated to go on with a life composed of dull
and meaningless routines. They are more autonomous and independent,
because they cannot be as easily manipulated with threats or rewards
from the outside. At the same time, they are more involved with
everything around them because they are fully immersed in the current
of life.

         But how can one find out if someone is autotelic? The best
method is to observe a person over a long period of time, in many
different situations. A short "test" of the kind psychologists use is not
very appropriate, in part because flow is such a subjective experience
that it would be relatively easy for a person to fake his or her responses.
A prolonged interview or questionnaire may help, but I prefer to use a
more indirect measure. According to the theory, persons should be in
flow when they perceive both the challenges in a given situation and
their skills to be high. So one way of measuring how autotelic a person
is, is by computing the frequency with which they report being in a high-
challenge, high-skill situation over a week of paging with the Experience
Sampling Method. We find that there are people who report being in this
situation over 70 percent of the time, and others less than io percent. We
assume that the former are more autotelic than the latter.

        Using this method, we can look at what distinguishes peo ple
whose experiences are mainly autotelic from those who rarely
experience this state. For instance, in one study we took a group of two
hundred very talented teenagers, and divided them into two groups: fifty
whose frequency of highchallenges, high-skill responses during the week
was in the upper quartile (the "autotelic" group), and contrasted them
with fifty who were in the lower quartile (the "non-autotelic" group).
Then we asked the question: Are these two groups of adolescents using
their time in different ways? The most significant contrasts between the
two groups are shown in figures 4.1 and 4.2. Each autotelic teenager
spent on the average ii percent of waking time studying, which is 5
percentage points more than a teen in the other group spent. Because
each percentage point is roughly equivalent to one hour, we can say that
in a week the autotelic teens spent eleven hours studying, the others six.


Figure 4.1

Percentage of Time Spent in Various Activities by Autotelic Teenagers
                Source: Adapted from Adlai-Gail 1994.


Figure 4.2

Percentage of Time Spent in Various Activities by Non-Autotelic
Teenagers




                Source: Adapted from Adlai-Gail 1994•


        The other differences involve hobbies, where the first group spent
almost twice the amount of time (6 versus 3.5 percent), and sports (2.5
versus i percent). The one reversal is in terms of time spent watching
television: the non-autotelic watched TV almost twice as often as the
autotelic (15.2 versus 8.5 percent). Very similar and equally significant
results were found in a later study of a representative sample of
American adolescents, where 202 autotelic teenagers were compared to
202 non-autotelic ones. Clearly an important dimension of what it means
to be autotelic is what one does with one's time. Passive leisure and
entertainment do not provide much opportunity to exercise one's skills.
One learns to experience flow by getting involved in activities that are
more suited to provide it, namely, mental work and active leisure.
        But is the quality of experience of autotelic youngsters better than
that of their peers? After all, the fact that they do more challenging
things is in part true by definition, since we defined being autotelic as
being often in challenging situations. The real question is whether being
often in flow-producing situations actually improves subjective
experience. The answer is yes. To illustrate the results, figure 5. t
presents the average weekly responses of the two groups of 202 autotelic
and 202 non-autotelic teenagers representative of the national high
school population, when they are doing either academic or paid work.
The results show that when involved in productive activities, the first
group concentrates significantly more, has a significantly higher self-
esteem, and sees what they are doing as very significantly more
important for their future goals. However, the two groups are not
significantly different in terms of enjoyment or happiness.


Figure 5.1

Quality of Experience Over a Week of ESM Sampling for zoz Autotelic
and 202 Non-Autotelic Adolescents When Involved in Productive
Activities
                   Source: Adapted from Hektner 1996.


Figure 5.2

Quality of Experience Over a Week of ESM Sampling for 202 Autotelic
and 202 Non-Autotelic Adolescents When Involved in Active Leisure




 Source: Adapted from Hektner 1996 and Bidwell et al. 1997, in press.


         How about the quality of experience in active leisure? Figure 5.2
shows the pattern of differences. First of all, as one would expect, in
leisure all teens report higher enjoyment and happiness than they do in
productive activities; however, they concentrate less and feel that what
they do is less important for their future goals. The comparisons between
the groups, except for happiness, are all statistically significant. Autotelic
youngsters concentrate more, enjoy themselves more, have higher self-
esteem, and see what they do as more related to their future goals. All of
this fits what we would expect, except for one thing. Why aren't they
happier?
        What I have learned from decades of doing research with the
ESM is that self-reported happiness is not a very good indicator of the
quality of a person's life. Some people say they are "happy" even when
they dislike their jobs, when their home life is nonexistent, when they
spend all their time in meaningless activities. We are resilient creatures,
and apparently we are able to avoid feeling sad even when all the
conditions suggest otherwise. If we can't say we are at least somewhat
happy, what's the point of going on? Autotelic persons are not
necessarily happier, but they are involved in more complex activities,
and they feel better about themselves as a result. It is not enough to be
happy to have an excellent life. The point is to be happy while doing
things that stretch our skills, that help us grow and fulfill our potential.
This is especially true in the early years: A teenager who feels happy
doing nothing is unlikely to grow into a happy adult.

         Another interesting finding is that the autotelic group spends a
significantly higher amount of time interacting with the family-on the
order of four hours a week-compared to the others. This begins to
explain why they learn to enjoy more whatever they are doing. The
family seems to act as a protective environment where a child can
experiment in relative security, without having to be self-conscious and
worry about being defensive or competitive. American child rearing has
emphasized early independence as a central goal: the sooner adolescents
left their parents, emotionally as well as physically, the earlier they were
supposed to mature. But early maturity is not such a great idea. Left to
fend for themselves too early, young people can easily become insecure
and defensive. It could be argued, in fact, that the more complex the
adult world in which they have to find a place, the longer a period of
dependence an adolescent needs in order to prepare for it. Of course this
"social neoteny" only works if the family is a relatively complex unit that
provides stimulation as well as support; it would not help a child to stay
dependent on a dysfunctional family.




If there is one quality that distinguishes autotelic individuals, it is that
their psychic energy seems inexhaustible. Even though they have no
greater attentional capacity than anyone else, they pay more attention to
what happens around them, they notice more, and they are willing to
invest more attention in things for their own sake without expecting an
immediate return. Most of us hoard attention carefully. We dole it out
only for serious things, for things that matter; we only get interested in
whatever will promote our welfare. The objects most worthy of our
psychic energy are ourselves and the people and things that will give us
some material or emotional advantage. The result is that we don't have
much attention left over to participate in the world on its own terms, to
be surprised, to learn new things, to empathize, to grow beyond the
limits set by our self-centeredness.

        Autotelic persons are less concerned with themselves, and
therefore have more free psychic energy to experience life with. Kelly,
one of the teenagers in our study who usually reports high challenges and
high skills on her ESM forms, differs from her classmates in that she is
not thinking most of the time about boyfriends, shopping at the mall, or
how to get good grades. Instead she is fascinated by mythology and calls
herself a "Celtic scholar." She works in a museum three afternoons a
week, helping to store and classify artifacts. She enjoys even the most
routine aspects of her work, like "putting everything in cubbyholes and
things like that," as well as being alert to what is going on around her
and learning from it. At the same time she enjoys her friends, with whom
she has long debates about religion and life after school. This does not
mean that she is altruistic or selfeffacing. Her interests are still
expressions of her unique individuality, but she seems to genuinely care
for what she does at least in part for its own sake.

        Creative individuals are usually autotelic as well, and they often
achieve their breakthroughs because they have surplus psychic energy to
invest in apparently trivial objects. The neuropsychologist Brenda Milner
describes the attitude she has toward work, which is shared by other
scientists or artists at the frontiers of their field: "I would say I am
impartial about what is important or great, because every new little
discovery, even a tiny one, is exciting at the moment of discovery." The
historian Natalie Davis explains how she chooses the problems to work
on: "Well, I just get really curious about some problem. It just hooks in
very deeply.... At the time, it just seems terribly interesting.... I may not
know what is personally invested in it, other than my curiosity and my
delight."
        The inventor Frank Offner, who after perfecting jet engines and
EEG machines, at age eighty-one became interested in studying the
physiology of hair cells, gives a perfect example of the humility of
autotelic individuals confronting the mysteries of life, even the
seemingly most insignificant ones:


     Oh, I love to solve problems. If it is why our dishwasher does not
     work, or why the automobile does not work, or how the nerve
     works, or anything. Now I am working with Peter on how the hair
     cells work, and ah ... it is so very interesting.... I don't care what
     kind of problem it is. If I can solve it, it is fun. It is really a lot of
     fun to solve problems, isn't it? Isn't that what's interesting in life?

         This last quote also suggests that the interest of an autotelic
person is not entirely passive and contemplative. It also involves an
attempt to understand, or, in the case of the inventor, to solve problems.
The important point is that the interest be disinterested; in other words,
that it not be entirely at the service of one's own agenda. Only if attention
is to a certain extent free of personal goals and ambitions do we have a
chance of apprehending reality in its own terms.

        Some people seem to have had this surplus attention available to
them very early in life, and used it to wonder about everything within
their ken. The inventor Jacob Rabinow saw his first automobile when he
was seven years old, as he was growing up in a Chinese provincial town.
H,; remembers immediately crawling under the car, to see how the
wheels were turned by the engine, and then going home to carve a
transmission and differential gears out of wood. Linus Pauling describes
his childhood in terms typical of most creative individuals:


     When I was i i years old, well, first I liked to read. And I read many
     books ... when I was just turning 9 ... [I] had already read the Bible
     and Darwin's Origin of Species. And ... when I was 12 and had a
     course in ancient history in high school-first year-I enjoyed reading
     this textbook so that by the first few weeks of the year had read
     through the whole textbook and was looking around for other
     material about the ancient world. When I was i i, I began collecting
     insects and reading books in entomology. When I was 12, I made an
     effort to collect minerals. I found some agates-that was about all I
     could find and recognize in the Willamette Valley-but I read books
     on mineralogy and copied tables of properties, hardness and color
     and streak and other properties of the minerals out of the books.
     And then when I was 13 I became interested in chemistry. I was
     very excited when I realized that chemists could convert certain
     substances into other substances with quite different properties....
     Hydrogen and oxygen gases forming water. Or sodium and chlorine
     forming sodium chloride. Quite different substances from the
     elements that combined to form the compounds. So ever since then,
     I have spent much of my time trying better to understand chemistry.
     And this means really to understand the world, the nature of the
     universe.

        It is important to notice that Pauling was not a child prodigy who
astonished his elders with intellectual brilliance. He pursued his interests
on his own, without recognition and little support. What started him on a
long and productive life was a determination to participate as fully as
possible in the life around him. Hazel Henderson, who has devoted her
adult life to starting organizations for the protection of the environment,
such as Citizens for Clean Air, describes vividly the attitude of joyous
interest such people share:


     When I was five-you know, like where you just open your eyes and
     look around and say, "Wow, what an incredible trip this is! What the
     hell is going on? What am I supposed to be doing here?" I've had
     that question in me all my life. And I love it! It makes every day
     very fresh.... And then every morning you wake up and it's like the
     dawn of creation.

         But not everyone is fortunate to have as much free psychic
energy as Pauling or Henderson. Most of us have learned to save up our
attention to cope with the immediate demands of living, and have little of
it left over to be interested in the nature of the universe, our place in the
cosmos, or in anything else that will not register as a gain on our ledger
of immediate goals. Yet without disinterested interest life is
uninteresting. There is no room in it for wonder, novelty, surprise, for
transcending the limits imposed by our fears and prejudices. If one has
failed to develop curiosity and interest in the early years, it is a good idea
to acquire them now, before it is too late to improve the quality of life.
         To do so is fairly easy in principle, but more difficult in practice.
Yet it is sure worth trying. The first step is to develop the habit of doing
whatever needs to be done with concentrated attention, with skill rather
than inertia. Even the most routine tasks, like washing dishes, dressing,
or mowing the lawn become more rewarding if we approach them with
the care it would take to make a work of art. The next step is to transfer
some psychic energy each day from tasks that we don't like doing, or
from passive leisure, into something we never did before, or something
we enjoy doing out don't do often enough because it seems too much
trouble. There are literally millions of potentially interesting things in the
world to see, to do, to learn about. But they don't become actually
interesting until we devote attention to them.

         Many people will say that this advice is useless to them, because
they already have so many demands on their time that they absolutely
cannot afford to do anything new or interesting. Time stress has become
one of the most popular complaints of the day. But more often than not,
it is an excuse for not taking control of our lives. How many of the things
that we do are really necessary? How many of the demands could be
reduced if we put some energy into prioritizing, organizing, and
streamlining the routines that now fritter away our attention? It is true
that if we let time run through our fingers we will soon have none left.
One must learn to husband it carefully, not so much in order to achieve
wealth and security in some distant future, but in order to enjoy life in
the here and now.




Time is what one must find in order to develop interest and curiosity to
enjoy life for its own sake. The other equally important resource is the
ability to control psychic energy. Instead of waiting for an external
stimulus or challenge to grab our attention, we must learn to concentrate
it more or less at will. This ability is related to interest by a feedback
loop of mutual causation and reinforcement. If you are interested in
something you will focus on it, and if you focus attention on anything, it
is likely that you will become interested in it.
         Many of the things we find interesting are not so by nature, but
because we took the trouble of paying attention to them. Until one starts
to collect them, insects and minerals are not very appealing. Nor are
most people until we find out about their lives and thoughts. Running
marathons or climbing mountains, the game of bridge or Racine's dramas
are rather boring except to those who have invested enough attention to
realize their intricate complexity. As one focuses on any segment of
reality, a potentially infinite range of opportunities for action-physical,
mental, or emotional-is revealed for our skills to engage with. There is
never a good excuse for being bored.

        To control attention means to control experience, and therefore
the quality of life. Information reaches consciousness only when we
attend to it. Attention acts as a filter between outside events and our
experience of them. How much stress we experience depends more on
how well we control attention, than on what happens to us. The effect of
physical pain, of a monetary loss, of a social snub depends on how much
attention we pay to it, how much room we allow for it in consciousness.
The more psychic energy we invest in a painful event, the more real it
becomes, and the more entropy it introduces in consciousness. To deny,
repress, or misinterpret such events is no solution either, because the
information will keep smoldering in the recesses of the mind, draining
away psychic energy to keep it from spreading. It is better to look
suffering straight in the eye, acknowledge and respect its presence, and
then get busy as soon as possible focusing on things we choose to focus
on.

        In a study of people who became severely handicapped by
disease or by accidents-blind or paraplegic-Professor Fausto Massimini
and his team found that several had adapted remarkably to their tragedy,
and claimed that their lives had become better as a result of their
handicap. What distinguished such individuals is that they decided to
master their limitation through an unprecedented discipline of their
psychic energy. They learned to derive flow from the simplest skills like
dressing, walking around the house, and driving a car. Those who did
best went far beyond just negotiating again the basic tasks of life. One
became a swimming instructor, others became accountants, traveled to
play at international chess tournaments and swimming meets, or became
archery champions shooting from a wheelchair.
        The same ability to transform a tragic situation into at least a
tolerable one is shown by victims of terrorists who survive solitary
confinement or prisoners in concentration camps. In such conditions the
outside, "real" environment is so barren and dehumanizing as to induce
despair in most people. Those who survive are able to ignore selectively
the external conditions, and to redirect their attention to an inner life that
is real only to themselves. It is easier to do so if you know poetry,
mathematics, or some other system of symbols that allows you to
concentrate and do mental work without any visible, material props.

        These examples suggest what one needs to learn to control
attention. In principle any skill or discipline one can master on one's own
will serve: meditation and prayer if one is so inclined; exercise, aerobics,
martial arts for those who prefer concentrating on physical skills. Any
specialization or expertise that one finds enjoyable and where one can
improve one's knowledge over time. The important thing, however, is the
attitude toward these disciplines. If one prays in order to be holy, or
exercises to develop strong pectoral muscles, or learns to be
knowledgeable, then a great deal of the benefit is lost. The important
thing is to enjoy the activity for its own sake, and to know that what
matters is not the result, but the control one is acquiring over one's
attention.

       Normally, attention is directed by genetic instructions, social
conventions, and habits we learned as children. Therefore it is not we
who decide what to become aware of, what information will reach
consciousness. As a result, our lives are not ours in any meaningful
sense; most of what we experience will have been programmed for us.
We learn what is supposed to be worth seeing, what is not; what to
remember and what to forget; what to feel when we see a bat, a flag, or a
person who worships God by different rites; we learn what is supposed
to be worth living and dying for. Through the years, our experience will
follow the script written by biology and culture. The only way to take
over the ownership of life is by learning to direct psychic energy in line
with our own intentions.




 
                                                                  NINE

hi 1r.i ¶.i'L i.:1 E1fl



Whether we like it or not, our lives will leave a mark on the universe.
Each person's birth makes ripples that expand in the social environment:
parents, siblings, relatives, and friends are affected by it, and as we grow
up our actions leave a myriad of consequences, some intended, most not.
Our consumer decisions make a tiny difference in the economy, political
decisions affect the future of the community, and each kind or mean act
modifies slightly the total quality of human well-being. Persons whose
lives are autotelic help to reduce entropy in the consciousness of those
who come in contact with them; those who devote all their psychic
energy to competing for resources and to aggrandizing their own self add
to the sum total of entropy.

        One cannot lead a life that is truly excellent without feeling that
one belongs to something greater and more permanent than oneself. This
is one conclusion that is common to all the various religions that have
given meaning to people's lives all through the long epochs of human
history. Nowa days, still heady from the great advances brought about by
science and technology, we are in danger of forgetting this insight. In the
United States and the other technologically advanced societies,
individualism and materialism have almost completely prevailed over
allegiance to the community and to spiritual values.

        It is significant that Dr. Benjamin Spock, whose advice about
child rearing was so immensely influential among at least two
generations of parents, in the twilight of his life doubts that the stress
placed earlier on training children to be unfettered individualists was
such a good idea. He now feels that it is at least as essential for them to
learn to work for a common good, and to appreciate religion, art, and the
other ineffable aspects of life.
        In fact, the warning signs that we have become too enamored of
ourselves are many. An example is the inability of people to form
commitments, which has resulted in half the urban population in
developed countries spending their lives alone, and in the dissolution of
such a high proportion of marriages. Another is the increasing
disillusionment that people report, in survey after survey, with most of
the institutions that we had previously trusted, and with the individuals
who lead them.

       More and more, we seem to bury our heads in the sand to avoid
hearing bad news, withdrawing into gated communities protected by
armed response. But a good personal life is impossible while staying
aloof of a corrupt society, as Socrates knew and those who have lived
under recent dictatorships have found out. It would be so much easier if
we were responsible only for ourselves. Unfortunately, things don't work
that way. An active responsibility for the rest of humankind, and for the
world of which we are a part, is a necessary ingredient of a good life.

         The real challenge, however, is to reduce entropy in one's
surroundings without increasing it in one's consciousness. The Buddhists
have a good piece of advice as to how this can be done: "Act always as if
the future of the Universe depended on what you did, while laughing at
yourself for thinking that whatever you do makes any difference." It is
this serious playfulness, this combination of concern and humility, that
makes it possible to be both engaged and carefree at the same time. With
this attitude one does not need to win to feel content; helping to maintain
order in the universe becomes its own reward, regardless of
consequences. Then it is possible to find joy even when fighting a losing
battle in a good cause.




A first step out of this impasse is to gain a clearer understanding of one's
self-the image each person develops about who he or she is. We couldn't
get very far without a self. But the downside of the self-image is that as
soon as it emerges in early childhood, it begins to control the rest of
consciousness. Because we identify ourselves with it, believing it to be
the central essence of our being, the self increasingly appears to be not
only the most important among the contents of consciousness, but-at
least for some people-the only one worth paying attention to. The danger
is that one's entire psychic energy will go toward satisfying the needs of
the imaginary entity we have ourselves created. This might not be too
bad, if the self we bring into being is a reasonable entity. But children
who are abused may grow up constructing a hopeless, or vindictive,
image of self; children who are indulged without being loved may create
narcissistic selves. A self may grow to be insatiable, or have a
completely exaggerated idea of its importance. Persons who own such a
distorted self nevertheless feel compelled to satisfy its needs. If they
think they need more power, or money, or love, or adventure, they will
do everything to satisfy that need even beyond what is good for them in
the long run. In such cases a person's psychic energy, directed by an ill-
conceived ego, is likely to cause entropy in the environment as well as
within consciousness.

        Being without a sense of self, an animal will exert itself until its
biological needs are satisfied, but not much further. It will attack a prey,
defend its territory, fight for a mate, but when these imperatives are taken
care of, it will rest. If, however, a man develops a self-image based on
power, or wealth, there are no limits to his exertions. He will pursue the
goal set by the self relentlessly, even if he has to ruin his health in the
process, even if he has to destroy other people along the way.

        It is not so surprising, then, that so many religions have blamed
the ego for being the cause of human unhappiness. The radical advice is
to neuter the ego by not allowing it to dictate desires. If we refuse to
heed our needs by giving up food, sex, and all the vanities that men
strive for, the ego will eventually have no say in what to do, and will
shrivel and die. But there is no way to completely do away with the ego
and still survive. The only viable alternative is to follow a less radical
course, and make sure that one gets to know one's self, and understands
its peculiarities. It is then possible to separate those needs that really help
us to navigate through life, from those malignant growths that sprout
from them and make our lives miserable.

      When asked what has been the most difficult obstacle to
overcome in his career, the novelist Richard Stern answered:
     I think it's that rubbishy part of myself, that part which is described
     by such words as vanity, pride, the sense of not being treated as I
     should be, comparison with others, and so on. I've tried rather hard
     to discipline that. And I've been lucky that there has been enough
     that's positive to enable me to counter a kind of biliousness and
     resentment ... which I've seen paralyze colleagues of mine, peers
     who are more gifted than I. I've felt it in myself. And I've had to
     learn to counter that.


     I would say that the chief obstacle is-oneself.

        For each of us, the chief obstacle to a good life is oneself. Yet if
we learn to live with it, and like Ulysses find a way to resist the siren
song of its needs, the self can become a friend, a helper, a rock upon
which to build a fulfilling life. Stern goes on to describe how, as a writer,
he can tame the unbridled ego and make it do creative work:


     Of course there are things in myself ... which I know are bad, mean,
     twisted, weak, this, that, or the other thing. I can draw strength from
     that. . . . I can transform them. They're sources of strength. And as I
     said earlier, the writer takes those, and they're his material.

        One need not be an artist to transform the "rubbishy parts" of the
self into a deeper understanding of the human condition. We all have the
opportunity to use ambition, the need to be loved-even aggressiveness-in
constructive ways, without being carried away by them. Once we realize
what our demons are, we need not fear them any longer. Instead of
taking them seriously, we can smile with compassion at the arrogance of
these fruits of our imagination. We don't have to feed their ravenous
hunger except on our own terms, when to do so helps us achieve
something worthwhile.

        Of course, this is easier said than done. Ever since the Delphic
oracle started giving the sensible advice "Know thyself" some three
thousand years ago, people who thought about these things agreed that
one must first come to know and then master the ego before embarking
on a good life. Yet we have made very little progress in the direction of
selfknowledge. All too often those who extol most loudly the virtues of
selflessness turn out to be motivated by greed and ambition.
        In our century, the project of self-knowledge has been most
strongly identified with Freudian analysis. Shaped by the radical
cynicism of the between-war years, psychoanalysis set its sights
modestly: it offered self-knowledge without aspiring to tell what one
should do with it once attained. And the understanding it offered,
profound as it was, was also rather limited to revealing only some of the
snares that the ego typically falls into-the malignancies that result from
trying to cope with the family triangle and the subsequent repression of
sexuality. Important as this insight has been, it had the unfortunate result
of providing a false sense of security to people who believed that by
exorcising some childhood trauma they would live happily ever after.
The self, alas, is more cunning and complicated than that.

        Psychotherapy relies primarily on recalling and then sharing past
experiences with a trained analyst. This process of guided reflection can
be very useful, and in its form it does not differ that much from the
injunction of the Delphic oracle. The difficulty comes when the
popularity of this form of therapy leads people to believe that by
introspecting and ruminating upon their past they will solve their
problems. This usually does not work, because the lenses through which
we look at the past are distorted precisely by the kind of problems we
want solved. It takes an expert therapist, or long practice, to benefit from
reflection.

         Moreover, the habit of rumination that our narcissistic society
encourages actually might make things worse. The ESM research shows
that when people think about themselves, their moods are usually
negative. When a person starts to reflect without being skilled at it, the
first thoughts that pop into the mind tend to be depressing. Whereas in
flow we forget ourselves, in apathy, worry, and boredom the self is
usually at center stage. So unless one has mastered the skill of reflection,
the practice of "thinking about problems" usually aggravates whatever is
wrong instead of alleviating it.

        Most people only think about themselves when things are not
going well, and thereby they enter a vicious circle in which present
anxiety colors the past, and then the painful memories make the present
even more bleak. One way to break out of this circle is to develop the
habit of reflecting on one's life when there is reason to feel good about it,
when one is in an upbeat mood. But it is even better to invest psy chic
energy in goals and relationships that bring harmony to the self
indirectly. After experiencing flow in a complex interaction, the
feedback is concrete and objective, and we feel better about ourselves
without having had to try.

        In order to experience flow, it helps to have clear goalsnot
because it is achieving the goals that is necessarily important, but
because without a goal it is difficult to concentrate and avoid
distractions. Thus a mountain climber sets as her goal to reach the
summit not because she has some deep desire to reach it, but because the
goal makes the experience of climbing possible. If it were not for the
summit, the climb would become pointless ambling that leaves one
restless and apathetic.

       There is quite extensive evidence showing that even if one does
not experience flow, just the fact of doing something in line with one's
goals improves the state of mind. For example, being with friends is
usually uplifting, especially if we see that interacting with friends is what
we want to do at the moment; but if we feel we should be working, then
the time spent with the same friends is much less positive. Conversely
even a disliked job makes us feel better if we manage to see it as part of
our goals.

        These findings suggest that a simple way of improving the
quality of life is to take ownership of one's actions. A great deal of what
we do (over two-thirds, on the average) are things we feel we have to do,
or we do because there isn't anything else we feel like doing. Many
people spend their entire lives feeling like puppets who move only
because their strings are pulled. Under these conditions we are likely to
feel that our psychic energy is wasted. So the question is, why don't we
want to do more things? The sheer act of wanting focuses attention,
establishes priority in consciousness, and thus creates a sense of inner
harmony.

        There are many things in life that we must do and don't like
doing. It may be sitting in meetings, or taking out the garbage, or
keeping track of bills. Some of these are unavoid able; no matter how
ingenious we are, we still must do them. So the choice is either to do
them against the grain, grumbling about the imposition-or do them
willingly. In both cases we are stuck with having to do the activity, but in
the second case the experience is bound to be more positive. One can set
goals for even the most despised task: for instance, to mow the lawn as
quickly and efficiently as possible. The very act of setting the goal will
take much of the sting out of a chore.

        This attitude toward one's choices is well expressed in the
concept of arnor fati-or love of fate-a central concept in Nietzsche's
philosophy. For instance, in discussing what it takes to live fully, he
writes: "My formula for greatness in a human being is arnor fati: That
one wants nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all
eternity.... Not merely bear what is necessary . . . but love it." And: "I
want to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in
things; then I shall be one of those who make things beautiful."

       Abraham Maslow's studies led him to similar conclusions. Based
on his clinical observations and interviews with individuals he
considered to be self-actualizing, including creative artists and scientists,
he concluded that the processes of growth resulted in fulfilling peak
experiences. These involved a consistency between self and
environment; and he referred to this as harmony between "inner
requiredness" and "outer requiredness," or between "I want" and "I
must." When this happens, "one freely, happily, and wholeheartedly
embraces one's determinants. One chooses and wills one's fate."

        The psychologist Carl Rogers also endorsed a very similar
perspective. He comments about what he calls the fully functioning
person: "He wills or chooses to follow the course of action which is the
most economical vector in relation to all the internal and external stimuli
because it is that behavior which will be the most deeply satisfying." As
a result, he con tinues: "The fully functioning person . . . not only
experiences, but utilizes, the most absolute freedom when he
spontaneously, freely, and voluntarily chooses and wills that which is
absolutely determined." Thus, as with Nietzsche and Maslow, the love of
fate corresponds to a willingness to accept ownership of one's actions,
whether these are spontaneous or imposed from the outside. It is this
acceptance that leads to personal growth, and provides the feeling of
serene enjoyment which removes the burden of entropy from everyday
life.
The quality of life is much improved if we learn to love what we have to
do-in this Nietzsche and company were absolutely right. But in
retrospect one can begin to see the limitations of the "humanistic
psychology" of which Maslow and Rogers were such outstanding
leaders. In the glory days of the mid-century, when prosperity reigned
and peace beckoned around the corner, it made sense to assume that
personal fulfillment could only lead to positive outcomes. There was no
need then to make invidious comparisons about ways of fulfilling
oneself, to question whether one set of goals was better than another-
what mattered was to do one's thing. The optimistic haze blunted all
edges, and we permitted ourselves to believe that the only evil came
from not fulfilling one's potential.

       The problem is that people also learn to love things that are
destructive to themselves and to others. Teenagers arrested for vandalism
or robbery often have no other motivation than the excitement they
experience stealing a car or breaking into a house. Veterans say that they
never felt such intense flow as when they were behind a machine gun on
the front lines. When the physicist Robert J. Oppenheimer was
developing the atomic bomb, he wrote with lyrical passion about the
"sweet problem" he was trying to solve. From all accounts, Adolph
Eichmann enjoyed working on the logistic problems involved in
transporting Jews to extermination camps. The moral implication of
these examples is clearly different, but they make the point that enjoying
what one does is not a sufficient reason for doing it.

         Flow is a source of psychic energy in that it focuses attention and
motivates action. Like other forms of energy, it is neutral-it can be used
for constructive or destructive purposes. Fire can be used to warm us up
on a cold night or it can be used to burn down the house. The same is
true of electricity or nuclear energy. Making energy available for human
use is an important accomplishment, but learning how to use it well is at
least as essential. Thus in creating a good life it is not enough to strive
for enjoyable goals, but also to choose goals that will reduce the sum
total of entropy in the world.

        So where is one to find such goals? It has been the task of
religions to define entropy as it applies to human affairs. It was called
"sin," and it consisted in behavior that harmed the person, the
community, or its values. All societies that have survived have had to
define positive goals to direct the energy of their people; to make them
effective, they created supernatural beings who communicated the rules
of right and wrong behavior through visions, apparitions, and texts
dictated to special individuals like Moses, Mohammed, or Joseph Smith.
These goals could not be justified only in terms of our lives here and
now, because if the only effects of our actions were the ones we could
observe in this life, common sense would dictate that we get as much
pleasure and material advantage as we can, even if we must be ruthless
in the process. Yet a community would be destroyed if everyone was
motivated by sheer selfishness, so all religions had to provide a scenario
for what happens to those who act only in terms of self-interest-such as
being reincarnated in a lower form of life, or being forgotten, or going to
hell.

        One of the main challenges of our time is to discover new bases
for transcendent goals that fit with whatever else we know about the
world. A new myth to give meaning to life, if you will, but one that will
serve us for the present and the near future-just as earlier myths have
helped our ancestors to make sense of their existence, relying on the
images, metaphors, and facts known to them. But just as the elements of
past myths were believed to be true to those who used them, we have
also to believe in the truth of this new dispensation.

        In the past, it was the prophets who voiced the myths that gave
power to the beliefs of the community. Drawing on familiar images, they
intimated that a supreme being was speaking through them to tell the
people how they should behave, and what the world beyond our senses
was like. There may still be prophets in the future claiming to know such
things, but it is less likely that they will be believed. One consequence of
depending on science for solving material problems and on democracy
for solving political conflicts is that we have learned to distrust the vision
of a single individual, no matter how inspired. Of course, the "cult of
personality" is still very much alive, but it is more tempered by healthy
skepticism. A credible revelation would have to have that element of
consensus we have come to expect from scientific truth, and from
democratic decision making.

       Instead of waiting for prophets, we may discover the foundations
on which to build a good life from the knowledge scientists and other
thinkers are slowly accumulating. There are enough hints about how the
universe functions to know what kind of actions support the increase of
complexity and order, and what kind lead toward destruction. We are
rediscovering how all forms of life depend on each other and on the
environment. How precisely each action produces an equal reaction.
How difficult it is to create order and useful energy, and how easy it is to
waste it in disorder. We learn that the consequences of actions may not
be immediately visible, but may have effects in distant connections,
because everything that exists is part of an interconnected system. Much
of this has been already said, in one way or another, in the religions of
the Plains Indian tribes, the Buddhists, the Zoroastrians, and innumerable
other beliefs based on a careful observation of life. What contemporary
science adds is a systematic expression of these facts in a language that
has authority in our times.

         But there are also other, perhaps more exciting insights latent in
modern science. For instance, the implications of relativity might suggest
a way to reconcile the monotheistic beliefs that have been so successful
in the last two millennia, and the more fragmented, idiosyncratic
polytheistic forms they replaced. The disadvantage of polytheism has
been that when people actually believed in the existence of separate
spirits, demiurges, demons, and gods, each with its own character and
sphere of authority, it caused a great deal of confusion and dissipation of
attention among the competing spiritual entities. The postulate of a
single God, whether by the Israelites, the Christians, or the Muslims,
reordered the believers' consciousness, releasing a tremendous amount of
psychic energy, which swept other faiths aside. However, the downside
of monotheism was that by specifying a single supreme being it tended
to develop into rigid dogmatism.

        What relativity and the more recent discoveries about fractal
geometries may suggest is that the same reality may be packaged in
different bundles, so to speak, and that depending on the perspective of
the viewer, the angle of vision, the time frame, and the scale of
observation one might see very different pictures of the same underlying
truth. Thus there is no need to brand as heresy visions and insights that
differ from the beliefs we learned as children, yet we also know that
these are locally valid, temporary manifestations of a single underlying
process of enormous complexity.
        Many of the relevant strands converge around the process of
evolution. Ironically, while Darwin's observations were justly seen as a
threat to fundamentalist Christian religion, the idea that over very long
periods of time ecological systems and the structure of organisms tend
toward increasing complexity has given hope to several scientists that the
universe is not ruled by chaos, but conceals a meaningful story. One of
the earliest to express this connection was the Jesuit paleontologist Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin, whose The Phenomenon of Man gave a lyrical-and
perhaps excessively lyrical-description of evolution from atomic dust
billions of years ago to the unification of mind and spirit in what he
called the Omega Point, his equivalent for the traditional concept of
souls joining with the supreme being in heaven.

        Teilhard's vision was derided by most scientists, but some of the
more adventurous ones-such as C. H. Waddington, Julian Huxley, and
Theodosius Dobzhansky-took it rather seriously. In one form or other,
evolving complexity has the making of a myth robust enough to hang a
faith on. For instance, Jonas Salk, the inventor of the polio vaccine-who
saw himself to be as much an artist and a humanist as a scientist-spent
the last years of his life struggling to understand how past life may hold
the key to the future. In his words:


     I have continued to be interested in some ... more fundamental
     questions, about creativity itself.... I see us as a product of the
     process of evolution, I would say creative evolution. We have now
     become the process itself, or part of the process itself. And so from
     that perspective I have become interested in universal evolution, the
     phenomenon of evolution in itself as manifest in what I call
     prebiological evolution, evolution of the physical, chemical world;
     biological evolution; and meta-biological evolution of the brain-
     mind. And now I'm beginning to write about what I call teleological
     evolution, which is evolution with a purpose. So my purpose now,
     you might say, is to try to understand evolution, creativity, in a
     purposeful way.

         It is too soon to see clearly what lies beyond these new horizons
that are just opening up. But writers and scientists are beginning to piece
together the vision that might lead into the future. Some of these efforts
still seem so fanciful as to be part only of the realm of imagination. For
instance, Madeleine L'Engle has woven into her novels for children plots
where events in the cells of the body parallel historical struggles among
human characters, which in turn reflect cosmic conflicts between
supernatural beings. And she is perfectly aware that the science fiction
she writes has ethical consequences. Even when the characters in the
book suffer and are about to be engulfed by the forces of evil, she
believes that: "You have to get them out, into some kind of hope. I don't
like hopeless books. Books that make you think, `Ah, life's not worth
living.' I want to leave them thinking, yeah, this endeavor is difficult, but
it is worth it, and it is ultimately joyful."

        John Archibald Wheeler, one of the most distinguished physicists
of this century, spends his time puzzling about how we play a vital part
in bringing about the material world that seems to exist objectively
outside and apart from ourselves. Benjamin Spock, the eminent
pediatrician, is trying to redefine spirituality in terms that make sense for
our times. And then there are those who, like the economist and activist
Hazel Henderson, have adopted a joyously free-form personal
philosophy in which their identity is seen as a momentary embodiment
of the ongoing stream of life:


     On one level I feel like an extraterrestrial. I'm here visiting for a
     while. And I'm also in human form. I'm very emotionally attached
     to the species. And so I have incarnated myself at this time. But I
     also have an infinite aspect to myself. It all kind of hangs together
     quite easily for me. It sounds flippant, but the thing is that this is a
     spiritual practice for me.

         It may seem that such pagan exuberance is nothing more than a
return to past superstitions, on a par with belief in reincarnation, alien
abductions, or extrasensory perception. The essential difference is that
New Age believers take their faith literally, while the people I am
quoting know that they are speaking metaphorically, using
approximations to an underlying reality they believe in, but cannot
express adequately. They would be the last to reify their insights,
believing them to be literally true. They know that their knowledge is
itself evolving, and in a few years might have to be expressed in entirely
different terms.
It is one thing for evolution to help us envision the future with reference
to the past, and another to give us directions for creating a meaningful,
satisfying existence. Surely, one of the reasons traditional religions have
had such a powerful hold on human consciousness is that they
personalized cosmic forces-for instance, by claiming that God created us
in His image, thus making it possible for thousands of Christian painters
to represent Him as a benign old patriarch. And perhaps more
importantly, they lent each individual's life a dignity and the promise of
eternity. This is indeed a hard act to follow. The process of evolution as
we understand it now works statistically on large numbers, and has
nothing to say about individuals; it is run by determinism coupled with
chance instead of purpose and free will. Thus it appears to be an arid
doctrine with no chance to inspire a person to organize his or her life
with reference to it.

       Yet the findings of science may have hopeful things to say to
each of us. In the first place, they make us increasingly aware of how
unique each person is. Not only in the particular way the ingredients of
the genetic code have been combined, yielding instructions for
developing unprecedented physical and mental traits. But also unique in
the time and the place in which this particular organism has been set to
encounter life. Because an individual becomes a person only within a
physical, social, and cultural context, when and where we happen to be
born defines a single coordinate of existence that no one else shares.

        Thus each of us is responsible for one particular point in space
and time in which our body and mind forms a link within the total
network of existence. For whereas it is true that who we are is
determined by genetic instructions and social interactions, it is also true
that having invented the concept of freedom, we can make choices that
will determine the future shape of the network of which we are a part.
What kind of cosmetics we use will help determine whether the air will
stay fit to breathe, how much time we spend talking to teachers will
affect what our children learn, and the kind of shows we watch will
influence the nature of commercial entertainment.

       Contemporary understanding of matter and energy also suggests
a new way of thinking about good and evil. Evil in human affairs is
analogous to the process of entropy in the material universe. We call evil
that which causes pain, suffering, disorder in the psyche or the
community. It usually involves taking the course of least resistance, or
operating according to the principles of a lower order of organization.
For instance, when a person endowed with consciousness acts in terms of
instincts alone, or when a social being acts selfishly even though the
situation calls for cooperation. When scientists work on perfecting means
of destruction they are succumbing to entropy even if they use the latest
and most sophisticated knowledge. Entropy or evil is the default state,
the condition to which systems return unless work is done to prevent it.

        What prevents it is what we call "good"-actions that preserve
order while preventing rigidity, that are informed by the needs of the
most evolved systems. Acts that take into account the future, the
common good, the emotional well-being of others. Good is the creative
overcoming of inertia, the energy that leads to the evolution of human
consciousness. To act in terms of new principles of organization is
always more difficult, and requires more effort and energy. The ability to
do so is what has been known as virtue.

        But why should one be virtuous when it is so much easier to let
entropy prevail? Why should one want to support evolution without the
promise of eternal life as a reward? If what we have said so far is true,
eternal life is actually part of the package of existence-not in the way
cartoons represent the afterlife, with haloed characters in nightgowns
standing around on clouds, but in the fact that our actions in this life are
going to reverberate through time and shape the evolving future.
Whether our present consciousness of individuality is preserved in some
dimension of existence after death or disappears completely, the
unalterable fact is that our being will forever remain part of the warp and
woof of what is. The more psychic energy we invest in the future of life,
the more we become a part of it. Those who identify with evolution
blend their consciousness with it, like a tiny creek joining an immense
river, whose currents become as one.

         Hell in this scenario is simply the separation of the individual
from the flow of life. It is clinging to the past, to the self, to the safety of
inertia. There is a trace of this sense in the root of the word for "devil": it
comes from the Greek dia bollein, to separate or break asunder. What is
diabolical is to weaken the emerging complexity by withdrawing one's
psychic energy from it.
        Of course, this is not the only way to read what science implies
about the future. It is also possible to see nothing but meaningless chance
at work in the world, and be discouraged by it. In fact, it is easier to do
so. Entropy holds also for how we interpret the evidence of the senses.
But this chapter started with the question: How can we find a goal that
will allow us to enjoy life while being responsible to others? Choosing
this interpretation for the current knowledge science provides might be
one answer to that question. Within an evolutionary framework, we can
focus consciousness on the tasks of everyday life in the knowledge that
when we act in the fullness of the flow experience, we are also building a
bridge to the future of our universe.




 
                                                          NOTES


Chapter 1

i. Auden. An excellent set of reflections on Auden's poetry and on
its place in contemporary literature are in Hecht (1993).

4. Systematic phenomenology. The theoretical and empirical bases
for the claims made in this volume can be found, for instance, in
Csikszentmihalyi    (199o,     1993);    Csikszentmihalyi    and
Csikszentmihalyi (1988); Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde (1993)•

5. Baboons. A detailed description of the activities of freeranging
primates is given in Altmann (1980). The daily activities of
peasants in the south of France during the Middle Ages are reported
in Le Roy Ladurie (1979)•

6. Differences in daily life. The French historians associated with
the review Annales pioneered the study of how ordinary people
lived in different historical periods. An example of the genre is
Davis and Farge (1993).

8. E. P. Thompson. Thompson (1963) gives some of the most vivid
descriptions of how daily life changed as a result of industrialization
in England.

9. Table i. The sources for the data presented in this table are as
follows: the time budget of American adults, using the ESM, has
been reported in Csikszentmihalyi and Graef (1980);
Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989); Kubey and Csikszentrnihalyi
(1990); Larson and Richards (1994) for that of adolescents see
Bidwell et al. (in press); Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1984);
Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen (1993)•

9. Time budgets. How much time hunter-gatherers spent in
productive activities has been estimated by Marshall Sahlins (1972).
Similar results are also reported in Lee and DeVore (1968). For time
budgets in the eighteenth century see Thompson (1963), and in
recent times Szalai (1965).

i i. Women carried water . . . The quote is from Hufton (1993, P•
30)-

iz. Leisure. For a detailed history of leisure, see Kelly (1982).

113- Cultures differ . . . McKim Marriot describes the traditional
Hindu view of the individual's position in the social context
(Marriott 1976); for the comparison of Caucasian and East Asian
children see Asakawa (1996).

114. The public sphere. The argument about the importance of
having a public sphere for the development of individuality was
made by Hannah Arendt (1956).

r5. The Experience Sampling Method. Those who might be
interested in the details of this method should consult
Csikszentrnihalyi and Larson (1987); Moneta and Csikszentmihalyi
(1996).



Chapter 2

18. Nine basic emotions. The main emotions that can be
differentiated and that are recognized across cultures are joy, anger,
sadness, fear, interest, shame, guilt, envy, and depression (Campos
and Barrett 1984).

i8. Genetically wired emotions. Although Charles Darwin himself
realized that emotions served survival purposes and evolved just
like physical organs of the body did, it was not until very recently
that psychological traits began to be studied from an evolutionary
perspective. A recent example is the work of David Buss (1994)•

i9. Happiness. One of the first modern psychological studies of
happiness, The Structure of Psychological Well-Being by Norman
Bradburn (1969), originally had the word "happiness" in its title, but
this was later changed to "psychological wellbeing" to avoid
seeming unscientific. Current studies include the extensive
summary of the topic by Myers (1992), the work by Myers and
Diener (1995), and Diener and Diener (1996), which finds that
people are generally happy; another source is Lykken and Tellegen
(1996). The international comparisons of income and happiness are
in Inglehart (1990). The main problem is that such studies are based
on respondents' global assessments of their own happiness. Because
people are strongly biased to see their own life as happy regardless
of its content, such a measure does not give much information about
the quality of a person's life.

22. Psychic entropy or conflict in consciousness, and its opposite,
psychic negentropy, which describes states of inner harmony, are
described in Csikszentmihalyi (1988, 199o); Csikszentmihalyi and
Csikszentmihalyi (1988); Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde (in press).

23. Self-esteem. William James' formula for self-esteem was
published in James (1890). The contrast in self-esteem between
ethnic groups is in Asakawa (1996) and Bidwell et al. (in press).
The self-esteem differences between mothers who are working and
at home was studied by Ann Wells (1988).

25. Mental operations. I discussed the role of attention in thinking
in Csikszentmihalyi (1993)• The Yale psychologist Jerome Singer
has studied daydreaming extensively (J. L. Singer 1966, i981).

27. Varieties of intelligence. The canonical work in this field is
Howard Gardner's analysis of the seven main forms taken by human
intelligence (Gardner 1983).

27. The development of talent. The effort it takes to develop a
young person's talent is described in studies by Benjamin Bloom
(1985), and those I conducted with my students (Csikszentmihalyi,
Rathunde, and Whalen 1993)•

29. The flow experience. Some of the main sources dealing with
this experience are Csikszentmihalyi 0975, 1990); Csikszentmihalyi
and Csikszentmihalyi (1988); Moneta and Csik szentmihalyi
(1996). For more specialized studies, see also Adlai-Gail (1994);
Choe (1995); Heine (1996); Hektner (1996); Inghilleri (1995)•
"Optimal experience" and "psychic negentropy" are sometimes used
interchangeably for the flow experience.

30. Figure i. The sources for this figure are in Csikszentmihalyi
(1990) and Massimini and Carli (1988). This representation has
gone through several revisions over the years, as empirical findings
forced us to revise our initial hypotheses. For instance, the most
recent revision has involved the reversal in the placement of the
experiences of "relaxation" and "boredom." Originally I had thought
that low challenges and high skills must result in the experience of
boredom. However, many studies, e.g. Adlai-Gail (1994),
Csikszentmihalyi and Csikszentmihalyi (1988), and Hektner (1996),
show that people report feeling relaxed in such a situation, whereas
boredom tends to occur more when both challenges and skills are
low.

33• How often in flow? The large survey of flow among Germans is
reported in Noelle-Neumann (1995). Some interesting accounts of
flow in different activities are the following: writing, Perry (1996);
computers, Trevino and Trevino (1992), Webster and Martocchio
(1993); teaching, Coleman (1994); reading, McQuillan and Conde
(1996); management, Loubris, Crous, and Schepers (1995); sports,
Jackson (1996), Stein, Kimiecik, Daniels, and Jackson (1995);
gardening, Reigberg (1995) among others.



Chapter 3

40. Psychopathology and flow. The psychiatrist Marten De Vries
(1992) has been one of the first to investigate in close detail how
psychiatric patients actually feel, and discovered in the process
several counterintuitive findings about psychopathology. For the
work of Professor Massimini and his group at the University of
Milan see Inghilleri (1995); Massimini and Inghilleri (1986).

411. Creative people. The quote from Richard Stern and those that
will follow later in this volume are taken from my recent study of
creativity (Csikszentmihalyi 1996), which is based on interviews
with ninety-one artists, scientists, political and business leaders who
have changed the culture in which we live to some extent. On the
relationship between flow and creativity, see also the collection
edited by George Klein (1990).

41. Solitude. For the deleterious effects of being alone, see, for
instance, Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1984); Larson and
Csikszentmihalyi (1978); Larson, Mannell, and Zuzanek (1986).

43. National survey findings that indicate a link between happiness
and having friends were reported by Burt (1986).

43. Experience in the family. The recent study by Reed Larson and
Maryse Richards, in which all members of the family participated in
an ESM study at the same time (Larson and Richards 1994), reveals
many intriguing patterns in family experience: as the title of their
book, Divergent Realities, implies, parents and children are rarely
on the same page when they interact at home.

44. Driving a car. That driving is one of the most enjoyable
experiences in many people's lives was suggested by one of our
ESM studies (Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre 1989); a more in-depth
ESM study sponsored by Nissan USA revealed many unanticipated
details, some of which are reported throughout this volume.

45• Surroundings and their psychological effects. For an exception
to the general neglect of how our surroundings affect emotions and
thoughts see Gallagher (1993). Other work on this topic includes
Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton (1981).

46. Time of the week and physical symptoms. Two unpublished
pilot studies, one completed by Maria Wong at the University of
Michigan and the other by Cynthia Hedricks (in press) at the
University of Southern California, find that significantly more
physical symptoms are reported on Sundays, as well as in situations
that do not require focused attention, suggesting that being occupied
to a certain extent prevents us from noticing pain.



Chapter 4
49• Americans want to work. These survey results are from
Yankelovich (1981), and they have been replicated by similar
patterns in other countries. For the ambivalence about work see
Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989); and the dialogue between the
German social scientists is in Noelle-Neumann and Strumpel
(1984). Noelle-Neumann interpreted the link between willingness to
work and a positive lifestyle as evidence that "work makes you
happy," whereas Strumpel understood the general preference for
leisure to mean that "work makes you unhappy."

5o The history of work. For some interesting insights as to how
work has changed over the centuries see, for instance, Braudel
(1985); Lee and DeVore (1968); Norberg (1993)+ Veyne (1987)-

53. Table 3. Results concerning how American teenagers learn
attitudes and skills relevant to their future occupations were
obtained in the course of a five-year longitudinal study of almost
four thousand students in middle and high school across the United
States, which was sponsored by the Sloan Foundation (Bidwell et
al. 1992). The negative experiences associated with activities that
are neither like work nor like play were explored in detail by
Jennifer Schmidt (1997)•

56. Women and work. Gender differences in the experience of work
are reported in Larson and Richards (1994). Anne Wells (1988)
found the differences in self-esteem between mothers who worked
full time and part time.

58. Unemployment. ESM studies of unemployed youth in the
United Kingdom were conducted by John Haworth (Haworth and
Ducker 1991). The international survey studies of unemployment
are reported in Inglehart (1990).



Chapter 5

64. Leisure is dangerous. The psychiatrists' warning was reported in
Psychiatry (1958); for similar arguments see Gussen (1967); Kubey
and Csikszentmihalyi (199o).
65. Sunday neurosis. The reference is in Ferenczi (1950); see also
Boyer (1955); Cattell (1955)•

69. Reading books. The differences found between individuals who
were frequent readers and those who were frequent TV viewers are
reported in Noelle-Neumann (1996).

70. Herodotus. See Persian Wars, Book i, Chapter 94-

7i. Leisure and cultural decline. For some of the historical evidence
see Kelly (1982); some of the current cross-cultural material is in
Inghilleri (1993)-

72. Leisure-centered lives. The study by Macbeth is reported in
Macbeth (1988); the quote from the ocean sailor is in Pir- sig
(1977); that from the rock climber is in Csikszentmihalyi (1975)-

76. Energy use and leisure. The finding that the use of
nonrenewable energy in leisure is negatively related to happiness, at
least for women, is reported in Graef et al. (1981).



Chapter 6

78. Therapeutic effects of companions. The reference is to the work
of Lewinsohn (1982).

79. Non-Western emphasis on the social context. The importance of
belonging to a social network in India is discussed by Hart (1992);
Kakar (1978); Marriott (1976); in Japan by Asakawa (1996); Lebra
(1976); Markus and Kitayama (1991).

8i. Friends. For the importance of friendship to a satisfying life see
Myers (1992)•

84. Sexuality. How selective forces throughout evolution have
shaped our sexual emotions, attitudes, and behaviors is well
described in Buss (1994). For a cultural history of human sexuality
see I. Singer (1966). The exploitation of sexuality is discussed in
Marcuse (1955)•
85. Family. The composition of families in the Middle Ages is
described in Le Roy Ladurie (1979). Other forms of family
arrangements are discussed in Edwards (1969); Herlihy (1985);
Mitterauer and Sieder (1982).

88. Moods in the family. These findings are from the research,
already mentioned several times, by Larson and Richards (1994).

88. Complex families. The theoretical notion of complexity was
applied to the family system by Kevin Rathunde (in press). See also
Carroll, Schneider, and Csikszentmihalvi (1996); Csikszentmihalyi
and Rathunde (1993); Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde (in press);
Huang (1996) for other findings that use this concept.

89. Sorcery and solitude. The generalized paranoia of the Dobuans
is described by Reo Fortune ([1932] 1963). The concept of
conversation as a means of reality maintenance was developed by
the sociologists Peter Berger and Thomas Luckman (1967).

90. Preference for solitary scenery. The survey in question is
reported in Noelle-Neumann and Kocher (1993, P• 504

9i. Talent and solitude. Data that show how students who cannot
stand being alone have trouble developing their talents is presented
in Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen (1993)-

92. Fear of strangers. The French historian Philippe Aries described
the dangers incurred by medieval students in Paris (Aries, 1962).
The threat to women walking the streets in the seventeenth century
is mentioned by Norberg (1993).

93- Vita activa. Hannah Arendt (1956) discusses the difference in
worldviews implied by an active as against a contemplative life.
The distinction between "inner-directed" and "outerdirected" ways
of life appeared in Riesman, Glazer, and Denney (1950). The
typology of "extroversion" versus "introversion" was developed by
Carl Jung (1954); for its current measurement, see Costa and
McCrae (1984).

94. Extroverts happier. Research suggesting that extroverts tend to
be more satisfied with their lives is reported by Myers (1992).
Chapter 7

98. Fifteen percent of the population. For this figure, see last note to
Chapter 2.

98. Gramsci. A very readable biography of this Italian political
theorist is by Fiore (1973).

ioo. Frequency of flow. The study reported here was done by Joel
Hekmer (1996).

ior. Why jobs are resented. The ideas mentioned in this section
largely derive from the many years of counseling with business
managers that I carried out with the University of Chicago summer
extension program in Vail, Colorado.

102. Lives dedicated to others. The biographies of individuals with
exceptional moral sensitivity were collected and analyzed by Colby
and Damon (1992).

103. Making jobs more meaningful. One of the earliest and still
most insightful accounts of how workers who are proud of their
jobs think is the series of interviews collected by Studs Terkel (1974

io6. Stress and strain. The physiologist Hans Selye was the first to
identify "eustress," or the positive value of manageable stress for
the organism. The optimal psychological response to strain is
widely investigated (Selye 1956).

11112. Flow in relationships. The quote describing a mother's
enjoyment when playing with her child comes from Allison and
Duncan (1988).



Chapter 8

ir6. To be totally absorbed ... The quote is from Allison and Duncan
(1988).

123. Social neoteny. In embryology, "neoteny" refers to the
retardation of development in human infants as compared to other
primates and mammal species. This is supposed to allow for more
learning to occur as the nervous system matures in interaction with
the environment rather than in the isolation of the womb (Lerner
1984). Social neoteny is an extension of this concept to the
tendency for some young people to benefit from a longer period of
maturation protected within the family (Csikszentmihalyi and
Rathunde in press).

128. Attention. The importance of controlling attention, or "psychic
energy," is fundamental to taking charge of one's life. Some of the
thinking relevant to this claim can be found in Csikszentmihalyi
(1978, 1993)•

1128. Blind and paraplegic. Fausto Massimini and his team at the
University of Milan have interviewed a great number of individuals
struck by tragedy, such as people who have become paraplegic, or
blind (Negri, Massimini, and Delle Fave 1992). Contrary to what
one might expect, many such individuals are able to enjoy their
lives more after a tragic accident than they did before. See also
Diener and Diener (1996). Conversely, research with lottery
winners (Brickman, Coates, and Janoff- Bulman 1978) suggests that
gaining sudden financial fortune does not improve happiness. These
results confirm the old wisdom that it is not what happens to a
person that determines the quality of life, but what a person makes
happen.



Chapter 9

132. Community and individuality. Some of the most important
recent statements about the lack of involvement with values greater
than the individual are by Bellah et al. (1985, 1991); Lash (1990).
For comments on the necessity to create new values as old ones lose
credibility see Massimini and Delle Fave (1991).

133. Self and evolution. A brief description of how the self evolves
philogenetically and ontogenetically is given in Csikszentmihalyi
(1993)•
    138. Nietzsche's concept of amor fati is in Nietzsche ([1882] 1974).
    For Maslow's thoughts on the same subject, see Maslow (1971), and
    for Rogers' see Rogers (1969).

    139. R. J. Oppenheimer's quote, and the problem of finding flow in
    destructive activities, is discussed in Csikszentmihalyi (1985);
    Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1978).

    143. Evolution. Some of the pioneers who have extended
    evolutionary thought to the realm of human cultural evolution have
    been Bergson (1944); Campbell (1976); J. Huxley (1947); T. H.
    Huxley (1894); Johnston (1984); Teilhard de Chardin (1965).

    146. Good and evil, from the viewpoint of evolutionary theory, is
    discussed by Alexander (1987); Burhoe (1986); Campbell (1975);
    Williams (1988).




 
                                                 REFERENCES
Adlai-Gail, W. S. 1994. Exploring the autotelic personality. Ph.D. diss.,
  University of Chicago.

Alexander, R. D. 1987. The biology of moral systems. New York: Aldine
  De Gruyter.

Allison, M. T., and M. C. Duncan. 1988. Women, work, and flow. In
  Optimal Experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness,
  edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. S. Csikszentmihalyi. New York:
  Cambridge University Press, pp. 118-37.

Altmann, J. 1980. Baboon mothers and infants. Cambridge, Mass.:
  Harvard University Press.

Arendt, H. 1956. The human condition. Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.

Aries, P. 1962. Centuries of childhood. New York: Vintage.

Asakawa, K. 1996. The experience of interdependence and independence
  in the self-construal ofAsian American and Caucasian American
  adolescents. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.

Bellah, R. N., R. Madsen, W. M. Sullivan, A. Swidler, and S. M. Tipton.
  1985. Patterns of the heart. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California
  Press.

1991. The good society. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Berger, P. L., and T. Luckmann. 1967. The social construction of reality.
  Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books.

Bergson, H. 1944. Creative evolution. New York: The Modern Library.

Bidwell, C., M. Csikszentmihalyi, L. Hedges, and B. Schneider. In press.
  Attitudes and experiences of work for American adolescents. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.
1992. Studying Career Choice. Chicago: NORC.

Bloom, B. S., ed. 1985. Developing talent in young people. New York:
  Ballantine.

Boyer, L. B. 1955- Christmas neurosis. Jourzzal of the American
  Psychoanalytic Association 3:467-88.

Bradburn, N. 1969. The structure of psychological well-being. Chicago:
  Aldine.

Braudel, F. 1985. The structures of evezyday life. Translated by S.
  Reynolds. New York: Harper and Row.

Brickman, P., D. Coates, and R. Janoff-Bulman. 1978. Lottery winners
  and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology 36, no. 8:917-27.

Burhoe, R. W. 1986. War, peace, and religion's biocultural evolution.
  Zygon 21:439-72.

Burt, R. S. 1986. Strangers, friends, and happiness. GSS Technical
  Report No. 72. University of Chicago, NORC.

Buss, D. M. 1994. The evolution of desire. New York: Basic Books.

Campbell, D. T. 1975. On the conflicts between biological and social
  evolution and between psychology and moral tradition. American
  Psychologist 30:1103-26.

Campbell, D. T. 1976. Evolutionary epistemology. In The Librazy of
  Living Philosophers: Karl Popper, edited by D. A. Schlipp. La Salle,
  Ill.: Open Court, pp. 413-63-

Campos, J. J., and K. C. Barrett. 1984. Toward a new understanding of
  emotions and their development. In Emotions, cognition, and
  behavior, edited by C. E. Izard, J. Kagan, and R. B. Zajonc.
  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 229-63.

Carroll, M. E., B. Schneider, and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1996. The effects
  of family dynamics on adolescents' expectations. Paper submitted for
  publication. The University of Chicago.
Cattell, J. P. 1955. The holiday syndrome. Psychoanalytic Review 4239-
  43•

Choe, I. 1995• Motivation, subjective experience, and academic
  achievement in Korean high school students. Ph.D. diss., University of
  Chicago.

Colby, A., and W. Damon. 1992. Some do care. New York: The Free
  Press.

Coleman, L. J. 1994. Being a teacher: Emotions and optimal experience
  while teaching gifted children. Gifted Child Quarterly 38, no. 3:146-
  52.

Costa, P. T. J., and R. R. McCrae. 1984. Personality as a lifelong
  determinant of well-being. In Emotion in adult development, edited by
  C. Z. Malatesta and C. E. Izard. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1975. Beyond boredom and anxiety. San
  Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

1978. Attention and the wholistic approach to behavior. In The Stream of
  Consciousness, edited by K. S. Pope and J. L. Singer. New York:
  Plenum, pp. 335-58•

1985. Reflections on enjoyment. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
  28, no. 4:469-97-

. 1988. Motivation and creativity: Toward a synthesis of structural and
   energistic approaches to cognition. New Ideas in Psychology 6, no.
   2:159-76.

i 99o. Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper
   and Row.

1993. The evolving self. A psychology for the third millennium. New
  York: HarperCollins.

1996. Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention.
  New York: HarperCollins.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., and I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds. 1988. Optimal
  experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., and R. Graef. 1980. The experience of freedom in
  daily life. American Journal of Community Psychology 8:401-14.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., and R. Larson. 1978. Intrinsic rewards in school
  crime. Crime and delinquency 24, no. 3322-35•

. 1984. Being adolescent. New York: Basic Books.

. 1987. Validity and reliability of the experience sampling method.
  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 175, no. 9:526-36.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., and J. LeFevre. 1989. Optimal experience in work
  and leisure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56, no.
  5:815-22.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., and K. Rathunde. 1993. The measurement of flow
  in everyday life. In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 40:58-97.
  Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press.

. In press. The development of the person: An experiential perspective on
   the ontogenesis of psychological complexity. In Theoretical Models of
   Human Development, edited by R. M. Lerner, Vol. i, Handbook of
   Child Development. New York: Wiley.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., and E. Rochberg-Halton. 1981. The meaning of
  things: Domestic symbols and the self. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., K. Rathunde, and S. Whalen. 1993. Talented
  teenagers: The roots of success and failure. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

Davis, N. Z., and A. Farge, eds. 1993. A history of women in the West.
  Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Delle Fave, A., and F. Massimini. 1988. The changing contexts of flow
  in work and leisure. In Optimal experience: Psychological studies of
  flow in consciousness, edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. S.
  Csikszentmihalyi. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 193-
  214•

deVries, M., ed. 1992. The experience of psychopathology. Cambridge,
  UK: Cambridge University Press.

Diener, E., and C. Diener. 1996. Most people are happy. Psychological
  Science 7, no. 3:181-4.

Edwards, J. N., ed. 1969. The family and change. New York: Alfred A.
  Knopf.

Ferenczi, S. 1950. Sunday neuroses. In Further contributions to the
  theory and techniques of psychoanalysis, edited by S. Ferenczi, 174-7.
  London: Hogarth Press.

Fiore, G. 1973. Antonio Gramsci: Life of a revolutionary. New York:
  Schocken Books.

Fortune, R. F. [1932] 1963. Sorcerers of Dobu. New York: Dutton.

Gallagher, W. 1993. The power of place: How our surroundings shape
  our thoughts, emotions, and actions. New York: Poseidon Press.

Gardner, H. 1983. Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences.
  New York: Basic Books.

Graef, R., S. McManama Gianinno, and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1981.
  Energy consumption in leisure and perceived happiness. In Consumers
  and energy conservation, edited by J. D. Claxton et al. New York:
  Praeger.

Gussen, J. 1967. The psychodynamics of leisure. In Leisure and mental
  health: A psychiatric viewpoint, edited by P. A. Martin. Washington,
  D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.

Hart, L. M. 1992. Ritual art and the production of Hindu selves.
  American Anthropological Association Meetings. San Francisco,
  Calif.
Haworth, J. T., and J. Ducker. i99i. Psychological well-being and access
  to categories of experience in unemployed young adults. Leisure
  Studies 10:265-74.

Hecht, A. 1993 The hidden law: The poetry of W. H. Auden. Cambridge,
  Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Hedricks, C. In press. The ecology of pain in Latina and Caucasian
  women with metastatic breast cancer: A pilot study. In iith Biannual
  meeting of the Society for Menstrual Cycle Research, edited by J.
  Christer.

Heine, C. 1996. Flow and achievement in mathematics. Ph.D. diss.,
  University of Chicago.

Hektner, J. M. 1996. Exploring optimal personality development: A
  longitudinal study of adolescents. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.

Herlihy, D. 1985. Medieval households. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
  University Press.

Huang, M. P.-L. 1996. Family context and social development in
  adolescence. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.

Hufton, 0. 1993. Women, work, and family. In A history of women in the
  West, edited by N. Zemon Davis and A. Farge. Cambridge, Mass.:
  Harvard University Press, pp. 15-45•

Huxley, J. 1947. Evolution and ethics. London: Pilot Press.

Huxley, T. H. 1894. Evolution and ethics and other essays. New York:
  Appleton.

Inghilleri, P. 1993• Selezione psicologica bi-culturale: Verso l'au- mento
  delta complessita individuale e sociale. Il caso dei Navajo. In La
  selezione psicologica umana, edited by F. Massimini and P. Inghilleri.
  Milan: Cooperative Libraria Iulm.

Inghilleri, P. 1995. Esperienza soggettiva, personalita, evoluzione cul-
  turale. Turin, Italy: UTET.
Inglehart, R. 199o. Culture shift in advanced industrial society.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Jackson, S. A. In press. Toward a conceptual understanding of the flow
  experience in elite athletes. Research quarterly for exercise and sport.

James, W. i 89o. Principles of psychology. New York: Henry Holt.

Johnston, C. M. 1984. The creative imperative: Human growth and
  planetary evolution. Berkeley, Calif.: Celestial Arts.

Jung, C. G. 1954. The development of personality. New York: Pantheon.

Kakar, S. 1978. The inner world: A psychoanalytic study of childhood
  and society in India. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Kelly, J. R. 1982. Leisure. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall.

Klein, G., ed. 1990. Om kreativitet och flow. Stockholm, Sweden:
  Brombergs.

Kubey, R., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1990. Television and the quality of
  life. Hillsdale, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Larson, R., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1978. Experiential correlates of
  solitude in adolescence. Journal of Personality 46, no. 4:677-93-

Larson, R., and M. H. Richards. 1994. Divergent realities: The emotional
  lives of mothers, fathers, and adolescents. New York: Basic Books.

Larson, R., R. Mannell, and J. Zuzanek. 1986. Daily well-being of older
  adults with family and friends. Psychology and Aging I2:117-26.

Lash, C. 1990. The true and only heaven: Progress and its critics. New
  York: Norton.

Le Roy Ladurie, E. 1979. Montaillou. New York: Vintage.

Lebra, T. S. 1976. Japanese patterns of behavior. Honolulu: University of
  Hawaii Press.

Lee, R. B., and I. DeVore, eds. 1968. Man the hunter. Chicago: Aldine.
Lerner, R. M. 1984. On the nature of human plasticity. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.

Lewinsohn, P. M. 198z. Behavioral therapy: Clinical applications. In
  Short-term therapies for depression, edited by A. J. Rush. New York:
  Guilford.

Loubris, S., F. Crous, and J. M. Schepers. 1995. Management by
  objectives in relation to optimal experience in the workplace. Journal
  of Industrial Psychology 2 1, no. 2:12 -17 -

Lykken, D., and A. Tellegen. 1996. Happiness is a stochastic
  phenomenon. Psychological Science 7, no. 3:186-9.

Macbeth, J. 1988. Ocean cruising. In Optimal experience: Psychological
 studies of flow in consciousness, edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I.
 S. Csikszentmihalyi. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 2
 14-31.

Marcuse, H. 1955. Eros and civilisation. Boston: Beacon.

Markus, H. R., and S. Kitayama. 1991. Culture and self: Implications for
 cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review 98, no.
 2:224-53.

Marriott, M. 1976. Hindu transactions: Diversity without dualism. In
 Transaction and meaning: Directions in the anthropology of exchange
 and symbolic behavior, edited by B. Kepferer. Philadelphia: ISHI
 Publications.

Maslow, A. 1971. The farther reaches of human nature. New York:
 Viking.

Massimini, F., and M. Carli. 1988. The systematic assessment of flow in
 daily experience. In Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flaw
 in consciousness, edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. S.
 Csikszentmihalyi. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 266-
 87.

Massimini, F., and A. Delle Fave. 1991. Religion and cultural evolution.
 Zygon 16, no. 1:27-48.
Massimini, F., and P. Inghilleri, eds. 1986. L'esperienza quotidiana:
 Teoria e metodi d'analisi. Milan: Franco Angeli.

McQuillan, J., and G. Conde. 1996. The conditions of flow in reading:
 Two studies of optimal experience. Reading Psychology 17:109-35.

Mitterauer, M., and R. Sieder. 1982. The European family. Chicago:
 University of Chicago Press.

Moneta, G. B., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1996. The effect of perceived
 challenges and skills on the quality of subjective experi- ence.Journal
 of Personality 64, no. 2:275-310.

Myers, D. G. 1992. The Pursuit of Happiness. New York: Morrow.

Myers, D. G., and E. Diener. 1995• Who is happy? Psychological
 Science 6:I0-19.

Negri, P., F. Massimini, and A. Delle Fave. 1992. Tema di vita e strategie
  adattive nei non vedenti. In Vedere con la mente, edited by D. Galati.
  Milan, Italy: Franco Angeli.

Nietzsche, F. [188z] 1974. The gay science. New York: Vintage.

Noelle-Neumann, E. 1995. AWA Spring Survey. Allensbach Institute fur
  Demoskopie.

1996. Stationen der Gliicksforschung. In Lesegluck: Eine vergessene
  Erfahrung?, edited by A. Bellebaum and L. Muth. Opladen:
  Westdeutscher Verlag, pp. 15-56.

Noelle-Neumann, E., and R. Kocher, eds. 1993. Allensbacher Jahrbuch
  der Demoskopie 1984-1992. Munich, Germany: K.G. Saur.

Noelle-Neumann, E., and B. Strumpel. 1984. Macht Arbeit Krank?
  Macht Arbeit gluchlich? Munich: Pieper Verlag.

Norberg, K. 1993. Prostitutes. In A history of women in the West, edited
  by N. Zemon Davis and A. Farge. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
  University Press, pp. 458-74•
Perry, S. K. 1996. When time stops: How creative writers experience
  entry into the flow state. Ph.D. diss., The Fielding Institute.

Pirsig, R. 1977- Cruising blues and their cure. Esquire 87, no. 5:65-8.

Psychiatry, Group for the Advancement of. 1958. The psychiatrists'
  interest in leisure-time activities, no. 39.

Rathunde, K. In press. Family context and talented adolescents' optimal
  experience in productive activities. Journal of research in adolescence.

Reigberg, D. 1995. Gluck in Garten-Erfolg im Markt. Offenburg,
  Germany: Senator Verlag.

Riesman, D., N. Glazer, and R. Denney. 1950. The lonely crowd. New
  York: Doubleday.

Rogers, C. 1969. Freedom to learn. Columbus, Ohio: Charles Merrill.

Sahlins, M. D. 1972. Stone Age economics. Chicago: Aldine Press.

Schmidt, J. 1997. Workers and players: Exploring involvement levels
  and experience of adolescents in work and play. Meetings of the
  American Educational Research Association. Boston, Mass.

Selye, H. 1956. The stress of life. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Singer, I. 1966. The nature of love. 3 vols. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.

Singer, J. L. 1966. Daydreaming: An introduction to the experimental
  study of inner experience. New York: Random House.

1981. Daydreaming and fantasy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Stein, G. L., J. C. Kimiecik, J. Daniels, and S. A. Jackson, 1995•
  Psychological antecedents of flow in recreational sports. Personality
  and social psychology bulletin 2 1, no. 2:125-35.

Szalai, A., ed. 1965. The use of time: Daily activities of urban and
  suburban populations in twelve countries. Paris: Mouton.
Teilhard de Chardin, P. 1965. The phenomenon of man. New York:
  Harper and Row.

Terkel, S. 1974. Working. New York: Pantheon.

Thompson, E. P. 1963. The making of the English working class. New
  York: Viking.

Trevino L.K., and J. W. Trevino. 1992. Flow in computer-mediated
  communication. Communication Research 19, no. 5539-73•

Veyne, P. 1987. The Roman Empire. In From Pagan Rome to Byzantium,
  edited by P. Veyne. Cambridge, Mass: The Belknap Press, pp. 5-230.

Webster, J., and J. J. Martocchio. 1993. Turning work into play:
 Implications for microcomputer software training. Journal of
 Management 19, no. 1:12 7-46.

Wells, A. 1988. Self-esteem and optimal experience. In Optimal
 Experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness, edited by
 M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. S. Csikszentmihalyi. New York:
 Cambridge University Press, pp. 3 2 7-41.

Williams, G. C. 1988. Huxley's "Evolution and ethics" in sociobiological
 perspective. Zygon 23, no. 4:383-407.

Yankelovich, D. 1981. New rules in American life: Searching for self-
  fulfillment in a world turned upside-down. Psychology Today 15, no.
  4:35-91.




 
WINDEX
                 Table of Contents
Acknowledgments ix
i The Structures of Everyday Life i
2 The Content of Experience
3 How We Feel When Doing Different Things 35
4 The Paradox of Work
5 The Risks and Opportunities of Leisure
6 Relationships and the Quality of Life
7 Changing the Patterns of Life
8 The Autotelic Personality
9 The Love of Fate
Notes
References
Index
